Church Concord: CONTAINING,

I. A Disswasive from unnecessary Division and Separation, and the Real Concord
of the Moderate Independents with the Presbyterians, instanced in Ten seeming
Differences. II. The terms Necessary for Concord among all true Churches and
Christians.
The First Part written 1655. The Second Part 1667. And Published this 1691. To
second a late Agreement of the London Protestant Nonconformists: And a former
Treatise called [ The true and only terms of Church-Concord.]

By RICHARD BAXTER.

Mat. 5. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children
of God. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. We beseech you, Brethren, to know them who labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: and esteem them very
highly in Love for their Works sake; and Be at Peace among your selves. Phil.
2. 1, 2, 3. If there be any Consolation in Christ, If any Comfort of Love, If
any Fellowship of the Spirit, If any Bowels and Mercies, Fulfill ye my joy, that
ye be like minded, having the same Love, being of one accord, of one Mind. Let
nothing be done through strife or vainglory: but in lowliness of Mind let each
esteem other better than themselves. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. And I, Brethren, could
not speak to you as to spiritual but as to carnal; to Babes in Christ -- For
whereas there is among you envying and strife, are ye not carnal and walk as
men? LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

THE PREFACE.
1. IOwe some satisfactory account to the Reader, of the Reasons of my
Publishing this Book, which I have cast by about Thirty four Years. It cannot
be well understood, without the knowledge of the Case we were then in, and the
Occasion of my Writing it.

The Ministers of the Churches were then (as is usual) of diverse Opinions about
Church Government. 1. Some men for our Diocesane Episcopacy as stated by the
Reformation. 2. Some were for a more Reformed Episcopacy, described by Bucer in
Script. Angl. 1. Archbishop Usher, etc. 3. Some were for Diocesans in a higher
strain, as subject to a foreign Jurisdiction, and as parts of an Universal
Church, Headed by a humane Head, the Pope being Principium Unitatis. 4. Some
were for National and Classical Government by Presbyters only, without Bishops.
5. And some were for a parity of Ministers and Churches, without any superior
Bishops, or Synods, or Governors; but to have every Congregation to have all
Governing Power in their proper Pastors. 6. And some were for each Congregation
to be Governed by the Major Vote of the people; the Pastor being but to gather
and declare their Votes; Among all these, the 3d sort, the Foreigners were
utterly unreconcileable; and of the 6th we had no great hopes: But with the
other four we attempted such a measure of Agreements as might be useful in a
loose unsettled time, to keep up Christian Love and so much Concord, as that
our Differences should not so much weaken us, as to frustrate all our
Ministerial Labors.

2. To this end I attempted a double work of Concord in Worcestershire: 1. For
the willing Ministers Episcopal, Presbyterian and Independent to Associate, in
the Practice of so much of the Ministerial Office, as they were agreed did
belong to Presbyters: II. To Catechize or personally by Conference instruct,
all the Families and capable Persons in our Parishes, who would come to us, or
admit us to come to them, in order at due appointed times.

God gave our People (in many Parishes) willing Minds, and encouraged us by
unexpected great success: The most laborious Ministers took the hint, and
seconded us in many Counties: First and chiefly in Westmorland and Cumberland,
and then in Dorsetshire, Wil^shire, Hampshire and Essex, (and Dr. Winter, and
others in Ireland)* The terms of our Association, the Reader may see Printed at
large 1653. But theirs of Westmorland and Cumberland more large, and worthy the
Consideration of the present tolerated Churches. I pray you read them.

3. But when it came to closest Practice, As the Foreigners, (Prelatists) and
Popular called Brownists kept off, so but few of the rigid Presbyterians or
Independents joined with us; (And indeed Worcestershire and the adjoining
Counties had but few of either sort,) But the main Body of our Association were
men that thought the Episcopal, Presbyterians and Independents, had each of
them some good in which they excelled the other two Parties, and each of them
some mistakes: And that to select out of all three the best part, and leave the
worst, was the most desirable (and ancient) Form of Government. But that so
much as might Unite them in the Comfortable Service of Christ was common to
them all: The most of our Ministers were Young men bred at the Universities
during the Wars, and engaged in no Faction, nor studied much in such kind of
Controversies; but of solid Judgment and zealous Preachers, and eminently
Prudent, Pious and Peaceable: And with them there joined many that had
Conformed, and thought both the Common Prayer and the Directory, Episcopacy and
Presbytery tolerable: And these in 1660. did Conform; but most of the rest were
ejected and silenced. Though of near Ten Thousand that the Parliament left in
possession, there were but Two Thousand cast out by the Prelates, we strongly
conjectured before hand who those would be: Satan desired to have Power to sift
us, as wheat, And the chaff and the bran stayed in, and made that which some
called the best in the World: And indeed much of the bran is honored by us as
very useful: But the simila was too fine and precise for the pallates of the
Great Churchmen, and was cast out in the sifting: And the Sifters did but call
the [Similago] Simulatio] and such other names, and out it went with Scorns and
Devestation: And the hatred of it is propagated as the natural Progeny of
revived true simulation and revenge. But though fur-fur be a name of no
honorable sound (or sense, as it looks to Brethren and the Church) yet for my
part I do with thanks for England, and with lamentation for other Lands,
consent with them that say, Few Churches are so well fed: God can use this for
the cleansing and drying up the Hydropical tympanite of this Land: And Christ,
I hope, will Remember the Penitent part of them, when he comes in his Kingdom,
and they that robbed others of their Civil and Church Rites, may yet be with
Christ in Paradise. Furfure pinguescunt pulli si lacte madescat. Even those
that read this Praise with displeasure, taking Repentance for a Disgrace, and
being loath to think they need it, may yet by Grace repent and live. Through
God's great Mercy the excussed simila has been Childrens food, though the
Milstones have made it unfit for seed. But God will aliunde provide seed:
Though we cannot but dread the abundance and malignity of the Seminary Tares.

4. But our trouble (next to the ignorance and badness that we found most
Parishes in) was Antichurches, or Separatists, that in great Towns and where
they found Entertainment, did gather Congregations out of the Parochial
Congregations; which being gathered on pretense that the Communion of our
Churches was unlawful, employed so much of their Preaching and converse in
laboring to prove it so, and in magnifying their own Opinions and ways, and
vilifying others, as made many Towns become places of mere strife, that I say
not of almost hostility.

5. These separating Antichurches were of diverse sorts: But of these it was two
Parties that most hindered our Concord and Success. The Laudian Prelatists, and
the rigid Independents: The former set up mostly in Great men's Houses, that had
been against the Parliament; with whom they had the great advantage of the
prejudice and exasperation of Minds that had suffered with and for them; and of
their Power over the People that as Tenants or Servants depended on them, and
the Countenances of their greatness, and a comfortable and honorable
entertainment with them. These told the People that the Parish Ministers were
Schismatics and but Lay men, (except the old ones that were ordained by
Diocesans.)

The other sort pretended sometimes faultiness in our Churches, as not so pure
as they; and sometime Liberty to gather the willing into Churches of their
Conduct, because Parish Bounds were not of Divine Right.

The Anabaptists also made us no small trouble; But the Quakers that made the
loudest noise, by railing at us in our Assemblies and Markets, did little harm,
being contemned because of the grossness of their Behavior: especially when we
had admitted them to public Disputes, and shamed them before all the People.

6. Our care was therefore to offer Love and Peace to the Laudians and the
rigid Independents. To the first sort, we offered to consine our Ministration
to that which they had nothing against, though we could not do all that they
thought best: we constantly used to read the Psalms and Scripture Lessons, some
Hymns, the Creed, Lord's Prayer, Decalogue, etc. and offered them the Sacrament
Kneeling that were capable and willing: And some of us permitted and maintained
the bare Reading Curates that in Chapels read the Liturgy to them. And
Petitioned that all intolerable Priests of what side soever might be removed
for better; but that no man might be ejected for being for the King. But we
spoke to the Deaf; and sought peace of the unpeaceable. We would have had them
to set up tolerated Bishops over all Volunteers that desired it: But that they
were utterly against, as thinking that the Party that would constitute their
Churches would but shame them by their ignorance and vice, such a Leaden Sword
did they take their Discipline to be, laying all on the force of the
Magistrates Sword, when yet the Keys, which they durst not bear without the
Sword (as it was done Three hundred Years) must have the Honor and Name.

7. And as to the other Separatists, we treated with their chief Leaders for
Union and Concord; and that occasioned the Writing of this Book. But we little
prevailed with the Old Conductors, or the Young self-conceited sort of Novices.
I will not dishonor the Dead so far as to name them that I treated with, and
the terms offered to them, and the pretenses on which they by tergiversation
refused it. Their Confidence in the Soldiery that failed and shamed them, I
think was it that hardened them into that Error.

And had not the Sword for a time upheld them, all these Sects had quickly come
to nothing (as indeed most of them did) by the Parts, Interest and Concord of
the United Ministry: For my own part I had little hinderance, nor any
Antichurch nor striving Party.

8. The present Conformists I know will take occasion to call our Congregations
such Antichurches now, as I wrote against then. And some on the other side will
say, What need was there now to publish your old Disswasives from Separation: I
will speak briefly to both these.

9. I. I know none now that are so much against Schism and sinful Separation,
as the moderate Nonconformists; nor any more guilty of it than those (Papists
and Tories) that most fiercely talk against it. Had we not been greatly against
Schism, we had never done and suffered so much as we have done to have
prevented or healed it: and to have kept the Church from tearing Laws, and
Canons that have battered Peace and Concord: we had never written and stoopt
and humbly begged for Unity and Peace of malicious, ambitious, revengeful men,
that made all our Endeavors fuel to increase the flames of their Cruelty. We
foresaw what the Legion was like to do, to make the Church and Land like the
man among the Tombs, that ragingly cut and tore himself: But the cure is too
hard for us. Is it lawful and good to shut the Churches Doors against us, and
throw Stones at us to drive us away, and banish us five Miles from all the
Churches of the Cities and Corporations of the Land, and all places where of
long time we had Preached, and to order the Iailers to keep us from the
Churches, and Informers to accuse us if we come there; and then to call us
Schismatics for not coming: And is it Schism for men thus used, to worship God
elsewhere?

Is there no Separation that is a Duty, because some Separation is a Sin? Is it
Schism to separate from Heathens or Infidels, or from the Papal Church, or from
Arrians? The Case was not then as it has been since: The separating Party had
nothing imposed upon them, that they could themselves say was against the Word
of God. They had no Canons that excommunicated them ipso facto, if they should
call the Churches Practice sinful. They were not cast out for not declaring
Assent and Consent to all things contained in and prescribed by Three Books of
fallible Imposers; They were not forced to Covenant never to endeavor any
alteration, (that is, Amendment of the present Church Government: Nor to
subscribe that if a King should Commission a French or Irish Army to invade the
Land, to deliver it to a Foreign Prelate, it is unlawful for the Land to resist
such an Army. The Corporations of England were not then constituted, by means
of an Oath, that neither King, Lords, or any Person have any Obligation to be
against Schism, Popery or Profaneness, or to repent of Sin, by Swearing and
Vowing it, if that Oath has a Confederacy also against the English Prelacy,
and was imposed and taken against Law. The Separatists that were against
Bishops, Liturgies and Ceremonies, were then at liberty to forbear them, and to
disown them. And what pretense had they then for Separation?

10. II. But to the other side, I answer, 1. The Loud Accusations of Schism or
Separation published against us by such as then did separate themselves from
the Public Churches, require us to undeceive those that are deceived by them,
by making them know our constant enmity to Schism; and that it is they that
drive us away, and not we that are driven, that are the Schismatics* in
England, as I proved in a Writing called [A Search for the Schismatick*] To
humble them that are the Cause, it is still necessary to show the Evil of that
Sin. It made not the Apostles Schismatics, to be cast out of the Synagogues;
no, nor Paul for separating the Christians from the blaspheming Jews, into the
meeting in Tyrannus School.

2. And the surviving of the Old Sectarian spirit of Division, makes it a Duty
to show still the Evil of it: Some cannot endure to hear those former
Miscarriages blamed, but by enmity to repentance make them their own, and
encourage the Evil spirit of Division: And some still keep up the dividing
Principle, of the Peoples Power of the Keys, and are ready to separate from
those Pastors that will not allow the whole Congregation to be Tryers or Judges
of the State of all that are to be baptized or admitted to Communion.

And if we never have more admission into more public allowance, the World
shall see that it was not long of us: But if God have so much Mercy for this
Land, as to strengthen us by public Concord, and unlock to us the Doors of the
public Churches, when I am dead, I would leave this Testimony against such as
shall then refuse or resist any lawful and desirable Concord.

And as to my terms of Peace then offered to the Independents, I think it
seasonable now to publish them, when God in Mercy has newly brought us to
publish our Concord in a very hopeful and comfortable form and manner, to drive
home the Nail, and to be a witness against them that yet will divide.

11. And because both old and late Experience tells me who those be, though I
have hereafter spoken to their Case, I will speak again though I seem guilty of
repetition.

It is the raw ignorant flashy self-conceited sort of Reformers that we are in
danger of, as to frustrate our Concord and Reformation. Such whether Ministers
or People have torn us, and continue so to do, and are like to do so still.

Paul knew what he said, and why, when he told us a Bishop must not be a
Novice, (or a young raw Christian) lest being puffed up with Pride, be fall into
the Condemnation of the Devil. And Act. 20. Of your own selves shall men rise
speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples after them. Ignorant unstudyed
Preachers, that attain to a laudable fervency in speaking what they know meet
with injudicious Hearers, that being of their own temper, discern not their
Ignorance, but value their Zeal, and these grow up into dividing Parties and
Churches, and cherish the Vices of each other, as if it were Wisdom and holy
Zeal.

The great Dividing Error of these People is UNRULINESS, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. Warn
them that are unruly] Ti^. 1. 10. There are many unruly and vain alkers, Iam.
3. 8. Their tongue^ are an unruly evil]. They take it for a Doctrine of Christ,
that they ought not only to be unruly, but to be Rulers of the Church, and of
their Rulers, and to usurp a chief part of the Pastors Office, to the Churches
Confusion and their own: They think that the T^yal of all that are received
into the Church by Baptism, or to it is Communion in the Lord's Supper, and of
all that are admonished, suspended, excommunicated or absolved, belongs to
the Major Vote of the People: And where this is denied them, they will have ^o
Peace.

It Is no time to palliate this mischievous Error. I resolve here to deal
plainly though briefly with the guilty, and therefore ask them,

12. Q. 1. If gross Ignorance deserve casting out, do not you deserve it that
are so grossly ignorant, even in a Point so plain, and of such practical moment?

Q. 2. Could you possibly be so proud as to think your selves capable of this,
if you had ever had true Humility, or knowledge of your selves?

Q. 3. Do not you forfeit even the right of choosing your Pastors that know no
better what a Pastor is, and that to be your Rulers is essential to their
office?

Q. 4. With what Eyes and Minds do you read the Scripture, that cannot there
see, that you are commanded to Obey them that have the Rule over you, for they
watch for your Souls, as those that must give account, that they may do it with
joy and not grief, for that is unprofitable to you, Heb. 3. 17. and v. 7.
Remember them which have the Rule over you; who have spoken to you the Word of
God. And v. 24. Salute all them that have the Rule over you, 1 Timothy 3. 5. A
Bishop must be one that Rules well his own House, else how shall he take care
of the Church of God. And (as the Steward of God. Tit. 1. 7. To give the
Children their Meat in due season, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. Know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, etc. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Let a man so
esteem of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of
God: It Is required of Stewa^^s that a man be found faithful?

Q. 5. Do you know what the word Pastor signifies? Do the Sheep Rule the
Shepherd and themselves?

Q. 6. The Pastor being but one, and you, having the Major Vote, are you not
his Rulers? And are you able to Rule him aright? Why do you not tell him what
and whom to reprove, etc.

Q. 7. Is it not Sacrilege to usurp a sacred Office? Like Uzzah's incense, and
C^rah's sin?

Q. 8. Who has required this at your hands? Who gave you Commission to Rule
the Church?

Q. 9* Do you not tremble to think what a charge you usurp, and what a dreadful
account you undertake to give? Will you answer for all that are un^neetly
Baptized, received to Communion, Excommunicated, Restored, etc. Do you not know
that this is a greater and harder part of the Pastors Office, than an hours
Preaching (which a well furnished man can do in the way that you like with
little or no study) If he must wholly attend this work, must not you do so, if
you undertake it? Do you know what it is to try so many Men and Women's
Knowledge and Professions and Lives, and to hear Witnesses, and hear each
person^ Plea for himself, and judge? Must you not leave your Trades for it, or
be treacherous? Even all of you, because the Major Vote must judge. O fearful
Self-condemnation!

Q. 10. Do you not know how certainly this will turn Churches into Confusion,
and the scorn of the World? Will you all agree in your Trials? Or will not one
think that person not holy enough, nor that profession of conversion
satisfactory, which another approves?

Q. 11. And where has God given the Major Vote the Government of the Minor? If
you can rest in ^ wrong judgment of the Usurping Majority, why not of the
lawful Pastors?

Q. 12. Why would you choose Pastors that be not wi^^r to govern than your
selves?

Q. 13. Do you not imitate those Diocesan^ that take on them the sole
Government of more Churches than they can govern: And do not you also undertake
what you cannot do?

Q. 14. Do you think it is not lawful for a great Lord like Abraham, that has
a hundred or many hundred Servants, to make a Church of his Family? And do you
think his Children and Servants should rule it by Vote, and try their Lord and
Ladies graces?

Q. 15. Do you not know that Baptism enters into the Universal Church as
such, and not into any particular Church without a further contract? And who
made you Rulers of the Church Universal? why you rather than another Church.
Did the People try and judge by Vote the Baptizing of the three thousand, Act.
3. and of Cornelius, and the E^much, and the Iailor, or the Samaritans, or any
one person? Prove it if you can, and defy not God's Word.

Q. 16. What if the Minister that must Baptize and give the Lord's Supper be
unsatisfied in your Judgment? Must he go against his Conscience in obedience to
you?

Q. 17. Is one abused Text [Tell, and hear the Church] ignorantly repeated,
enough to blind you against all this Evidence? If the King send to the City of
London to cast out an ill Member, does it follow that all the People must do it
by equal Power or Vote, or some as Rulers, and others as obedient Consenters?
your freedom and your choice of Rulers is not a Power to Rule. Papists and all
Sects abuse this Text.

13. Is not your Liberty to be governed only as consenting Volunteers enough
for you, unless being many Masters you receive the greater condemnation, Jam.
3. 1. I would you would read the Third Chapter of James, and the Fourth to the
Ephesians, and the Second to the Philippians, on your Knees, begging of God to
cause the Scales to fall from your Eyes, and to give you his Eye salve, that
you may see that you are poor, and miserable, and blind and naked: When the
greatest Millenaries say, This is spoken of the new Jerusalem in another World
in Paradise, do not repine that I apply it to you.

14. And that you may not be proud of your Church Liberty it self (not to be
forced to Sacraments and Communion, Let me tell you, what it is. It is a
Liberty to be sinful, disorderly and unhappy, resulting from that Necessity
which God in Nature and Scripture has founded, in that he will make no one
happy without his voluntary consent: If you will you may renounce your Baptism,
and your Childrens Church Membership, and your own: you may after a first and
second Admonition Excommunicate and condemn your selves, and renounce Communion
with the Universal Church, and with Christ himself; you have liberty to forsake
the Assemblies and Communion of the Church, and the help and conduct of true
Pastors: you have liberty to forsake God, and to be damned: O woeful liberty!
God will not pardon, or save you against your wills: And Kings and Bishops
should not force you to take a sealed Pardon, or any of the Childrens peculiar
part without your voluntary consent. As much as you blindly cry down Freewill,
I think you deny not, but men have a will free and able to Sin, and to choose
Destruction, till Grace cure that freedom. And verily I think to such ignorant
proud Dividers as you, it is but such a freedom to choose your own Teachers,
where Christian Magistrates have more Wisdom to choose for you: Not much more
than for Boys to choose their own Schoolmasters or Tutors, or Servants in a
Great man's Family-Church, yea or Sons, to choose their Pastor. Your most
desirable Liberty is to have wiser Governors and Choosers, and to have Wit,
Humility and Grace to obey them. (But yet to be the discerning Judges of your
Duty, and to do nothing against God's Law).

Q. 18. I would know why you do not also your selves Baptize and Administer the
Lord's Supper? Do you not know that the Ministerial Power of the Keys lies
more in judging decisively who should receive these Sacraments, than in the
actual delivering them. Do you not as the Lay Chancellours do by the Parish
Ministers, make them but the Executioners of their Decrees: You must Judge, and
your Pastors Execute, or as Cryers proclaim your Judgments.

Q. 19. When all the Church must try the Repentance or Conversion of a Sinner,
must he open his Sin before you all? If not, you will take him I doubt for no
true Penitent. If yea, then by what right can you make his secret Sins to be
openly known. Auricular Confession is better than such: And if an aged Person
for want of use be incapable of handsome Expressions about Religion, must he be
put to shame before you all? And as Mr. Noyes* says, Shall Lads thus uncover
their Father's nakedness?

Q. 20. Are you sure that upon a wiser Examination than yours, most of this
masterly Party would not be cast out themselves. In many things we offend all:
And he that shows not his religious Wisdom out of a good Conversation by
works of Meekness, but has bitter envying and strifes, his glorying is a lying
against the truth: Such Wisdom is not from above, but is earthly, sensual and
devilish: For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil
work.

I would advise the Pastors of such masterly People, to try and examine these
Tryers: I have given them a Catalogue of Questions for them at the end of my
Reformed Pastor: Try whether they can tell you, whether Christ has one* or
two, or three Natures? Whether he was Man before the World? In what Nature he
made all things? How the Godhead and Manhood are one Person? Whether each be a
part of Christ's Person? What the Soul is? How they will prove against an
Infidel that Christ is the Son of God? and that Scripture is true? What the
definition of Faith is? and of Justification, and of Regeneration? And the
Covenant of Grace? whether it be the substance of the Holy Ghost that is given
in to the Faithful, or only his Effects? An hundred such Questions, I doubt you
will find them ignorant Answerers of. It Is a sad case to have those try men's
regeneration that know not what regeneration is. If you will abuse the Letter
of the Text, the Women must Govern: Are not they of the Church? You Will say, They
are forbid to speak. Ans. That Is as Teachers; but what is that to Judging? And
are not you forbid to Rule, when you are commanded to OBEY?

The Church that must be Heard, is it that must be Told and Judge. But it is
the Pastors that must be Heard: For if all the People be the speaking
Reprovers, it will be a clamorous Church. And how without such clamor can the
multitude be heard? And must not all Dissenters have leave to enter their
Dissent against the Major Vote. What if Twenty be of one Mind and Twenty one of
another? Will one Voice satisfy the Consciences of the rest to acquiesce.

Q. 21. You build all this on the foundation of Rebellion against God and
Governors; as if the People were the first receivers of ruling Power, and were
by Nature made the Rulers (or Lawmakers) by a Majority over the Minor part:
which is so false, that as People they have no Ruling Power to Use or Give. All
Power is of God, and none have it but by his Gift: And he never gave Power to
the Children and Servants to Rule the Master of the Family; nor to the People
to rule the Pastor or Church, nor to the People to Rule the Justices or Judges,
etc. God made Governors so early, as prevented the Peoples making them in the
essential part of the office. It Is enough that they choose him (in Cases not
Natural) that shall receive it from God.

But I wonder not that Brownists and ignorant Sectaries receive this false
Principle of the Bodies Ruling Power by a Major Vote, when even Archbishop Laud
and Dr. Beveridge, yea, and judicious Richard Hooker, yea and many Papist and
Protestant Authors of Politics; and some Lawyers have published it: to the
deceiving of the undistinguishing Ignorant, and the confounding of Societies,
Civil and Ecclesiastical, and the robbing God of his Prerogative, and feigning
all Government as a Mushroom to spring out of the Earth, which comes down from
Heaven: Power is by descent from above.

Q. 22. I will ask you but this Question more, Whether now the Brethren called
Congregational, the most. Able and Zealous have consented to a form of Concord
which excludes the Peoples Government, can your Consciences choose but accuse
you as proud, and Enemies of Concord, if as wiser than all these you be so
foolish as to continue the Divisions.

And also when it is known that it was men of your Principles and Tempers that
caused our former Confusions, and pulled down after the King, the Parliaments
of all sorts, the Protector and one another, till they set up their Quarters
over the Gates, and plucked up the Floodgates that have these Thirty years
overwhelmed us, and hazarded all the Reformation: Is there after all this any
excuse for Dividers, or any pretense to extenuate their Sin? A Sin that has
cost England, Holland, Germany, Poland, and many other Nations dear. Yea, a Sin
that tore the very Apostolic Churches, and grieved the hearts of the Apostles,
and caused them to record their vehement obtestations against it. [If there be
any consolation in Christ, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and
mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being
of one accord and of one mind: Let nothing be done through strife or
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better than
themselves: Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others.]

Had you not been ignorant of Church History, but known what the Churches from
the Apostles days till now, have suffered by an hundred sort of Sects and
Heresies, and what the woeful effects of them have been, and what a Scandal they
proved to the beholders, and how shamefully they all ended, you would have
feared the very appearance of so direful an evil, and would not have cherished
a worm of so many feet in your bowels, even that IGNORANT PRIDE which has
caused all this.

What is there in this odious Sin, and this contentions Church State, that
should make men professing Godliness love it, and make the cure of it so hard.
Is Ruling a work of ease? Is there nothing but Honor in it? Is it not dreadful
to be accountable for the ill managing of it? Do you not reproach Pastors as
dumb Dogs and treacherous, that neglect their Duty: Yea, and Kings and
Magistrates if they miscarry: And are not you afraid of your account of a
usurped mis-performed Government? Can you judge whether your Pastors understand
the Gospel in the Language that the Holy Ghost has given it in? and whether
they rightly expound a thousand difficult Texts? and whether they decide
Doctrinal Controversies truly or erroneously? Or do you not rather cry up men
that are of your Opinion, be it right or wrong, and love those that are sick of
your Disease, and tempt such ignorant Teachers to speak and do that which
pleases the People, for fear of incurring their censure, ^^^^^ losing their
maintenance. It grieveth me ^o hear that some are drawn so far to concur in the
Peoples guilt, that they will reject from their Communion all that will
communicate with the most Godly Conformists; And make Adversaries say, that the
Question between us is, Whether Bishops or Women, or at least ignorant Voters,
should govern the Church. They say, The public Churches have Faults and Forms.
And have you no Faults? Had the Jews Church no Forms? Is not the whole Bible a
form of words for Instruction and Prayer and Praise? Obj. But they are God's
Words. Ans. Then God was for Forms. But your Bibles are all Man's words: Do you
think that Moses, the Prophets, or Christ were Englishmen? Or was any of the
Scripture written or spoken in English by them, or by the Apostles? Do you not
take every word in your Bibles on trust from English Conformists, or such men?
It was Conformists (all save one) that made the Translation of the Bible which
you use. The Papists say, It is a false Translation? How will you confute them,
and prove that you have any Gospel or Word of God? And is not taking all your
Bible as to the words on Trust from Conformists a greater degree of Communion
with them, than receiving the Sacrament at their hands in form?

I advise all sober Persons to be no Members of any such Church, as will engage
them to have no Communion with any others, but to be as guilty of Separation a^
they are themselves.

I mean, that you make not or perform any such wicked Covenant or Condition of
Communion with them, though their Leader should seem the most Zealous and
Devout: To renounce Communion with all the Church of Christ, save such a
Schismatical Sect, yea, or with all that have not purer Worship than our
Liturgy, or that are not purer Churches, is a Sin so heinous, as should deter
you from it. Though better be to be preferred, renounce not Communion with all
that have not better, lest yours prove worse. Had not the Public Churchmen
been guilty of Schismatical Separation, calling men from all Churches and
Worship save their own, and appropriating all Church Title and Communion to
themselves, they had been more blameless than they are. But while some silence,
and others separate, Concord is banished more and more.

And if the Imposing Party well consider this late Agreement, they will find
that there is nothing in, it that may make them think, that the same men will
be averse, to any just terms of a further Agreement, with those that have been
their Ejecters. They have agreed to take no Members out of any of your true
Pastoral consenting Churches, without a just hearing and satisfactory Reasons
to them. But I hope you take not all your Parishioners, even Atheists, Papists
and Infidels for your Church Members; No^ yet all your Auditors and
Catechumens, but only your Communicants: And is it not better that they be
Members of Nonconformists Churches than of none? I have elsewhere cited you the
Canons of a Council decreeing, That if the Bishop of the place convert not any
Heathens or Unbelievers, and another convert them, they shall be his Flock that
did convert them, (in my Hist. of Councils.)

Would they but first admit the Excluded to Public Lectures where the
Incumbent consents, it would prepare the way for further Concord. The Great
Reconciler will in due time reconcile and closely Unite his own. Amen.

Apr. 11. 1691. Ri. Baxter.

To the UNITED Protestant Nonconformists IN LONDON.
THough I was, by the Confinement of decrepit Age, and Pain, hindered from
having any part, in the Form or Contract of your Agreement, I think it my Duty
to signify my Sense of what you have done, and by the Publication of my old
Endeavors of that Kind, to promote the Execution. I greatly rejoice in your
very Attempt: That God exciteth you to a practical desire of speedy healing our
pernicious, shameful Strifes: Much more that you have so Skilfully made the
present Plaster for the Wound: No man does any thing so well, but it might be
better done: You must look that it should be assaulted by Cavil and Reproach:
Those that these Thirty Years have denied you Brotherly Communion with them,
will be loath you should be thought to have any Union among your selves: And the
Potent Schismatics that to divert the Infamy from themselves, have Stigmatized
you with their own Name, will be loath that your Concord should confute them:
while you offer your Reasons to prove that what they make necessary terms of
Ministration and Communion, would be to you if obeyed (not meddling with them)
no less than [deliberate Covenanted Perjury or Lying and renunciation of
repentance and amendment of Church-Corruptions, and of the Law of Nature and
Nations, and the Kingdoms Self-defence;] they must stretch their Wits, and gift
of Tongue, to make all this seem but a melancholy or feigned Fear, and that it
is but things indifferent that you refuse: As they call me Antiepiscopal, and
against the Church, because I would have more Bishops over a Thousand or many
Hundred Churches than One, and would have as many hands to do the work, at
least as are necessary to the Hundredth part of it; and would have more
Churches in a Diocese than one, and would have Incumbents to be Pastors and
Rectors: But dreaming Men that build Cities, or Travel in their Sleep, can
build more or go further in an hour (specially if they lie soft in a University
or a Great man's House, than a waking Man can do in a Year or in his Life. My
own Judgment of Episcopacy and Church Constitution I have often Published, and
you may see it in Lascitius and Commenius Books of the Bohemian Waldenses
Church Government.

Brethren, I hope you fix not your Bounds of Pacification, in the words or
limits of this Form of Concord, with a ne plus ultra. Either (when I am dead)
the Public Church Doors will be unlocked to your lawful Communion or not: If
yea, it will be so great a Mercy, that the Prospect of a Possibility of it,
will justify my Publishing my old Reasons against unnecessary Antichurches, or
Militant contentious Gatherings; But if God have not so much Mercy for this
Land, but that the Doors be locked up against desired Concord, or Venient
Romani, our Foreign Jurisdiction men will prevail to deliver up the Land to a
pretended Universal Foreign Power, and make all believe that it is Treason to
resist either a French or Irish Army, if they be but Commissioned to perform
it; Then your Concord with such as are not Enemies to Peace, will be a
comfortable help to your patient Sufferings, and may keep up some sparks of the
Reformed Religion from being utterly extinguished: And while you dwell in the
Secret of the most High, you may lodge under the shadow of the Almighty: And
may enter into your Chambers, and shut the Doors on you, for a little moment
till the indignation be over-past; and God be known by the Judgments which he
executes, when the wicked are ensnared in the work of their own hands. Thus
praying God to save you from violating the Concord you consent to, and from
being perverted by the ignorant Dividing sort of Teachers or People, and that
you will study Mr. Meade's Reasons against Division, well and seasonably urged,
I bid you Farewell.

Your Quondam Fellow Laborer, Ri. Baxter.
London, April 23. 1691.
The Contents of the First Part.
Chap. I. THe Necessity of Concord, and Mischief of unnecessary Separations
manifested, in Twenty of the ill Effects. Page 1. Chapter II. What is Incumbent on
the Pastors for the Prevention and Cure hereof. p. 13. Chapter III. The first
Difference with the Independents Reconciled, viz. Of the necessary
qualification of Church Members. p. 15. Chapter IV. The second Difference
reconciled: Of a Church Covenant. p. 19. Chapter V. The third Difference
reconciled: Of the extent of a particular Church. p. 21. Chapter VI. The fourth
Difference reconciled, whether a particular Church has Power in it self to
Ordain and impose hands on their chosen Pastors. p. 23. Chapter VII. The fifth
Difference reconciled: Of the first subject of the Power of the Keys; Or of
Right to Govern and Censure. p. 25. Chapter VIII. The sixth Difference reconciled:
Whether a Pastor of one Church may do the work of a Pastor in other Churches
for that time, being called to it. p. 32. Chapter IX. The seventh Difference
reconciled: Whether each particular Church has Power to exercise all
Government and Church Ordinances within it self, without subjection to Synods
or any other Clergy Governors as over them. p. 33. Chapter X. The eighth
Difference reconciled: Whether Laymen may Preach in the Church; or as sent to
gather Churches. p. 38. Chapter XI. The ninth Difference reconciled: Whether the
Parish Churches are true Churches. p. 41. Chapter XII. The tenth Difference
reconciled: Of taking Members out of other Churches, and of Gathering Churches
in other men's Parishes. p. 42. Chapter XIII. The sum of this Agreement reduced to
Practice. p. 55.
The Contents of the Second Part.
Q. 1. What are the necessary terms of Communion of Christians as Members of
the Universal Church? p 62. Q. 2. What are the necessary terms of the Communion
of Christians personally in a particular Church? Q. 3. What are the terms on
which Neighbor Churches may hold Communion with one another? Q. 4. What are
the terms of Communion between the Churches of several Kingdoms? (Foreign
Jurisdiction is confuted in another Book.) Q. 5. What is the Magistrates Power
and Duty about Religion and the Churches and Ministers of Christ: and the
Peoples to Magistrates, (further opened in a Treatise of NATIONAL CHURCHES.)
Chap. I. The Necessity of Concord.
THE Judgments of all wise and sober men must needs disallow both the Practice
of Division and unwarrantable Separation from the Churches of Christ, and the
common Liberty for Gathering Churches out of Churches now pleaded for, and too
much practiced by many; and also the Occasioning of Divisions and Separations
by over rigorous proceedings with tender Consciences, and imposition of
unnecessary things and too much severity against those that through infirmity
are guilty of some culpable Divisions and Uncharitableness: For it is not this
Oil that will quench these flames.

In order to the healing of our dangerous Divisions, I think it meet to deliver
my thoughts in the ensuing Method. 1. To show the Evil of our Divisions, and of
the common practice of Private Separated Churches, where in Public there are
able, godly, faithful Ministers, and such Public Churches as may lawfully be
owned: For I meddle with no other case. 2. To show what the agreeing Public
Ministers should do on their parts for the prevention and cure of these
Distractions. 3. To give you the true state of the Differences that have
occasioned them. 4. To propound those Terms by which a safe Reconciliation may
be made. 5. To which I should add (if it were not for being thought too bold or
confident) the Magistrates Duty, both in order to our Agreement, and in case we
will not be agreed.

I. Though I take not a Private Meeting, or a Tolerated Private Church for so
odious a thing in it self considered as some do, but confess that such may be
Good or Evil, as the Cause of the Assemblies, -- the Aspect of the Times, and
other Circumstances and Accidents shall make them, and doubt not but there may
be warrantable Separations from one or many particular Churches, where the
blame may lie upon the Churches, and the Private Assemblies sometimes may be
more justifiable than the allowed Public ones; yet as unnecessary Separations
and Divisions are a great transgression; so what the Aggravations of that
transgression are, and what wrong the Cause of God receives from the
Differences among the godly themselves, and the Divided and Private
Congregations that are gathered by occasion of these differences, in many parts
of England, I shall briefly show.

1. When in one and the same Parishes (the boundaries of the ordinary Churches,
as to habitation) there shall be diverse Churches, one Public, and one Private,
it will ordinarily cause great Disaffection and Contention among the Christians
of that place: There will be Pastor against Pastor, and People against People;
and one will be accusing another according to their several apprehensions, and
making the ways, and consequently the persons of each other to he odious or
unacceptable to others: And hereby Christian Love will be much quenched, and
Unity and Concord much overthrown, and all the Effects of Love abated, and the
odious remnants of Uncharitableness, Malice and Emulations will revive. Too
common and sad experience puts this out of doubt. Alas! what Factious Doctrine,
for Parties and against Parties are usually managed in Public and Private,
where these Divisions once appear? What unconscionable Censures pass too often
on one side or both? What bitter unchristian taunts and scorns, and reproachful
words? When public Writings so abound with these, and the Press is become the
common scold, and the most unchristian Language is spoken so familiarly to all
the Land, and uncharitableness and fury are afraid of being concealed, no
wonder if in private among those that are pleased with such discourse, the
Preacher sit in the Scorners Chair.

2. Uncharitableness and Divisions, are as plainly, urgently and frequently
prohibited, and condemned in the Word of God, as almost any sins that are: And
Love and Unity, Peace and Concord are pressed as much as any Duty of Man to Man.
Certainly these Great Obligations are such as smaller matters cannot dispense
with. And wonderful it is, that so many thousand, that abhor the Popes
dispensing with Oaths and Promises, and Subjects Duties, and with some of the
positive commands of God, can yet without remor^e of Conscience so easily, so
long, so confidently dispense with the greatest Duties of Man toward Man, even
with Charity it self, and the effects of Charity. He that must owe nothing
else, must owe Love, Romans 13. 8. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Verse 10.
Every Commandment of the Second Table is briefly fulfilled in Loving our
Neighbors as our selves. Verse 9. Yea he loves not God that loves not his
Brother. 1 John 4* 21. Love is of God; and every one that loves is born of God
and knows God: He that loves not, knows not God: For God is Love. 1 John
4* 7, 8. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his Love is perfected
in us. Verse 12. God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God,
and God in him. Verse 16. If any Man say, I love God and hates his Brother, he
is a Liar: For he that Loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he
Love God whom he has not seen: And this Commandment have we from him, that he
that Loves God, Love his Brother also. Verse 20, 21. Every one that Loves him
that begat, Loves him that is begotten also. 1 John 5. 1. We know that we have
passed from Death to Life because we Love the Brethren: He that Loves not his
Brother abides in death. Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer, and you
know that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him. 1 John 3. 14, 15. Yea
we ought to lay down our Lives for the Brethren. Verse 16. This is the New and
frequently urged Command of Christ, that we Love one another. John 13. 34. and
15. 12, 17. Gal. 5. 14. Iam. 2. 8. This is it that we must provoke each other
to. Heb. 10. 24. and that must continue* Heb. 13. 1. We must Love one another
with a pure Heart ^ervently. 1 Pet. 1. 2^. Yea by Love we must serve one
another. Gal. 5. 13. And Paul took this to be so Essential to our
Sanctification that he tells the Thessalonians, 1 These. 4. 9. that [as touching
Brotherly Love, he need not write to them, for they were taught of God to love
one another.] And can that be the way of God that dispenses with so Essential
a part of Holiness, or that secretly and unobservedly extinguisheth this holy
Love! Let Experience teach you, whether the present way of private separated
Churches, be not the opening a Shop, or Forge, for Military Engines against
each other? And under pretense of defending Truth, whether they be not the
Nurseries of uncharitable Wars among the Servants of the Lord?

And then as Love is extinguished, so the sinful fruits of the contrary Vice do
by such Divisions prosper and abound! And what weekly Bills of heinous sins
might we see, that are committed on these occasions, if all the envious,
slanderous, censorious, and other uncharitable words were open to our view that
many that profess the fear of God, are frequently guilty of. It is a sad
condition that tempts Christians to so much Sin, and quieteth their
Consciences in it, as if their horrid iniquity were their piety; and that
brings too many separated Churches under some such reputation as Alehouses
are fallen into (I speak it not in contempt but lamentation) which are taken to
be lawful, but places where so much Sin is committed, that it is a suspicious
sign for a M^n to be often seen in them, especially near home. As Swearing and
Excess of Drink are the ordinary sins of Alehouses, so Church dividing,
Censorious, Envious words, with more that I shall anon mention, are the too
common Sins of these Dividing Congregations.

And then as Love* so Unity and Concord is importunately urged on us in the
holy Scriptures, and the contrary condemned. O read and study that prayer of
Christ, that his Servants may be One, John 17. 11, 21, 22, 23. how high he
drives it, and how much he insisteth on it. His Church was then most spiritual
and pure, when it had the greatest Unity, Act. 2. 1. [ They were all with One
accord in One place] when the Holy Ghost did fall upon them! Act. 2* 42. [They
continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking of
Bread and Prayer] verse 44. [All that believed were together (yea and by the
power of Love, though not by Levelling destruction of Propriety) had all things
common.] Verse. 46. [They continued daily with one accord in the Temple -- ]
Act. 4. 31, 32. They were together [praying when the place was shaken, and they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost: And the multitud^ of them that believed
were of one heart and soul.] So Act. 5. 12. Many great faults we find had
tainted the Church of the Corinthians, the Galatians, and too many more; when
yet we find not that any Separated Churches were gathered by the godly, for the
avoiding these corruptions (nor that I remember, on any other occasion.) No
where do I read in the same Precincts or Cities, of any Churches separated from
the first Churches, but only the Societies of Heretics, that are so much
reprehended and branded with Infamy by the Spirit of God. Not one that ever I
could find of the true Believers, did take this to be his duty: Name any Church
that was separated from a former Church in Scripture, and held divided
Assemblies in the same Precincts, and was approved by the Lord. I find
Divisions in the Churches too many; some saying, I am of Paul, and some, I am
of Apollo; but I find none but those condemned of Heresy, that divided from
the Churches. Separation from the World was the practice of the Churches; but
separation from the Churches was the practice of Heretics only, as far as I
remember; or those that are charged with Schism at least; though I remember not
that mere Schism then rose so high. They that had the Apostles among them could
not easily fall to such a Crime, till they fell from the Apostles. And far were
the Apostles when they reprehended the Corruptions of the Churches, from
persuading Men to separate from them. (Though it is possible for such a case to
be, when that may be a Duty, yet all those faults enumerated by Paul, did not
make it so.) But contrarily they charge them not to forsake the Assembling of
themselves together, as the manner of some (the Heretics) was. Heb. 10. 25.
and [beseech them by the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ to speak all the same
thing, and that there be no Divisions among them; but that they be perfectly
joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. I Cor. 1. 10. 11.
[That they be all of one Mind, having Compassion one of another, loving as
Brethren, being pitiful and courteous, not rendering evil for evil, or railing
for railing, but contrariwise blessing, etc.] 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9. O how constant,
and how earnest were the Apostles in these Exhortations, and in answerable
Prayers to God. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. [If there be therefore any Consolation in
Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels
and Mercies, fulfill ye my Joy, (and what was Paul's so much desired Joy?) That
ye be like minded, having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one mind: Let
nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each
esteem other better than themselves: Look not every one on his own things, but
every Man also on the things of others.] Romans 15. 5, 6. [Now the God of
Patience and Consolation grant you to be like minded one toward another
according to Christ Jesus, that you may with one Mind, and one Mouth glorify
God. Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause Divisions
and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them:
For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies, and by
good words and fair speeches deceive the Hearts of the simple.] So 1 These. 5.
12, 13. Study. Iam. 3. throughout.

Abundance of such passages are before us in the Word, which tell us that this
Great and Necessary command of Love and Unity, is not to be dispensed with, nor
Divisions among Christians to be accounted small things. And shall men
professing the fear of God, go against such a stream of Holy Precepts? And be
sensible of a Swearers or a Drunkards Sin, and not of so great a course of Sin
of their own?

3. The Nature of Gods Graces in his Servants Souls is contrary to a way of
Separation and Division: As Fire would to Fire, and Water to Water, so would
Christian to Christian: Grace is sociable, and abhors Division as well as
Nature. Wounding is not its Delight. Love is an Essential part of the New Man.
The living Members rejoice together, and suffer together, and be not easily set
against each other; but it is hurt to all that is hurt to one.

4. Divided Churches are the Seminaries of Private dividing Principles; As they
proceed from such Principles, so do they cherish and increase them. They
espouse an Interest that is contrary to Catholicism and Christian Concord; and
therefore we find that they make it much of their Business to propagate it.
Whatever Opinion drew from the Communion of the Church, must be there pleaded
for against the Peace of the Church. And to have a Mutineer in the Army of our
Lord is bad; but to have Schools and Nurseries of Mutineers dispersed through
the Land, and favored by Godly Men, is far worse.

5. And certainly so far to forsake the Catholic Principles and Interest, and
be so void of a Catholic Spirit and Love, as to set a part against the whole,
or a smaller part against the Profit of the main part of Christ's Body, is a
thing much unlike the Christian Nature, and unbeseeming a sensible Member of
Christ. With what hearts do such dividing Brethren read all those passages of
Scripture that speak of the Unity of the Catholic Church? We have all one End,
one Hope, one Law. [There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as we are called in
one Hope of our Calling: one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism (one Baptismal
Coveanting with God) Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. one God and Father of all; who is above
all, through all, and in us all; therefore must we endeavor to keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace] v. 3. [For as the Body is one and has many
Members, and all the Members of that one Body being many, are one Body: so also
is Christ: For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body -- ] 1 Cor. 12.
12, 13. And the Spirit and Ministry are given to this one Body [for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be no more Children tossed
to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the fleight of
men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking
the truth in Love, may grow up in him, in all things, which is the Head, even
Christ; from whom the whole Body fitly joined together and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes increase of the Body to the edifying of it self in Love.]
Ephesians. 4. 12, 13 14, 15. Note here the Unity of the Catholic Body, and who is
the Center of the Church, and in what way it prospers to perfection? and all
will tell you of Unity in Christ, and Communion of the several parts in Love.
[God has tempered the Body together, having given more abundant honor to that
part that locked; that there should be no Schism in the Body, but that the
Members should have the same care one for another: and whether one Member
suffer, all the Members suffer with it, or one Member be honored, all the
Members rejoice with it: Now ye are the Body of Christ and Members in
particular, 1 Cor. 12 24, 25, 26, 27. O how much the Nature and Unity of the
Church Universal, even the Body of Christ, is forgotten by most men, that
withdraw into separated Assemblies upon those grounds and terms, as condemn or
cost off most of the Universal Church of Christ.

And how do they look upon the face of the World, if indeed they know what
state it is in, and has been in, when they can find in their hearts to keep up
our Divisions? (of which more anon).

6. Moreover our Divisions and Separations do much destroy the Power of
Godliness: partly as is said, by destroying Love and all the Operations of
Love, wherein it principally consists: and partly by diverting Professors of
Religion from Practical Doctrine, Conference and Meditation, and filling them
with Fancies and Opinions and Passions. So that when once in a Town there is
Church against Church, and Pastor against Pastor, almost all (or too much) of
their time is taken up in wrangling and contending and making their Cause good
against each other; and they strive not to overcome each other by Meekness,
Patience and Love: It is the raising of an Ecclesiastic War through all the
Quarters of the Land! And few thrive by these Wars above any Wars. Mark whether
Holiness, Love and Heavenliness appear as much in their Families and Lives,
where this War is raised, and Fire kindled, as it did before.

7. Moreover, it keeps out too often a Saving work of Grace, and turns off
many that were coming on, and crusheth fair hopes too often in the bud. Many a
Minister has rejoiced in the Hopes of a Conversion which seemed to be begun,
on the younger sort especially of his Hearers: And when they have seemed to be
somewhat humbled, changed, resolved for a Holy Life, suddenly some Divider or
other lays hold on them, and turns the stream of their Thoughts and Z^al,
upon Opinions and barren Controversies, and spoileth our hopes of the work of
Grace, and forms them up into Contentious Hypocrites. And alas how apt are
such separated Assemblies to ^empt men to this miserable case? even as Ale
houses are to make men Drunk. Sober men may be there; but there is the Nursery
of Opinionative Religion.

8. But there is no effect so grievous to my thoughts, as the common hardening
of the ungodly. Who sees not how it makes them think unbelievingly or
contemptuously of all Religion, when they see so many Churches and ways, and
hear them so condemn each other, they think they may warrantably condemn them
all, and say as bad by them, or speak as contemptuously of them as they do of
each other. They think they are as well already, as turning to such a divided
People can make them? And when they think of turning, the Tempter asks them,
as the Papists use to do, Which Party will you turn to? Why rather to this,
than all the rest?] What a readiness did I see to entertain the way of
Godliness presently after the Wars in many places, that had before been under
the Power that most reproacht it! Till they saw us by the Ears among our
selves, and see us fall into so many Parties, and then they turned their
reverence into contempt.

Let no man fly to God's Decrees here, and say, that [Offences must be, and
Heresies must arise that the approved may be manifested, and that the Elect
cannot be deceived to Perdition] For Sin is Sin, and Misery for all this: They
may on those Grounds as well let Physicions have leave to give men Poison, or
any m^n to set our Towns on fire, because nothing can be done against God's
Decrees? It is as true among the Indians and Turks, that the Elect cannot be
deceived to Perdition, and that God knows who are his, as here: and yet I
hope all Christians will lament the Sin and Misery of the World of Infidels,
and Idolaters, and pray and endeavor (as far as they can) their recovery by
the Gospel: We must fetch no such Conclusions from any Decrees of God, as shall
hinder from praying that his Name may be Hallowed, his Kingdom come, and his
Will be done in the Earth as it is in Heaven: Such as may encourage us to dig
Pits for the Blind, and cast such stumbling blocks in their way, and be
Servants to the Tempter and Enemy of Souls in hindering them from Salvation.
And what can we to hinder them more, than to bring the Churches and Holy
Worship and Ways of God into doubt or contempt among them?

9. Our Divisions make us and the Cause of God to be our Adversaries Reproach,
and his Name is evil spoken of among them through us. They have taken it up as
their common Argument to draw men to Popery, (and now at last to Infidelity),
that we are a Babel of Confusion, and have no Unity among us, and they point to
our several Parties, and ask men, How they know that this is in the right more
than all the rest? and why he will cleave rather to one of them than to
another? Can a tender Conscience, and one that regards the interest of
Christ, forbear to mourn while the Name of God is daily reproached, and his
Servants made the Song of Drunkards, the Scorn of Papists and all their
Adversaries, and the byword of the Profane, by our Divisions?

10. These Divisions and Antichurches do hinder the Holy Order and Discipline
of Families, when the Husband is of one Church and the Wife of another; or the
Parents of one, and the Children of another; or the Master of one and the
Servants of another; or one Child and Servant of one Church and another of
another: This hinders the Governors from seeing effectually that their
Families be soundly instructed, and kept from Heresies, or neglect of
Ordinances: It hinders them from taking a due account of their Children and
Servants of what they learn: It divides Families, and induces the Children
and Servants to refuse to join in Family Prayer and other Duties with their
Parents and Masters, and to refuse to hear them repeat those Sermons, which
they refused to hear from the Minister himself: And it turns the Holy
Conference, and charitable Communion of Families, into perverse Contendings
about their several ways.

11. And these separated Churches do much hinder the Labors of the Ministers
of Christ, and the true Reformation of the Churches. It grieveth the Souls of
Faithful Pastors, to see that their Children, or those that they hope have
somewhat of Christ in them, shall be the Instruments of Satan to hinder their
Labors; and it grievously weakeneth the Builders hands when they are thus
opposed by those for whom they have spent themselves, and in whom they should
have Comfort after their Travels, and from whom they should have help for the
promoting of their work with others; Drunkards and Swearers in some places,
hinder not the Ministers work so much as Antichurches, that make it their work
to draw men to themselves, and to that and do find themselves engaged to speak
against the Public Church and Ministry, and to that End to quarrel with or
reproach the Doctrine or Worship there performed. And how can th^se Ministers
reform their Churches, that are forsaken (yea and opposed) by so many of those
that should be the Materials of their Churches, and should be their strength
against the Profane, and help them in Reforming, and in the exercise of
Discipline? It making Discipline it self (on both parts) also to be of almost
no Effect, when he that is cast out of one Church can presently step into
another, and perhaps under pretense of greater Holiness, and there reject those
that rejected him, and seem more Innocent than they.

12. These private separated Churches also do give great advantage to the
secret Enemies of the Truth, and Corrupters of Sound Doctrine, to creep in and
sow the Tares of Heresies among poor Christians that have no Pastor at hand to
contradict Deceivers. And most of the horrid Errors of these times, that have
poisoned Souls, dishonored God, divided us and disturbed our Peace, have crept
in at these back Doors: Few have made their Entrance at the Public Assemblies,
in comparison of those that have come in at private Meetings. And here it is
that Papists and other Adversaries have opportunity to Play their Games, and to
lay their Trains of Gun. Powder to blow up both Church and State, without the
Odium of being Traitors and Powder-Plotters, yea, by the Countenance and Favor
of the State. It will not secure us, that Papists are excepted from Liberty
among us, as long as a Vizir, or another Name, and some Equivocation shall be
to them a Patent for Liberty and Toleration.

13. Moreover, our Separations tend to the grievous Pollution of the Ordinances
of God, by setting up profane Persons as Ministers, and encouraging profane
Administrations, and Societies, and so dis^o^ouring the Christian Name, and
hardening the Ignorant and Ungodly by these means. For when those that are most
Zealous against Profaneness are withdrawn, and leave the ignorant careless
People to themselves, they will have Ministers like themselves (if such are
to^erated) and they will make up such Churches as are incapable of Discipline,
and will go on as smoothly in the Abuse of Sacraments, and the Praises of God
and all Holy Ordinances, as if they were the only Christians in the Land, and
theirs the only regular Churches, and none but Sectaries differed from them. Or
if they were not allowed the Public holding of Undisciplined Churches, and
profanation of Holy Ordinances, yet as long as all may have what private
Assemblies they please, they will there at least have their Ignorant unworthy
Ministers to fit all their Humors, and there they will Profane the Name and
Holy things of God. And O what abundance of provoking Sin will be committed in
England every Week, and this through the Separations of Pious Persons, and the
toleration of the State, as for their Indulgence? Do we make Laws against the
Profanation of the Holy Name of God, by Swearing and Cursing? and shall men
fearing God let loose, (yea further) the Rabble of the Ungodly through the
Land, in the Profaning of the same Name, and Holy Ordinances, and the Office
of the Ministry, under a pretense of Worship? The case of Nadab and Abihu, and
the Bethshemites and Uzza, do tell us, that God is more jealous about his Holy
Things, than in our common Affairs.

14. Moreover, It is an actual Reproaching of all our Solemn Assemblies, to
separate from them; as if you openly proclaimed them to be such, that an honest
man may not lawfully hold Communion with. Whereas the Interest of Christ is so
great among them, so much of his acceptable Worship, and so many of his
faithful beloved ones are there, that he will not take such usage well. If we
must needs have private separated Assemblies, let the Servants of Christ so
close together, that the Ungodly and not they may be the separated part, and
may be driven into Corners: Let the Holy ordered Assemblies of the Saints be
the Public Assemblies, and let not the ungoverned have that honor.

15. It is an unspeakable Mischief of these Antichurches and Divisions, that
they are the great Impediment to Universal Communion of all the Servants of
Christ in the Land: which is a work of great Necessity to the common good, and
exceeding desirable to all Christians. Were we but one, One Body by some common
Bond and Communion, our Rulers would quickly be resolved in the Point of
Toleration, Heresies might be easier extinguished, and Profaneness might
through all the Land lie under such Discouragement as might much abate it;
whilst every where the unanimous Servants of the Lord did keep out all the
obstinate Impenitent Persons from the Public Communion; and he that is cast
out of one Church is cast out of all; and none in any Country would entertain
him: Whereas now they have ordinarily a room in the most Public Assemblies, or
if one Church reject them, when they travail into other Parts, they are as
acceptable as others: and so Communicatory Letters are made useless. But the
Principal thing that I here intend is, that excellent Security of the Gospel
and Godliness to our Posterity, and the welfare of the Nation that might be
happily promoted by this Unity: For then the Church and Commonwealth might be
so complicate and commensurate as would be the Strength and Glory of them both:
They may hold in Life, but never attain that stability and Glory that God has
propounded to them, and given them means for, till (for the generality) the
Members of the Church and the Freemen
of the Commonwealth are the same: (I say not [the Subjects] but [the Freemen]
that is, those that shall be capable of Governing or electing Governors.) Then
will not the Interest of Church and State be set in Opposition against each
other, nor Rulers keep up sinful jealousies against the Gospel and Ministers of
Christ, then will the Magistrate support and second the Ministry and Church,
and the Ministers and Church be the faithfullest obeyers and defenders of the
Magistrate: And then we shall not need to fear when one Parliament has made us
wholesome Laws, and owned the Gospel, left a majority of malignant impious
Choosers should give us another that will undo all, and cast out the chief
Blessing and Glory of the Land. Were Church and Commonwealth but duly
commensurate (as aforesaid) then sober men and faithful to the interest of
Christ would choose our Parliaments, and so a Succession of Righteous
Governors might be secured to the Land! A Mercy of inestimable Value, that
would advance Britain yet much higher above any Nation under
Heaven! And what clear Reasons could I give for this; and how easily could I
answer all considerable Objections, and how easily might it be quickly put in
execution, if it were not for this one most lamentable Evil, even the
unreconciled Parties, and the undisciplined Churches and Antichurches among us?
Till then, we hold our precious Mercies on such slippery terms, as should
awaken all honest men to look after a better Security: God can make Wolves
befriend his Lambs, and the Serpentine brood that are haters of Piety to choose
Pious Governors: But Wonders of Mercy are fitter for a grateful remembrance,
than for secure Expectations, when we wilfully cause our peril.

16. And it is an aggravation of the Sin of these Dividing ways, that they are
continued in such a time and place as this! When men have nothing forced on
them that they were wont to complain of; and nothing wanting but what they have
such more than ordinary helps to procure in the Public Churches* Formerly it
was the Prelacy, and Li^urgy and Ceremonies that by the Separ^tists was
pretended as a justifying Cause of their Separation: (And yet then the ancient
Nonconformists themselves did write against them more than any did): But now
they can pretend no such things as these: Who forces any thing upon their
Consciences, which the tenderest Conscience of understanding People has cause
to refuse? And if Discipline be wanting, they have much encouragement to
endeavor and hope for a supply: If the Ministers be bad, they may cast them
out: We all desire it: If they be faithful, they will be willing to go as far
as they can in the exercise of Discipline: and it is the discouragements,
Divisions, and withdrawings of those that should help them that does much
disable them.

And it seems to me a great Aggravation that usually this Sin is the fruit of
so many other Sine! How often is it brought forth by a proud over-valuing of men's
own Opinions, Parts and Piety? and by uncharitable censoriousness of others,
and a vil^f^ing extenuation of all that is good in them! And how ordinarily
does it bring forth disobedience, murmuring, and disdain of those that were
their Teachers? and evil speaking against the things that they understand not?
And too commonly it proceeds from laziness! When they will not be at the
trouble and cost of doing their parts to reform the Churches where they are,
they will lazily separate, to save them a labor: It is a harder work and
requires much more Self-denial to join in the admonishing of the several
Ungodly Persons in the Churches, and follow it in God's way till they are
reclaimed or cast out, than to get in private among a few that will put us to
no such trouble. I see not but these Persons while they cry up Discipline,
would destroy it. As some on one extreme refuse to exercise it, so these on the
other extreme will be Members only of such Societies when they shall have
little or no use for it, and consequently exclude it, or at least where it
shall not cost them much. Lay this together, and consider whether in such times
as these, when Godly Magistrates are ready to encourage us, and Godly Ministers
willing to do what they can in Reformation, and no burdens are forced on their
Consciences, and we refuse not their Communion that differ from us in tolerable
Points, that yet in these times men will fly from our Assemblies, and set up
Antichurches as they do! Alas, what pievish Children are in the Family of God.
One part now separate into private Churches, because we have not Prelacy,
Liturgy and Ceremonies; and another part separate, even when they are cast out,
because they be not pleased in all things, that look to the other Extreme!
Doubtless the Separatists in our days of Reformation and Liberty, are much more
unexcusable, than they were in the times of Ceremonies and Violence. What!
cannot all the Endeavour^ of Magistrates and Ministers by such a Reformation,
that many others think too much, yet sweep the Churches clean enough for you to
enter? In other Ages it was the affliction of the Godly to be cast out of the
Church by evil Governors: But now how many do cast out themselves? The Jews
persecuted the Disciples by casting them out of their Synagogues, Ioh. 16. 2.
and 12. 42. And will you cast out your selves from the true Churches of Christ?
And that from such Principles, and with such concomitant aggravating faults as
those forementioned?

17. And it is an aggravation of this Sin that it is continued against so much
and long Experience. Have we not long found by Experience how it quenches
Charity, and hinders the Gospel, and cherishes Errors, and causes the rest
of the forementioned Evils? And shall we love it, when we have found it Evil?

18. And it is no small aggravation of this Sin, to consider what England is,
and what all the rest of the World is at this day, and what it has been from
the beginning until now: Had it not been the greater Sin to have separated
from* the Jewish Church (much worse than English Congregations) when all the
rest of the World were Aliens, and much further from God than they? Five Parts
of the World are Idolatrous Heathens, and Mahometans: A Sixth part only make
any Profession of the Christian Name: Not a quarter (I think) of that Sixth
part are Protestants: How ignorant and rude the Eastern and Southern Churches
are, is lamentable to relate: Few of them have any Preaching, but only Homilies
and Liturgies read. What the Papists are I need not tell you. Not the Twentieth
part of the World ^^^ adm^^^nts: And among these, alas, how few have so much of
the life of ^ining th^^ among them as the meaner sort of our English
Congregations? And has Go^ called this spot of Earth, this narrow Island, a
corner of the World, to honor with the greatest luster of the Gospel, and true
Reformation and Godliness? and yet will these men withdraw from the Public
Churches here, as if no Public Church on Earth (but the few of their way) were
worthy of their presence: Are they no more thankful for England's singular
Privileges? nor no more humbly sensible of their own unworthiness? And would
they separate from all the Public Churches almost in the World?

19. These continued Divisions among our selves are a great discouragement to
our highest Rulers from seeking the healing of the Churches abroad. The
greatest Service they can do to God, is to reconcile the Churches, and bring
them to Agreement, and strengthen them thereby against their Adversaries. And
all good men desire this of them, that they would improve their interest to
this end. But alas, with what heart can they set upon it; as long as they are
unable to reconcile and unite the best of the Subjects here at home; It was the
Grecians Jest upon a great man among them, that he went about to reconcile all
the Princes and States of Greece, and could not reconcile his Wife and her Maid
that lived unquietly at home. And do not we prepare such Entertainment for our
Governors attempts in so good a Work?

20. Lastly, I heartily desire that our Divisions and Antichurches may not
prepare renewed Wars, and Calamities to the Commonwealth. Certainly the Body of
the Nation is much disaffected to them: And I wish that for their sakes they
grow not disaffected to the Government, and ready for Enterprises that beseem
them not. But I much more fear, left animosities among the several Parties
should make them busy and bold in their Enterprises against each other, and
still seeking opportunities to oppress one another, and to advance themselves.
And lest the several Parties be to their Prince, like the many Wives that some
of the Jews had to their Husbands, that were still jealous of his Affections,
lest he loved this or that Wife better than the rest: Every one looks to be
most esteemed. And jealousy is apt to break its bounds. But I will not
Prognosticate, but forewarn: If Unity be our Strength, and Division our
Destruction, let us pity the calamitous Church, and not set fire on the
Commonwealth. And let all Christians (that are such indeed) lament our
distances, and lay to heart the Sin and Calamity of our long Divisions; and at
last let Catholic Principles and Affections be entertained by us, and let us
pray, and study, and seek, and submit and deny our selves for the Unity of
Christians, and the Churches Peace.

For my part I have spoken much of this from certain Experience: The Evils of
Divisions and Antichurches I have seen abroad: The Ease and Comfort of Unity
and Peace I enjoy at home! O what a Mercy is it to me, and the poor Flock that
Christ has committed to my Charge; what a help to my Labors and to their
Souls, that we have not Minister against Minister, nor Church against Ch(...)
any separating Parties to ensnare men; but that we Serve the Lord ^^^, to ^^
Heart and Soul, one Mind and Mouth. If I can procure the e^^^^t of this Mercy
no further, I will compassionate the Church, and rejoice in it at home.

Chap. II.
THE Second part of my Task I shall briefly dispatch, which is, to show what is
incumbent on the Pastors of the Church, for the prevention of such Separations,
or their increase. Having spoken the most that I think necessary of this, in
the end of my Catholic Key, Part 2. I shall refer the Reader thither for the
Rules of the Churches Peace, and the terms on which they must be put in
execution. I shall only here reassume these few particulars, suitable to our
case.

I. If we would prevent our Peoples Separations, we must not make the door of
the Church so narrow as to shut out the faithful, though infirm. If we keep
them ou^, we cannot for shame child them for not coming in. The principal
thing that here we must avoid, is large and particular Professions of Faith,
containing Controvertible Opinions, and Points that many true Believers are
unsatisfied in; and also the imposing of unnecessary Ceremonies. The Holy Ghost
has decided this difficulty to our hands, and left it us as a standing Rule,
Romans 14. 1. That we must receive even him that is weak in the Faith, but not to
doubtful Disputations. And that we must [be like minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus, and therefore receive one another as Christ also
received us, to the Glory of God.] Romans 15. 6, 7. Men must be called to no
Profession but of Points plainly contained in the Holy Scriptures, and the
ancient simplicity must recover us to the ancient Charity and Unity: And though
more knowledge be necessary to the Pastors than to all the Flock, yet must the
Scripture sufficiency be maintained, and necessary things distinguished from
unnecessary, and those that are necessary to the being of the Ministry, from
those that are necessary but to the Better being; and nothing should be imposed
on Pastors themselves as necessary to the Communion of Churches, but Points
that indeed are necessary to such Communion, and those (if possible) in
Scripture phrase.

But because Heretics will subscribe to Scripture and to ancient Creeds, and
simple Confessions of Faith, therefore many have thought that other kind of
Confessions must be made which they cannot subscribe to: But by that course the
mischief of Heresy is not so much avoided, as the mischief of Divisions
caused; and all because the right way of obviating Heresies is mistaken and
overlookt. Heresy in the Mind is cured only by Doctrine, and is not it that we
have here to obviate; but Heresy in the Mouth must be corrected by Discipline;
and it is not a better Rule or Law than Scripture for them to Subscribe that is
the Remedy, but a careful Execution of that Law against them, 1. By casting
them out of our Communion after a first and second admonition, when they are
proved guilty, and 2. By the Magistrates restraining them according to the
quality of their offense. He that has a Conscience to Subscribe to all the
Scriptures, and yet contradict them by his Heresy, may do so by any Form that
you can impose on him, that has any appearance of fitness to be so imposed. We
must not make new Laws, every time the old ones are misinterpreted or broken.

Our great danger in England is of Popery, above any thing except Impiety it
self. And the strength and upshot of all the Papists arguings, is [ Where was
your Religion and Church before Luther?] which by their Exposition is, [Where
was your Thirty Nine Articles, or your Assemblies Confession, or any Church
that Successively from the Apostles held them.] This is their all, (which
indeed is nothing.) LET US OWN AS THE RULE OF OUR RELIGION BUT THE HOLY
SCRIPTURES, AND EXPRESS OUR BELIEF IN SCRIPTURE PHRASE, (without distorting it
to look toward any Heretical or Erroneous Sense,) AND THEN WE MAY EASILY TELL
A PAPIST WHERE OUR RELIGION AND CHURCH WAS BEFORE LUTHER;] yea the simplest
Women, that understand but what Christianity is, may thus be able to defend
their Religion against the Cavils of these Learned Adversaries: Let us not
therefore give away so great an advantage, and withal divide the Church of God,
by departing from the sufficiency of the Scripture, when it is the principal
point wherein a Protestant differs from a Papist, and that wherein we
unanimously oppose them.

II. If we would avoid Separations, we must keep up holy Discipline, and not
leave the Churches so polluted by the abundance of impenitent impious Persons
as may frighten tender Consciences from us: Discipline that is pleaded for must
be faithfully practiced. We must not step out of the way of God by unj^st rigor
to please any Men, nor to avoid their offense; but we must cast out those that
should not be in the Church, the rather lest those withdraw that should be in:
And herein a principal part of our Care must be, to set Godly people a-work
upon their own Duty, in a loving, humble admonishing of Offenders, that we may
convince them how sinful a course it is to expect that Men should be cast out,
before they have been dealt with on the Terms, and by the degrees that Christ
has appointed; and to run away from the Church because they will not do their
Duties.

III. To this end that our Churches may be capable of Discipline, the Duty of
Confirmation, must be so far restored, and faithfully practiced, that none may
be admitted into the Number of Adult Members for the Communion proper to such,
till they have made a credible Profession of their Faith and Repentance, and
renewed their Baptismal Covenant, (consenting to the State and Duty of Church
Members, if they are stated in a particular Church) and so are Approved by the
Pastors of the Church. Without this Discipline cannot be exercised, as I have
showed in a Treatise for Confirmation.

IV. Lastly, if we will prevent Antichurches and Separations, Ministers must be
studious, that they may be able to confound Gainsayers, and then they must be
holy, harmless, humble, self-denying, charitable, manifesting tender Love to
all that they deal with, prudent, and very vigilant and industrious, thinking
no cost or pains too great for their so great ends. Because we have neglected
these four necessary things, Separations have afflicted us.

Chap. III. Difference I.
THE third part of my task is, to state the Controversies that occasion our
present Divisions in England: There are (besides intolerable Heretics, as
Seekers, Quakers, etc.) but three Parties that I remember that trouble us much
with unjust Separations and Antichurches. The first is that new Prelatical
Party that unchurch our Churches, and nullify our Ministry, and Ministerial
Performances; and draw into private Meetings, supposing that only Laymen or
Schismatics with whom they must not Communicate, (because they are not
Ordained by English Prelates) have possession of the public Churches. To these
I have spoken in my Disputation of Church Government, and therefore shall say
nothing here.

The Second Sort of Separatists are those called Anabaptists, that deny
Communion with our Churches, supposing us to be unbaptized: To these I shall
speak by themselves in the Offer of an Agreement. The Difference is
sufficiently made known.

The Third Sort are those that of old were peculiarly named Separatists,
together with some of those that are now called Congregational or Independents,
who withdraw upon some Differences in Points of Discipline, which Differences*
it shall now be my work to state: And because I would be brief, I will annex
the Accommodations to the Differences.

I. The first Point of Difference, which I think is no Difference, and yet is
it that indeed makes almost all the Difference, is about the necessary
Qualification of Church Members. That this makes almost all our Difference
(except what disowned neglects of Discipline, and other such faults among us
occasion) is known to us by experience, who hear the Members of the private
Churches allege this as the principal Point of Difference, for our accusation
and their own justification, that we take those for Godly that they take not
for such. That Doctrinally here is no difference between the Parties, but what
is between the Persons in the same Parties, is in their words apparent. The
Independents say that the Members of the Church must be [visible Saints.] The
Presbyterians deny it not. The Presbyterians say that Sincerity or real
Sanctity is not of Necessity to Visible Church Members: The Independents say so
to, and no wonder; for else the Visible Church would not be Visible, nor could
any Man be known to be a Member, because we know not their Sincerity or real
Holiness.

Master Norton Resp. ad. Apollon. p. 7. 11, 12. thus fully opens their mind;
that [All and only those Competentes that are Ecclesiastically (...) Believers,
and walk orderly are the next matter of a Visible Church and to be admitted.]
By Ecclesiastically Believers he tells us that he means [such as are faithful
in the judgment of the Church, or such as toward whom whether they are
positively faithful or not, we are bound to carry our selves in common Church
Duties as if they were faithful.] To this he takes these four things necessary.
[1. A Confession of the Fundamentals, and other points of See Rutherford
Peaceable Plea, p. 92. etc.
Religion, which are of necessity to avoid No^es Temple Measured, p. 62, 63,
64, 65, 66. excellently disputes this Point. Of the Judgment of all sorts of
Protestant Divines on this, see my Dispu^. of Right to Sacraments.
a scandalous Life. 2. Such a declaration of the Experimental work of Faith
which contains the substance of Conversion, though it may be counterfeit. 3. A
Conversation Twisse Vind. Great. l. 3. Er. 8. 6. p. 77. Agnosco libenter:
Fid^les dici minime merenter, apud illos, quotquot fucatam ipsorum professionem
po^^runt dignoscere.
not scandalous. 4. A testified Subjection to the Gospel of Christ, and his
Government.] Gilespi^ Aar. Rod, p. 514. I believe no Conscientious Minister,
would adventure to Baptize one who has manifest and infallible Signs of
Unregeneration. Sure we cannot be answerable to God if we should Minister
Baptism to a Man whose Works and Words do manifestly declare him to be an
Unregenerated Unconverted Person. And if we may not initiate such a one, how
shall we bring him to the Lords Table?


There is nothing in all this but what the Presbyterians consent to, with these
Explications, which we doubt not but will be allowed. 1. That this excludes
not the Infants of Believers from being Infant Members of the Church without
these Qualifications in their Persons. 2. That if Infant Members grow up and
claim a place among the Adult, it will These. S^lmur, Vol. 3. p. 59* Th. 39.
[Sacramenta non conseruntur nisi iis qui vel fidem habent, vel saltem ^am prae
se ferunt, adeo ut nullis certis argumentis compertum esse possit eam esse
ementitam.]
then be meet that all this be done by them. 3. But yet that it is one thing to
admit them into the number of the Adult Members of the Church Universal, (as
the Eunuch, Rutherford Due Right, p* 231. [Such (as are ignorant of the first
Rudiments and Foundation of Religion) are materially not of the Visible Church,
and have not a Profession, and are to be taught; and if they wilfully remain
in that darkness are to be cast out.
Acts 8. and others were by Baptism,) and another thing to admit them into a
particular Church also And that the consent to Christianity is it that is
necessary to the first, and the consent to the Duty of a particular Member in
that Church, is necessary only to the Second, (which supposes also the First)
4. That there is great difference between a Baptized Person that needs but
Confirmation or Repentance, and a Converted ^nfidel, that is to be Baptized: It
is meet to have some Testimony of the Life of the former, because he is in
Covenant already: But the Life of the latter is not to be supposed to be
upright, but ungodly, and therefore we may not require of him a Testimony of
his upright Life, but a Confession and Lamentation of his ungodly Life, with a
Consent and Resolution for new Obedience: Upon this much the Apostles Baptized
their Converts, without delay to try their Lives. 5. And there is difference to
be put between what is necessary ad esse, and ad been esse: Necessitate medii
and praecepti. And the Profession of Christianity, that is, of present Faith
and Repentance, and this by any tolerable intimation or signification, is all
that is necessary to the Being of such Adult Members: And that the Testimony of
his good life is only necessary (when it may be sought) to the performance of
our Duty, and the purity of the Church. If we admit a Man of another Country
without Testimony or Trial, upon his mere profession, or if we do so through
haste, or negligence, or multitude of Persons that we have to deal with in
populous places, this does not nullify his Membership: Nor yet if we admit him
upon a dark and less express Confession. And, 6. It is a Man's Profession that
is his Title*condition to Visible Membership; and his Life is but a
Confirmation of that; and where there is not opportunity of enquiring after
Men's Lives, it is sufficient even in point of Duty, that we receive his
Profession, if no Man will bring witness of a Life so vicious as may invalidate
that Profession. 7. And I think we may take it for granted that Mr. Norton's
Second demand of [a Declaration of the Experimental work of Faith, or substance
of Conversion] is satisfied in the Profession of Faith and Repentance, or in
our renewing our Baptismal Covenant: For doubtless all the substance of
Conversion is contained in these: He that professes that he believes in God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, renouncing the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil, or that he believes and repents, and is willing to live a holy Life,
does profess Conversion.

The Sum of all is this, which we are agreed in: [ A Credible Profession of
Christianity, that is, of Faith and Repentance, or of Holiness,] is that which
is the Title-condition to our Membership in the Church Universal, and its
Privileges: And [A Credible profession of Consent to be a Member of this
particular Church] added to the former is the condition of our Right to
admittance into such a Church. And a careful Pastor will and should consider
how Men's lives do answer their profession: But if nothing be brought from the
Life to invalidate it, the profession it self must be accepted: And therefore
if no such Omissions or Commissions are proved against the person that desires
our Communion as are of sufficient weight to prove that the persons profession
is Incredible, it is to be received, because every Man is supposed to be better
acquainted with his own Heart, than the Church is or can be: And every Man is
to be supposed Credible till he can be proved Incredible by Evidences that in
foro Ecclesiae are satisfactory: Especially when Men have to do with a
Heart-searching God, and their Everlasting Life or Death lies at the stake,
and when the holy Life that they engage themselves to live, is so contrary to
Flesh and Blood, and seldom are there times so good, in which it is not
reproached at least by the ungodly, we have reason fide humand to believe Men's
profession in such a case. And as God will have Men's Salvation or Damnation lie
more upon their own choice, than upon any other Man's, so is it his wise and
gracious Order, that their Church Mercies or Judgments, their standing in the
Church or being out of it, shall lie more upon their own Choosing or Refusing
than on the Churches or any others: And therefore if Men dissemble in their
profession, the Church is blameless, and it is themselves that bear the blame
and suffering: And so if they keep out themselves, or force the Church by their
Impenitency to cast them out. But if the Church should keep out Men that would
come in, that do not wilfully refuse Gods Terms, these persons would lay the
blame on the Church, and say, Lord, I would fain have entered, but could not be
received.

Let any Man read Mr. Norton, and such others, and he will allow me to
conclude, that de lege in this point we are agreed, even in two words, that [ A
Credible Profession] is the Condition or Qualification requisite in the Adult.

Yea and we are agreed also what are the Qualifications that must make a
profession Credible: Viz. that it be (or seem to us to be) tolerably
Understanding, Deliberate, Free or Voluntary, Serious, and not Invalidate by
contradictory words or practice, sufficiently proved. And for the matter of it,
we are agreed, that it must be a profession of all the Essentials of
Christianity, and that it must be a Consent to present and not only to a
distant future holiness. Even as a promise to become a Husband or Wife to
another a Month hence, is not Marriage, but a promise of Marriage.

We are agreed also that Extremes in the Execution of this Rule, must be
cautelously avoided. As on one side, that we do not take that to be a
profession that is none, and that we take not that for Credible that is
Incredible; and that we take not that for Understood that is not tolerably
understood, or that for deliberate, voluntary or serious that is not so, or
appears not so: And that we be not careless when it may be done, in inquiring
how Men have kept their Baptismal Covenant, and what their Lives are, before we
Confirm them, or Approve them for the Communion of the Adult: And that we
refuse not to hear what just exceptions can be brought against them: Lest we
frustrate Church Order and Ordinances, and nullify Discipline, and pollute the
Church. And on the other side we are (in the Doctrine) agreed, that Hypocrites
will be in the Visible Church, and that we must not refuse those that have the
least knowledge of the Essentials, though they are not able in the Congregation
to express it, nor privately in any but broken and unhandsom words; and that
withal make the most imperfect Credible Profession of Faith and Repentance, and
Resolution for Obedience: And that we must not break the bruised Reed, nor
reject the least of the Lambs of Christ, but receive them that are weak in the
Faith, and not of our own Heads reject any persons Profession as Incredible,
without sufficient Reasons for such a judgment of it.

Indeed there is abundance of difference in these points, but 1. It is in the
Judgment of particular Persons and Cases, and not in the Law or Rule of our
Proceedings. And, 2. It is a difference between Persons, and not between
Parties: Some of the Congregational way are more rigid than many of the
Presbyterians, in Judging who are Credible Professors, and who not: Some will
hear the Reports of a change, when most Presbyterians, will be satisfied with
the profession of Holiness, though it have grown up with the person from his
Infancy, and he knew of no change: Some look for such Evidence from a Holy
Life, as may it self directly suffice to ingenerate in the Church a persuasion
that the person has Saving Grace, and so they make the Life to be Testimonium
primarium, vel primario aequale: When most Presbyterians take the Profession
for the Primary Testimony, or condition of Right; and so receive it directly as
Credible, by such a Humane Faith, as one Man Credits another by in all Civil
Transactions in the World: And they look at the Life but as a Secondary
Testimony, which may Confirm or Invalidate the former: Though after Church
entrance, the Life is directly looked after in the Discipline of the Church.
But this difference is between Men of the same parties; Independents differ
from Independents, and Presbyterians from Presbyterians; and perhaps a hundred
Men of the same Congregational way, may most of them gradually differ from each
other in the strictness or laxness of their Executions, as one is more or less
Charitable than another, or more or less Tender, Compassionate, Strict, or
Rigid, Censorious, or Remiss, etc. which may occasion difference.

I conclude therefore that about the great disturbing point, viz. The Matter of
the Church or Qualification necessary to Members, Presbyterians and
Independents, differ not Doctrinally (though practically persons of each party
differ among themselves;) and therefore that here is No Need of a
Reconciliation.

Chap. IV. Difference II.
THE second Point supposed to be a Difference, is about the Necessity of a
Church Covenant. Here is no Difference at all between the Learned of each
Party, that I am able to discover. We are Agreed, 1. That our consent to
Norton. Resp. P. 28. ^3. De Veritate talis Ecclesiae to nomine dubitare
peccatum ducimus. Q. 3. Quale saedus sufficit ad formam Ecclesiae? R. Faedus
implicitum sufficit ad esse: faedus explicitam ad magis ordinatum esse
desideratur.
the Covenant of Grace is it that makes us Christians, and so Members of the
Universal Church; and the Profession of that Consent (which regularly is to be
done in Baptism, Parents professing their Consent Rutherford Plea, Page 85, 86.
An explicit Vocal Covenant whereby we bind our selves -- by entering in a new
Relation to such a Pastor, and to such a Flock, we deny not, as if the thing
were unlawful -- Nor deny we that at the Election of a Pastor, the Pastor and
People tie themselves by reciprocation of Oaths to each other; the one to
fulfill faithfully the Ministry he has received of the Lord; the other to
submit to his Ministry in the Lord: -- 5. Any Professor removing from one
Congregation to another, and so coming under a new Relation to such a Church,
or such a Ministry, is in a tacit and virtual Covenant to discharge himself in
all the Duties of a Member of that Congregation. --
for their Infants benefit; and the Adult professing their own Consent, does
instate them in their Visible Membership, 1. The baptized Person being Offered
to God, and so solemnizing his own Covenant Act; and God by his Minister
accepting him into his Church.

2. And we are Agreed that a signified Consent is necessary to Membership in a
particular Church: that is, A Consent to the Relation of a Member; which
includes a Consent to the necessary Duties of that Relation, and an acceptance
of the Benefits.

3. And we are Agreed that any tolerable signification of this Consent is all
that is absolutely necessary. And that an express Church Covenant is not
necessary to the Being of a Church or Member: but that one that by actual
Submission and Communion has signified his Consent, may be truly a Member.

4. And yet we are Agreed, (because Ignorantis non est Consensus, and for many
other weighty Reasons, expressed in my Book of Confirmation) that where we can
require and procure it, without a greater accidental Detriment to the Church,
it is needful ad been esse to the Churches Reformation, and to the Persons
firmer engagement, to the satisfaction of others, and the due execution of
Discipline, etc. that the Consent be as open and express as may be: As nothing
is more necessary, excellent, honorable, reasonable, than a Holy Life, and
nothing that less fears the light than the Cause of God, so he would have his
Cause to be openly owned, and managed above board, and would be confessed
before men, and have all men know what they do, that take him for their Master.
It is an honor to God and the Gospel, and an excellent advantage to the
ordering of the Church, and the saving of the People, to have all brought to as
serious and solemn an Engagement to the Living God, as conveniently can be
procured. I doubt not but the Presbyterians would join with their Brethren, to
Petition the Sovereign Rulers that all our People may be brought to this. Let
no man think so uncharitably of them, as if they desired that Christ should be
but darkly and implicitly owned by the Churches, and as if they would not have
Church Members know what they do; Doubtless they cannot but be sensible how
much it would further their Ministry with the People, if Magistracy would but
assist them herein against the stubborness of ignorant and wilful men; that men
might be compelled to submit to Instruction and Approbation, and make a
credible Profession of Christianity, owning their Baptismal Covenant, and by
this engage themselves to submit to the Officers, Discipline and Ordinances of
Christ, in the Churches where they desire Communion. The thing that the
Presbyterians have stood upon is no more, but to vindicate the Truth of our
Churches against Separatists, that have denied them to be true Churches,
because they had not an explicit Covenant. They deny not that such a Covenant
may conduce much to the well-being of the Church; especially if we have the
Magistrates help to take off the Peoples prejudice.

Note here also, that by [a Covenant] we mean nothing but [exprest Consent] and
that [exprest Consent] is indeed [a Covenant]. And that by [an* Implicit
Covenant] we mean but [a Consent that is less express] and not [that is not
expressed at all]: For Consent cannot be known to the Church without some
Expression.

I conclude therefore, that (whatever some particular persons may be guilty of)
there is no real difference between the Presbyterians and Independents in the
Point of a Church Covenant: and therefore here is no work for a Reconciler.

God forbid that any faithful Ministers of Christ should fight against that
much which is profitable to the well being of the Church, merely because
without it the Church may have a Being. Then must we Plead for hunger and want
and calamitous Diseases that leave us but the being of men. Nature and the
Scripture Presidents in the Old Testament, and the Doctrine of the Apostles,
and ancient Practice of the Churches, do satisfy us of the usefulness of Holy
Covenants, prudently, seasonably and seriously made. Of this I have said more
in my Treatise of Confirmation.

Chap. V. Difference III. Of the Extent of a particular Church.
THE third Point wherein they seem to differ, is about the Extent of a
particular Political Church, viz. Whether it be a single Congregation, or
diverse Congregations? Whether the Ecclesia Prima or a particular Church of the
first Generation, as distinct from a Combination of Churches, should be no more
than can meet in One place, and hold personal Communion in the Worship of God?
Here is an appearance of some difference, but really none that will find a
Reconciler work. Some Presbyterians distinguish indeed between a Worshipping
Church, and a Governed Church: and they would have Norton. Illius Eccl^siae
constitutio quae uno in loco ordinario ad eultum* Dei celebrandum convenire
requeat (ob suam multitudinem) est illegitim^, ^ non tamen quoad ^jus Essentiam
sed quoad adjunctum numerositatis. Rutherford Due Right, Page 301, 302. [1. The
ordinary Power of Jurisdiction because of nearest Vicinity and Contignity of
Members is given by Jesus Christ to one Congregation in an Isle. 1. Because
that Church is a Church properly so called. -- A Congregation is a Church
wanting nothing of the Being and Essence of a Church. Yet is it in complete
Land. Minist. Ius Div. Minist. Part 2. P. 82. [These Angels were
Congregational, not Diocesane. Ib* The Asian Angels were not Diocesane Bishops,
but Congregational Presbyters seated each of them i^ One Church, not any of
them in more than One.
a single Congregation to be one Worshipping Church, but many conjoined in
their Pastors to be the first or lowest Governing Church. But that is but in
cases of necessity, when there are not Elders enough in the single Worshipping
Church. So that really both Parties are agreed, 1. That a particular Church may
consist of One single Congregation if it be but furnished with more than one
Elder for the work of Government. (Though for my own part I am quite out of
doubt that where one man only is the Pastor or Governor of a Church, that man
only may Govern that Church, and do the work of a Pastor to that Church*) 2.
And they are agreed, that a Church that does not or cannot ordinarily See Mr.
Hooker's Concession of many Meetings in one Church, in Mr. Cawdrey's Review, P.
148.
meet in one place, may yet be a true particular Church.

In times of Persecution when the Church dare not publicly appear, or has no
capacious Rooms to meet in, but are forced to meet dispersedly in Houses, it
may not only be lawful but most convenient, for some that meet in one House and
some in another, and some in a third, a fourth, a fifth, to be all united in
the same Pastors, that shall visit them severally as they see cause and have
opportunity, and rule them all. And in a well ordered Church there is none
denies, but that in less Public Meetings the Church may be distributed into
several Houses: and that the Aged, Sick or Lame, or any that by distance cannot
frequently come to the same most Public Meeting, may yet have Chapels of
Ease, or be allowed to meet in Houses rather than not at all: This all agree
in. And I think few Presbyterians, if any, will deny, that it is most
convenient, regular, and suitable to the Ends of a particular Church, (which is
Personal Communion in Worship, and Holy Order) that where it can be procured,
the whole Church (except the Sick or Lame, or necessarilyhindered) may
frequently, if not most usually meet in one Assembly. So that either here is no
work for a Reconciler, or a very easy work. For the Presbyterians say, that a
particular Church May consist of one Congregation (and I believe they will say
that ordinarily it is most fit): and the Independents say, It Must consist but
of one Congregation, or as many as May meet together for Personal Communion in
Worship, if they have Liberty; but that this is not Essential to the Church.
Either then here is no Difference, or if there be, it is thus reconciled in a
word. The Presbyterians [ May be] shall yield to the Independents [ Must be]:
The Licet to the Oportet. Secure them but of more than one Elder in a Church,
and I dare warrant you that all the sober Moderate Presbyterians shall readily
and heartily yield to this. They have no conceit, that there Must needs go many
Congregations to make a particular Political Church.

If any Presbyterians refuse to condescend so far for Reconciliation, another
easy remedy is at hand. Let each have Liberty to hold that Church which in the
extent is suited to their Judgment. Let them that needs must have a Church of
many Congregations, hold it, if the people do consent (as few will) so they
will faithfully do the Pastoral work. If they will join three or four Parishes
together as the lowest Governed Church, let them have their Liberty (exercising
just Discipline in them). But let others also have their Liberty that think it
meeter, if not necessary, that the Church be but of one Congregation. The
distance and quality of people may very much alter the case in this point. In
places where four Parishes at great distance would afford but enough for one
particular Church (if any such Parishes be) it may be the more tolerable to
have ordinary Meetings in the several Parishes for Worship, and Discipline
administered (and sometime the Lord's Supper) in a fuller meeting of all the
Church: But I hope we are in no necessity that this should be an ordinary case.
But Liberty in these cases may well be granted.

Chap. VI. Difference IV.
THE fourth Point of Difference is, Whether a particular Church has Power in
it self to Ordain and Impose hands on their chosen Pastors? This Difference is
easily Reconciled. For, 1. The Presbyterians hold that regularly it is fittest
that the Pastors of diverse Churches Norton. Resp. P. 99. Toti multitudini
Ecclesiae competit examen Pastorum per mannuum impositionem, eorundem ordinatio
in Eccl^sia homogenea sed non in officium Ecclesiasticum; quia officium
Ecclesiasticum recipitur invocatione, non ordinatione, idque a Christo
immediate, non a tota multitudine.
conjunct do Ordain, because of the Interest and Relation which they suppose
each Minister has to the Church Catholic, yet withal they deny not but he
has a true Ordination, that is ordained by more than one Pastor of the same
Church. Id. p. 100. Vicinis insuper ordinary consultis in Ecclesia homogenea
competit fraternitati auxilio and Consilio Presbyterorum vici^orum, and
prudentum aliarum Ecclesiarum, P. 101. Populus in judicando dirigi potest ac
ordinary debet a judicio aliorum Pastorum, Electionem vel prae^unte vel
concomitante. Requiritur Con^ilium aliorum Presbyterorum and Prudentum propter
insufficientiam in Ecclesia infirmiori: Propter salatem in amplitudin^
Consiliarii in Ecclesia instructiori: in omnibus propter Communionem
Ecclesiarum. P. 103. Propositio illa B^llarmini [Non sunt very Pastores, qui
non sunt a veris P^storibus ordinati,] vera est ordinary; se^ extra ordin^m
minime necessaria. Ju^. Ib. p. 105. Quam vis in Ecclesia been constituta non
debet, aliis quam Presbyteris Ordinandi munus mandari, in defectu t^^e^
idoneorum Presbyterorum, potest non-Presbyteris mandari. Ames.
2. Though they deny (and justly) that Imposition of hands in Ordination
belongs to the People, yet they judge not an irregularity in that Ceremony of
force to nullify the calling of the Pastor. 3. If a man that is duly elected
and qualified, be in Possession of the Ministry, without a Regular just
Ordination (as if it were but by Ruling Elders, or by one such with the
people), though such an Ordination is not to be it self approved of, yet being
upon a Doctrinal mistake, we may well hold Communion with such Churches,
leaving the guilt of their Error on themselves, when we cannot remedy it. 4.
The Congregational Brethren hold that in case they have no Officers in that
Church, the Counsel In Ecclesia constituta actum ipsum ordinandi ad Presbyteros
pertinere ultro concedimus.
and Help of other Pastors may, and ordinarily ought to be made use of: and
that ordinarily they are not to be held P. 106. Toti multitudini Ecclesiae
(...) competit collatio potestatis claviu^ in Ministr^s, aut tota, illa
potestas, qu^ Ministri^ Officium Ecclesiasticum tribuit.
true Pastors, that be not Ordained by true Pastors, and that in a constituted
Church the Act of Ordination belongs to the Presbyters: and that the
multitude confer not the Power of the Keys, but Christ immediately. And that
the counsel of Neighbor Pastors is requisite, not only to a weak Church,
because of their insufficiency to Judge, but also for the safety of a well
furnished Church, by the Amplitude of Advice, and in all Churches, for the
Communion of Churches. And I think, they grant it Lawful, though not Necessary,
that these Neighbor Pastors lay on hands as well as counsel.

This much being Doctrinally agreed on, our Practical Agreement is easy; thus,
1. Let the Doctrinal point of the Necessity of more Pastors to Ordain be let
alone, and left to each Man's Liberty (it being no Article of our Creed, nor a
Credendum of absolute necessity;) and seeing the Congregational party hold that
more (from Neighbor Churches) May join in Ordaining, and the Presbyterians
hold that, they Must (in point of Duty,) in all reason the May be should yield
to the Must: And therefore let the Congregational de facto on their own
Principles admit of Neighbor Presbyters herein: If they will not yield in a
thing by themselves confessed Lawful for the Reconciliation, and Communion of
the Churches, the guilt of unpeaceableness will be theirs. Especially while
they have the Election of their Offices, and no detriment is like to arise by
it to their Churches.

2. But if any of them have not so much love to Peace and Communion of Churches
as to yield to this, the Presbyterians can in consistency with their
Principles, hold Communion with them for all this, as Churches, though
deficient, having first disowned their disorder. And therefore their Pastors
may join with us in our Assemblies, and we may as Brethren hold a loving
correspondency, though we own not their defects.

Other differences (Doctrinally not the least) there are among us. 1. Whether a
Man may not be Ordained a Minister, sine titulo, without Relation to a
particular Church, but to the World and the Church Universal? And so, 2.
Whether such may not be Ordained without popular Election? And, 3. Whether
therefore a Man be not sometime in time, A Minister of Christ, before he be The
Pastor of this particular Church. 4. And so whether the peoples Election be not
only to make him Their Pastor, and not A Minister of Christ in general. 5. And
whether such an Unfixed General Minister, may not Preach, Baptize; and also pro
tempore administer the Lords Supper, yea and Govern a particular Church that
pro tempore calls him thereto; the peoples call or consent being necessary
for the Exercise, but not always to the Being of the Office or Intrinsic power:
(As a Physicion licensed to practice in general must have Men's personal consent
before he be Their Physicion) But, 1. These I cannot call properly differences
between the parties, because I think the Congregational are not themselves
agreed about them. 2. If they were, yet they are such whose practice our
Reconciliation is not much concerned in. Let every Man in these Opinions be
left to his liberty, and it need not hinder our Agreement or Communion. For my
own Opinion about most of them, I have expressed it, Disput. of Church
Government 1. and 2. and about some more of this nature.

Chap. VII. Difference V.
THE Fifth point of Difference is, about the first subject of the power of the
Keys? Or more plainly and limitedly, of the Right of Church Government, and in
particular of Censures. And here the difference seems greater Against the
peoples Power of the Keys Rutherford Peaceable Plea, and in his Due Right of
Presbyteries, and many more have written at large, and unanswerably taking the
Keys for [Government or Pastoral Administrations.]
than in any of the rest: And with some it is so. Some have made the
Congregation by a Major Vote the Governors of the Church. Against this as
intolerable we have much to say. 1. There is no power but of God: But the power
of Church Governing is not given to the people by God; therefore it is none.
The Minor is good till a power be proved, and the peoples Commission produced;
which never yet has been attempted with any considerable appearance of Truth.
Rutherford's Plea, p. 6. The Power of the Keys is given to the Church of
Believers, as to the end, [for the Edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.]


Obj. The Keys were given to the Church in Peter, Mat. 16.] Ans. Mr. Norton p.
45. [Sin per Ecclesiam Representtaivam intelligitur Ecclesia talis proprie
dicta* h. e. Ecclesia virtualis, vic^-Ecclesia, Ecclesiam repraesentatam
subjective repraesentans, atque ad^o vi delegationis habens potestatem ^arum
negotia ex^quendi jure D^i; hoc sensu simpliciter negamus Ecclesiam
repraesentativam.]
1. The most learned and moderate of these Brethren P. 4. Their Power of
Choosing is a Power about the Keys, but not of the Keys: And it is common to all
Believers who are not to take Pastors as the Market goes upon a blind hearsay,
etc.
say, that There is no such thing as a Lawful Representative Church, therefore
Peter was none. 2. It lies on them to prove that Peter represented the Major
It Is commonly granted them, that the people regularly should choose their
Officers, where some unfitness of their own does not forbid it; but that
necessarily they must consent to his Relation, or else he cannot Exercise his
Office on them. And it is granted them commonly [according to Cyprian's words,]
that the people also have a great hand in the Rejection of unworthy Pastors,
and that in case they prove intolerable, and they have no more regular way to
depose them, after sufficient patience and warning they must forsake them. But
none of these are Acts of Church Government no more than for a Corporation to
choose the Major, or for the Servant while he is Free to choose his Master, or a
Scholar his Schoolmaster, or a Patient his Physicion, or for the Soldiers to
forsake a Traitorous Commander that would deliver up their lives unto the
Enemy. It Is one thing to be a Church Governor, and another thing to choose or
refuse a Church Governor.
Vote of a Congregation, in receiving the Keys. Till they have proved it, we
take them to have said nothing. It suffices us for a disproof. 1. That no such
thing is spoken. 2. That the Keys of the Kingdom, are in Scripture phrase
significant of Stewardly Government, which is in Scripture assigned to the
Pastors over the people. 3. That Peter was not a private Member himself, much
less a Congregation; but a Pastor, and a single Pastor, Bishop or Apostle. 4.
That the same power is elsewhere given to all the Apostles, ( John 20. 21.) but
not to private Members, or to Congregations of such. 5. That John 20, 21, 22.
the power is described to be a power of Remitting and Retaining Sins, annexed to
their Ministerial Mission, and therefore such as belongs not to private Men.
Dr. Owen was at last against all Governing Power in the people, and for the
Pastors Government only.


Obj. 1. Cor. 5, 4, 13. The Church is commanded to deliver the Incestuous
person to Satan, and to put away the wicked person from among them.] Ans. 1.
That was but Executively, Paul having himself most solemnly past the Sentence,
v. 3, 4. [For I verily as absent in Body, but present in Spirit, have judged
already as though I were present concerning him that has so done this deed, (
Paul you see does judge: And that) in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when
ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, (What then does he decree to do?) with
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one to Satan, etc.]
which with the Excommunication, it is most probable contained a Corporal
miraculous penalty (as Elimas was struck blind, and Ananias and Saphira dead,
etc.) so that [to deliver] is the act that Paul himself resolved to perform, at
their meeting: The Text [(...)] is not [I have judged concerning him,] but [I
have judged him] even [(...), etc.] [to deliver such a one.] But if any will
rather take [delivering] here to be the Churches act than Paul's, yet it is
plain that it is after his Judgment or Sentence, or [Condemnation] as the
Syriack has it; and therefore that it is but, 1. The solemn declaration. 2.
And Execution of the sentence already past.

2. But if Paul had left the Work to them he wrote to, there would have been no
proof that the Censure had been committed to the people: Here are two works to
be done: The Sentence, and the Execution, (that is, avoiding Communion, etc.)
and accordingly two parts of the Church to do it, the Pastors to Censure, and
the people to Execute it, by actual avoiding or putting away. Now if Paul write
to an Organized, Governed Society to [deliver to Satan and put away] no Man can
hence prove that he commits the same parts of the work equally to all the
parts of the Society: No more than he can prove, if the Prince write to this
Borough [to cast out a turbulent Member] that he intends to equal the people
with the Magistrates in the work, or to commit the same part of the work to one
as to another: But rather it plainly imports (and no more) that every Man in
his place obey the command.

Obj. Matthew. 18. Tell the Church] authoriz^th the people. Ans. 1. It is
incumbent on the affirmers to prove that it is the whole Body of the people
that is there meant. And some think this Argument disproveth it, [That Church
which must be heard, must be told ( If he hear not the Church.) But the whole
Congregation is not the Church that is to be Heard; therefore it is not the
Church that is to be told.] The Major seems plain, because else the
Equivocation in the word [Church] would make the matter not intelligible. The
Minor they prove, because the whole Congregation cannot speak* and be heard,
without confusion: Nor are the Representers of the people in speaking: If they
be, then here is a word for a Ministerial Representative Church.

2. But yet for my part I shall yield that it is this whole Congregation that
is here meant that must be told. But my answer then is the same as the last to
the last objected Text: It is the same Church that has Officers and People,
the same Body that has Eyes, and Ears, and Hands: But it does not follow that
the Ears, and Eyes, and Hands, are the same Members: Or if the Man have a
command to Hear, See, and Work, that he is therefore commanded to do all these
by the same Parts. The Church may first Hear by her Officers, and lastly Hear
by the Congregated people, and Execute by them, and yet not Censure or
Admonish, or Absolve by them. All the Church must hear at last, and each part
do its proper work in casting out.

Arg. 2. If God have made the Pastors the Stewards, Overseers, and Rulers of
the Churches, commanding them to Rule well, and the people to Obey them as
their Rulers, then is it not the people that God has made the Rulers. But the
Antecedent is express, 1 Cor. 4. 12. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. Acts 20. 28. 1 These.
5. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and 3. 1, 5. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 5. It is intolerable
abuse of Scripture to suppose that it is so self-contradictory as to make the
same persons the Rulers and the Ruled, and to command them to obey others as
their Rulers whom it would have to Rule them, and be obeyed, and to command
them to Rule well whom it would have to be subject.

Arg. 3. (To be briefer in the rest.) This Doctrine of popular Rule destroys
the very Essence of a Political Church: For as in a Civil Political Body the
Pars Imperans, and Pars Subdita are Essential to it, so are the Ruling and
Ruled part in a Political Church: So that the Being is gone, and the Body
dissolved into a Community, or ungoverned Company, if the Governing part be
taken down: As here it is: For the people are made Governors, whom God never
made so, and so indeed are none. And the Officers being a few to the people,
are supposed to be subject.

Arg. 4. And this course introduces (having destroyed that of Gods
Institution) a New Species of a Church.

Arg. 5. And it sets the people on a Work that they are incapable of. Their
parts allow them not to judge some cases, but secondarily as obedient to their
Guides, (as some Heresies against the Original Text, etc.) Their Callings and
Necessities allow them not time for all that work that to a faithful Government
is required, it being such as takes up with Ministers, a great part of their
time.

Arg. 6. And it sets up an hundred and one, to be Governors of ^n^ty nine,
without any Scripture command or president, if not to the oppres^ or dividing
of the Church. Where did Men go to Voting in Scripture for Acts of Government?
And where find we that the lesser part are to be Ruled by the greater? What if
the lesser part be the wiser, or in the right, and say as God says (in judging
of a Heretic or such like) and the greater part be more ignorant and partial,
and contradict God, and cast out an Orthodox Man as an Heretic? By what Word
of God are the smaller number bound to take them for their Rulers that can but
get the casting Voice?

But yet though some do thus differ from us in the Essentials of Church Policy,
we are here in no danger, I think, of a continued distance from the
Congregational party, but may quickly be Reconciled, if indeed there be any
real difference among us. For, 1. The Brethren that we have to do with do
expressly reject and write against this Doctrine as Brownism (it is their own
word) See Dr. Taylor's 2d Disswasive very* well on the Text, Dic Ecclesiae. Mr.
T. Goodwin, and Mr. Nigh Pref. to Mr. Cotton's Keys, p. 5.
which say they [doth in effect put the chief (if not the whole) of the Rule
and Government into the hands of the people, and drowns the Elders Votes, It Is
no contemptible case that Mr. Cawdrey puts Review, p. 151. Are not a company of
Women with the Pastors a true Church, having all things Essential to it? And
have they the Ordaining, Admitting, Governing power by Vote or not? If not,
then is it not in a Church of Saints as such, but in the true Governors by
Office, or in none.
which are but few, in the Major Vote of theirs.] And they [give unto the
Elders or Presbytery, a binding power of Rule and Authority proper and peculiar
to them. Ibid p. 4.
]

2. It is usually confessed by the most Learned of them that the Elders are the
I must profess that Scripture and Reason speak so plainly that Pastors are Gods
Officers to Rule. Rulers must Rule, and the Ruled obey, that I admire that wise
and good Men can find a temptation to err in so plain a case.
Rulers of the Church, (for the express Scripture cannot be denied) and that
(say they) two or three, or more select persons should be put into an Office,
and be trusted with an entire interest of Power A Church in a Prince's or
Noblemans House, will consist of perhaps a Lord and Lady and their Children,
and a hundred or two hundred Servants: Now can any Man think it agreeable to
Gods Word, that the Servants because they are the Major Vote, (and the Children
a^ Age with them) shall question, examine, and censure by Excommunication their
Parents and Rulers?
for a multitude, to which that multitude ought, by a command from Christ, to
be subject, and obedient, as ^o an Ordinance to guide* them in their consent,
and in whose sentence the ultimate formal Ministerial Act, of binding or
loosing should consist: This power must needs be esteemed and acknowledged in
these few to have It Is a true and weighty Speech of Mr. Cawdrey, ib. p. 155.
[These destructive courses of Levelling Church and State, proceed from the
placing of all Power Originally in the people -- ]
the proper Notion and Character of Authority, in comparison of that Power
(which must yet concur with theirs) that is in a whole Body or multitude of It
has been made a Controversy whether Bishops or Pastors may Excommu^te a
Prince: But if his own Family (...) just and meet) should be a Church, ^ave him
Examined and Excommu^ed by his own Servants out of that Family-Church methinks
should seem a ^a^der case*
Men, which have a greater and nearer interest in those Affairs, over which
these few are set as Rulers. Jid. ibid p. 7.
] And as long as they confess that the Pastors are the Rulers and the people
must obey, I think* in sense we are agreed.

3. And though many of them say that Co^ton Keys', p. 33. The Brethren of the
Church are the first Subject of Church Liberty, and the Elders thereof of
Church Authority: And both together of all Church Power needful to be exercised
within themselves.
the Power of the Keys are in the Church or people, yet they usually tell us
that it is but Privilege and Liberty which they mean by Power and by Keys, and
that as distinct from Authority: So that it is but a misuse of Terms, and a
false Exposition of a Text, that they are guilty of, rather than an Error in
the thing it self.

4. And Jid. ib. p. 3. Norton page 74, 75.
they confess also that this power of the Pastors [they have immediately from
Christ (in respect of a mediation of delegation or dependence on each other)
and are the first Subjects of the power allotted them.] They say that [the
Office of Rectors is received immediately from Christ, and to be exercised in
the Name of Christ] and that [it is the Designation of the person that is from
the Church, but the Application of the Office from Christ.] Mr. Noxton adds,
p. 75. [ Distingu^ndum accurate inter officium ipsum, and conjunctionem
personae cum officio: Officium est a Christo conjunctio talis personae cum tali
officio est ab Ecclesia: Christus confert authoritatem illi personae quam
eligit ad hec munus, and quasi praesentat Christo Ecclesia,] that this is the
very truth, supposing Ordination also to have its place) I have manifested
Disput, of Ordinat.

The truth Iudicium de coercendo poenis corporalibus, est Magistratus:
Iudicium, de actionibus Pastoralibus praestandis, an non, est Pasto^um:
Iudicium de obediendo vel non obediendo est subditorum. D^ Propriis actionibus
unusquisque praejudicat, officium discernendo.
is, the people have not the least degree of Governing Power: (but each man of
Self-government, and Parents, and Masters of Family-government) It is Christ
that appoints Ministers as his Ambassadors, Stewards and Officers, and
commands them to speak in his Name and stead, and the people to hear and obey
him in them. So that the gainsaying of this Truth, would be of unspeakable
injury to the Church: (Besides what is forementioned) 1* It would rob Christ of
his Government, which is exercised by his Stewards and Ministers. 2. It will
engage the godly people in Rebellion. 3. Yea, and in Usurpation of his
Government. 4. And it will deprive the Church of the very life of all that
Edification and Consolation which they should have by the Ministry. This is our
Joy in Baptism, that as we deliver up our selves or Children to Christ, so
Christ there by his Authorized* Minister actually receives us or them. This is
our Joy in the Lord's Supper, that Christ by his Authorized Minister, says to
us, [ Take ye, Eat ye, This is my Body, etc.] and actually delivers himself
to us. This is our Joy in Ministerial Preaching of the Gospel, that by a
special Officer Christ proclaims to us the offer of free Pardon and Eternal
Life. This is our Comfort in Ministerial Absolution (which should be as Solemn
as Excommunication) that Christ by his Messenger does pronounce us pardoned by
name, and receive us into Mercy and Church Communion, supposing that our
Repentance be true as we profess it. And so this is the terror of
Excommunication, that Christ by his Officer does pronounce men bound, and bind
them over to answer it at his Bar, and cast them by his Sentence out of his
House. If you make all these to be but humane Administrations, they are made
vain.

And therefore blame not the Presbyterians if they have been jealous of
Christ's Interest, and his peoples Comfort, and the life and honor of all the
Ordinances performed by the Minister. But yet the peoples Liberties are
secured, and the Congregational Brethren may have their desires. For who will
deny that the Ministerial Government being not Coercive by external force, the
people therefore must consent, or else we cannot govern them. We can lay an
Obligation on them from God ( e. g. to avoid such a Heretic): but we cannot
force them to obey it: And therefore there can be no executive Excommunication,
that is, Avoiding of the Offenders, without the peoples consent! But this is
their Sin, when they answer not the Command of God, and not their Power to
Govern. We grant also that they are not to be blindly led, and take all
carelessly upon their Pastor's words; but must have (ordinarily) cognizance of
the case before a person be cast out and they obliged to avoid him: So that
they have a Iudicium Discretionis, as the Pastors have the Iudicium
Directionis. But yet (as I have showed in Pref. to the Reform* Past.) the
sinful dissent of the people will not always disable or excuse the Pastors from
their part. If a man be proved an Heretic, and the Major Vote of the people do
absolve him, in some cases, it may be the Pastor's Duty, openly to pronounce
him a Heretic, and (if impenitent) unfit for the Communion of the Church, and
to bind him over to God's Judgment, and charge him to depart, and the Church to
avoid him. If the Church will not do their Duty (by consenting) that will not
always excuse me from mine (which is this now described). Yea, and in the
execution I will do my part, and leave them in the guilt of omitting theirs:
that is, I will avoid familiarity with him, and will not personally give him
the Sacrament, and if he intrude and take it, I will openly disclaim him;
Otherwise, 1. I must not Preach and apply God's Word, unless the Major Vote
consent. For all this is but the Preaching of God's Word about avoiding
Heretics (or other Offenders) and applying it to this case (supposing the
Matter of Fact past doubt.) 2. And then a Major Vote might warrant me and the
Minor part to break the express Commands of God, (and so make a God of a
sinning people): For God says [A man that is an Heretic reject: with such a
one Eat not: Keep not company with him, that he may be ashamed: from such turn
away, etc.] And may I disobey all these express Commands, if the Majority be
but against them? May I give him personally the Sacrament, or Absolve him, or
be familiar with him, etc? Indeed, 1. I would not forsake the Church, nor make
a Division in it from every such Miscarriage; but when I have done my own Duty,
leave the guilt on them, if they refused to do theirs. 2. And I would not so
much as pass the Sentence, or do what I have before said, in case it might by
breeding a Division do more hurt than good in the Church, (for no Duty is at
all times a Duty), but would be contented soberly to have entered my Dissent,
to free my self from the peoples Sin. 3. At upon these grounds we will grant a
use of Voting in the Church (though would have as little need of it as I could)
Though we will acknowledge (...) Governing Votes, yet for Peace and Concord we
will acknowledge that things indifferent a Minor part should submit to the
Major part: For in ord to Unity, a Majority should have force, though among
Subjects in ord of Regiment, Ten thousand have no more Authority (I mean, Ius
Regend than one.

And both in Receiving, Rejecting and Absolving Members, as the Governi^ Power
is only in the Pastors, when the People are to obey, and who are bou^ by office
to attend on the Work, so it is plain that the obligation to Obedien^ binds
the People to submit to the Direction and Judgment of their Pasto^ if they know
them not to go against the Word of God. And if the People (...) entrust the
Officers or any Delegates of their own in Conjunction with them, judge of those
that are to be taken in or cast out, or if their own incapaci disable them from
a sufficient discussion of the case, or their business allo them not so much
leisure as the work requires, they are bound to acquies in the judgment of
their Rulers. I prove it ad hominem (the Nature of G^vernment and Obedience
proving it undeniably ad rem). If a Minor part (99.) is bound (by your own
opinion) to submit to the Major part (as 10^ that yet have no Governing Power,
when they dissent themselves (and captivate their Consciences to a vulgar
Vote), much more should the People a case not understood (where Conscience
therefore has nothing against t^ Sentence) submit to the judgment of the
Stewards of Christ whom he has commanded them as their Rulers to obey: But the
former is their own: Therefo^

I conclude this (on which I have been larger in Reasoning, because of t^^
weight of it) that here is no room for any other Reconciliation, than to (...)
our Agreements, and to leave each other to the Liberty of practicing accordi^^
to the small differences of our Judgments. We are agreed that the Pastors a the
Rulers, and the people the Ruled that must obey: and that the peop must be
governed as rational free Agents, and have a Freedom from Arbitra^^ Government,
and from all Commands or Sentences that are contrary to (...) Word of God, but
not a Freedom from Obedience, nor from the Blessing of P storal Conduct. And we
are Agreed that, in order to Unity, the Major Vo in lawful things must be
submitted to: and that a Minister (having enter^ his dissent) may forbear such
reproofs or censures of a Heretic or Impious ma as would break the Peace of
the Church, and do more harm than good, becau of the peoples sinful adhering to
him; so be it, they own not the sin it se^^ nor do thus ordinarily to the
excluding of Discipline: For then I would lea^ that people. What farther need
then of a Reconciliation in order to our Communion? If any will not take in, or
cast out a Member without the peop^^ Major Vote, let them take their Liberty:
And if any people had rather tr^ their Pastors and Delegates with this Care,
and will more acquiesce in th^^ Judgments; till they see cause to suspect them,
let them also have their Lib^^ty; we can do nothing against the peoples wills,
but by proposal! And if the pastors and people consent in these modal or
circumstantial things, it little concerns Associated Churches. Let this
therefore be unmentioned and we are Agreed.

Chap. VIII. Difference VI.
THE sixth Difference is, whether a Pastor of one Church, may do the work of a
Pastor in other Churches when he has their consent and call? Some have made a
stir about this, and dreamed that a Pastor may Preach out of his own Church,
but only as a private man, and therefore may not Baptize, Administer the Lord's
Supper, or exercise Discipline in any other Church. But the Learned and Sober
part of the Dissenters, are become Consenters in the most of this, so that here
is little work for a Reconcilement. For they confess that Ministers may as
Ministers Preach and Administer the Sacraments to other See Mr. Norton at large
proving that a Minister of a particular Church, may (not only by virtue of his
Gifts) and the common bond of Christian Charity, but also by virtue of his
Calling, exercise in another Church the acts of his Office, Charitative non
Authoritative, p. 76. c. 6.
Churches. Indeed they say, that this is only Charitative, not Authoritative.
Herein they mistake: For though such have not a stated Authority over another
Church, yet have they a temporary Authority, as Of this see my Disput. of
Ordination, and 3d of Episcopacy.
they are called. For he that has the Call and Power of Office, and a Call pro
tempore to exercise that Office, has Authority to exercise it, and does
exercise an Authority (for the Office essentially is an Authority.) But every
true Minister of Christ that pro tempore is called to the Ministerial work in
another Church, has an Office (which is Authority) and a call to exercise it.
Therefore,

But says Mr. Norton, p. 83. [Hence it would follow either that there are
occasional and partial Ministers pro tempore, or that the same man is the fixed
Minister of many Churches at once, or that he is not the Minister of that
Church where yet he has Ministerial Authority.] Ans. None of all these will
follow: But only this, that he that is either a stated Minister in the Church
Universal, or also a fixed Pastor of a particular Church, may also be the
temporary Pastor of another particular Church. As a fixed Physicion of one
Hospital, or Schoolmaster of one School, may upon a Call both Charitative and
Authoritative, be for a Day or a Week the Physicion of another Hospital, or the
Schoolmaster of another School. It is a contradiction to say, [He may exercise
his Office, and not Authoritatively.]

Obj. But says Mr. N. the Minister of this Church, is not the Minister of
another Church by the constitution of the Holy Ghost, by whom every Minister is
tied to one certain Flock.]

Ans. 1. A great Error. There should yet be general Ministers in the Church
that should be itinerant, and no more fixed (where the Churches state so
requires it) than Paul, Barnabas, Apollo, Titus, Timothy, and abundance more
then were. Your own Argument is, Page 80, 81. [ Ex analogia Potestatis
Ministrorum erga alias Ecclesias cum Potestate Ministeriali erga omnes gentes,
sive omnem Creaturam: Si Ministri Ordinarii virtute instituti habent Potestatem
Ministerialem, non Ecclesiasticam modo debito, erga omnem creaturam, habent
aliquam Potestatem Ministerialem Ecclesiasticam modo debito erga omnem
Ecclesiam. At, etc.] What need we more? Is not Potestas Ministerialis
Authority? Then I know not what Authority is! Authority is either Rational ex
virtute and aestimatione donorum; or it is Imperial or Official, which in all
subordinate Officers is Ius agendi actus ejus Officii. Ministerial Power is Ius
Ministrandi: Ministerial Authority is Ius Ministrandi: Therefore he that has
Ministerial Power, has Ministerial Authority. 2. No Minister is so tied by the
Holy Ghost to one certain Flock (any more than one Schoolmaster or Physicion)
as not to exercise his Office by Authority pro tempore in another Flock when he
has a Call. Charity and Authority go together. Charity obliges him to
exercise his Office, that is, his Authority. The rest of the Objections there
an ordinary Reader may answer without help.

But yet here is nothing to hinder our Communion. For, 1. They grant us in
Substance what we desire, that is, the temporary exercise of the Ministerial
Office, to the World, or to other Churches according to their Capacities. 2. If
yet there be any difference in Principles, let them that think Ministers have
no Power out of their Congregation, practice accordingly, and stay at home: Let
them give us our Liberty in this, and take theirs, and the matter need not
hinder our Communion.

Chap. IX. Difference VII.
THE seventh Difference is, about the Power of a particular Church to exercise
all Government and Church Ordinances within it self, without Subordination to
Synods or any other as extrinsick Ecclesiastical Superior Governors.

This is Pleaded for by the Independents in ordinary cases (whence Mr. Cotton
owns the Name of Independency, Keys, P. 29. 53.) says he, [A Church of a
particular Congregation, consisting of Elders and Brethren, and walking in the
Truth and Peace of the Gospel, as it is the first subject of all Church Power,
needful to be exercised within it self; So it is Independent upon any other
(Church or Synod) for the exercising of the same]. Some of the Episcopal and
Presbyterians deny them this, and affirm, that Synods are a Superior Power,
and that particular Congregations without the lower sort of Synods called
Classes may not Excommunicate, and that in an ordinary Regimental order,
Congregations are under the Government of Synods (and consequently say the
Episcopal, of the Heads of those Synods). But the more moderate both Episcopal
and Presbyterians hold that Synods oblige directly but gratia Unitatis and
Communionis Ecclesiarum, and not directly by a Superior Governing Power. So
Bishop Usher professed his Judgment to me: and that a particular Bishop or Church
was not subject to a Synod as their Superior Governor, but bound in lawful
things to consent for Unity and Communion. And Mr. Cotton grants, for ought I
see, as much, if not more than this comes to; and Mr. T. Goodwin and Mr. Nigh, I
think as much in their Preface to his Book, says Mr. Cotton, p. 53. [A fourth
Corollary touching the Independency of Churches is, That a Church fallen into
any offense (whether it be the whole Church, or a strong Party in it) is not
Independent in the exercise of Church Power, but is subject both to the
admonition of any other Church, and to the Determination and Judicial Sentence
of a Synod, for Direction into a way of Truth and Peace] [For (says he)
Ecclesia litigans non ligat, that is, if Christ has not given to a particular
Church a Promise to bind and loose in Heaven, what they bind and loose on
Earth, unless they agree together, and agree in his Name, then such a Church is
not Independent in their Proceedings, as do fail in either: For all the
Independency that can be claimed is founded upon that Promise, What ye bind on
Earth shall be bound in Heaven, etc.] The fifth Corollary affirms, that
[Though the Church of a particular Congregation consisting of Elders and
Brethren, and walking with a right foot in the Truth and Peace of the Gospel,
be the first subject of all Church Power needful to be exercised within it
self, and consequently be Independent from any other Church or Synod in the use
of it; Yet it is a safe and wholesome and holy Ordinance of Christ, for such
particular Churches to join together in holy Covenant or Communion, and
Consolation ( Consociation or Consultation it should be) amongst themselves, to
administer all their Church Affairs (which are of weighty and difficult and
common concernment) not without common Consultation and Consent of other
Churches about them. Now Church Affairs of weighty and difficult and common
concernment, we account to be, the Election and Ordination of Elders,
Excommunication of an Elder, or any person of Public Note, and Employment; the
translation of an Elder from one Church to another, or the like. In which case
we conceive it safe and wholesome, and an Holy Ordinance, to proceed with common
consultation and consent.] And so he proceeds distinctly to prove this, 1.
Safe. 2. Wholesome. 3. An Ordinance, adding this Caution, which we accept. [To
see that this Consociation of Churches be not perverted, either to the
oppression or diminution of the just Liberty and Authority of each particular
Church within it self: who being well supplied with a faithful and expert
Presbytery of their own, do walk in their integrity, according to the Truth and
Peace of the Gospel. Let Synods have their just Authority in all Churches, how
pure soever* in determining such (...) as are requisite for the Edification of
all Christ's Churches according to God. But in the Election and Ordination of
Officers, and censure of Offenders, let it suffice the Churches consociate to
assist one another, with their counsel and right han^ of fellowship, when they
see a particular Church to use their Liberty an^ Power aright. But let them not
put forth the Power of their Community^ either to take such Church Acts out of
their hands, or to hinder them in the^ lawful course, unless they see them
(through ignorance or weakness) to abu^ their Liberty or Authority in the
Gospel -- They may indeed prevent the abu^ of their Liberties, and direct in
the lawful use of them, but not take the^ away, though themselves should be
willing] So also before, Page 47. he sai^ [4th Propos. In case a particular
Church be disturbed with Error or Scanda^ and the same maintained by a Faction
amongst them: Now a Synod (...) Churches, or of their Messengers, is the first
Subject of that Power and A^thority whereby Error is judicially convinced and
condemned, the trut^ searched out and determined, and the way of Truth and
Peace declared, an^ Imposed upon the Churches] which he proceeds to prove.

And Dr. Goodwin and Mr. Nigh in their Preface approving of this, sayin^ that
these Synods have [a due measure of Power committed to them, suite and
proportioned to those, and are furnished, not only with ability to giv^ counsel
and advice, but further, upon such occasions with a Ministerial Pow^ and
Authority, to determine, declare and enjoin such things as may tend to the
reducing such Congregations to right order and peace.]

And whereas they put it in as a caution, that yet Synods may not
Excommunicate, I answer, that as long as they grant that they may renounce
Communion with such a Church, and Doctrinally apply to them their Portion, an^
Doctrinally enjoin the people to avoid the impenitent Offenders (by applyin^
the Scriptures to them that enjoin it) we have no mind to disagree wit^ them
about the rest.

I conclude therefore, that we are Dogmatically agreed in this great Poin^ as
far as is necessary to our Loving Communion. Let us in our Consociation^ either
keep our Principles to our selves, of the degree of a Synods Power, (...) else
let all have Liberty to write them down in the Register Book of the Syno^ and
so to proceed in Concordant Practice. Perhaps some may be found the think
Synods are the proper Superior Governors of the Pastors of particul^
Churches, yea, and their Ordinary Governors: Others may think that the^ are
not necessary, nor any Ordinance of God; but yet a lawful thing that man for
Peace be used. And others (that I think are in the truth) may think the Synods
are not the direct Governors of the particular Pastors, but are God^ Ordinance
for the Communion of Churches, and so indirectly bind in lawf^ Agreements, both
as our own Consents oblige us, and as God's general Command of doing all things
in Unity and Peace and Concord, does animate the^ Agreements. Let us impose
none of our Principles here on others; but Agr^ to hold Communion in Synods,
for mutual Edification, and Corroboration, a^ such like ends of Communion as
Mr. Cotton mentions; and to be accou^ table to the Brethren in cases of
offense, so far as to tender them due satisfaction and hear their Brotherly
Admonitions; In a word, let us but maintain the necessary Communion of Churches
which the Ends and Nature of the Church require, and we shall press no more.

Obj. But, being free, why should we desire to be bound, in Associations?

Answ. You are not free from brotherly Charity, and the Communion of Saints,
and the Concordant doing the Works of God, of common Concernment. Nor do we
desire you to bind your selves to any thing but what is antecedently your Duty,
and you're already bound to by God.

Object. But perhaps if we associate with you, you will be rigid for your own
ways and be the Major part, and then if we displease you, our Communion shall
be rejected to our disgrace.]

Ans. 1. The Churches can pass as disgraceful a Sentence on you, if you come
not near them, as if you joined with them. Yea, and they will no doubt take it
to be their Duty, if they have proof of the Heresies or Scandals of any
Neighbor Minister, (aggravated by the shunning of their Brethrens Communion),
to disown them, and warn their people of the danger. If you join with us, you
are more like to escape such Censures or injurious Reflections, than by keeping
from us: For familiarity kindles Love: and your presence may awe many, and
your words satisfy those that could not be so well satisfied, if they had not
heard you speaking for your selves.

2. Moreover, you have opportunity to prevent such abuse as you fear, in your
terms of entering the Association.

3. Surely Brethren that so earnestly desire your Communion for the Churches
Peace, will not be hasty to renounce Communion with you.

4. By their Accepting you, they are engaged not to Reject you, for any Opinion
or Practice which they knew you guilty of when they Accepted you: For if it
were not of weight to hinder your Reception, it may not be of weight to cause
your Rejection.

Obj. But under the Name of a Communion of Churches, you seem to set up a
Provincial Church, with a Discipline of taking in and casting out.

Ans. Nort. P. 45. Si Ecclesia Representativa sumitur pro mutua consultatione,
consotiatione and confoederatione Ecclesiarum particularium in Synodis per
Legatos, nova Ecclesiae forma non addita, and liberate Ecclesi^ salva, rem
agnoscimus.
Is it the Name of a Church that you fear, or the Thing? Not the Name, for we
use it not, nor do you charge this on us. If the Thing tells us what you mean
by a Church. If such a thing as you use to define it to be, we deny that we set
up such a Church. But if you will call the Officers and Delegates of the
Churches, met for Communion, by the Name of a Church, you may use your Liberty:
we hold this Communion for no higher ends, than your own forecited words allow:
and therefore it is but such an Assembly as you may allow.

Take Mr. Norton's yet larger Concessions, Page 110, etc. [ Ecclesiae
particulares mutuam Communionem inter se inire possunt, and in eis causae
Communes omnium Ecclesiarum, i. e. talis res quae omnibus Ecclesiis
particularibus Communes sunt, quamvis immediate unam tantum Ecclesiam tangunt,
ut sunt Pastorum vocationes, Membrorum excommunicationes, etc. Vel etiam tales
res quae immediate omnes Ecclesias ex aequo tangunt communiter) Communi
consensu Ecclesiarum dijudicentur and discernantur] -- Page 111. [ Solummodo
inde Colligimus ei potestatem supremam decidendi quaestiones fidei debitam,
quod and prompte damus -- ] Page 112. De necessitate Synodorum. Tametsi,
Concilia non sint ita absolute necessaria, ut Ecclesia sine illis nunquam been
esse possit; tamen in tanta hominum malitia, and temporum perversitate, non
tantum insigniter sunt utilia, sed etiam quodammodo necessaria: ita ut Ecclesia
salutari hoc remedio non possit carere; sine insigni veritatis, pietatis and
Concordiae Christianae detrimento. Nemo, inquit Parkerus, quod sciam, Ecclesiae
alicujus reformatae alumnus ante Hugonem Grotium, negavit Synodos esse
necessarias: quibus nos (...) libenter profitemur, sequentibus freti
rationibus. 1. A Natura duce; Cujus dictamine in Controversiis difficilioribus
and grandioribus a judicio inferiori ad. praecellentius confugimus. Hinc jus
appellationum in causis gravioribus ab inferiori ad superiorem sententiam.
Parker: Cum in causis and Personis Ecclesiasticis multae lites oriantur, jus
appellationum necessario concedendum quis neget? Appellationes sunt juris
Divini, and naturalis, and in omni societate admodum necessariae, propter
multorum judicum iniquitatem and ignorantiam. 2. A fine Concilii -- 3. Ab
exemplo, etc. 4. A Praecellentia Concilii, etc. 5. A (...) Ecclesiarum; quam
valde tuetur unio sententiarum in Synodis; unde (...) suavissima and diuturna,
cum doctrina and mores probantur ad invicem: sin autem singulis Ecclesiis
particularibus juxta sententias proprias incedere licet, nulla habita vicinarum
ratione, quam facile in parts and dissidia abiturae sunt? 6. A fructu
administrationum: quae si caeteris Ecclesiis consentientibus fiant, spes est
etiam fore efficaces: sin dissentientibus timendum ne inefficaces sint. E. g.
in casu excommunicationis vicinis comprobantibus excommunicatus argutus ab
omnibus, dijudicatus ab omnibus, procidens, etc. -- Page 118. Quatenus
particulares Ecclesiae s^se subjicere debent sententiae Synodi. R. Legitimis
Synodi decretis ab omnibus Ecclesiis h. e. a majori part Ecclesiarum receptis,
and a Magistratu Christiano approbatis, tenentur particulares Ecclesiae
acquiescere, 1. Sub periculo reatus ordinis publici turbati. 2. Sub poena non
Communionis cum aliis Ecclesiis. 3. Sub poena correctionis per poenas civiles a
Magistratu.

Then he comes to the Q. What if the Synod conclude against the Truth, and the
Church stand for it? And answers, 1. That it is not easily to be supposed in
reformed times, And 2. Uti in Civilibus, est Veritas absoluta and Iudicialis:
and sententia supremi judicis vera est quoad homines, licet non sit vera
absolute: Ita in Ecclesiasticis Veritas est absoluta and Synodalis: Synodus
autem cum sit supremus judex quaestionis, sententi^ Synodalis licet non sit
vera* absolute, est tamen vera Ecclesiastice: Si in foro exteriore. -- Page
119. Statuendum est ordinem publicum prae^erendum esse praesenti obedientiae
ergo praeceptum affirmativum, non fundamentale. -- Hic obtinet illud (Ames.)
Gravissima in*commoda fac^unt aliquando ut praeceptum affirmativum desinat
obligare, quod alias non possit non observari sine peccato. Ordini igitur tali^
Ecclesia in hoc casu sese subjicere and potest and debet: sed tamen sine
peccato.] --

Is not here enough for our Agreement in this Point? I should have feared
Censures if I had said as much.

But I hope you deny not the Power of Christian Kings, nor that a Christian
Sovereign and Christian Subjects are a Christian Kingdom, and de nomine may be
called a National Church. And Moses, David, Solomon, Josiah, had a Governing
Power over the Priests, though not to change the species of their Office. And
if I and others think that Apostles and Evangelists have Successors to the End
of the World in the ordinary parts of their Office, and in Superiority you may
with Peace hold your Opinion and leave us to ours: Of which elsewhere.

Chap. X. Difference VIII.
THE Eighth supposed Difference is, about Private men's Preaching: and it has
two Parts. 1. Whether Private men, may Preach in the Church? 2. Whether the
Church may send them out as private men unordained, to Preach in the Parishes
of England, or to the Heathens or Unbelievers?

The Presbyterians deny not but Private men may Preach in some cases. None that
fear God do desire any to bury their Talent, nor would hinder men from doing
the Work of God. But they would have bona been, God's Work done in God's Order.
On these Conditions we allow Private men to Preach. 1. If they do it but ex
Charitate, and pretend not to the Ministerial Office. 2. And if they do it
occasionally, and not as men separated to that work as their Calling (for then
they become Ministers indeed while they disclaim it in Name. 3. If they do it
not needlessly, to a proud ostentation of their parts; but only when Abler Men,
or Ministers are not to be had, or else on some urgent weighty cause. 4. If
they make not themselves the Judges of their own fitness, but expect the
Approbation of the judicious, faithful, concordant Ministers that know them. 5.
If they undertake no more than they can perform, and suppose not themselves
fitter than they are, and so run not beyond their Knowledge, nor dishonor not
the Work of God. 6. If they thrust not themselves into any Church to Preach
without a Call, nor ordinarily without the Pastors consent. 7. If they do it
not unseasonably when by offending they are likely to do more hurt than good.
8. If in the manner, season and continuance they submit to the Guidance of the
Pastors of the Church (if it be more than ordinary Teaching, and not such as
every able. Master of a Family may there do). With these Cautions we grant that
Private men may Preach Many Episcopal Divines grant it: And the Presbyterians
ordinarily permit it in their Expectants that are trained up for the Ministry.
A Maid begun the Conversion of the Iberians by Conference; And interlocutory
Preaching is truly Preaching. Edesius and Frumentius converted the Indians.
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus of Caesaria, maintained
Origene's Teaching while he was a Private man: and that in the Church before
the Bishops. And when Demetrius of Alexandria reprehended them, affirming it to
be an unknown case, that a Layman should preach in the presence of a Bishop,
they gainsay him, and produce the Examples of Neon a Bishop that required
Evelpius to teach, and of Celsus that set Paulinus to preach at Iconium, and of
A^^icus that set Theodorus to teach at Synnadorum. And, says Dr. Fulke,
Demetrius himself does seem to allow, that when no Bishop was present, a Layman
might preach, Eusebius. Hist. li. 6. c. 20.

But that every proud unworthy Man, and every seducing Heretic, should preach,
yea and thrust himself into other Men's Charges, or that any should preach
besides the forementioned Rules, this we deny, and take it for a dangerous
Usurpation.

But are we not agreed in this? Hear and Judge: Mr. Cotton so downright denies
ordinary private Men to Prophecy, interpreting 1 Cor. 14. 31. of
extraordinarily Gifted Prophets (of which see his Keys, page 20, 21.) that Mr.
Goodwin and Mr. Nigh thought meet to signify some Dissent, Pref. p. 6. And yet
they grant, that this must be performed by private Men, [1. Only Occasionally,
not in an ordinary Course. 2. By Men of such Abilities as are fit for Office.
3. And not assuming this of themselves, but judged such by those that have the
power, and so allowed and designed to it. And, 4. So as their Doctrine be
subjected (for the judging of it) in an especial manner, to the Teaching Elders
of that Church.] And I think that this is enough to signify, that here we
shall have no cause of a breach with them. Mr. Norton speaks to the same
purpose, page 123, 124, 125. and joins with Mr. Cotton in denying Prophecy to
private Men, and expounding 1 Cor. 14. of extraordinarily Gifted Prophets only:
In this therefore Doctrinally we agree.

2. But the second seems the more dangerous difference: That their Churches
should presume to send abroad Preachers not in Office, for the Conversion of
Souls, by setting them apart to that work, and directing or allowing them to be
stated Ordinary Teachers. Their excuses are, that Pastors are proper to
particular Churches; and it is not into Churches but Parishes that they send
them; not to Rule or Teach a Church, but to Convert Souls and gather Churches.
Ans. But, 1. It is not your calling Parishes [no Churches] that makes or proves
them none. You are not the Judges, when they profess themselves Churches. If
others send Men to preach in your Churches, it will not excuse them with you,
if they face you down that they are no Churches, and therefore they may preach
in them. 2. But suppose they were all Heathens, you have never yet proved that
to be a stated Preacher for their Conversion, is not to be a proper Ministerial
Officer. Contrarily, 1. In the days of the Apostles and all their helpers, it
was part of the Office of a Minister, (yea and of the chief Ministers) to be
stated Preachers for the Conversion of unbelievers, and gathering Souls to
Christ: But the Office of the Ministry is now the same as then. Therefore*

2. To go and Teach, and Disciple the Nations is as true a part of the
Ministers Commission as to teach the Church ( Matthew. 28. 19.) Therefore it is
not common to private M^n.

3. Ordinary Baptizing is no work for private Men: Therefore not preaching. The
reason of the consequence is, 1. Because they are conjoined in the Minsterial
Commission, ( Matthew. 28. 19.) 2. Because if Pastors go not abroad the World
with these private Men to preach to Infidels, then when they have converted
any, they must be unbaptized till Pastors can come to them: Which is contrary
to all Scripture example that Baptism should be so long delayed after
Conversion ordinarily.

4. To be separated to the Gospel of God, is a chief part of the description of
a Minister (by Office) Romans 1. 1. But these private Preachers are by the
Churches separated to the Gospel of God (by right or by wrong) therefore they
are made Ministers by Office. Indeed the first object of the true Ministerial
Office (in order of nature) is the uncalled World; and the calling of them is
as Eminent a part of their Office as preaching to a Church.

This is the most Eminent Evangelizing, to declare the Glad-tydings of
Salvation to the World: And this is the preaching that requires sending, Romans
10. On this work were the Twelve and the Seventy sent: on this work specially
did the Apostles lay out themselves. And not only they, but Apollo, Luke, Mark,
Timothy, Titus, Silas, and abundance of the chiefest Ministers of Christ.

But yet we have no matter to excuse a Division or Alienation, from this
Difference. For, 1. I cannot prove it a Difference between the Parties: For I
know not that the Congregational Party have owned and espoused the Opinion
which I here oppose; though some particular persons do: And therefore I do not
charge it on them. 2. If they did, yet Infidels are so far from us, that
irregular endeavors to Convert them, will be no matter of a breach: And were
we nearer them, we might leave others to practice according to their Judgments,
as long as we are not guilty of the Error. 3. They do not pretend to sorce
themselves into our Parish Churches (ordinarily) against his will that is the
allowed Teacher there. 4. While they do in Name disclaim Ordaining them, they
actually Ordain them. For they set them apart to the Office of the Ministry,
and it is Pastors that do it: And this is the substance of Ordination:
Imposition of Hands is but the Investing Ceremony. And if they say that A
stated Preacher is no Officer, that makes him not to be none: And if they say,
that they Ordain him not when they Approve and Appoint him by an Instrument to
that Office, that makes it not to be no Ordaining; no more than if they should
Appoint Men to a Pastoral Charge, in one of their own Churches, and say, It is
no Office, or Ordination. 5. And when the peoples consent is afterward added,
the Man is more fully separated to the Work. 6. But however, as long as they
allow us our liberty of Ordination, and thrust none upon our Communion as
Pastors that are no Pastors, we have no pretense to make this a stop to our
Communion. Let us close together, and pass this by, and God will further inform
us, and dispel our darkness when we walk together in holy Love and Peace.

Chap. XI. Difference IX.
THE Ninth seeming Difference is, about our Parishes in England, whether they
are true Churches of Christ, or not. But here is little or no difference that
is stood to whatever any particular persons may think, it is not a difference
between the parties. For, 1. It is not desired of them to grant that a Parish
as a Parish (that is, the people, yea the Christians inhabiting such a space of
ground) is a Church. It Is possible they may be of many Churches, or of none
(but the Universal.) 2. Nor is it desired that they take every Member of the
Parish, no nor every Hearer, for a Member of the Church. Men of several
Churches, or of no Church may live in the Parish, and hear together. 3. Nor are
they desired to take any Parish for a true Political Church that has not a
true Pastor, with a competent number of professed Christians joined together
for personal Communion in Gods Worship.

But that our ordinary Parishes in England that have true Ministers are true
Churches is so familiarly granted by the Congregational party, that to recite
their words seems needless: And therefore they utterly disclaim separating from
us as no true Churches. 1. That our want of a Church Covenant nullifieth not
these Churches, I told you before they grant, because our consent is our
Covenant: And our ordinary practice tolerably signifies that consent. Says
Mr, Norton, p. 21. [ Siuna externa fidei professione, veritatis and sanctitatis
praxi, eodem baptismate uniantur, and eundem publicum cultum uno in loco
frequentent, iisdem inspectoribus Ecclesiae subsint, etc.] See the place, where
he acknowledges this a Church without an Explicit Covenant.

2. And that the impiety of our Parishes, or other incapacity of the Members is
not such as to nullify our Churches they confess. Because a good Church may
have some bad Members: And where the greater number are bad, the Pastor and the
better (smaller) part may denominate the Church, and it may be true, though
polluted. What Doctrinal and Practical Corruptions were in the Churches of
Corinth, Galatia, and diverse of the Asian Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. is so plain,
and has been so often mentioned that it is needless to recite the Texts. Says
Mr. Norton, 28, 29. Immo tantum abest, ut ob defectum foederis expliciti (salva
vel ungulae religione in rebus Jesus Christi) ullas Congregationes ex
Ecclesiarum albo expungamus; ut Caetus multo graviora passos, essentialibus Dei
gratia adhuc in tuto positis tanquam non Ecclesias judicare, salva conscientia
nullos posse, sancte testemur. Distinguendum inter Ecclesiam puram, impuram,
impurissimam, and nullam* -- Fundamentalia sive Essentialia sunt materia and
forma Ecclesiae particularis. Materia sunt homines profitentes Doctrinam
salutaris fidei: Forma est mutuus consensus politicus ad incedendum in illa
fide, vel verbis, vel factis, modo aliquo visibiliter significatus: Adeo ut non
sufficit subitanea aliqua conjunctio, and sanctae communionis exercitium, ad
Ecclesiam constituendam, nisi constantia illa accedat, saltem quoad
intentionem, quae statum adfert Corporis and Membrorum in spirituali quadam
politia: Qualem consensum nos foedus vocare jam toties diximus.]

As this proves our Parishes true Churches, so that greater corruptions than
the Vices of some, even Fundamental Errors in the Church it self, does not
presently destroy the Church is his Opinion, and Parker's cited by him: Ibid.
says he, [ Neque tamen Ecclesiam errores fundamentales statim destruunt, donec
eis addatur contumacia in foro exteriori. Ecclesia in fundamento aberrans
tamdiu manet Ecclesia quamdiu non est pertinax.]

Certainly here is as large a judgment of Charity as we can reasonably expect,
and so large as without some distinction, will be liable to controversy.

We easily confess that most of our Churches need much Reformation, and that
all in our Parishes are not Church Members: But yet I may well suppose that we
are Agreed that those of them that have true Pastors are true Churches, and
that this is the case of our Parishes ordinarily, or very many at least (yea
some such Dissenters think that they may be true Churches without Pastors) so
that here between the parties there is no disagreement, whatever particular
persons hold. Many are more afraid lest a great many Parishes should be Made no
true Churches (in a Political sense) by setting over them such as are no true
Ministers, than be proved none before they are made None. But I see no danger
of this, while we have liberty of Election and Ordination.

Chap. XII. Difference X.
THE Tenth Controversy, is about, 1. Taking Members out of other Churches, 2.
And separating from the Parish Churches, by gathering out of them a select
number to be a distinct Church.

And here there is a Practical Difference to our woe: But in order to
Reconcilement, I should hope that I might suppose our Agreement in all the
other points of Difference to be sufficient, and that being satisfied in those
the Brethren that have been for withdrawing from our Churches, will be
satisfied to join with us for their Reformation, and not do as they have some
of them done. For we have therefore come as near them as we can in the rest,
that they might have no just occasion to depart from us: And if that yet they
will depart, when the offense is removed, then it would be as if they should
say, We are against Concord and Unity as such: And our judgment for Division as
such, that is, for Dividing without cause. When we have answered all that our
Brethren allege for their withdrawing, we may expect that they should return
to an Orderly Communion. This Controversy is de fine, and seeing we grant them
much in the rest for this, therefore we cannot grant them this: If in War we
grant all that is desired for Peace, it is supposed that we will not grant the
continuance of the War; nor in reason must that be one of the demands.

I speak all this but of unjust Separations: For there is a Separation which we
are all agreed to be lawful (as far as I know) as, 1. We all agree that where
Christians live in the midst of Infidels, they must come out from among them
(by Faith and Repentance) and be separated (by the Baptismal Engagement first,
and the Communion of Saints after) and not touch the unclean thing. The Church
must be separated from the World, or it is no Church.

2. We are agreed that when a true Church Visibly cease to be a true Church,
by loss of its Essentials statedly, it is our Duty to judge it to be no true
Church (that is but to judge it as it is) and forsake it accordingly.

3. When we cannot hold local Communion with a true Church without committing
some sin, which they would force upon us, and which we may escape by leaving
them, we ought to withdraw from the local Communion of that Church (for we must
not wilfully sin, nor do evil that good may come by it:) Yet so as that still
we must hold Internal, and also External distant Communion, by owning them as a
true Church, and corresponding with them as a Neighbor Church.

4. If a true Church in the corruption of the Materials become incapable of its
Ends, and we have with sufficient patience tried the means of its Reformation
without success, it is ordinarily (unless some greater matter hinder
accidentally) our Duty to forsake it: Yea and to esteem it no more a true
Church, if it be the Principal Ends that it is become incapable of. As if the
Body were fallen into an Opinion against Communion and Public Worship, and yet
should think they might hold their Relations: This were a contradiction. If
they would in Public, worship God with a Worship false in the Essentials, and
which is no Church-worship, but Impiety or Deceit. And though I will not now
determine how far Discipline is necessary to a Church, more than to say that
the Power is Essential to the Pastors Office, yet I may boldly conclude that in
point of Duty. if a Church be so corrupted by Heresy or Impiety that
Discipline cannot be exercised in it, because the greater part do own the
Heresy or Sin, or the Sinners in their Sin, and this be not in one or a few
Acts, but they are against the course of Discipline in the main, and Vote for
Wickedness, or against Piety, or the public Censures of the Church, or refuse
to execute them; and if after sufficient patience I cannot reform them, I shall
take it to be my Duty to take with me the better part of the Church, and
forsake the rest, as to local Communion, and perhaps first to cast them out
from us (as to their Relation) though we are the lesser part: Unless in some
cases, where Public Good requires a delay, and suspendeth my Duty for the
time.

5. If a Pastor be despised by the Church, and refused, or if they desire his
stay, and yet wilfully disobey him, and his Labors are unprofitable among
them, that are like to be profitable elsewhere, we doubt not but he may remove,
as being rejected and forsaken first by them.

6. If a Pastor and some choice Members with him have a Call to a far more
Eminent Service of God, conducing much more to the public Good, we doubt not
but they may remove, though the rest dissent. God is the Master of his
Ministers and people more than Men are.

7. If the Necessities of a Man's Family (Ministers or people) require him to
remove his Habitation, I doubt not but he may remove, though the Church
dissent: unless in some Cases where by accident his removal may more dishonor
God, or hinder public Good, than his Estate or the preservation of his Family
can countervail: The Church has not power to tie Men to Ruin their Families,
nor to continue with them during Life, nor during their pleasure: Nor is it
implied in the consent of Membership, which is to be no more, but that [I will
hold Communion with this Church as a Member, while I here Cohabit, or I have no
call from God to remove.] It is so in Civil Corporations* Cohabitation is an
antecedent part of our Aptitude for Church Communion; and many just Causes may
deprive us of that Aptitude, and make the persons to be materia indisposita and
incapax, and so destroy his Relation of it self.

8. If persons that have a weak Pastor, or a corrupt Society, can to the great
advantage of their Souls remove, they may do it whether the Church will consent
or not, in case their removal do not accidentally do more hurt against the
honor of God, and the public Good, than their profit can countervail: And
still supposing, that the Churches consent be first orderly sought.

9. The same I say of them that have Pastors that will not exercise any
competent Discipline, though with sufficient patience importuned thereunto.

In one word, in no case is a Man bound to stay with any Church to the certain
prejudice or danger of his Soul, or the Souls of his Family, unless in the
foresaid case, (if such a case there be) when the public Good and the Cause of
God will receive more detriment by our removal than our benefit will
countervail.

10. Lastly, If we be unjustly cast out of any Church, and persecuted by them,
and have no just redress at home, no doubt but we may join with another Church.
As if a Pastor that is for Rebaptizing would take none but who will be
Rebaptized, or having taken some in, will cast them out: Or if a Pastor be set
over us, of an uncharitable Spirit, that will take in none for Godly but those
of his Opinion, or some few of a higher Form, and denies Communion to all the
rest, in this case it is he that does the wrong, and they are necessitated to
join with another Church, that will receive them; and another Church may justly
receive them, if first they cannot prevail for their reception at home.

All this we grant for a removal from a Church without the guilt of Schism or
sinful Separation. But on the other side we must needs desire, 1. That Men will
not rashly and self-conceitedly judge any of these Cases to be where they are
not: And therefore that they will take the advice of the next unanimous,
peaceable, faithful Pastors. And for this, says Mr. Norton, p. 167. [But when
this or that Congregation is to be taken for No Church, let the judgment be in
the hands of a Council, or in an Ordinate state of the Churches.]

2. We desire that whole Churches may not be taken for no Churches without
proof, nor before they are heard speak for themselves: And that those that have
possession of the public Maintenance and Temples, (I know no fitter Name for
them) will not gather a part of the people into a new Church, as if there were
none before, till it be proved upon equal hearing: Nor that they would not
Dissolve the old Church, instead of Reforming it, nor withdraw from them,
instead of casting out the unfit in an orderly way of Discipline; unless where
Discipline and Reformation cannot be had: If we propose the exercise of
Discipline to a Parish, and the most will rather disown (or refuse to own)
their Relations as Members, than live under Discipline, and so Separate
themselves from us, (or profess that they never took themselves for Members)
then the blame will lie on them, and they are the Separatists: But if they Own
their Relations, and offer to live as Christians under Discipline, in holy
Communion, surely they must be cast out upon proved accusations, Man by Man, in
Christ's way, Matthew. 18. or not at all. I confess by drawing out a few from the
rest, we may escape a great deal of labor, trouble, and ill will of those that
should be cast out: But the selfish, easy way is not like to be the way of God.

3. We desire that Pastors that preach the Faith, may not be the lowest in
Charity, nor uncharitably censure all those as ungodly and unfit for Church
Communion, that want but distinct Conceptions, and fit Expressions, through the
lowness or neglect of their Education; or that are not able, to be the mouth of
a Family in Prayer, while they are willing to perform the Duty, if they could,
and to learn that they may perform it: And that the weak in Faith may be
received, and the little ones suffered to come to Christ, even all that are
willing to give up themselves to him, and of those that so come to him none may
in any wise be rejected, or cast out till they turn from Christ and the Holy
Covenant: That the Lambs may be carried in our Arms, and the bruised Reed may
not be broken; and that the tenderness of Christ to the least of his Members
may be remembered, and the price of Souls, and our own former weakness; and also
how much more grievous it should be to us, to keep or cast out one of our weak
Brethren that Christ would have received, than to let in many intruding
Hypocrites, who shall be made serviceable to the Church, and their Masks shall
be our just excuse, though not their own* And specially remember that it is
Christ that is the Lord of the Family, and we are but Servants, and therefore
we must take all our directions from him, and shut out none but those that we
are sure he would have shut out: And remember that in doubtful cases, we are
allowed to incline to the more charitable side. Force not Men unjustly by
refusing them, to seek acceptance in other Churches.

Though I intended at first more brevity than will consist with long
citati^ons, I shall recite a few words of Judicious Mr. Noyes of New England:
Temple measured, p. 63, 64. says he, No Wheat must be pulled up with the
Tares, the Tares must rather be tolerated -- that Rule which requires more
than is necessary in the weakest Believer, must needs exclude the called of
God: And that Rule which necessarily or absolutely requires unnecessary
Experiences, savoriness of Speech, suitableness of Spirit to our tempers,
persuasion of sound Conversion, etc. such a Rule I say requires much more than
is necessary or competible to the weakest Believer. To require a persuasion in
our Hearts of the Conversion of all that are admitted, is too much; unless we
can meet with a Rule, that will admit all Saints, and also afford such a
persuasion. It will contradict the Rule of our admission, to make our
apprehensions part of the Rule. Our fancies are a leaden Rule; and if we are
severe, and have no certain Rule to regulate us, we shall exclude the weak more
often than we shall receive them. 4. The lowest degree of absolute probability
that a person is converted should be satisfactory. The weakest Christians are
to be received, Romans 14. 1. and the weakest can hold forth no more than the
least degree of an absolute probability; the strongest can hold forth no more
than the highest degree of probability. Again, either the highest, or the
lowest, or some middle degree of probability is requisite: The highest is not:
And what rule is there for some middle degree? If it be not in our power to
require a Years experience for more degrees of probability, why a Months
experience?]

I have elsewhere proved that the true condition (which Mr. N. here calls the
Rule) is nothing but [A CREDIBLE PROFESSION] and that it being to be received
upon a Humane Belief, that has a fallible object, [IT IS TO BE TAKEN FOR A
CREDIBLE PROFESSION, WHICH CANNOT BE PROVED FALSE OR INCREDIBLE.] This is the
Scripture-way, and this is the ancient way of the Churches: And if you will
needs on either hand forsake these Terms, I presume to Prognosticate, you shall
but wrong your Brethren, and your Souls, and the Church and Christ, and
bewilder your selves, and make work for Repentance. With confidence after long
consideration and disputing the point I speak it. But I return to Mr. Noyes.

Page 64. [ The Practice of the Apostles, Acts 2, etc. must confine our
prudence: They were better directed and instructed than we are: And they
expected no Testimony, nor a days experience: They could not in so short a time
make any Inquisitions, or hear any persuasive relations. The youngest Converts
must be instantly embraced: Therefore some days of Experience or Testimonies
are not necessary. Some are ignorant and of an arid Constitution and
Expression: Therefore an explicit savor of Language is not equally requisite
in all -- The Apostolical Rule was large: It suffered many corrupt Members to
creep in -- None, as far as we read, were put by: Yet Converts were many,
young, ignorant, rude; and Conversions were sudden and passionate -- If ample
relations of the work of Grace be necessary, then either for satisfaction or
for edification. Not for satisfaction, as has been proved: Not for edification
-- For, 1. Would it not be as profitable for all Members to come about again at
certain seasons? 2. Such relations do uncover the nakedness of Brethren and
Fathers. 3. They slander such as are not Gifted; such as cannot express
themselves in good language. 4. Pride is set on the stage in the House of God.
5. Hypocrites are provoked to paint and act themselves. 6. Such relations are
known to afflict the afflicted, who came to us, and with us in love, and we
here hide our Faces from them. 7. The eloquent, and such as have Athletick
constitutions carry away undeserved respect from Country Christians. Materiam
superabat opus. Hence issue comparisons: Nay we foster, (instead of preventing)
suspicious partiality. 8. Young Men exalt themselves over the Faith of their
Ancients. 9. Some are sent to their Graves frustrate of their hopes, we being
in a way to admit no more in many years, than were admitted by the Apostles in
one day -- 10. To grieve such as ought to be comforted, to defame such as
deserve honor, to judge one another for infirmities, is unjust. Romans 14. The
Apostle thought it just to think well of all, Phil. 1. 17, etc. -- The Apostles
were diligent and faithful in directing and exhorting, and rebuking: And why
are they then so silent in point of admission? Yea when the Churches were
corrupted, and pestered with corrupt Members, such as made their Bellies their
Gods, Phil. 3. Jude 4. 1 Cor. 15. and 13. Surely admission has never been
deemed in the Churches so momentous as with us: And yet we commit it to the
dissident and multiformons fancies of Members, without a Rule -- The Apostles
were never acquainted with those Questions, [How, when, where, and whereby, and
by whom Conversion was wrought?] The Church is a tender Mother, Cant. 7. and
speedily embraces her Infant by admission into her Arms, and lays it to her
Breasts of consolations. Experience tells us that a Man will not easily make
Protestations before God, and subject himself to Discipline, unless it be
resolved with him. If it be resolved, he shall be saved -- Happy is he that is
resolved to slay from the wrath to come, to the Ark, to Z^ar, to the Cities of
Refuge: And open we the Gate readily (without many expostulations) to rescue
him from the avenger of Blood: Yea the way is to be made easy to encourage him
to come. We must not have such a Rule of admission, as may in an ordinary way
disinherit Saints of their Right and Privileges in the Kingdom of God.] So far
Mr. Noyes.

3. We crave, and expect our Brethrens consent, that we may not have the Gospel
hindered through the Land, by unnecessary sinful private Antichurches: That
every Town or City where are Men professing Godliness, may not be as a pitched
Field; and holy Exercises turned into Contendings; nor Christian Assemblies
turned into Schools of War, or scolding places. Let us not be many Masters,
lest we receive the greater condemnation. The wisdom from above is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, etc. where envying and strife is
there is confusion and every evil work. This wisdom descends not from above,
but is earthly, sensual, devilish.] Iam. 3. Let us agree then to do what lies
in our power, that the Churches may be reduced to the Primitive patterns, that
met all in One place, and there were of one Heart and Soul. Where find you in
all the Scriptures, that there were two distinct Churches, (especially
distinguished or divided by differences) in one City; and that when for the
number they might have joined in one? Where find you that the worst Church had
any good men that separated from it into a distinct Church in that place? Is
Scripture our common Rule? I beseech you then be able well to resolve these
Questions, before you venture in your practice to contradict the word. If we
drive you from our Churches causelessly, the Shame be on us! But if you
causelessly depart into Antichurches, the blame shall lie on you. Do not
stagger and confound our poor People, by showing them in each Town, Minister
against Minister, and Church against Church; and entice not young Novices into
an opinionative Religiousness, and draw not the Nation from the Power of
Godliness, and Practice of Charity, into doting about Questions.

4. For order sake, let Parishes be the ordinary bounds of Churches; not so as
if all in the Parish, are therefore of the Church, but so as that ordinarily we
take none out of others Parishes. Let us not do it without just cause, nor do
it when it will tend more to public hurt, than any persons good can
compensate. If you could prove Parishes no Churches, yet they that Preach to
them for their Conversion, caeteris paribus, are fittest to be their Guides,
when they are converted. Tell us if you can, wherever you found one instance in
Scripture or the Primitive times, of one Soul that forsook the Church that was
Congregated in the City of his Habitation, and was a Member of any other
Church, in a place where he dwelt not; Except the Heretics that Jude says did
[separate themselves, being sensual, having not the spirit] whose manner it was
to forsake the Assemblies, Heb. 10. 25. Cohabitation is requisite to the Ends
of Churches, even the exercise of Communion, and the offices of Members one
toward another. How can we watch over men that live out of our reach? How know
we what their conversation is?

But especially when a Parish has a faithful Minister, that undertaketh to
prove the Members that you receive to be part of his Pastoral Charge or Church,
it will no more warrant any man irregularly to receive them, because he affirms
that it is no Church, or they no Members, than such an Affirmation concerning
your own Churches or Members will warrant others to receive your Members.

5. And that justice may be exercised, and order observed, let no Member remove
till he have sought the Consent of the Church where he is, or heard them give
their Reasons against it: And let none be received from another Church or
Parish, but either upon Communicatory Letters or Certificates, or else after a
just discussion of the Cause with the Church or Teachers from whom they do
withdraw.

6. And as it is agreeable to our several Principles, and the great thing that
is now desired, that we may all correspond in Brotherly Associations, and have
Synods at fit Seasons for the Communion of the Churches that are linked
together; let us there be Responsible (not as to our Governors, but as to
Associated Brethren, and Churches), for our Actions that are of Public
offense, or of which we shall be there accused; and in particular for this, of
taking Members out of other Churches, that the Cause may have an equal hearing.

7. Or if any of you shall refuse to meet in constant Synods, yet do this much
at least: Let your Churches and ours be so far Consociate as to Own each other
for true Churches, (though we take the Liberty to disown any notable Distemper
that we may see each other guilty of), and let Communicatory Letters be
necessary for any that be received from one Church to another, unless in
special cases: And deny not to appear at least on such an extraordinary
occasion at a Synod, to satisfy the Churches when you are accused.

8. And let us agree on such Rules for the peaceable management of our
remaining Differences, as are necessary to the Security of the common Truths,
and the common cause of Christianity and Piety which we own, that we hinder not
God's Work, and harden not the Ungodly, and weaken not each others hands, and
prove not at last the unwise Destroyers of the Church, and Betrayers of the
Gospel and our Liberties to the Enemies, by our obstinate Divisions and
Contentions. If the worst be supposed of a resolved distance (which we dare not
be so uncharitable as to suppose) we may yet expect an Agreement to such terms
as are here after offered to the Anabaptists.

If yet it be insisted on by any, that [by holding Communion with us in Synods,
and being there responsible for offenses, you shall be proceeded against to a
Non-Communion]: I further answer, 1. Will you choose a Non-Communion to escape
it? yea, to escape a possibility of it? And shall it be by your own act and
guilt, lest it should be by other men's? 2. Again, I tell you, they can declare
their avoiding your Communion whether you Associate or not: And will have the
more occasion, when you wilfully divide and refuse to be responsible, than when
you live among them as Brethren in Charitable Correspondencies and Communion,
and walk in order. And there will be far more probability that things will be
carried on against you in their Synods, in your absence, than in your presence,
when you speak for your selves. 3. They will allow you in any of the ten
fore-allowed Cases to take Members out of other Parishes and Churches, and also
out of all those Parishes that have no tolerable Pastors, or where the People
have any warrantable cause to depart; yea, in case the person will but remove
his Habitation, they will not contend (though he do it causelessly.) (And surely
the Public Order and Peace of the Churches, is of greater moment than the
Riches and worldly Accommodations of a particular man: and therefore in most
cases reason it self will tell us that it is fitter such incur some incommodity
by removing their Habitations, than that the Church incurr damage by their
breaking Order, and crossing all the Scripture Presidents, where men were ever
Members of the Church that was in the Places where they lived, or next to them,
and there none but Heretics had Antichurches, or separated Assemblies).
Moreover, if you do disorderly receive any Members out of other Churches, the
Brethren associated may by Evidence of Reason satisfy and reduce you; If they
do not so, they will understand on what account you do it; and so if it be but
on some tolerable Mistake or Infirmity, they will be satisfied in the disowning
your Sin, without disowning your Communion. But if it be on an intolerable
ground, and such as signifies you to be incapable of their Communion (as if
you should cherish Heresy or Ungodliness, and cast out men for sound Belief
and Piety), they can but in the extremity declare you incapable of their
Communion, and warn your People to take heed of you; and so they can do,
whether you associate or not.

So that I may conclude, 1. That difference in Practice will necessitate a
Toleration of Postors taking Members in certain cases, out of other Parishes.

2. But differences in any Principles between the several Parties will occasion
none, if we could exactly practice our own Principles.

1. That difference in Practice will is evident: 1. Because it is impossible
that all men of the same Parties should have the same degrees of Prudence,
Moderation, Charity, Zeal, etc. which will make some to exclude abundance of
persons that others of the same Party will admit. 2. Because if the Pastor
should be moderate, he cannot promise that his Congregation will be so: And if
they too rigorously refuse any Members, he is not able alone to retain them. 3.
And if abundance of tolerable Christians be refused, there is no reason that
for the rigor of others, they should wholly be deprived of the Communion of
the Church, and the Ordinances of God. I easily foresee, that whoever was first
guilty of it, it is the more Charitable Churches that will be put most upon the
receiving of Members out of other Parishes: For the uncharitable will take
perhaps an Hundred, and leave out and reject two Hundred of their Parishioners
that should be accepted: And then the next adjoining Church cannot conscionably
refuse their Entertainment.

But let us have these three Points at least agreed on, 1. That the Neighbor
Pastors and Churches may be consulted with and heard, before such rejections be
made, or at least afterward upon the Complaint of the rejected. 2. That those
that are refused in one Parish, join with the Public Church in the next, and
that, without necessity, they do not either draw into private Churches, nor yet
join themselves to public Churches so distant, as are incapable of holding
such Communion with them as Church-ends require. 3. And that the Neighbor
Pastors do not promiscuously receive all that are rejected by the Public
Pastor at home; but only such as upon just trial are found fit.

Q. But what shall the people of the Parish do that are put upon such straits,
as to join with another Parish far off, because they have a Minister at home
that refuses them (as possibly an Anabaptist that requires them to be
rebaptized, or an uncharitable rejecter of all except such as have voluble
Tongues, etc.)

Answ. 1. He that is chosen to be the Pastor, is chosen to the Pastoral work,
and therefore is trusted with the oversight and government of the Church: which
must not be taken out of the Pastors hands, because of the Miscarriages of
some. 2. But this must be prevented in the choice. Patrons must choose none but
Prudent Pious men, that will not intolerably wrong the Church: And the
Approvers must let no others in. But if Patrons or People choose such men, and
the Approvers let them in, there is no Remedy, but shift for your selves, unless
you can get them out again. 3. If therefore they be so grossly injurious,
procure the Magistrates to punish such for maleadministration: For to them it
does belong: (Though it should be a very gross and proved abuse that must
warrant them to punish the Pastors.) Let the Cause be heard, and the
Commissioners have Power to remove them, if after warning they are uncurable.
4. And if the Magistrates will not do so, but keep them in, all that the
Neighbor Churches can do, is to hear the Case, and if it be gross and
intolerable, to disclaim Communion with them, and receive such Christians as
the uncharitable do reject. This is all that can be done. But the best way is
to be careful in the Choice. For it is an intolerable course that some are
harping on, that Pastors should not be trusted with Church Guidance and
Administrations (that is, to do the work of Pastors), any further than
Magistrates make them Rules, because they may possibly be too imprudent, or
injurious to the People. Surely as long as the Patrons or People choose, and
the Magistrate Guards the Door, and also may punish or reject
maleadministrators as the Cause requires, there needs no more.

2. And that difference in Principles between the Parties as thus principled
cannot be here a cause to break us, I shall further evince, when I have given
you the Concessions of the Independent Brethren: which I shall do in Mr.
Norton's words Englished: Page 156, 157, etc. Cap. 16. [ A Believer may
lawfully adjoyn himself into the Communion of that Church, in which he cannot
enjoy all God's Ordinances: or in which some Corruption is tolerated in God's
Public Worship without due Reformation; or when such are admitted to the
participation of Sacraments, that give no evident signs or works of Repentance
and Faith, but in many things hold forth the love of the World: and if he join
himself to such a Church, he is not therefore involved in guilt, and defiled
with the impurities of others; nor must he therefore depart, that is, separate
from such a Church. -- Schism is an unlawful Separation from the Communion of
the Church: it is always a great Sin.] This he proves Page 158, etc. 1. In case
of inculpable want of Ordinances: 2. Of culpable want by Negligence; 3. Of
culpable want by refusal of God's Ordinances: says he [In the Jewish Church
God's Ordinances could not be enjoyed: for the Priests and Elders rejected, not
only John, but the Doctrine and Baptism of John: and yet it was then lawful for
men to join themselves to them, Matthew. 21. 25. The Scribes rejected John's
Baptism, Mark 11. 27. 31. and yet the Scribes sitting in Moses Chair are to be
heard, Mat. 23. 2, 3. the hearing of whom, such as is meant in that place,
imports a Conjunction to the Jewish Church.

By comparing a Church that tolerateth the rejection of an Article of Faith,
with a Church rejecting an Ordinance of God. A temporary rejection of an
Article of Faith tolerated in a Church is a greater evil, than the rejection of
some Ordinance. In the Church of Corinth many denied and derided the
Resurrection of the Dead; and this Corruption is tolerated in the Church, and
yet in the Reformation of that Church, the Apostle does neither presently
forbid Union with the Church, nor Command Separation from the Church. In the
Churches of Galatia the rejection of the Doctrine of Justification by Faith was
tolerated at least: there being such as judged that beside Faith, Moral and
Ceremonial Works were necessary to Salvation: which other Doctrine he calls
another Gospel, Gal. 1. 6. But this was a greater evil than not to have granted
the Enjoyment of some Ordinance: and yet they did not therefore cease to be
Churches.

And therefore it was yet lawful to be a Member in a Galatian, much more in the
Corinthian Church, and consequently they were not bound under the guilt of Sin,
to present Separation, but might with a good Conscience in their Station yet
expect a Reformation: And why might not a man in the same hope with a safe
Conscience adjoyn himself either to the Galatian Churches, or that at Corinth,
even in that time of their Defection? especially if an opportunity of Communion
with other Churches were shut up?

2. We say, that a Believer may lawfully adjoyn himself into the Communion of
that Church in which some Corruption in God's Public Worship, is tolerated
without due Reformation.

The Children of Israel going a Whoring, Judge. 8. 27. after the Ephod set up by
Gideon, was a tolerated Corruption of worship. The custom of Sacrificing in the
high Places, from the days of Solomon, till the times of Hezekiah, was a
tolerated Corruption in Public Worship. The same is to be judged of the
Translation of the Passover, to the following next Sabbath, lest they should
feast on two days together. Which Translation appears in the Paschal
Observation by Christ, different from the Jews Observation. The wrong Ministry
of the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses Chair, was such a corruption: for
the Chair of Moses, that is, the office of public teaching Moses Law, and the
Books of the Prophets in the Church was by God's institution ordinarily proper
to the Priests and Levites: yet Christ commands to hear them, but not to
separate from them. To this may be added the observation of Circumcision and
the Ceremonial Law after Christ's resurrection, and with an opinion of
necessity to Salvation, Gal. 4. 21. 10. and 5. 2. But all these were
corruptions in God's public Worship tolerated without due Reformation. And who
in those times did judge either the Churches Union to be Not-lawful, or
Non-separation to be unlawful? To one bears witness the Pious Practice of so
many Proselites coming to the Church, and of the Church receiving them: to the
other, the very state of the Godly remaining in the Church.

By comparing the Corruption in an Article of Faith, with Corruption in Public
Worship, etc.] Here he repeateth the Argument forecited, adding [P. 161. It is
the Duty of every Believer to adjoyn himself to some Church: By adjoining our
selves to the Church, we adjoyn not our selves to the impurities of the Church.
A believer joining himself to a Church not pure, specially when he cannot enjoy
a purer, sins not. The sin of the Church exempteth not a Believer from Duty,
which may be performed without sin or grievous incommodity. As some corruption
of the Communicants must not drive away from the Supper, a Believer prepared
worthily to Eat. So neither must some corruption in the Church drive away the
faithful from Union with that Church.

3. Believers may join themselves lawfully into the Communion of that Church,
in which such are admitted to partake of the Sacraments, that hold forth no
evident Signs or Works of Repentance and Faith, but show in many things the
love of the World.

1. Whatever others do, it is the Duty of every Member at Age, to examine
themselves, and so to eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. 2. The Sin of
one cannot deprive another Brother (that communicates not in his Sin) of his
Benefit, much less absolve him from his Duty. 3. If trying our selves and
coming worthily as much as in us lies, we do in our Places endeavor by lawful
means that the old leaven may be purged out, and we may be a new lump; the
Communion is not defiled by other men's coming unworthily, though our comfort be
diminished. -- The Church of Corinth was not pure in Worship: Women spoke, that
is, taught in the Church. It was corrupt in Doctrine, many denied the
Resurrection of the Dead. Most corrupt in Manners; when besides Fornication,
Sects, and many other Vices, some also showed the love of the World, whence
strifes before Heathen Judges about corporal things. Yet the Apostle commands
not the prepared to abstain from the Supper; but he corrects the abuses about
the Supper, commanding every man to examine himself, and so to eat.] So he
proceeds to other Proofs from the Church at Jerusalem [ where holy things were
administered by Priests that were stark naught, and very many arrant Knaves were
present; and yet Christ and his Apostles go into the same Temple for the
Public exercises of Religion: they use the same Worship with the rest of the
people; neither the desperate ungodliness of the Pharisees, nor the dissolute
licentiousness of the rest of the peoples lives, could drive them from
Communion with the rest of the people in holy things: And why? Because the Lord
and the Apostles well knew that the Consciences of the Godly are not defiled
with the Society of the wicked; if with a pure Conscience they Communicate in
the same holy things.]

Next he proves the 4th Branch, that he that joyneth to such a Church, does
not therefore Sin, nor is defiled with other men's Impurities, p. 163* 164.

Then p. 164, 165. he pr^ the 5th Branch [that a Believer that has joined
himself to such a Church, must not therefore depart, that i^s separate from
such a Church, and that under this danger of guilt] but it is too long to
recite all. It is not men of such Principle^ and Practices as these that we
account Separatists! What do Presbyterians say more than this eminent
Independent Brother, in a Writing purposely written in Latin by the persuasion
of others in New England, to Vindicate their Churches against Apollonius, and
commended to us by Mr. T. Goodwin, Mr. P. Nigh, and Mr. S. Simpson. Yet lest any
think him too loose, I will add his last leaf of Rules [ How in a less pure
Church Communion must be continued with a safe Conscience? Answ. 1. We must
still aim and endeavor according to: our Places, that the Church may be
purifie^^ according to Christ's Mind. Not without seasonable and due warning
the Church of its Defects. The Defects are to be lamented with holy sighs and
sorrows. In no way approving, but prudently and patiently tolerating Defects in
that Church, which we c^n neither cure, nor depart from without a greater Evil.
-- When singular Evils, cannot be cured without a greater public Evil; that
must be born which cannot be amended.

In the Churches Reformation this Doctrine must be observed (Paraeus in Matthew.
13.) that those that press for too much exactness (or strictness) do more hurt
the Church, than profit it.

The Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ is a Spirit of Truth, Peace and Communion;
so loving Peace, that he commands Communion with a true Church though impure:
and so loving Truth, that he forbids impurity in every Church.

We reject the Separatists, that distinguish not between a Church and the
Impurities of a Church. Schism is a grievous Crime.

We reject the Formalists not sufficiently distinguishing a Church from no
Church, not separating the precious from the vile: what is this but Confusion?

Confusion and Schism are the Scylla and Charybdis: Peace and Truth are the
Jachin and Boaz of the Christian Cause: the obtaining of which must be
endeavored under him, and implored and expected from him, who is Peace, Way,
and Truth, alone able; among so many and (alas) too hot Contentions, and
differing opinions of the Learned and Godly, to reach us the mete-wand, and
direct his Servants into Concord, and into the perfect measure of the Temple,
Altar and Worshippers: Preserving us Men, Brethren, searching after truth in
Love, both from the left hand of Confusion, and the right hand of Separation.]
So far Mr. Norton, and so ends his Book.

And thus I have showed the Nearness of both Parties; and easiness of
Reconciliation, as to their Principles, and that there is nothing among them,
owned by either Party, that should hinder a loving Consociation, Correspondency
and Communion of the Churches, for their mutual strengthening, and the healing
of the Mischiefs that Divisions, Emulations, and Contentions have long caused
among us.

Nothing remains then to be feared, but lest men's Minds are further distant
than their Principles, and that Charity does not effectually dispose them to
Agree in Communion as far as their professed Principles will permit them. But,
though Experience make this undeniable, yet their Piety and their Professions
do put us in hope, that there are such Habitual Principles of Charity, as
better Encouragements and Opportunities will undoubtedly revive, to our
Reconciliation.

The Congregational men profess their desire of Reconciliation. Read but Mr.
Cotton's Preface to Mr. Norton; and Mr. Norton's Epistle to Apollonius: But
especially the Practice of such moderate men as Mr. Firmin, and diverse that of
late hence Associated with the Presbyterians, does give us a more certain
Demonstration of their readiness for Peace. And if many are otherwise minded,
it should be no prejudice to the peaceable.

And for the Presbyterians readiness to the Works of Peace, besides the many
motions that they have made, and the joining of some in Associations with their
Brethren, I shall now add but the affectionate Profession, which they make of
their desire of Reconcilement both with the Congregational, and Moderate
Episcopal Party, in the Epistle to their Ius Divinum Minist. 1. Concerning them
of the Congregational way, they say [ That this disagreement shall not hinder
us from any Christian accord with them in affection. That we can willingly
write upon our Study Doors, that Motto which Mr. Jeremiah Burroughes ( who a
little before his Death did ambitiously endeavor after Union, amongst
Brethren, as some of us can testify) persuades all Scholars unto. Opinionum
varietas, and opinantium Unitas, non sunt (...). And that we shall be willing
to entertain any sincere motion (as we have also formerly declared in cur
Printed Vindication) that shall further a happy accommodation between us.

Then speaking of the Godly moderate Episcopal men, they add [ Though herein we
differ from them, yet we are far from thinking that this Difference should
hinder a happy Union between them and us. Nay, we crave leave to profess to the
World, that it will never (as we humbly conceive) be well with England till
there be an Union endeavored, and effected between all those that are Orthodox
in Doctrine, though differing among themselves in some Circumstances about
Church Government. And the Lord has strangely made way for this long desired
Union, by the bitter, woeful and unutterable fruits of our Divisions, which have
almost destroyed, not only the Ministry, but even the very heart and life of
Religion and Godliness.] Read there the rest.

You see then that we are all resolved for Peace and Concord; and devoted to
it, and intent upon it: And you see how small a matter will do it: yea, that it
is done already, except the actual execution of our Doctrinal Agreements. What
then is wanting, but that we be up and doing, and practice as we profess, and
that Magistrates, and especially the Protector and Parliament now Assembled,
that have so fair an opportunity, and from whom it is commonly expected, do
call them to the work, and help to remove the hindrances, and further them by
the Countenance and Assistance of their Authority.

The Sum of our Agreement reduced to Practice.
1. WE are Agreed that Adult Church Members, must be such as make [A Credible
Profession] of Faith and Repentance, and so of Holy Resolved Obedience: Or such
as personally own and accept the Covenant of Grace, and give up themselves to
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Let us therefore take up with this Description in our future Agreements; and
in the practice, the Prudent, and Charitable will not presume to censure any
Man's Profession as Incredible, coram Ecclesia without proof.

Let us therefore unanimously set up Confirmation, or (if you dislike the Name)
the Trial and Approbation of the Profession of all that are entered among the
Adult Church Members. And if any are too loose on one side, or too rigid on the
other in the practical part; the judging, and accepting or refusing of the
tried, let the Matter be debated, at the Synods of the Consociate Pastors, if
there be any Accusation put in.

2. We are Agreed that Consent is necessary to Church Membership: And that it
must be a signified consent: And that the most express consent is best to the
well being of the Church caeteris paribus; but yet that a darker way of
signifying may serve to the Being of the Church.

Let us therefore thank God that we live in days of Liberty, wherein we may all
use the most edifying way, and accordingly let us Agree to call our people to
an express consent. But if any deny this, let them not be thereupon disowned,
but forborne, so be it they will perform the whole work of their Ministry
faithfully toward all that they take for their Charge.

3. We are Agreed that it is lawful for a particular Church to consist of no
more than can meet in one place: And yet that it is not necessary to its Being
that actually they do all meet in a place.

Let us therefore resolve to confine our particular Churches ordinarily to a
Parish: Unless it be where Parishes are so small, or fit persons so few, that
it is fit to lay diverse of them together, as to Church ends. Yet so that if any
refuse this Agreement, and will needs take four or five Parishes for distinct
worshipping Churches, and yet but one Governing Church, (in the Officers) we
bear with them, and allow them the liberty of their way, so be it they will
faithfully perform the work both of Worship and Discipline to them all.

4. We are Agreed that it is lawful and meet that Neighbor Pastors be advisers
and helpers in the Ordinations of Presbyters; and yet that they are truly
Presbyters if they be Ordained but by the Presbyters of a particular Church.
(And in cases of Necessity, if unordained.)

Let us therefore Agree in practice that Ordinations be ordinarily performed by
the Advice and Assistance of the Synod of the Associated Pastors, or some
deputed Members of it. (The case of Ordination by Bishops I handle elsewhere,
and not here.) And if any refuse this, let them be forborne, so be it they be
Ordained by Lawful Presbyters, of their own Church or any other with whom we be
not bound to avoid Communion.

And if any Congregation through Error have no true Officers (in the judgment
of the Synod) for want of true Ordination, yet let us hold such Communion with
that Congregation (if other things correspond) as is due to a Neighbor
Community of Christians, though not as is due to a Political Society.

5. We are Agreed that the Pastors are by Commission from Christ appointed to
be the Rulors of the Churches, and the people commanded to obey them: And that
it is they that are the Authorized Teachers of the Flocks, and are to
Administer the Sacraments, and Ministerially to bind or loose: And yet that the
people are to be Governed as Freemen, and are not to obey apparently
unrighteous censures, and therefore are by an Obediential Judgment, to discern
what is fit to be obeyed, and what not.

Let us therefore practice according to this Agreement; and let the Pastors
Rule, and let the people Obey; but not Obey against Gods Word: And therefore
let the people have so far cognizance of the Cause, and their conse be
required, as is necessary to their free, discerning, safe Obedience, and to the
Churches Peace. And if any Pastors will make more use of the peoples consent,
and others less, let us forbear each other, till some ill consequents produce
an accusation at the Synod; and then let the case be heard and judged.

6. We are Agreed that a Pastor of one Church may Exercise diverse acts of the
Pastoral Office in another if he be called to such Exercise pro tempore. We
need not therefore mention this in our further Forms of Concord; but leave each
Man to his Liberty. If any Pastor think he may not Exercise his Pastoral Office
abroad, let him stay at home: But let them have Liberty that are otherwise
minded.

7. We are Agreed that a particular Church that has a Presbytery, may Exercise
all Acts of Worship and Government within it self, that are appertaining only
to it self. And that Synods should be used for Communion of Churches, where
things that concern the Churches in common, or their Communion with one
another, should be heard and judged.

Let us therefore give way to particular Churches to enjoy their Liberty; and
let all the Churches be linked together, and the Pastors associate, and meet in
Synods for such Communion. Yet so that if any one in weakness shall refuse to
Associate, or be an Ordinary Member of such Synods, (being caetera sanus) we
shall not therefore withdraw our Brotherly Love, nor that distant sort of
Communion of which he is capable: Though we must disown his way, lest others be
tempted to the like Division.

8. We are Agreed that no Men should bury their Talents, and that the Gifts of
our people that are suited to the profiting of others, should be used to as
public benefit as may be, so it be orderly, regularly, in their Callings, in a
due subordination to the Ministry, and under their direction, for the helping
and not the hindering of their Work (according to the forementioned
limitations.)

There is no Difference therefore among us here that is needful to be taken
notice of in our Form of Concord, it being between particular persons, and not
parties that the difference lies. And actual miscarriages are to be enquired
after as other Crimes in the several Churches and Associations.

9. We are Agreed that all Parishes that have in them a people professing
Christianity, and consent to live as particular Churches in Communion for Gods
Worship, are true Churches, as that word does signify a Community of
Christians: And if they have true Pastors, they are true Churches, as the word
[Church] does signify a Political Society of Christians, capable of the
ordinary actual worshipping of God in the public use of all Church Ordinances.

But because it is not to be expected that we should all be acquainted with the
qualifications, consent or practice of the people in all the Parishes of the
Land, nor of the Ministers call; it is not therefore to be expected that we be
made Judges of the state of all Parishes, nor that we put our judgment of all,
or any of them by Name, into our Form of Concord. But if practically any of us
shall either slander any particular Church to be No Church, or shall use it as
no Church, the case must be heard and judged of in our Churches and
Associations.

10. We are Agreed that no Member should forsake a Church and be received into
another, without sufficient Reason to be given to the Church that he forsakes;
if they require it: And that much less should any part of a Church make an
unnecessary Separation from the rest, and become a distinct Church by
themselves: And we are Agreed that private Antichurches, (I mean, separated
Assemblies set up against the public Assemblies, and as Rivals drawing persons
to themselves and keeping up Faction, and Contention in the place) should be
carefully avoided by us all; unless there were a certain Necessity of such
Separations. We are Agreed also that no public Pastors or Churches should
refuse the Communion of any of their Neighbors, that are [ Credible Professors
of Faith and Repentance, and Holiness of Life;] much less should they cast off
the greatest part of their Parishes that are such! And yet we are Agreed that
there are several cases in which Persons may withdraw from Churches; or for
those of one Parish to join with a Church in another Parish; though the bounds
of our Habitations are usually meet to be observed for the bounding of our
Churches (not that all in the Parish be therefore of the Church, but that
ordinarily none be of the Church that is not in the Parish.)

Let us therefore put only the necessary Generals into the Form of our
Agreement, and leave the particular cases of any that shall be accused of any
violalation thereof, to be heard at the Synods of the Associations: Where if
the Accused will appear, they may have a Brotherly hearing; if not, the case
may be judged according to the Evidence that shall be given in* and the
Associated Brethren proceed accordingly, in admonishing the Offenders, and
holding or not holding Communion with them, and declaring this.

The yet Briefer Sum of our Agreement is, 1. To avoid Unnecessary Separations
and Contentions. 2. To hold an Ordinary course in Synods, for the Communion of
Churches, and strengthening each other for the work of God.

For the attainment of these we must yield as far as Lawfully we may in lesser
things: But to deny us these, viz. Union, and Communion, and Peace, is todeny
us our end, and all.

Yet Note, that it is not our Intention to impose upon all others, all points
that these two parties are agreed in, nor to put all their Agreements into our
Form of Concord, as if we regarded Agreement with no others. For instance, both
parties are Agreed of the Divine Institution of mere Ruling Elders: But so are
not all others that are fit for their Communion. And therefore let that point
be left out, to the liberty of each Church. So both parties are Agreed that the
Moderators (or Presidents) of the Associated Synods, should rather (in point of
convenience at least) be temporary, than stated, and that they should have no
Negative Voice in Ordination. But others that are fit for our Communion think
otherwise: And therefore let this be left out of the Form of Concord to our
Brethrens Liberty. If they will hold Communion in the Associations that have
but temporary Presidents, let them be received: And if those that own not
stated Presidents, or at least such as Exercise a Negative Voice in Ordination;
will yet hold Communion in Synods (with a signification of their dissent in
that point) with them that are of a contrary mind, they are to be received; and
will be, by such as more regard the honor of God, and the Churches peace, and
the Interest of Christian Charity, Piety and common Truths, than their own
conceits, and carnal Interests.

I shall therefore next adjoin the Necessary Terms of an Universal Concord
between all the Faithful Pastors and Churches of Christ in these Nations, which
yet need not be subscribed, but taken as presupposed; there being in the
following Form of Concord, for the General Peace and Communion of the Churches,
enough for Subscription, or Express Consent.

Church Concord ABOUT Government and Order.

The Second Part.

The Just Terms of Agreement between all Sober, Serious Christians (by what
Names soever now distinguished:) In point, 1. Of Catholic Communion. 2. Of
particular Church Communion. 3. Of the Communion of Neighbor Churches; 4. And
of Churches of several Kingdoms. 5. And of their Duty as good Subjects to their
Prince.

Humbly offered to all the Christian Churches as the true and sufficient remedy
of their Divisions, if not rejected or neglected: And as a standing Witness
before God and Man, against Dividing Zeal and Church Tyranny.

By RICHARD BAXTER, a Servant of the God of Love and Peace.

We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves: Let every one of us please his Neighbor for his good to
edification -- That ye may with One Mind, and One Mouth glorify God --
Wherefore receive ye one another as Christ also received us to the Glory of
God, Romans 15. 1, 2, 6, 7. Be of One Mind, Live in Peace, and the God of Love
and Peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13. 11. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst
at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

To the READER.
Countrymen,
MY Savior having made me Believe, that every Kingdom divided against it self
is brought to desolation, Mat. 12. 25. I shall the less regard the Ministers of
Satan, who will say that such attempts to unite the true Subjects of Christ and
the King, is a dangerous Plot to strengthen Rebels against the King, by their
Union. If such Fiends should do their will upon me, as Faith is but a means to
the final perfective Grace of Love, so I shall as much rejoice, to be a
Sacrifice or Martyr, for Christian Love, as for the Christian Faith: And if
Peacemakers shall be called the Children of God (by those that are his Children
at least,) I am contented with that blessedness, (Mat. 5. 9.) and envy not
their kind of Honor or Prosperity.

If this attempt shall speed no better, than many which I have formerly made
have done, as to any public Reconciliation I shall not yet think it vain,
while the private minds of many Christians are formed into more peaceable
Apprehensions and Dispositions. But if it should succeed for any public or
common healing, how great would be my Joy? While the Conciliatory Writings and
Precious Names, of Usher* Hall, Davenant, Dury, Bergius, Buroughs, etc. are so
sweet to me; Let Envy gnash the Tenth, and dividing Malice do its worst, I hope
in this delightful work to live and die.

One thing I must warn the Reader of, that I have omitted Scripture proofs of
my Assertions, because they are self-evident or past Controversy, and because
that the proofs which are fetched from two or three Texts compared, will not be
understood, by the usual sleighty Readings of such, as expect the very
Syllables: of the Assertions in the proofs. Therefore for brevity I take it to
be the better way, ^^ this time to offer here a full sufficient proof of any
one of these Assertions, which shall be questioned, to such as shall soberly
demand it.

A Servant of Christ for his Churches Unity and Peace, Richard Baxter.
Acton, Nov. 2^, 1688.
Q. SEeing you have often affirmed publicly that the Terms of Concord among
Christians are easy to be known, if their unwillingness to practice them were
not the hinderance, you are desired to answer these Questions following. 1.
What are the necessary Terms of Catholic Communion of Christians as Members of
the Church Universal? 2. What are the necessary Terms of the Communion of
Christians personally, in a particular Church? 3. What are the Terms on which
Neighbor Churches may hold Communion with one another? 4. What are the Terms
of Communion between the Churches of several Kingdoms? 5. What is the
Magistrates Power and Duty about Religion, and the Churches and Ministers of
Christ?


I. It is to be understood that the Universal Church is considered as Spiritual
or as Visible: As Spiritual, it is the Universality of true Spiritual or
Regenerate Believers, as Headed by Jesus Christ. As Visible, it is the
Universality of the Baptized, or Professors of true Faith, as Headed by Christ,
(the Author and Object of that Faith.) And accordingly Christians are to be
distinguished. And that the Question is of the Visible Church and Christians.

2. This being supposed I answer, that Catholic Visible Communion consists,
1. Fundamentally, in being all Baptized or entered into the same Covenant of
Grace, with God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and so being joined to
the same Head, and entered into the same Universal Body, and professing the
same Faith, and Love, and Obedience contained in that Covenant, and not falling
away from that Profession, or any Essential part thereof.

2. And consequently that we all acknowledge the extraordinary Ministry of the
Prophets and Apostles, and receive their Testimony and Doctrine recorded in the
Sacred Scriptures: At least the foresaid Essentials of the Covenant; and so
much more as we understand, and are convinced to be Canonical Scriptures, or
written by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

3. And also that we acknowledge a stated ordinary Ministry in the Church,
appointed by Christ to Disciple and Baptize the Nations of the World, and then
to teach them to observe all his Commands. And that we profess our willingness
to join in Christian Assemblies under the conduct of such Ministers, for the
worshipping of God, and furthering our own and others Salvation; if we have
opportunity so to do: And that we do accordingly.

II. Q. 1. We speak only of Visible Christians in this second Question also (of
Church Communion.)

2. [ A Particular Church] signifies either, 1. A Community of Christians
agreed to live under Pastora^ Guidance, before they have a Pastor, or have
practiced that agreement. This is not the Church here mean^. 2. Or a Political
Society of Christian Pastor and People professedly associated for Personal
Communion, Exercise of these Relations as such in the public worshipping of
God, and for the furtherance of Love and Obedience in each other.

The Ends difference it from all Civil Societies of Christians; and from the
associations of many Churches for Communion by delegates.

The necessary Terms of this Church Communion are these.

1. The Pastor (whether one or more) must have all things essential to his
Office. 1. As to his Qualifications, that is, 1. That he understand at least
the Essential Points of Christianity and Church Communion. 2. That he be able
to teach them to others in some competent degree. 3. That he be willing to do
it; and this for Gods Honor, the Churches Good, and Men's Salvation. 2. As to
his Call, that he have a true notification of the will of God, that he should
undertake this Office; which is ordinarily done. 1. By the Ordination, (that
is, the Approbation and Investiture) of Bishops or Pastors. 2. And (in this
case of his relation to a particular Church) by the peoples consent: All this
in truth is needful before God, and in Appearance and Profession before the
Church.

2. The People must be Baptized persons, Sacramentally engaged into Covenant
with God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and such as have not professedly
deserted that Covenant by Apostasy; nor are proved before a lawful Judicature
to be deserters of any Essential part thereof. (Whether open professed
Covenanting may not serve without Baptism in cases of Necessity, where Baptism
cannot be had, is a case so extraordinary that we need not here meddle with it.)

3. He that was Baptized in Infancy, and yet having opportunity at full age
does make no Profession of Christianity, nor own his Baptismal Covenant openly
by word or deed, is to be numbered with Deserters.

4. Though the most plain and open profession is usually best, where it may be
^ad; yet a profession less explicit may serve to the being of Church Members;
such as is their actual joining with those Churches, who purposely assemble to
make public profession of the Christian Religion (Faith, Love and Obedience.)

5. There must be also a signification of consent to their particular
Church-Relation: either more express and plain, or at least by such actions
which may be reasonably presumed to signify it. (As ordinary joining in
Church-worship with that particular Church, and submitting to the necessary
guidance of the Pastors.)

6. He that thus consents to his Relation to the Pastor and that Church, is a
Member, though he consent not to the Membership or Presence of many particular
Members thereof: Because they are but Integral and not Essential parts of the
Church.

7. But if a usual mixture (in the Assemblies) of Heretics or Strangers which
are not Members of that Church, or any other confounding cause do give the
Pastors sufficient reason to call all or part of the people to an express
signification of their consent to their Relation, to put it out of doubt; they
that causelessly refuse such signification, do seem to deny their consent, and
allow the Pastor and Church to judge of them accordingly.

8. The office of the Bishops or Pastors is subordinate to the Teaching, and
Interceeding and Ruling office of Christ; And their work is to Teach the people
the Word of God; to be their Mouth and Guide in public Worship, in Prayer, and
in Thanksgiving and Praise to God, and to administer his holy Sacraments, and
to exercise that Power of the Keys which Christ has committed to their trust,
in the Prudent and cautelous use of Church Discipline: And all this according
to the Laws of Christ, recorded in the holy Scriptures. These therefore must be
the Works and Ends, for which these Churches must (professedly) assemble:
Especially on the Lord's Days, which are separated to these holy Uses.

9. The General Command (in Nature and Scripture) that all be done to
Edification, decently and in order, do require the Church with Prudence to
determine of such undetermined Circumstances, Modes and Orders, as fall under
those Generals: As what Translation of the Scriptures to use; what Meter of the
Psalms; what Tunes; whether to divide the Scriptures into Chapters and Verses;
what Chapters to read; what Psalms to Sing, and when and how many: what
particular Method to use in Preaching; and what words: what helps for Memory?
whether written Notes? in length or briefly? At what Hour to begin: How long to
Preach and Pray: In what words to Pray. In what decent habit, and in what
gesture to Preach or Sing God's Praises, etc. what Utensils to use, as Pulpit,
Font, Table, Cloth, Cups, etc. In what Place, etc. In all which the Pastors are
the Guides by Office, and in many the Agents: And it is no sinful Will Worship
or adding to the Word of God, to determine in such cases: And they that will
not stand to such Determinations cannot be Members of their Flocks: As if any
will not meet at that time, or place where the Church does meet, or will not
use the same Psalms, or Translations, or hear the Pastor in such a Method, or
with such Notes, etc. he thereby refuses the Communion of that Church; which
must have some determinate time and place, etc. But yet the Pastors Power being
for Edification, and not for Destruction, he must take the Peoples consent in
all, so far as the Churches good requires it, to their Edification and Peace,
and guide them as a Father by Love, and in Humility as the Servant of all, and
not as Lording it over the Flock: And if his Determination should be so
perverse as to be destructive of the Church or of the Worship of God, the
people must seek the due Remedy (of which more anon).

10. As the Keys of the Church are committed by Christ to the Pastors, for
intromission, Guidance and Sentential Excommunication, that is, for the
Government of the Church; so the People must not usurp any part of their
office: They are not obliged to try the Faith or Holiness of such as are to be
Baptized, or such as are to be received into their Public Communion; but may
rest in the Pastors Judgment, whose office it is to try them: supposing still
that they have their due remedy, in case of corrupting or destructive
Male*administration. And that their needful assistance in their Places should
be used.

11. If any Member of the Church do live in any Heresy or other great Sin,
contrary to his Covenant with God, those who are acquainted with it, must
admonish him and seek to bring him to Repentance, in the order appointed by
Christ; And if he repent not, they must tell the Church; And if being duly
admonished by the Pastors, he yet repent not, the Pastors as the Church Guides,
must pronounce him unfit for the Communion of the Church, and require him to
forbear it, and the people to avoid him; which the people must obey. Yet so, as
that if the people have sufficient cause to doubt whether a censure be not
contrary to the Word of God, they may enquire into the cause; And if they find
it contrary indeed, they must not execute that Sentence, by any of those
private Acts of alienation, which are in their own Power: And they may seek due
reparation of the public breach.

12. If one Pastor of a Church where there are many do perniciously and notably
corrupt the Faith or the Worship, or the Discipline of the Church, the other
Pastors must admonish him, and both they and the people disown him, if after a
first and second Admonition, he repent not. And the same must the people do by
all the Pastors, if all be guilty in the same kind; and must trust their Souls
with more faithful Pastors. But this must not be done mistakingly, headily or
rashly, nor as an Act of Government over the Pastors or the Church; but as an
Act of Obedience to God, for the preservation of their Souls, and of the
interest of Christ: Nor must it be done without such consultation with, and
assistance of the Neighbor Churches, or the Magistrates, as their case shall
make necessary or profitable to their right Ends. Nor by a violation of any
lawful Orders of the Magistrates.

13. If a Pastor preach some unsound Doctrines, or faultily perform the public
Worship, or neglect just Discipline, and receive the unworthy to the Communion
of the Church, or reject the worthy, the presence of the innocent Members, (who
make not the fault their own by consent, or by neglecting their Duties to
reform it) makes none of this to be their Sin, nor is to be taken for a sign
of their consent: Nor will the presence of the unworthy deprive the Godly of
the Blessing or Comfort of God's Ordinance: Nor are they bound to separate from
that Church, because of these Corruptions, unless they are so great as to
unchurch that Church, or make their Worship and Communion such, as God himself
rejects and will not accept: or unless by imposing Sin upon them, or some
other way, the Church expel them; or they have accidentally some other reason
to remove.

14. The Members of the same Church must live so near to one another, as that
they may be capable of the Communion and Duties of their relation. But whether
Parish-bounds shall be Church-bounds, and whether there shall be one Church
only, or more in the same Parish, is a thing which God has not directly
determined, but only by general Rules to direct our Prudence, as cases are by
Circumstances varied.

Where the Magistrates Laws thus bound the Churches, and the conveniences of
Numbers, Maintenance, Place, and common Expectation require it; And where it is
commonly taken for scandalous Disobedience, or Disorder or Schism, to do
otherwise, Prudence forbids us to violate these Bounds and Orders, without
true necessity. Not taking all for Church Members who are Parishioners, but
taking none but Parishioners into that Church, nor setting up other Churches in
that Parish. But when there are no such Laws and Reasons for it, and where
there are plainly greater Reasons or necessity to do otherwise; we should not
make such a Law to our selves.

15. When true sound Churches are first settled, all unneoessary and causeless
Separation from them, or setting up of new Churches in the same Towns or
Parishes, by way of disclaiming them, or in opposition to them, should be
avoided by all Christians. Because, 1. We find not in Scripture times, that any
one City had many such Churches, approved of God: (The numbers of Christians
being but enough for one). 2. Because it takes up more Ministers than the
interest of the Universal Church can allow to so few. 3. Because it proceeds
from a sinful want of Love and Unity; and tends to the further decrease of
both: Long and sad Experlence having showed, that each of those Churches think
it to be their Duty to stablish their several persuasions, and oppose the
contrary; whereby they are carried as for the interest of the truth, to make
their Adversaries be thought to be ignorant, erroneous, or bad, and so to make
one another seem less amiable; to the ruin of Love and the division and danger
of the Churches. And because Love and Unity are so frequently and vehemently
pressed in the Scriptures: and Divisions or Schism so much forbidden.

16. All these are sinful Schismatical Separations, but in very different
degrees. 1. When the interest of some Heresy, or lesser Error, and the
disclaiming of some truth, does cause men to separate. 2. When they slander a
true Ministry as no true Ministry, and so separate. 3. When they slander a true
Church as no true Church. 4. When they separate because they accuse true
worship to be Idolatry, or lawful worship to be unlawful. 5. When they falsely
accuse the Churches Faith, Worship or Order to be defective, and to want some
necessary part (As the Papists do by the Protestants, who take up with the
Scripture-Religion alone.) 6. When they accuse some tolerable failing in the
Church, to be intolerable, and such as makes their Communion unlawful. 7. When
they separate from the Church because of the Holiness and Strictness of its
Doctrine and just Discipline, which crosses them in their Sin; or because they
hate the Purity of its Worship and Obedience. 8. When they separate because
that they have not a part in the Government of the Church themselves, in
receiving Members, or censuring them; or because they may not be Teachers of
the Church, or otherwise invade the Pastoral Office. 9. When Pride or
Coveteousness makes them separate, through personal distaste at the Pastors or
any Members, for want of respect or honor, or gain, or upon supposed injuries.
10. When the Minor part separate, because they have not their own will against
the Major part, in the choice of Ministers, or in other Church Affairs, in
which they have just cause to acquiesce. 11. When they overvalue their own
Conceits and doubtful Opinions, and their own indifferent Modes or words of
Circumstances of Worship or Order, so that they think it needful to separate to
enjoy them. 12. When they expect that the Pastors should Excommunicate, or deny
the Communion of the Church, to such as they account unfit, without any
accusation and proof, or true Church-justice; And do separate from the
Communion where such are received; as unlawful for themselves. 13. When they
separate upon this false Supposition, that their presence makes them guilty as
Consenters, of all the Ministers Errors in the Doctrine or Method or words of
his Preaching, Praying or other Administrations. 14. When they separate because
the Church will not forbear the Singing of David's Psalms, the Baptizing of
Infants, or some other such part or order of God's Worship. 15. When they
separate because they will not consent to the lawful Circumstances of Time,
Place, Translation, Meter, Tunes, Utensils, or Methods which the Church does
use. These all are unlawful Separations. But the great aggravations are, when
they separate to set up Heretical Doctrine, and Teachers, or false
Church-Orders and Worship corrupted in the Essentials; or to promote
ungodliness, or to rail at others from whom they separate, and to cherish
Divisions to the injury of the common Christian Cause.

17. These following are lawful Causes of Separation. 1. When the Pastors are
really no Ministers of Christ, but incapable, or uncalled Usurpers, or
Heretics or Infidels; or open Enemies to Piety, who do more harm than good,
and set themselves to destroy the Church of God, and the ends of their Ministry
2. When the Church makes not Profession of the Christian Faith, or are not
baptized or visible Christians. 3. When the worship of the Church is Idolatry,
or such for the Substance as God will not accept, nor it is not lawful to join
in. 4. When the Church renounceth, or omitteth any Ordinance of God, which the
whole Church must ordinarily perform, and which all things considered, it is
not lawful to omit. 5. When (after due admonition) the Church is turned into a
Theater of Contention, and a School of Malignity and reviling the Brethren, and
of destroying Christian Love to others; or of promoting Schism to the
intolerable wrong of the people, and of others, and of the Cause and Churches
of Christ. 6. When (after due Admonition and Patience) the Church so far
renounceth Discipline, as openly to own and justify such wickedness or heinous
Sins, as are inconsistent with the true Profession of Christianity and
Godliness.

18. And if the unsoundness, badness or weakness of the Pastors, and the
faultiness of the Worship, Order or Discipline, be not so great as to make
Communion with the Church sunply unlawful; yet any free man whose Edification
is greatly hindered by it, and can elsewhere have far greater helps for his
Salvation, and join with a Church which walks more conformably to the
Christian Rule, may lawfully remove himself to such a Ministry and Church; when
it is not to the greater hurt of others, than his own good. Especially such
whose ignorance, weakness and deadness, makes a lively and convincing Ministry
more needful to their safety and welfare, than it is to others: For it is a
Sin, Caeteris paribus, to prefer the worse before the better; and a sin to
neglect the best means for our Souls which we can lawfully enjoy: And the Soul
is more precious than to be hazarded or left in sin and darkness for an
unnecessary Circumstance.

Nor is it any sinful Separation, or Disorder, for the Members of one Church to
communicate occasionally with other Churches of Christ; seeing our relation to
the Universal Church is more strict and inviolable than to any particular
Church as such.

Also in case of removal of our Habitations, or change of our Family Relations,
or other the like Reasons, it is lawful to remove from one Church to another
(without any unjust censuring of that which we remove from:) And if the first
Church will not consent (after due means for their satisfaction) we may remove
without their consent.

19. He that is denied Communion with the Church, unless he will speak or
subscribe some falsehood, or take any false Oath, or make any unlawful promise,
or commit any other sin, is sinfully cast out or repulsed by the Imposer, and
is not guilty of Schism or sinful Separation, by denying to commit such imposed
sin.

And he that only removes from the place of meeting, with the Pastor and
Church when they remove, and does not withdraw from the Church it self; or that
adhereth to his lawful Pastor and part of the Church, when the rest of the
Church adhere to an Usurper, is not to be judged guilty of Schism; for such
avoiding of Schism.

20. The principal care for the avoiding of Schism, and for maintaining Unity
and Love, is incumbent on the Pastors of the Church; whose first work must be
to preserve this Love and Unity in their particular Churches, to prevent
withdrawing into separating Churches. To which end, their first care must be to
give no just cause, by corrupting of Doctrine, Worship or Discipline, to any to
withdraw; and not to impose any unnecessary thing as necessary to Communion;
but to unite in things necessary, and to give liberty in things unnecessary* (A
means approved in all Ages by Peacemakers:) And to guide the Church by the
paternal Government of Reason and Love, and not by Tyranny to make themselves
hateful: And to be much in preaching Love and Concord, that the people may know
the sin and danger of Factions and Divisions; and to avoid all Factiousness and
Contentiousness themselves. And their next care must be to labor after a
laudable (if they cannot reach an eminent) degree, of ability in teaching, and
exemplariness in a holy and charitable Life, that they may win the esteem and
love of the Flock, and may give them no occasion to think that the necessity of
their Souls, requires them to seek for better helps.

But if differing (though tolerable) Opinions, do so possess any of the peoples
minds, that no means can satisfy them, to continue in the same Assemblies; and
their presence will be more hurtful than their absence; or if the Pastor or
Church be so over-rigid as not to tolerate their dissent; the next thing to be
done, is to permit them to Worship in other Assemblies, (though their
withdrawing may not be justifiable;) and to take care that Love and Peace be
maintained with them, as with Neighbor Churches; though perhaps weak and
faulty; which brings us up to the next Question.

Q. 3. What are the Terms on which Neighbor Churches, may hold Communion with
one another?

A. What these particular Churches in the question are is showed before.

The Communion in question consists, 1. In holding the same Faith. 2. In the
same Worship of God, in the necessary parts. 3. In the same profession of
Obedience to God. 4. In a professed estimation of each other as Brethren, and
as true Churches of Christ. 5. And in a professed Love to one another as such.
6. And in such Communion and mutual Assistance, as tend to the preservation of
the Church Universal, and the benefit of each other. The Terms therefore and
means must be these following.

1. They must publicly profess the same Christian Religion, in all the
Essential parts; which is no more, but [ That we continue our consent to our
Baptismal Covenant, with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, renouncing the
Devil, the World and the Flesh: Particularly professing to believe all the
Articles of the Ancient Creed, and to Desire all that is contained in the Lords
Prayer, and sincerely to endeavor to live toward God and Men according to the
Ten Commandments: Believing also the Sacred Canonical Scriptures to be true,
and taking them for the entire Rule of our Divine Belief, and Worship, and
Obedience.] And we renounce, so far as we can know them, all Heresies, Errors
and Practices contrary hereto.]

This is all the Profession that is to be required of any person in order to
the Catholic Communion of Christians as such; or of the Members of a
particular Church, (besides their consent to their particular Church relation;)
or of Neighbor Churches for their Communion with each other. Except when any
scandal obliges us to clear our selves (whether it be suspected Heresy or
wickedness of Life) by a just Purgation or Repentance. And the requiring of
larger unnecessary Professions, has been the grand Engine of Church Divisions
through many Generations.

2. Yet as there are Christians of diverse degrees of knowledge, and soundness
in the same Church, so there are Churches also as different: And though we must
own them all as Christian Churches, which are such indeed, yet must we not
judge them equally sound or pure; but must disown the gross corruptions of
Doctrine, Worship or Discipline which are proved to be in any of them; and must
specially honor those that are more faithful, pure and entire.

3. No one particular single Church must claim or usurp a Right of Dominion or
Government over other Churches, as given them by God; seeing that all such true
Churches are as Cities or Corporations in one Kingdom; which are all governed
by one King, but are none of them rightful Rulers of the rest. Nor must any Men
of their own heads set up such Forms of Government as of Humane right, in
Conformity to the Secular Governments of the World, (and this as Spiritual in
the Exercise of the Keys which Christ committed to his Ministers) though one
eminent Minister may instruct and admonish many others, and have some care of
many Churches) contrary to, or inconsistent with, the Orders settled by Christ
or his Apostles, who were commissioned by him for the settling of all
Universally necessarily Church Government, and infallibly guided therein by the
Holy Ghost, Much less may the Unity and Peace of the Church be laid upon such
invented policies, as it is by the Papists, who make their forged. Head, Pope
or Council, a constitutive essential part of the Catholic Church, and seign
all the Christian World to be Schismatics, who will not be his Subjects.

4. But Love, and Concord, and Peace must be maintained among the equal parts
of the Catholic Church. Seeing it is the strength of the Churches and their
Beauty, and the Exercise and help of the Life and Holiness of all the parts:
Therefore such correspondencies must be maintained among them, as tend to a
right understanding of each other, and to a just furtherance of these happy
ends: And as in particular Churches, the determinations of useful circumstances
according to Gods general Rules, is no sinful addition to Gods Word or
Ordinances, so neither is it here to be so judged, if Magistrates by Laws or
Churches by consent, do determine of useful undetermined circumstances, for the
ordering of these Correspondencies, and preventing Contentions, Factions and
Divisions.

5. The ordinary means of these correspondencies, are Messengers and Synods,
(or Councils) and Letters Testimonial or Certificates. If one Church be
offended with another, upon suspicion of Heresy or scandalous Practices, they
may by Messengers admonish them, and these may by Messengers make their
Purgation or Confession. As also if they desire Advice or Help from one
another; but if in common and weighty cases, there be need of more common and
judicious consultations, or significations of Consent and Concord, Synods are
the means thereto. And if one Member Travel into other parts, or remove his
dwelling, or be to be received by other Churches; especially in Suspicious
Times and Cases, Communicatory Letters and Certificates are the means, that
Heretics and Deceivers abuse not the Churches.

6. Whether these Synods shall be held at certain stated times, or variously as
occasions vary? And whether they shall have a President? And whether he shall
be mutable or fixed? And of how many Churches they shall be composed? And how
often they shall meet, and how long they shall sit; with such like, are
circumstances left to Humane Prudence, under the general Laws of Christ. But
the use of Synods is so ordinary and great, that in sound and peaceable
Countries, where Heresy or Church-Tyranny does not turn them against their
proper ends; and where State-Iealousies cause not Rulers to forbid them, the
statedness and frequency of them will be of very great advantage to the
Churches: But in the contrary cases it may be quite contrary.

7. Though no one of these Bishops or Pastors in Councils (nor many conjunct)
be by Divine Right the proper Governor over the rest, and therefore as to one
another their Canons, are Agreements for Union, rather than the Laws of
Superior Governors, yet do they not by their Assembling lose their Governing
Power over their Several Flocks, but meet to exercise it with the greater
consideration and force: And therefore their lawful Determinations and
Agreements may be truly obligatory to their several Flocks.

8. The largeness of these Councils should be suited to the occasion and
necessity: As the Scandals, Heresies, Schisms or Contentions do require. But to
make proper Universal Councils to be the ordinary Supreme Governing Lawgivers
to a Body Politic called the Universal Church is a device of those who would
do Christ's work in their own mistaking way, and for the preserving of the
Churches Unity, will desperately divide, corrupt and injure it. There is no
necessity of it, Christ's Universal Laws being sufficient, with the Civil
Government of Princes, and the Circumstantial Determinations of the particular
Churches: And it is pernicious, if not impossible: The many thousand Miles
distance of the Churches, the paucity of the Pastors, and necessity of their
presence in many Churches; the many years that must be spent in Travel; the
opposition of Heathen and Infidel Princes whose Subjects they are, or through
whose Countries they must Travel; the Wars and Jealousies of Princes; the
probability of the death of the ablest Pastors in such a Voyage; they being
usually aged Men and weak; their diversity of Tongues, and unintelligibleness
to one another; their long continuance in such Councils; their incapacity to
meet and hear together in any one Room; the probability that the numerousness
of the nearest Bishops, and paucity of the remote, will make a Faction go for
the Council; the improbability that ever they will return to bring home the
Decrees; the unsatisfiedness of the Churches in their Decrees, when a thousand,
or an hundred Pastors who choose one single Delegate, know not whether he will
speak their sense or not; with many such Reasons, make it as pernicious as
unnecessary. Nor have the Christian Churches ever had such Councils (the
meetings of the Twelve Apostles being nothing to this purpose:) But as all Men
know that the Roman Emperors had no power to Summon the Pastors who were the
Subjects of other Princes; so the recorded Suffrages of all the Councils
certify us, that they were none such; but the Subjects only of the Roman
Empire, (or those that had been such) with a very inconsiderable number of some
adjacent Bishops, and that but very seldom: So that those Councils were
Universal only as to the Empire of Rome (and that but very rarely, if ever) but
never as to the Christian World.

9. If a plurality of Heretics, Schismatics, or ungodly Bishops or Pastors,
should by the advantage of their Councils oppress the Churches or the Truth,
the Sound and Faithful Pastors must hold on in the way of Duty, and not forsake
the Truth or the Flocks, in Obedience to such Councils.

10. If any Church or Pastor be accused or defamed to the Neighbor Churches,
of any Heresy, Schism, Scandal, or Injury, either to any Person of that
Church, or to any Neighbor Church or Person, the general Precepts of Christian
Charity, Concord, Humility, Submission, etc. do oblige such accused Persons, to
tender to their offended Brethren (especially if it be many Churches) due
satisfaction, and to hear their Reasons and Admonitions, and to acknowledge
their own faults, and amend if they have erred; and in lawful things to yield
to others, for Peace and Concord, and to avoid offense, where greater accidents
make it not then unlawful so to do.

11. If any Pastors or Neighbor Churches, remain impenitent, under such proved
Heresy, Impiety or Crimes, as are inconsistent with the true profession of
Godliness, the Synods, or Neighbor Churches (after due Admonition and
Pationce) should openly disown their sins, and if they be inconsistent with the
Essentials of Christian Communion, should also disclaim Communion with them;
and should send to the innocent part to exhort them to save themselves by
Separation from the rest; or to forsake such Heretical and Impenitent Pastors:
And should motion them to better Pastors, and send some to instruct them in the
mean time, if they be accepted. But none of this must be done, in case of
tolerable infirmities or failings.

12. A truly Ordained Minister of Christ, being called or accepted by a Church
for the present time, to teach them, and guide them in public Worship and
Sacramental Communion, in the Sickness, or Absence of their stated Pastors, or
in a vacancy, ought to assist them, and is to be esteemed as a Minister of
Christ in those Administrations.

And when a Church is destitute of Pastors, it is (ordinarily) the peoples
Duty, to desire the Faithful Neighbor Pastors, to assist them for supply;
especially in the trial of such parts of Pastoral sufficiency, which they are
unable to try themselves; and to Ordain (by Approbation and Solemn Investiture)
such a Person to the Ministry as they Consent to, if he be not before Ordained;
or if he be; yet by Prayer to desire God, to Bless him in that special Charge.

Q. 4. What are the terms of Communion between the Churches of several Kingdoms?
A. This needs no more addition to the former Answer but this. 1. That their
Communion in the main must be the same in Faith and Love and Obedience to God,
as if they were under the same Civil Government. 2. But they must not busy
themselves needlessly with the distant and unknown cases and business of others;
Nor 3. Must they violate the lawful restraints of their civil Governors, nor
disturb the Peace of Kingdoms, upon pretenses of the Churches Privileges or
Interest: 4. And if they are offended at the Doctrine, Worship or Practice of
other Churches; they should send to them for satisfaction, and those Churches
should send them the forementioned Confession of the Christian Religion, and
either purge themselves from the Crimes of which they are accused, or confess
them and forsake them.

But when the Pastors which in several Countries, have drunk in differing
Opinions, shall expect that all others should speak as they do, in all
controverted Points of tolerable difference; and by their odious imagined
consequences, shall slander other Churches or Pastors, as holding that which
they disclaim, or as denying that which in their public Confessions they
profess as their very Religion, and by their passions, unskilfulness and
uncharitableness, shall make all differences (though but in words, or very
narrow) seem more material, wide and dangerous than they are, and shall
hereupon proclaim their Brethren to be heretical or blasphemous, and use to
revile them, and renounce Communion with them, and would silence the Pastors if
it were in their Power; These under the Name of the Ministers of Christ, do
powerfully militate for the Devil against the Love and Peace of Christians; and
are the pernicious Incendiaries in the Churches of Christ.

Q. 5. What is the Magistrates Power and Duty about Religion, and the Churches
and Ministers of Christ?
Answ. I shall say more as to their Power, than as to their Duty, because I
know not how it will be endured; or how that counsel will be taken or followed,
which is not desired. It more concerns us to consider of our own duty to them.

1. All the forcing Power about matters Ecclesiastical, (whether by corporal
Penalties or forced Mulcts) belongs only to the Magistrate: (Besides what
Parents and Masters may do). And if any Pastors use it, it must be as
Magistrates, receiving it from the Sovereign. And the Sword is so unseemly in a
Pastors hand, and so ill taken by the people, and so adverse to the persuasive
Loving Government which he must exercise, and has ever been of such unhappy
effects to the World; that it were to be wished that Princes would keep their
Sword from the Clergy to themselves, and commit it to such Officers, as have
not so much other work to do, and are not so likely to abuse it.

2. If any Pastors will declare that Princes are bound to punish men, merely as
Excommunicated by them, without any trial of the Cause before themselves or
Officers; and will Excommunicate Magistrates for not Imprisoning, Banishing or
Burning, or otherwise afflicting those whom the Clergy have Excommunicated, or
judged to be so used; Much more if any will teach and declare that
Excommunicate Kings are no Kings, (yea, though a Foreigner that has no Power
over them Excommunicate them); or that they may be killed as Tyrants; or that
the Pope or any other, have Power to depose them, and dispose of their
Dominions (see the Council at Lateran under Innocent 3d. Can. 3. and the
Council at Rome under Gregor. 7.) If such be Subjects, they are injurious to
the Civil Power; If they are Foreigners, they are open declared Enemies.

3. The Office and Power of Kings and other Magistrates is from God; and their
lawful Commands are to be obeyed for Conscience sake; and not to avoid their
Punishments only.

4. Their Office is to promote Obedience to God and to his Laws, by making
Subordinate Laws of their own, and to be a terror to Evildoers, and a Praise
and Encouragement to them that do well.

5. The Clergy as well as others must be subject to Kings and Magistrates: Nor
is it tolerable Doctrine which would exempt their Persons or Estates, except it
be by the King's consent.

6. Princes must not only promote natural Obedience to the true God, but also
the special Faith and Obedience of the Gospel, by means which are suitable
thereunto.

7. Princes may make Laws, forbidding the Publication of all pernicious Damning
Doctrines, and the Practice of Idolatry, and of all great and notable Crimes
against the Law of God, and may Correct the Offenders by convenient Penalties,
with Prudence and Moderation.

8. If heretical, covetous, or lazy Pastors, corrupt God's Word and Worship
notoriously, or neglect their certain Duty, to the betraying or endangering of
the Flocks, or are persons incapable of the Office; the Magistrate may drive
them on to their Duties, and (moderately and prudently) punish them for their
negligence and unfaithfulness; and may forbid the incapable to exercise that
Office.

9. Such Circumstances of Worship, and Orders of Assemblies (before instanced)
as are fit for Common Determination and Agreement in all the Churches; being
such whose Determination is not proper to the Pastors Office, may (on moderate
terms, and by religious advice) be determined of by Magistrates; And all their
lawful Determinations must be obeyed.

10. There needs not the device of Popes or Patriarchs, to call Councils, or
to keep Peace among the Pastors of the Church: For the Magistrate must do it,
as a great part of the work of his Office. Every Sovereign may call such
Pastors unto Councils as are his Subjects: And several Princes by agreement may
call their respective Subjects together when there is Cause; And proper
Universal Councils (as is showed) are things which never were known, nor are
not to be expected: And it must be a very extraordinary necessity, which must
warrant the Pastors of several Kingdoms, to hold Councils together, when they
are forbidden by their Kings: Princes also may correct Church-Tyrants and
Usurpers, and Destroyers of Faith, or Piety or Peace: They ought to restrain
such Pastors as would raise Seditions or Rebellions, or Persecutions of the
Innocent, or that pretend Religion for the open and obstinate revilings of
their Brethren, and are proved to be unquiet Firebrands to kindle Dissentions,
and destroy Men's Love to one another, or arbitrarily to oppress the Flocks.

11. When any question, Who must be Judge, in cases of Heresy, Infidelity or
Idolatry as divulged or practiced, the true answer is obvious and easy. 1. In
regard of public Ecclesiastical judgment, and the Sentence of Excommunication
or Absolution, the Pastors of the Church are the proper Judges, by virtue of
the power of the Keys. 2. In regard of public civil judgment in order to
corporal forcible punishment or impunity (as there is just cause) the
Magistrate is the only public Judge. 3. In regard of that private judgment of
discerning, by which every rational person must know his own Duty, both to God
and Man, and discern when and how far to obey Man, without disobeying God,
every such rational person is a Judge; that is, a Discerner of what he ought to
do. And Christ always the final Judge.

12. Yet may not the Magistrate invade the Pastoral Office it self; nor Ordain
or D^grade Minister^, (in that Spiritual Sense as it is committed to
Church-Guides;) nor Administer the Sacraments, nor exercise the proper power of
the Church Keys, which Christ committed to Church Officers, by such
Excommunications or Absolutions as are proper to that power; nor may they
hinder the ^astors from the due performance of their Office, in matter or
manner: Nor forbid the necessary Preaching of the Gospel, or public
worshipping of God, by all or any of his Ministers: But are bound to promote it
with studious diligence, as Patrons of the Church.

13. But if they should forbid us the necessary Preaching of God's Word, or
necessary assembling for God's public Worship, (as we must not account, those
seasons and circumstances necessary which are unnecessary, so that which is
necessary indeed, we must not desert, till we are disabled to perform it;
seeing it is greater Sacrilege, if we alienate a person consecrated to God in
so sacred an Office, than if we should alienate conseorated Goods or Lands;
which are not so nearly related to a holy use. And seeing we took not up our
calling upon mere trial for a time* And seeing it is more Cruelty in us, to see
Thousands perish in ignorance and ungodliness, while we deny them our necessary
help, than to shut up the Bowels of our Compassion to them, who are in corporal
distress: And seeing Christ's threefold charge to Peter, does teach us, also,
as we love him to feed his Lambs. And all that are truly called to the
Ministry, may say of their duty as Paul of his Apostolical Works, [ Necessity
is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me, if I Preach not the Gospel] Joh. 21. 15,
16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 9. 16. But there is no absolute necessity of our Liberties,
Maintenance, Ease or Lives. And those that are indeed the Servants of God, and
fear his Judgment, and look for their Reward and Felicity from him, must (with
Dan. chapter 6. and the Apostles Act. 4. 18, 19. and 5. 29.) hear God and obey him
before men: Luke 12. 4. and fear hell fire more than death, as Christ
commands; and love men's Salvation and Christ's Kingdom better than our lives:
Luk* 14. 26. 33. 1 Ioh. 3. 16.

Yet must we take heed that we overvalue not our own labors, and that we
pretend not a necessity of them when there is none: And that we invade not the
public Temples or Maintenance, which are at the Magistrates disposal: And that
we be not too querulous under our own sufferings, to make the Rulers odious to
the People; nor any way stir up Sedition under pretense of saving Souls; nor
carry on any carnal interest and work of our own, under the name of the work
and interest of Christ. And as to the places, seasons, numbers, and other
circumstances of our Ministerial Duties, they must be fitted to the Churches
good, which is their end, and varied according to the variety of Cases; and we
must not expect that all men and in all cases do observe the same which some
must do.

14. But where we may not actively obey, we must either fly to another City,
Mat. 10. 23. or patiently suffer, and not resist, Romans 13. 3. 5. Matthew. 5. 10,
11, 12. We must not revile when we are reviled, nor curse (no not in our
hearts) the Rulers of our people, nor secretly or openly dishonor them;
Because their honor is more necessary to the common good than our vindication
is: 1. Pet. 2. 23. Act. 23. 5. Eccl. 10. 20. Much less may we raise any
Seditions or Rebellions* or revenge or defend our selves by Wars against them,
or against their truly authorized Officers: The Christian Religion being so far
from justifying any disloyalty, that it most strongly obliges us to honor our
Superiors, upon the highest accoun^^; and to give place to wrath and evil,
Romans 12. 17. 19. 21. and to pray for Kings and all in authority, that we may
live a quiet and peaceable*life, in all godliness and honesty. And though among
Christians as some tha^ bear that Name are vicious and sensual; so some are
t^rbulent and seditious; and some that are better may be ens^ared by the
Differences of Statesmen and Lawyers; and it has ever been Satan's grand
design to raise jealousies against Christianity and Godliness in the Rulers of
the Earth, and to make them believe, that the most serious and godly Christians
are the worst and most dangerous Subjects; yet the very Nature and Laws of
Christianity, do make it most evident that the best and the entirest
Christians, and the most Godly and Heavenly Men, must needs be the most loyal
faithful Subjects; and he that is truest to God, will (so far as he
understands) be truest both to King and Kingdom: And as our Obedience to the
fifth Commandment is part of our Religion, so the promoting of all due
Obedience unto our Governors, and the preventing of all Rebellions and
Disloyalty, must be part of the work of all true Pastors, in their public
Teaching and their private converse.

15. All Christian Magistrates must know that their Subjects are, I.
Approveable. II. Tolerable. III. Intolerable: specially as Teachers.

I. The Approveable they must encourage and maintain. II. The Tolerable they
must Tolerate. III. The Intolerable they must Suppress. But if they mis-judge,
God will judge them for it.

16. It is not credible that all the Patrons in England are such men, as God
has entrusted to choose Pastors for all men's Souls, and as will choose such as
all are bound to commit the Pastoral conduct of their Souls to: And that
Bishops will institute no others; nor yet impose any thing, which a good
Christian may think sinful: Nor yet that all Christians are bound to venture
their Souls on the conduct of any that Patrons choose, or on the practice of
all that is imposed. Therefore Pastors of their own choosing should be Licensed
to tolerated Churches.

1. Subscribing the Essentials of Christianity. 2. Living under Laws of Peace
and Loyalty. 3. Paying their Parish Dues.

17. They whose Labors do more good, than their Mistakes and Faults do hurt,
should be corrected only by such moderate Penalties as hinder them not from
their Ministerial Work.

18. When all is done, Good Rulers will do good, and promote Truth* Piety and
Peace, and suppress the intolerable, and restrain the envious proud tyrannical
Clergy. And Bad Rulers will judge the best Men to be the worst, and take them
for intolerable, and serve Satan by laboring to disable or destroy them. The
God of Love and Peace, make Rulers, Teachers, and People to be Men of Love and
Peace; or make us long for that World where all are such in full Perfection,
Amen.

FINIS.

