NONCONFORMITY, WITHOUT CONTROVERSY.

FROM ROMANS Chap. 12. Ver. 2.

SHOWING, That it is every Christian's Duty, To be a NONCONFORMIST to this
World.

By BENJAMIN BAXTER, Preacher of the Gospel.

Jer. 15. 19. Let them return unto thee, but return thou not unto them. John
15. 19. You are not of the world, I have chosen you out of the world. LONDON,
Printed by A.M. for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible on London-Bridg* 1670.

READER,
TAke not occasion by the Title of this Book, either of a pleasing or
displeasing Mistake. It speaks not at all against any Conformity to the
lawful Commands of lawful Governors, in things Civil or Ecclesiastical; but
only against a Conformity to the Vices of the World: Which should be no offense
to any who renounceth not his Baptism, in which we all renounce the World, with
the pomps and vanities thereof, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh;
promising that we will not follow or be led by them. He understands nothing
of Christianity, who understands not the enmity of the World, to a life of
sincere Holiness; and how inconsistent the Love of the World is to the Love of
God; and how much the Life and Death of Christ were intended and fitted, to
mortify our earthly Minds and Affections, and to bring us to a holy contempt
of the Pleasures, and Profits, and Honors of the World; and that it is the
office of our Faith, to be our victory over the World; and all this, in the
imitation and strength of Him, who has heartned us to the war, with this
Encouragement, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World. They that are not
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is not their Belly, who glory not in
their shame, and mind not earthly things, while they are named Christians; are
crucified to the world, and the world to them, by the cross of Christ; and
their Political conversation is in Heaven. This Subject you will find handled
in this Discourse, by the Reverend Author, (my very dear and worthy Friend)
with great plainness and perspicuity, in a style neither obscure, dull, nor
tedious; and in a most natural and congruous Method (in which respect all the
Sermons that ever I heard from him, (whereof some were above thirty years ago)
did excel other men's). The Lord make it effectually serviceable to his Ends,
who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil
world, according to the will of God, and our Father. To whom be glory for ever.
Amen. Gal. 1. 4, 5.

Sept. 14. 1668. Ri. Baxter.

To the Virtuous and his much Honored Cousins Mrs. Grace Allen, Wife to Mr.
William Allen, Merchant: Mrs. Sarah Paunsfoot, Wife to Mr. Robert Paunsfoot:
Mrs. Hester Brear-cliff, Wife to Mr. Thomas Brear-cliff, Merchant: all of the
City of LONDON.
Much Honored Cousins, IT is not any Ambition to appear in Print, that has
induced me to this Undertaking; Only I could not handsomely decline the
Dedication of this Posthumous Piece, and Presenting it to your Hands, who have
so clear and unquestionable a Right to it, as will appear by the Sequel. I
presume you are not ignorant, that it was really intended and designed for you
by the Reverend Author, (now at Rest with the Lord) your dear Brother and mine;
Who, (had he not been prevented by Death) had done it with his own Hand: but
perceiving the Printing of this Book procrastinated beyond his Expectation, and
being daily sensible of his near approaching and long expected Change, it was
his desire that I would undertake it in his behalf; and indeed it was one of
the last requests he made to me before he left the World. I doubt not then, but
what I have done herein, will be well construed and kindly accepted, when it is
done in pursuance of so honest a Design* and to gratify the just and
reasonable Desire of so near and dear a Relation, who (on his Deathbed)
bequeathed this Legacy as a Testimony of his unfeigned Brotherly-Love, and
Memorial of his real Gratitude to you his dear Dear Sisters, who had not been
forgetful of him, but often relieved and refreshed him by your Kind and Christian
like Visits, in his Low and Languishing Condition.

As for the Subject of the following Discourse, You will easily grant, it is
very seasonable and needful as for all Times, so especially these last and
worst Times, wherein Worldliness so much prevails and gets ground of Godliness
even in the Hearts and Lives of those that call themselves Christians, whereas
did they truly answer the Name they bear, what would it speak else, but their
Conformity to Christ, and not to the World.

The Words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 29. 30, 31. deserve seriously to be
taken, and laid to heart by every Christian: Where, to take us off the extremes
of Joy and Sorrow in the Possessing, or Parting with Earthly Relations, and
Worldly Comforts, he tells us, The fashion of this World passes away: and yet
notwithstanding, how do we find by Woeful Experience, the Hearts of too many
drawn away and enticed through the Predominancy of Worldly Lusts, that this is
their chiefest study how to keep in with the World by Fashioning and Conforming
the daily Actions of their Lives according to the Rules and Patterns of it? And
herein, how do they seek to out-vye and out-stripeach other with so great
Emulation and Contention (when their Lives and the World are hastening to an
end) as if it were their highest Ambition to live and dye the Werld's
Favorites? But, certainly if there were a through and sound Belief of a Life
and World to come, after this present frail and transitory State of all things
here below, how would it turn the Stream and Current of Men's Thoughts and
Affections, and have a powerful Influence on their Lives and Conversations, to
make them more Godly, and less Worldly; and from this very Consideration (2
Pet. 3. 11.) the Apostle argues strongly for a Holy and Godly Conversation, and
not a Worldly Conformity. But our Savior himself has foretoldus (and
therefore we may and must believe it) that toward the end of the World it will
be a rare thing to find true Faith, (Luke 18. 8.) that Victorious Grace which,
St. John tells us. (1 John 5. 4.) overcomes the World and the Lusts thereof.

But (dear Cousins) I am persuaded better things of you, and such as accompany
Salvation. You have been happy above mamy, in respect of your Education, having
been acquainted with Sound Principles of Godliness from your tender years,
through the Care and Diligence of your Religious Parents. And although there
are too many to be found in these times, between whose Principles and Practices
there is little or no Conformity, but the one is rather a plain Confutation of
the other; I hope you will never be found in that number: for that precious
Seed of good Principles which was sown in your Minority, was not (it seems)
burned and last, but has (through Gods Blessing with a continual watering)
budded and brought forth seasonable and wholesome Fruit for the Comfort and
Refreshing of others, which has occasioned (no doubt) the Thanksgiving of
many to God on your behalf. And if God has given you, (with a large and
plentiful Estate) a large Heart and open Hand to do good, it is a double
Blessing, and lays a double Obligation upon you to be thankful.

Now because the best Christians need daily Monitors to warn them of Dangers,
and to awaken them to Duty and the continual Exercise of their Graces; give me
leave as a faithful Friend to beseech you to keep in remembrance, and seriously
to ponder what the Apostle writes to Timothy (1 Timothy 6. 17. 18, 19.) The more
Splendid your outward Condition is, the greater is the Danger you are exposed
unto, from the Temptatations of a Smiling and Flattering World, which being
masked and vetled, are not easily known and discovered; which if they were,
would more easily be resisted, and were nothing so dangerous. They that by
Experience know what a tempting thing Worldly Grandeur is, and have any
acquaintance with their own hearts, how apt they are to be taken with it,
cannot but acknowledge, it is none of the easiest Points of that difficult Duty
of Christian Self-denial, for those that have arrived at the Haven of Worldly
hopes, to keep their Hearts humble from being lifted up with Self-admiring
thoughts, when their outward Greatness and Splendour invites others to applaud
and admire them. And indeed it will put the Faith of Christians to the greatest
Stress, and prove not only the Truth but the Strength thereof, when, in the
midst of Worldly Enjoyments, they can look above them to higher and better; and
in the midst of Worldly Greatness, can live above it in the Soul-ravishing View
of Heavenly Glory. It must needs be then a Mercy worth the asking, and a Lesson
worth the learning, to have our Hearts loosed from all outward Comforts before
Hand, and to leave and part with them in affection, before we are called to
part with them indeed, (seeing there will be a time of parting and we enjoy
them on no other, but partingterms) and then, whenever they are taken from
us, or we from them, the trouble of parting will not be great. But to detain
you no longer with an Epistle; As concerning the Author of the ensuing Sermons,
it is needless for me to write any thing to you who were so nearly related and
so s^^iliarly acquainted with him, to whom (I doubt not) his Memory is and will
be precious; and that true Love, and due esteem you always had for his public
and profitable Labors is a sufficient Commendation of this Practical Piece to
your Serious Perusal which I hope and heartily wish (through the Blessing of
God) may prove advantageous to preserve you from Worldliness, and for the
promoting the power of Godliness in your Hearts and Lives, that you may daily
strive after a nearer and closer Conformity to Christ your Heavenly Pattern in
all his imitable Graces; then shall you have no cause to repent the reading,
but rejoice and bless God, that by his good Providence it is brought forth to
public View, wherein the Author, (though dead) yet speaks.

Your most Affectionate Kinsman in any Service of Christian Love to be
commanded, STEPH. BAXTER.

THE CONTENTS.
THE words of the Text, words either of Counsel, Caution, Command, p. 1. Here
considered as a Prohibitive Precept, 1 The Act forbidden, ibid. 2 The Object to
which it has relation, 2 What is not forbidden. Not living in the world, All
using of the world, All converse with the men of the world, ib. Two things
forbidden to Christians in relation to the world, Affection, Imitation., ib.
Doct. It is the duty of Christians to be Nonconformists to this world, 2 1.
Explication. Two things opened, 1. What is meant by the world, its Frame,
Family: Here, meant the Family, 3 Five Reasons, why the worst of the World are
called the World, 4, 5, 6. 2. What it is to be a Nonconsormist to this World,
7, 8, 9. Wherein conformity to the World stands: In, 1 Approbation, 2
Imitation, 9 Wherein a Nonconformity stands: In Judgment, Affection,
Conversation, 10, 11 Not conforming to the World's Rules, Examples, 12 2
Confirmation. 1 Reasons in general* what a Christian is 1 Called from. 2 Called
to: 1 Holiness, 2 Happiness, 13, 14, 15 2. Reasons in particular. 1 Conformity
to God and the World, cannot consist, 16 2 This World is one of a Christian's
declared Enemies, 17 3 Christians are predestined to another Conformity, ib.
4 What was a Christian's Rule before conversion, cannot be after, ib. 5 One End
of Christ's living on Earth, was to give us an Example to conform to, ib. 6 It
is a Debasement to a Christian, to be a Conformist to this World, 18 3
Vindication. Quest. Whether all conformity to this World, be unlawful? 19
Conformity distinguished into Civil 19 Sinful, 28 Doubtful, 30 Advice given
concerning Doubtful Conformity, ib. 4 Application. 1 Information. 1 What is the
Character of a true Christian, 32 What to judge of those who are Conformists to
this World, 34 3 Why Nonconformists to this World, are so much hated, 38
Exhortation. Three things handled, 1 The chief Causes of a Conformity, viz. 1
Slavish fear of the World's frowns, 41 2 Sinful love of the World's favors,
ib. Four things men naturally affect, 1 To be thought somebody in the world 42
2 To be free from the world's hatred, ib. 3 To have company in their way, 43 4
To have Elbow-room. 44 2. Discoveries, whether we are Nonconformists to this
world, By being unlike the world, 50 By being Conformists to another world, 50
Enquiries hereupon made, General, Particular, ib. 1 General Enquiry, What
conformity to those in Heaven? 50 Quest. Who are in Heaven? Answ. God, Christ,
Angels, The Spirits of just men made perfect, ib* Trials of our conforming to
God in our Judging, 51 Affecting, ib. Conformity to Christ in Sufferings, 53
Sanctity, 55 To Angels: In doing the will of God on Earth, as they in Heaven:
That showed in five particulars, 57 To the Spirits of just men: That showed in
two particulars, 60 2. Particular Queries, 1 What Language do you speak? 62 2
What Life do you live? ib. 3 What Works do you do? ib. 4 What things do you
most look after? 63 5 What world do you most provide for? ib. 6 What world do
you account your home? ibid. 7 What Interest do you most rejoice in? 64 8 From
what world do you fetch all your comfort? ib. 9 What Promises do you most
prize? ib. 10 How do you do the Civil businesses of this life? ib. 3.
Directions, that we may be Nonconformists to this world, 65 1 Compare both
worlds together, ib. Both worlds compared in seven particulars, 65, to 71 The
Question put upon this comparison, Which world is most worthy of our
conformity? 72 2 Compare together the loss of conforming, the gain of
Not-conforming, ib. The gain and loss of Conformity, compared, 71, to 78 The
gain and loss of Not-conforming to the world, compared, 78 What a Nonconformist
to the world gains. 1 A good report from godly men, 79 2 A good report from God
himself, 80 That those Worthies (mentioned Heb. 1^.) lived and dyed
Nonconformists to the world, 81 3 Compare together the Rules and Examples of
the World, and of the World, 82 Upon comparing them, three things considered 1
Which most worthy of our conformity, 83 2 To which we are most engaged to
conform, ib. 3 By conforming to which, they will be most advantaged, ib. 1
Which are most worthy of our conformity: An examination of the world's Rules
for Judging, Practice, found to be Corrupt, Naught, 83 An examination of the
world's Patterns and Examples, and they found to be such, 84 An examination of
the Rules of the Word, and they found to be holy and pure, ib. Rules for
Judging, Three, 85 Rules for Practice, Five, 86 An examination of the Patterns
and Examples of the Word, 87 An Objection against Scripture-Examples, answered
in two things, 91 The result of this Comparison; and the Rules and Examples of
the World found to b 1 More high, 88 2 More holy, 89 3 Having better and higher
approbation than those of the world, 93 Quest. By whom they are approved? ib.
By God himself, ib. By those that are godly, 94 One day by all, both good and
bad, ib. 4 Most safe for Eternity, 95 5 Most becoming a Christian's Calling,
Profession, Spirit, 96 6 Most Consolative, 97 7 A conformity to them, a
Christian's wisdom, 100 2 To which we are most obliged to conform, God, or the
World, 101 Qu. Which has done most for you? 102 Which can do most for you?
103 3 By conforming to which, we shall be most advantaged, ib. Two things
enquired into, Which promises most? Which threatens most? 104 The Motives
wrapped up in the Directions, 106 Eleven particular Directions, that Christians
may be Nonconformists to this world, 106, to the end.
A NONCONFORMITY
Commanded and Commended.
Romans 12. v. 2. And be not conformed to this world.
THE words considered in themselves, are either words of, Counsel, issuing from
the Apostle's Wisdom; or words of Caution, issuing from the Apostle's Care and
Love; or words of Command, issuing from the Apostle's Authority: Be not
conformed to this world.

We will consider them as a prohibitive Precept, wherein we have

1. The Act forbidden, and that is Conformity.

2. The Object to which it has relation, and that is, to this world.

And mark, it is said, to this World, (...), not to the world, but to this
world. The Greek word taken strictly, signifies the present Age of the world;
so as if the Apostle should say, Be not conformed to this Age; intimating, that
it was an Age wherein Sin and Corruption did more abound. But we shall take it
more largely; so, this World, as distinguished from another World. There is the
World that now is, and the World that is to come. It Is said of Demas, That he
embraced this present world. So the thing forbidden, is not being in the world,
nor using of the world, nor all converse with the men of this world; but it is
conformity to this world that is forbid.

There are two great things the Scripture forbids us, in relation to the world:
1. Affecting of it, Love not the world. 2. Imitating of it, and conforming to
it; so here, Be not conformed to this world.


Doct. It is the duty of Christians to be Non-conformists to this world.

In handling of it, we shall speak to four things: 1. The Explication. 2. The
Confirmation. 3. The Vindication. 4. The Application.


1. For Explication; so two things come to be opened: I. What is meant by the
world to which Christians are not to conform. II. What is meant by being a
Nonconformist to this world.


I. What is meant by the world that Christians are not to conform to. To let
pass the several acceptions of the world in Scripture, It may be understood
either of the Frame or Family of the World.

1. For the Frame; so for what the world consists of; so for the Heavens and
Earth, and the things contained in them, Heb. 1. 2. By whom also he made the
world. So it is not here understood.

2. The Family of the world; so the world is taken for the persons that inhabit
this lower world, the Earth: and so in Scripture, for the wicked of the world,
1 John 5. 19. The world lies in wickedness. Where by the world is not
understood the Frame, but the Family and men of the world; who by a special
appellation in Scripture are styled the men of the world, Psalm 17. 14. and the
children of this world, Luke 16. 8.

And the reasons why they are called the world, are these.

1. The worst are the most of the world, they take up most room in the world;
the Godly are a little Flock. Who can number the dust of Atheists, Swearers,
Drunkards, Sabbath Breakers, Covetous, Profane? How few are those that fear an
Oath, to those that swear? How few are those that sanctisie a Sabbath, to those
that profane it? How few are those that call upon the Name of the Lord, to
those that blaspheme his Name? How few are those that fear God, to those that
fear him not?

2. The worst are for the most part the greatest of the world, they are the
most flourishing part of, and people in the world; and they are the world's
ownlings, whom the world loves, as our Savior says, The world will love its
own. They are the Diamonds of the world, and the godly are but the Pebbles,
They are the persons in esteem, when the godly are accounted the (...),
off-scowring of the world. They are the men that have most worldly wisdom, most
worldly wealth, most worldly honor, and therefore called the world.

3. The worst are called the world in regard of affection; they love the world,
and the things of the world. They savor the things of the world, and savor of
the world; they smell of the world, as Esau's garments did of the Field. The
saying is, Vnum quodque illud est quod amat; every thing is that it loves.
Affections work a change, especially that of love, which in a manner changes
one into the person or thing loved. Hence it is the worst are called the world.

4. The worst are called the world, in respect of Conversation; they are
carnali conversatione Mundo dediti, as an Expositor says, they are wholly
addicted to, and given up to the world; the world is the Principle from which,
and the End for which they act; they rise no higher in their conversation, than
the world; their conversation is not in Heaven; they do all carnally; so they
eat, and so they drink; so they live, and so they dye; and therefore called the
world.

5. The worst are called the world, Because they are all for the world; for the
Riches, and Pleasures, and Profits, and Vanities of this present world. If they
can have but those things, they care for no more. They make the world their
rest; they must have the things of the world, or else they dye. Give them the
things of the world, and it suffices. The things of another world, they mind
not, they desire not, they seek not after. What they look after and covet, lies
below. As the Duke of Alva, when he was asked by the King of France, Whether he
had seen a great Eclipse that was of the Sun? Replied, That he had so much to
do on Earth, that he could not have while to look up to Heaven. So it is with
these; a Portion in this life, and in this world, is the highest in their
esteem; as that profane Duke of Burbon said, He preferred his part in Paris,
before his part in Paradise. And upon this account the worst are called the
world; and this is that world that is chiefly meant, to which Christians are to
be Non-conformists.

So much for the first.

II. Consider, What it is to be a Nonformist to the world: so, in handling
that, we shall do two things:

1. Show you wherein Conformity to the world stands.

2. Wherein Nonconformity stands; and so shall show you what it is to be a
Conformist and a Nonconformist to this world.

The words in the Original are (...), which Beza renders the Configuremini, Be
not configured to the world. Some render them (and so the Vulgar), Nolite
conformari, Be not conformed, as here in the Text. The words may be rendered,
Be not figured or fashioned according to this world, 1 Pet. 1. 14. Not
fashioning your selves, etc. where the word is the same in the Original, with
that in the Text. Having done this, I now come to show wherein

1. Conformity to the world stands. Conformity supposes and implies a pattern
to which one does conform. What is Conformity but a walking or working by a
Rule or Pattern, out of a study and desire to imitate it? So conformity to
Christ stands in the imitating and following the Pattern that Christ has left
us, and writing after the Copy he has given us; treading in his steps, 1 Pet.
2. 21. Leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. So conformity to
the world stands in treading in the world's steps, writing after the world's
Copy, following the world's example. The world has its Tables, which it hangs
forth for a pattern of Conformity to others. It has its Samplers, wherein is a
description of its actions, for the imitation of others. There is a Scheme and
Figure of the world, according to which it wonld have all to fashion
themselves. It knows that man is (...), a Creature that is apt to imitate, who
will be working according to some Pattern or other; and therefore has its
Patterns of all sorts, which it hangs forth to gain his Conformity. So then
there are two things that make up conformity to the world, and that make a man
a Conformist to the world.

1. Approbation. 2. Imitation.
1. Approbation; when a man in his judgment approves of the world's Principles
and Practices, concluding that best that the most of the world say and do; That
the world's way of worshipping God, is the best way; That the world's way to
Heaven is the easiest way, and therefore to be chosen.

2. Imitation: This follows upon Approbation: He likes the Copy, and therefore
resolves to write after it. He likes the Pattern, and resolves to imitate it.
As it is in writing, we first look on it, and like the Handwriting, and then
there is a taking of Pen in hand to write like it. In a word, Conforming to the
World stands in this, When a man is inwardly and outwardly, not what God, but
the world would have him to be. When a man judges as the world judges, thinks
as the world thinks, speaks as the world speaks, acts as the world acts, loves
as the world loves, delights as the world delights, hates as the world hates.
When a man's carriage and disposition is the the same with the men of the
world; when a man makes the rule of his life to be the sinful Manners,
Customs, and Examples of the world, and salves all with worldly distinctions
and limitations.

II. What Nonconformity to the World is, and what it is to be a Nonconformist
to the World.

Nonconformity to the World consists of these things:

1. A Nonconformity to the World in Judgment. He that is a Nonconformist to the
world, must judge of things otherways than the world does. The world calls evil
good, and good evil; the world puts darkness for light, and light for darkness;
the world thinks the ways of God unequal, the service of God burdensome, the
Servants of God fools, the Ministers of God illiterate Dunces, Religion it self
irrational: It thinks Holiness singularity; and strictness and preciseness in
the ways of God, to be foolish scrupulosities. It thinks great sins little
ones, and little sins to be none at all. It thinks Repentance and Salvation to
be the easiest things in the world, and that the way to Heaven is not so hard
as the Scripture makes it. What a low opinion has the world of sin, judging is
not to be so evil as it is? What a low opinion has the world of Grace,
thinking it not to be so excellent as it is? What a low opinion has the World
of Christ, thinking him not to be so necessary, amiable, and desirable, as he
is? What a low opinion has the world of Heavenly things, and the great things
of Eternity, thinking them not to be of that everlasting concernment as they
are? What a low opinion have they of the Saints of God, thinking them not to be
so excellent and useful as they are? What a low opinion have they of Religious
Duties and Ordinances, thinking them not to be so necessary, sweet, and
heavenly, as they are? So this is the first thing, Wherein a Christian is to be
a Nonconformist to this World, In point of Judgment* He must judge of things
otherways than the World judges.

2. A Christian must be a Nonconformist to the World, in respect of Affection.
He must have his Affections set upon higher objects than those things the
affections of worldly men are set upon; he must be unlike the world in his
love, desires, and delight. The World loves nothing but what is like it self;
none but those in whom it espieth its own conditions and dispositions; he must
be unlike the world in his sorrow, grief, and mourning, which is for worldly
crosses, not for sin; it mourns more for the Effect, than the Cause. The
Affections of the World run with a bias toward the World; they are all edged
and pointed downwards; they always face some Worldly Object. And in this
particular a Christian is to be a Nonconformist to the World.

3. A Christian must be a Nonconformist to the World in respect of Practice. A
Christian must not do as the World does; he must not conform to the World in
respect of its Rules, Examples.
He must not walk by the Rules the World walks by: He must not imitate the same
Patterns: the life of a Christian must be a life ordered by the Rules and
Examples of the Word, not of the World. His Principles from which he acts, his
Rules and Precepts by which he acts, and his Ends for which he acts, must be
higher than the World.

And thus much for the Explication.

II. For the Confirmation of the truth of the Doctrine: So consider the grounds
and reasons, Why Christians must be Nonconformists to the World.

First, They are to be Nonconformists to the world in respect of their Calling.
A Christian's Calling, and his Conformity to the world, cannot consist nor
stand together. To make this out, consider 1. What a Christian is called from.
2. What a Christian is called to.


1. What a Christian is called from. He is called from the world, he is called
out of the world; and so he is called from a conformity to the world: John 15.
19. I have chosen you out of the world. The Church is described to be a company
of faithful ones, chosen and called out of the world. Now, What is this calling
out of the world? It is not calling them from living in the world. It is not
calling them from using of the world; it is not calling them from all
conversing with the world; but it is a calling them from conforming to the
world, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people; (i. e.) Have nothing to do with
Babylon's Manners, and sinful Customs, and corrupt Forms of Worship.

2. Consider what Christians are called to, 2 Pet 1. 3. they are said to be
called to Glory and Virtue. Christians are called to Holiness and Happiness.
And upon this account he must not be a Conformist to this world.

1. He is called to Holiness* 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. Be ye holy. Now Holiness
consists not with conforming to the world; the world is unclean, impure,
unholy; 1 John 5. 19. The world lies in wickedness; it lies like a Beast in
its own dung and filth. Conforming to the world, is being like the world, and
bearing the image of the world; and so it is to bear the image of that that is
unholy and unclean. A Christian is called to bear another image; he is called
to be like God. But none can bear the Image of God, and the Image of the world
too. God is infinitely holy; and he that will be like to a holy God, must be
unlike an unholy world: Jam. 1. 27. it is there made one part of that Religion
that is said to be pure and undefiled, For a man to keep himself unspotted of
the world: which shows that the world is a bespotting and defiling thing. 2
Pet. 2. 20. we read of the pollutions of the world. If you look upon that
Scheam and Figure of the world that St. John has drawn, 1 John 2. 16. you will
find, whatever is in the world, is all lust. So Tit. 2. 12. we read of worldly
lusts. And if you will see what the way, and course, and practice of the world
is, you have it in 1 Pet. 4. 3. excess of Riot, Drunkenness, Revelling, etc. So
then it cannot be, that a Christian's being called to holiness, can consist
with a conforming to this world.

2. Christians are called to Glory. As to Holiness, so to Happiness. Now
calling to glory, and conforming to the world, cannot stand together. Prove. 15.
24. The way of life is above to the wise. That way that leads to glory, lies
above the world. Those Principles from which a man acts, those Rules by which a
man acts, and those Ends for which a man acts, that acts for Heaven, and seeks
for Glory and Immortality, are all higher Principles, Rules, and Ends, than
those of the world, and far above them. The world's way will never bring a man
to glory; it may bring a man to worldly Honor and Preferment, but will never
mount a man to the enjoyment of the things of that world that is to come. The
world has kept many from Heaven, and is still the great block and hinderance
in the way to Heaven. How many have the cursed courses and examples of the
world, undone and damned? And how often does the Scripture cautionate all to
take heed of the world as a dangerous Rock, against which a thousand Dema^^
have dashed themselves, and made shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience.

Secondly, Consider some particular grounds, Why Christians are to (...)
Nonconformists to the world.

1. Conformity to God and the World, cannot stand together, no more than the
love of God and the love of the World can, 1 John 2. 15. If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. There is an antipathy and
contrariety between God and the World. A man is never more like God, than when
he is most unlike the World. Now a Christian is to conform to God and Christ.
The first and best, is said to be the Rule of the rest. Christ is our highest
and best Pattern. Here is no serving of two Masters; no conforming to two
contrary Patterns. He that will be a Conformist to the World, must be a
Nonconformist to God and Christ.

2. The world is one of the declared Enemies that a Christian is to fight
against: worldly lusts, as well as fieshly lusts, fight against the soul; so
that conforming to the world is taking part and siding with our Enemy. The
Apostle says (Gal. 6. 14.), The world is crucified to me, and I to the world;
(q. d.) The world and I are upon equal terms of defiance; I neither care for
the would, nor the world for me.

3. Christians are predestined to another Conformity than that to the world:
Rom, 8. ^9. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed
to the image of his Son. Not to the Image of the world* Conformity to the world
consists not with that Predestination.

4. What was a Christian's Rule and Pattern before conversion, cannot be his
Rule after. Before conversion the world was so: Ephesians. 2. 3. The Apostle tells
the Ephesians, that before conversion they walked according to the course of
the world.

5. It was one end of Christ's living so long on earth, to give us a better and
a more noble Pattern and Example, than what the world gave, 1 Pet. 2. 21.
Leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps.

6. It is a debasement to a Christian to be a Conformist to the world. The
ground of Conformity and Imitation, should be to advance and better; but in
conforming to the world, a Christian does but degrade himself; he writes after
a Copy, by which he cannot mend his hand. It is observable in Scripture, what
the wicked of the world are compared to; among Beasts, to I* yons, Bears,
Wolves; among Plants, to Briers, Thorns, etc. Among other living Creatures, to
Vipers, Dogs, Swine. What a debasement is it for Christians to be like such, to
wallow as a Sow in the mire, etc.

Thus much for Confirmation.

III. The Vindication of the truth. So the question is this, Whether all
conformity to this world be unlawful? And the reason of the question is this,
Because the Apostle speaking of the fashion of the world, (1 Cor. 7. 29.) he
makes Marrying, and Weeping, and Rejoicing, and Possessing, to be some of the
fashions of the world. So the question is, Whether all conformity to the world
in these its fashions, be unlawful?

Ans. We must here distinguish of the Manners, Customs, and Fashions of the
World; so they are of three sorts: 1. Some are Civil. 2. Some are Sinful. 3.
Some are Doubtful.


1. There are the Civil Customs, Manners, and Fashions of the world; and
concerning them, I answer, That all conformity to the world in those, is not
unlawful; as to marry, to weep, to rejoice, to buy, and possess, is not
unlawful; yet I must tell you, that all conformity to the world, even in these
things, is not lawful: For consider, Even in things that are lawful, it is not
lawful for a Christian to be such in the practice, use, and enjoyment of those
things, as the most of the world are; and therefore the Scripture, when it
treats of those things which are in themselves lawful, yet it sets those bounds
and limits to Christians which the World observes not. It calls upon Christians
to have their affections set on things above the world; to be sober in using
the things of this world; to remember, while they are in this world, they are
almost come to the end of the world; and so to use the world, as those that
look for another world: to look upon this present world, as that that will
shortly be the world past; and to look upon the world to come, as that that
will shortly be the world present, all the days of Eternity. I shall give you
two places of Scripture, wherein Christians are forbid to be Conformists to the
world even in these things; One is 1 Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at
hand, be ye sober. The word is (...): it is diversely rendered; but here its taken
for sober-mindedness: Sobriety, properly taken, is a moderation of the Appetite
about eating and drinking: but here it is put for the moderation of the
Affections about the world, and the things of the world: The sobriety there
enjoined, implies,

1 Modesty 2 Moderation of Mind.

1. Modesty of Mind: So Romans 12. 13. Let no man think more highly of himself
than he ought to think, but think soberly of himself, etc Where Sobriety is
opposed to pride of heart. And in this a Christian must be a Nonconformist to
the world. He may marry a Wife, but must not be proud of a Wife; he may
purchase, but not be proud of his Purchase; he may possess, but not be proud of
his Possession. Now this is the way of the world, to be proud of all their
enjoyments; and in this Christians are not to conform to it.

2. Moderation of Mind: And so Sobriety is opposed to letting out the heart and
affections too much upon the world: and this is the sobriety that is called
for, and wherein Christians must be unlike the world. It is not this that
Christians are exhorted to, To give over marrying, and possessing, and using
the things of this world; but to be moderate in the use of them, and therein to
be unlike the world. And it is observable what reason the Apostle gives for
this Sobriety in the place forementioned, viz. The end of all things is at
hand. An end of all the Civil Customs, Fashions, and Manners of the world; an
end of Marrying, Buying, Possessing; an end of Building, Planting, Eating, and
Drinking; an end of all Worldly Businesses, Employments, and Enjoyments. And
this he makes the reason why Christians should be sober and moderate in these
things, and herein to be unlike the world.

The other Scripture is 1 Cor. 7. 29. 30. This I say, Brethren, the time is
short, etc. Consider, the Corinthians had written to the Apostle to be resolved
in diverse cases; and among others, some concerning Marriage: To which the
Apostle gives an answer in that Chapter, telling them, he could not give an
absolute determination what was to be done; but he did suppose that this and
that was best; and then adds, But this I say, brethren, etc. as if he should
say, The questions are difficult, and the answers (it may be) you will find
doubtful; but this I can tell you of certainty, without if^s and and's,
positively and resolvedly, and of which you need not doubt; Brethren, the time
is short; Let those that have Wives, be as though they had none, etc. The
meaning is, that a Christian is to have his heart above all Creature Comforts,
and all Creature-crosses; and in this, Christians are to be unlike the world.

Says the Apostle, Let them that have Wives, be as though they had none. Now
he that has a Wife, has two things:

1. A great deal of comfort. A Wife is a second self, one that a man can make a
partaker of all his contentments, and who will be a sharer with him in all his
crosses (supposing her to be a good Wife).

2. A great many cares. Such (says the Apostle) as are married, shall have
trouble in the flesh, 1 Cor. 7. 28. Now when the Apostle says, That such as
have Wives, must be as though they had none; the meaning is, they must moderate
their affections in that enjoyment, that they be neither taken too much with
the comforts, nor vexed too much with the crosses in a Wife. And so for the
rest, when the Apostle speaks of weeping, and rejoicing, and possessing, that
we should be as though we wept not, and rejoiced not, and possessed not; the
meaning is, that we should still remember, that there are greater things to be
wept for, and to be rejoiced in, than the things of this World; and greater
Possessions to be sought after, than the Possessions of this life: and then
observe the Apostle's Motives to enforce this Exhortation.

1. The time is short: Tempus est contractum, so Beza; The time is contracted,
it is drawn into a narrow compass. The Greek word is (...), which signifies
such a contraction and drawing in, as of Sailors, as is used by Seamen and
Boat-men when they draw near to shore. Some refer it to the time of life; so
that the Apostle's meaning is, That the time of life is short. Those that lived
in the first Ages of the world, had their lives drawn out, the thread of their
lives was spun out longer; they by the course of Nature lived Six hundred,
Seven hundred, Eight hundred years; so they might have their thoughts more
busied about the world, in peopling Countries, in marrying Wives, in building
Cities, etc. the time of their life was long: but now the time is short; and
therefore Christians are so to use the world, as those that must shortly leave
it.

Others think the Apostle (when he says the time is short) means the time of
the World's being and continuance, is short: that God is gathering in the Sails
of Time, and that the end of the World is at hand; it is not long that there
will be no more marrying, no more weeping, no more rejoicing, no more
possessing in this world, because the time of the world's being is short. This
is the Apostle's first Reason, why we should be moderate in these things.

2. The second Motive is, The fashion of the world goes away: And as the other
led the Van, so this brings up the Rear of the Exhortation; the Greek word is
(...), the Scheam, which signifies a Mathematical Figure, only external and
accidental, without substance: The Vulgar renders it Figura, the Figure of the
World: Beza renders it Species, the Show of the World: Some think the Apostle
therein alludes to a Comedy, or a Show upon a Stage, which is but a show or
appearance; so all the things of the world are but a show and appearance; there
is no true solidity orreality in them: and then observe he says, It passes
away, to show that the World is upon Gate and Motion; it has been some
thousands of years passing by us, and the Rear of it is coming up, and it will
not be long ere the World and all the fashions of it (as Marrying, Weeping,
Rejoicing, Possessing, etc.) will be past and gone. Though its now the fashion
of the world, yet ere long these things will be no more.

The sum of all that I have been speaking to, is this, That though Christians
may be Conformists to the world in these Civil things, yet not in all respects;
and that in their conforming to things lawful and civil, yet there must even in
that conformity be something wherein they must be unlike the world. We may do
some things that the world does, but we may not do them in all respects as the
world does them. Our Savior tells us, (Luke 20. 34.) The children of this
world marry, and are given in marriage; i. e. Those that live in the world,
while they are in the world, have this way, and manner, and fashion, and
custom; they marry, and are given in marriage: where the things themselves of
marrying, and giving in marriage, are not condemned; but this is condemned, Our
being like the world even in those things that are in themselves lawful. And
this appears by another expression of our Savior, (Luke 17. 26, 28.) As it was
in the days of Noah, they eat, they drank, they married, and gave in marriage,
etc. And as it was in the days of Lot, they bought, they sold, they planted,
they builded, etc. Now these were things that were never unlawful in
themselves. It was never unlawful in any age, for a man to eat, and drink, and
marry, and give in marriage. It was never unlawful for a man to buy and sell,
to plant and build; and yet this seems to have been the way of the world then,
which is by our Savior condemned. But the meaning of our Savior is this, That
though they were lawful things, yet by the men of that Generation they were
used unlawfully. They made it the main and whole business of their lives, to
eat and drink, to marry and give in marriage, to buy and sell, to plant and
build; they minded nothing else, as if they were only made for those ends, and
no other, no higher. But in this, Christians must be unlike the World: they may
eat and drink, marry, buy, sell, plant, build; but still remember, they were
made for higher and nobler Ends than these, and not be in the use and practice
of these things, as the World is. The World's excess in these things, is by
Christians to be avoided. So then, to close all, There is a conformity to the
Word in Civil things, that is lawful for Christians, but not a full conformity.
Thus much for the Civil Manners and Customs of the World.

Secondly, There are the Sinful Manners, Customs, and Fashions of the World,
which are in themselves purely sinful. Now to these it is unlawful for a
Christian to be a Conformist in any respect. The Apostle (Ephesians. 2. 2.) speaks
of those that were then Christians, That in time past they walked according to
the course of this world; where he means not the civil course, but the sinful
course of this world, as it appears ver. 3. Fulfilling the lusts of the flesh,
and the desires of the flesh* and of the mind. Where the Apostle shows, that
this was the course of the World then, and that they conformed to it in the
time of their unregeneracy, which now they ought not to do, being called to be
Christians; and convinces them, that (...) conformity in times past, was their
sin. So then, a Christian's conforming to the sinful courses of the world, is
absolutely unlawful. It Is the commendation given of the Saints of old, That
they were utterly Nonconformists to the world in sinful things. Thus Noah is
said to be a man perfect in his generation, Genesis 6. 9. He did some things that
the men of his generation did; Noah did eat, and drink, and marry, all this the
men of his generation did sinfully, and in this Noah did not consorm to them.
So we may see how Lot behaved himself in his generation; he was so far from
conforming to their sinful manners, that the Apostle tells us (2 Pet. 2. 7.),
That his righteous soul was vexed with their wicked conversation. And the same
Apostle tells the Christians in his time, of their Nonconformity to the sinful
manners of those times, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein they think it strange, that ye run
not with them into the same excess of Riot. They thought it strange, they would
not do as the wicked of those times did. What was the course of the Wicked of
those times? The Apostle shows, v. 3. For the time past of our lives may
suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles; and so mentions
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine, revellings, banquetings, etc. These
manners of the world being sinful without dispute and controversy, they are
not at all by Christians to be conformed to.

And thus much for the sinful Manners and Fashions of the World.

Thirdly, There are the doubtful Manners, and Fashions, and Customs, of the
World; such as about which there may be a question, Whether they are sinful or
not? Concerning these, Christians ought to examine their conformity by
Scripture-Rules. Under this doubtful conformity, comes conformity to Exotic
Modes in Behavior and Apparel; the saying indeed is, That though fools bring
up Fashions, yet wise men will be obliged to follow them: I am not for an
affected singularity, it being commendable prudence to conform our selves to
what Custom (in an indifferent matter) has made to be general in the practice
of all. But Christians are to take heed of a conformity to those fashions that
are either so immodest or extravagant, that they become not Christianity. It Is
very doubtful whether we are to be of the number of those who are first in the
fashion, or to change from one extreme to another; the Scripture (without
doubt) condemns excess in these things. How many are there, which spend more
time in trimming and decking themselves, than in serving God! Which gave
occasion to Sir Thomas Moor, to say to a Lady (whom he beheld industriously
curious in dressing and trimming her self) O Madam, how unjustly will God deal
with you, if he give you not Hell, since you take such extraordinary pains for
it! Christians must know, where there is in fashions an affected vanity in
apparel and dressing, savouring of pride, a conformity therein remains no more
doubtful, but is absolutely sinful. To these fashions may be referred,
Painting, Frizling, Powdering, and Black-patching; of the last of which, a
Romanist says. That if the Divine Workman should so six those their best
contrived Patches, as to remain ever immovable, they would soon be ashamed to
appear with such disguised deformities; and all would then esteem them (as
indeed they are) but a mere disfiguring of what they so vainly intended to
beautify and amend. In the matter of Fashions, Christians must know, that
there are some things, which if they are not sin, are near akin to sin; and a
conformity to these things is to be avoided, according to the precept of the
Apostle, 1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil; the saying is, In
dubiis minimum, In doubtful things its good to do the least. I shall close up
this of doubtful Conformity, with that passage in Ezra 2. 61, 62, 63. There
were some that upon the return from the Captivity, pleaded that they were of
the Priest's Line; but the Register being searched, and their Genealogy not
found, they were put by the Priesthood till there should stand up a Priest with
Vrim and Thummim. So it were well in these doubtful cases, if Christians would
avoid conformity to these things, till there be more Scripture Light to warrant
it. What has been attempted by some (as particularly, by the Author of that
Book entitled, Auxiliary Beauty), it tends more to please Fancy, than to
satisfy Conscience, and to warrant the practice.

Thus much for the Doubtful Manners and Fashions of this world.

APPLICATION.
1. Information: So you have the true Character of a true Christian: He is one
that is a Nonconformist to the world. His motion is a Counter-motion to that of
the world. Though he lives in the world, yet he conforms not to the world. The
Apostle (2 Cor. 10. 3.) distinguishes between living in the flesh, and after
the flesh; so there is a walking in the world, and walking after the world.
True Christians make the sinful courses and practices of the world, the object
of their sorrow and lamentation, but not of their imitation. Thus did Noah, and
Lot, and other holy ones in their generation; they are Antipodes to the world
in judgment, affection, conversation. We read of Heathens, that in their
generations would not conform to the me^ of their generation; but what they
did, was out of singularity: but what Christians do, is to be out of sincerity.
It should be with Christians as with the Planets, which have a motion of their
own, contrary to the wrapped motion of the Heavens, whereby they are carried from
East to West: they have a retrograde and secret motion of their own, whereby
they are carried from West to East. So the Children of God, though they live
and converse in the World, yet have a motion of their own, contrary to the
World: As some Creatures being hatched under a Hen, presently fly or run away.
Though a Christian in the Civil things of this life, seem to move as the World
moves, yet has he a motion of his own Heaven-wards, which the World suspects
(and blindly censures), but understands not.

2. Inform. What are we then to think of those that are Conformists to the
world? Is it to be thought that those will ever be accounted Christians on
Scripture-account, that conform to the world? It Is sad to see how many call
themselves Christians, who when the Image and Superscription that they bear,
comes to be examined, will be found to be only Worldlings* It may be,
Christians in their own account and esteem, but not in God's. You that call
your selves Christians, consider whose Image and Superscription you bear. Such
you are as the Image is that you bear, and the Pattern to which you conform.
True Christians are such as bear the Image of Christ, and conform to the
Pattern and Example of Jesus Christ; and those cannot be real Christians that
conform to the World. It is not an outward Profession that makes a true
Christian, Romans 2. 28. He is not a Jew that is one outwardly. Those are not
true Christians that are only so in bare pro^ession. God looks what a
Christian's conformity is, and what copy and pattern he writes after. The
Apostle speaks of some (2 Timothy 3. 5.)* that had a form of godliness, but denied
the power of it. It is the power of Godliness and Christianity, that speaks one
to be godly, and a Christian indeed. And this power of godliness is a
transforming power; it makes those that have it, God-like, and so godly;
Christ-like, and so Christians indeed. So then, in Christianity there are two
things to be considered, the Profession, and the Power. Now it is the power of
Christianity, and not the profession only, that speaks us to be Christians.
It Is true power cannot be without profession, but profession may be without the
power. A Tree that bears fruit, must of necessity have leaves; but a Tree may
have leaves; and yet no fruit. And such a Tree, not withstanding the fair
flourish it makes, is but barren, and like the Fig Tree in the Gospel which our
Savior cursed, coming to it, finding leaves only, and no fruit, Matt. 21. 19.
So then, as there is a power in godliness which speaks men to be truly godly;
so there is a power in Christianity which must speak men to be truly
Christians. Now, this power of Christianity does conform and transform us into
the Image of Christ. As the power of godliness makes us (as I said before)
God-like; so this power of Christianity, Christ like. But where is a conformity
to the world, there is a power, whereby men are made world-like; and how can
those that are like the world, that bear a worldly and an earthly Image, and
not the heavenly, and that of Christ, be Christians indeed? It is sad to see so
many call themselves Christians, that are so much conformable to the world, to
its sinful courses, fashions, rules, and examples; as if Christianity did not
hold forth higher and more excellent examples and patterns for them to imitate,
and higher and more heavenly rules for them to walk by. To such we may say as
the Prophet said to the Messengers of Ahaziah, Is it because there is no God in
Israel, that thou sendest to Baal-zebub, the God of Ekron? So you that call
your selves Christians, let me ask you, Why do you conform to the World and its
sinful courses? Is it because you are so commanded to do? You see the Scripture
commands the contrary. Is it because you have nothing higher and better than
the World to conform to? Sure you have. The saying is, The first and best in
every thing, is the Rule of the rest. Are you not called to a conformity to the
best? That God that is Optimus Maximus, the Best and Greatest, calls you to be
like him, calls you to be like his Son, who is the most perfect pattern for our
imitation; calls you to be like his Saints, who in their several generations
pleased God, served his Will, and are fallen asleep: he calls you to be like
those Servants of his that are yet in the World, and to be followers of them as
they are of Christ: He calls you out of the World, and to be unlike it, and to
have nothing to do with it by way of conforming in the least to its sinful
courses. He cautionates you against such a conformity, and tells you the
dreadful danger of it; and he has laid down Rules in his Word, by which
Christians are to walk, that are made up altogether of that purity and
holiness, of which the World is altogether void, it lying (as the Apostle
says) in wickedness. And now tell me, How can he be a Christian indeed, that
is a Conformist to the World? and such as are Conformists to the World (you
see) have nothing to plead in that particular, as if they had not better Rules
to walk by, and higher Patterns to imitate, than those of the World. He that is
a Christian indeed, is one that has given up his Name to Christ, and entered it
into his List; and how can such a one serve and fight under the Colors and
Banner of the World? Such forget their Baptismal Covenant, one clause of which
is this, Renouncing and forsaking of the world. Christians, let me tell you,
There is a day a coming, when the great enquiry will be, Whose Image and
Superscription you bear. Your Conformity or Nonconformity to the world, will
speak that, and accordingly will be your doom.

3. Inform. Here we may see what is the cause, why Christians (that will be
Christians indeed) meet with so much trouble and opposition in and from the
World; the cause is, Nonconformity to the World; the ground of the quarrel
between the World and them is, That they are unlike the World; that they will
not do as the most do; that they will not do as their Neighbors do; that they
are unlike every body; that they are a company of foolish precise persons, that
delight to be singular. This is the reason why the World, and the men of it,
hate those that are truly godly: Every thing loves its like; and the unlikeness
of the Saints to the World, is the cause both of the World's hatred, and the
World's wonder at them, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein they think it strange, that ye ru^
not with them into the same excess of riot. The Saint's strictness is the
World's wonder. As I said before, it is in this case as with the Eggs of
Patridges hatched under a Hen; when they are hatched, they run, and (as soon as
they can) make away. The World is (as it were) the Hen, under whose wings
Christians are for a while hatched; but when they begin to take their flight
upwards, then the world wonders at them. And as this is the cause of the
World's wonder, so it is the cause of the World's hatred of them, and of all
the afflictions and persecutions they meet with in and from the world. Our
Savior told his Disciples, In the world you shall have affliction; and gives
this as the reason of it, I have chosen you out of the world. The world (as our
Savior says) will love its own, those in whom it can see its own conditions,
dispositions; its own Image and Superscription. Likeness causes love; and upon
this account it is that the world cannot but love those in whom she espies her
own likeness, and cannot but hate those that are unlike, and in whom she
cannot see a conformity to her. Hence it is that the World has always been a
Stepmother to the Saints of God, using them rigidly and coarsely, as those whom
she did not own as hers, because they owned not her by a conformity to her.
Christians, if you be not like the World, you must not think it strange if you
be hated in and by the World. If you have not the world's likeness, you are not
to expect the world's love. If you walk contrary to the world, you must expect
that the world will walk contrary to you. Your nonconforming to it, is a
secret condemning of the world's ways and courles; and then it is not to be
wondered at, if the world condemn you.

Thus much for the Use of Information.

2. Exhortation. So I am now to exhort you to the duty of Nonconformity to the
World; and in doing this, I shall acquaint you with three things:

First, With what are some of the causes of a Conformity to this World.

Secondly, With some discoveries, whereby we may know whether we are not
conformed to this World.

Thirdly, With some directions to prevent yonr being Conformists to this World.

First, We shall show you some of the causes why so many are Conformists to the
World; and they are chiefly two: 1. A base and slavish fear of the World's
Frowns. 2. A base and sinful love of the World's Favors.


And from both these proceeds that base and sinful compliance with the World,
and conformity to it.

1. A base and slavish fear of the World's Frowns. They fear the trouble they
may meet with in the World, if they should swim against the stream of being
unlike the World. Most love a Religion without trouble: and although opposition
be made the Attendant of true Religion, following it as the shadow does the
body; yet most love (as a cheap Religion which may cost them nothing, so) such
a peaceable Religion as may not disturb their worldly rest, but that will
suffer them to sleep in a whole skin. Indeed, for a man to be no more religious
than the World would have him be, may seem to make for his outward peace. As a
wise man said, For that man that would deny his body no sensual pleasure, and
yet save his soul at last, there was no place like that of Italy, and no
Religion like that of Rome: So I say, For that man that only studies his
outward peace, (viz. a freedom from the World's malice, hatred, and opposition)
there is no Religion like the World's. And hence it is that so many comply with
it, and conform to it. Consider, there is in every one naturally a strong
propensity and inclination to these four things.

1. To be thought somebody in the World, and not to be looked upon as Ciphers,
as No-bodies; to be well accounted of, well spoken of by the most of their
generation. Some extremely affect the good will and the good-word of every one,
and hereby are betrayed to a sinful compliance. Although such should remember
the saying of our Savior, Woe unto you when all men speak well of you. Mat. 5.

2. There is a desire in most to be as free from trouble and opposition in the
World, as they can. Most say with Issachar, Rest is good. Why should I (say
some) create trouble to my self, and may choose? Why should I cross with the
World, and cause the World to cross with me? If I do as the World does, and
conform to it, I need not fear its frowns. And this is one cause why so many
sinfully comply with, and conform to the World; not remembering the saying of
our Savior, Matt. 5. 10. Blessed are those that are persecuted for
righteousness sake, etc.

3. There is in men naturally a desire to have company in their way. Man is a
sociable Creature, and loves company. Now the way of the World is the way most
beaten, and trodden, and frequented, being the way that most walk in. Men
naturally love not solitary paths, but those in which they can see most
footsteps. And upon this account it is that so many comply sinfully with the
World, for the sake of company; not at all considering whither the broad way
leads; nor that prohibition, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

4. Men naturally desire Elbow-room in their way. They love ways wherein they
may enjoy the most of sinful liberty; and this they fancy to be only found in
the way of the World; they would have room for them and their lusts to march
together: and such a way the way of the World is; the wide way (as our Savior
says) that leads to destruction. And hence it is that so many comply with the
World; not considering, That it is easier for a man to have so much Religion and
Christianity as will please the World, and go to Hell at last, than to have so
much as will please God, and bring him to Heaven.

2. The second cause is, A strong love to, and desire after the World's
Favors. There is an innate disposition in persons to enjoy the World's
Sunshine, thinking there is a refreshment in those beams. They think it sweet
to sit in the World's lap, to be hugged in the World's bosom, to be embraced
in the World's arms. Many love not to see others embraced, and themselves cast
out; to see others favored, and themselves frowned on; to see others the
world's Darlings, and they to be the world's Outcasts. The world has its
temptations on both hands. On the one hand there are its persecutions, and
threats, and frowns; on the other hand, its preferments, allurements, and
favors; and the last of these have often proved the most powerful temptations
to draw men to compliance with the world. Thus it is observed of Julian, That he
drew more away, and made more Apostates by his Preferments, than he did by his
Persecutions. We read (Rev. 12. 4.), that the Dragon with his tail drew the
third part of the Stars from Heaven: the meaning is, that many that were
eminent in the Church, and did shine as Stars, were drawn away, and became
Apostates, by the tail of the Dragon, i. e. by its embraces. And this is one
great reason why men have been brought to comply with, and conform to the
world. And this has ever been the world's way of tempting; it first frowns,
and then flatters; and the latter has been found to be the most dangerous:
Thus was that famous Galeacius assaulred; and when they saw threatenings would
do nothing, he was offered a great sum of Gold to return again to his former
Religion and Country: but his answer was, That he preferred one day's
communion with Christ in the Gospel, before all the Gold in the world. And thus
it was with Luther; when they saw Bulls and nothing else by way of Menace,
would do, then they offered him a Cardinals Hat; but his answer was, Contemptus
est a me Romanus and favor, and furor; I despise both Rome's Favors and Fury.
Though these stood as unshaken Mountains; yet, how many, if not by the first,
yet by the last have been overcome; like the Traveller, who by the wind kept
his Cloak closer, was by the warm and alluring beams of the Sun invited to cast
it off. The Sunshine of the world has had more influence upon men to conform
them to the world, than all its cold and stormy blasts could have. It Is Favors
and Preferments has drawn those whom its Persecutions could not drive. Hence
it is that so many comply with, and conform to the world; not remembering, that
there is more comfort and happiness attends those that are the world's
Cast-aways, than those that are the world's Darlings. Those Christ chooses to
be the objects of his love, whom the world casts out as objects of her hatred.

Secondly, Consider the trials and discoveries, Whether we are Conformists or
Non-conformists to this world.

1. He that is a Nonconformist to the world, is one unlike the world; he is
unlike the world in his judgment, affection, conversation; he does not judge as
the world judges, of Christ, of Holiness, of Heaven, of Saints, of Sin. Here
is the question, Whether we differ from the world in these? One said of Nero,
That must needs be good that Nero persecutes. And so I say, That must needs be
evil that the world commends, and good that the world condemns. Try your selves
by this, Do you judge as the world judges? Do you love and hate, as the world
loves and hates? Is your conversation according to the course and conversation
of the world? Then you may conclude, you are Conformists to the world. Oh that
Christians would but examine themselves seriously, wherein they are unlike the
world; and by that they may find whether they are Non-conformists to the world.
I am brief in this, because I have spoken more largely to it before:

2. He that is a Nonconformist to this world, is a Conformist to another
world. When the Apostle says, Be not conformed to this world; it implies,
there is another world to which we ought to conform. Scripture mentions a world
that now is, and a world that is to come. There is another world besides this
present world; a world that will be, when this world shall be no more. As I
said before, so I say again, It is but a little while, and the world present
will be the world past; and the world to come, will be the world present all
the days of Eternity. Now Christians, you are to be Conformists to the world
that is to come; there is an Earthly and a Heavenly world; and the great thing
you have to do, is to examine what Conformity there is in you to the latter (to
the Heavenly world) that is to come. And what of Heaven is to be* seen in you?
What of Heaven in your judgments? Do you conform to the world to come in that?
Christians, you see here how the world judges of things and persons: but, Do
you think we shall have in Heaven that judgment of things that the men of the
world have now? If you ask, How we shall judge of things here, who are yet on
Earth, and not in Heaven? Why the Word, and not the World, is your Rule; you
need not say, Who shall go up into Heaven to bring us tidings what is the
judgment of things there; we have it near, in the written Word. Next, What
conformity is there to Heaven in your Affections? Are they heavenly? Remember,
the Command is (Col. 3. 2.), Set your affections on things above. And, What
conformity is there in your conversation? Is your conversation in Heaven? The
Apostle says, the conversation of a Christian should be so, Phil. 3 27. What
engravings of Heaven are there on your conversations? What beginnings of Heaven
have you in you? How many are there that begin Hell on Earth, and have the
engravings of Hell written upon their conversations? These indeed are
Conformists to another World, but it is that World of Darkness, and not of
Light, that is to come.

But in prosecuting these Discoveries of a Nonconformity to this World, for
every one's better and fuller satisfaction, I shall proceed by way of Inquiry;
those shall be of two sorts: 1. Some more general. 2. More particular.


1. More general: And so the Enquiry is this, What conformity is there in you
to those that are in Heaven, and that inhabit Heaven? If you ask, Who are in
Heaven? The Scripture tells you, That there is A God. A Christ. Angels. Spirits
of just men.


1. God is in Heaven, his Throne is there. He dwells there in respect of the
manifestation of his glory. He is said to inhabit Eternity, and to dwell in
that high and holy place, Isa. 57. 15. The enquiri^ ^^ this, God is in Heaven;
and, What conformity is there in you on Earth, to that God who is in Heaven?
You are called to be like him, to be holy as he is, to be merciful as he is
(not in respect of equality, but similitude and likeness). You are called to
be partakers of the Divine Nature; and, What is that but to be partakers of
Divine Graces, by which we bear his Image, and so become like him? You are
called Children of God, and Children are to resemble the Father: Now try, how
you resemble him, and by that, your conformity to him.

1. Consider how God judges of things. Here the Scripture gives us light; and
by it you are to see whether you judge of things as God does. He judges of Sin
as the greatest Evil, of Sinners as the greatest Enemies; of Grace, as most
excellent; of gracious ones, as most precious; of Heaven, as most desirable; of
the World, as most vain and contemptible. Thus God in his Word declares his
judgment of these things. Now the Query is, What conformity there is in our
judgments to this? Whether we judge of things as God judges of them? And so for
the estimative faculty, Whether you esteem things as God esteems them? The
godly man is described (Psalm. 15.) to be one in whose eyes a vile person is
contemned; but he honors them that fear the Lord.

2. How God-like you are in your affections? and, What conformity is there in
yours to his? The Scripture acquaints us with what God loves, and with what he
hates, and with what he delights in. The Scripture tells us what he loves; That
he loves righteousness, loves holiness; he loves uprightness, he loves truth
and sincerity in the inward parts. Now put the question to your selves, Whether
you love the things which God loves? The Scripture tells us what God hates, He
hates iniquity, and all the workers of iniquity; he hates sin, and all
sinful ways; he hates all sin. And now see what conformity there is in your
affections, of hatred to this? The Scripture acquaints us, what it is that God
delights in. It tells us, that he delights in those that fear him; He
delights in uprightness. He is a God that has pleasure in uprightness. He
delights in mercy. Now Christians, try what conformity there is in you to
your Heavenly Father in these things.

2. Christ is in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. from whence we look for a Savior, etc.
We look for him from Heaven: And it is an Article of our Faith, That he is
ascended into Heaven: Though Christ be in Heaven, and you on Earth, yet there
is to be in Christians a conformity to Jesus Christ. Christ is the Head; now
he is in Heaven, and the members must be conformed to the Head. Though he be in
Heaven, yet he has left us such footsteps on Earth, in which we are to tread.
Those that will come to Christ in Heaven, must tread in his steps on Earth, and
so ascend up to him. Christians are still to be followers of Jesus Christ.
Christ is the great Master they are to follow, and the grand Pattern they are
to imitate. The great Apostle said, Be followers of me, as I am of Christ. Now,
Christians, try what conformity there is in you to Jesus Christ; and you have
reason to put your selves upon the trial, because the Apostle tells us (Romans
8. 28.) We are predestined to be conformed to his Image. Let me tell you,
there are three things wherein Christians are called to be conformable to Jesus
Christ, viz. Sufferings, Sanctity, Glory. In this world we are called to be
conformed to Jesus Christ in the two first: when we come to Heaven, we shall be
made conformable to him in the latter. Now the Querie lies about the two first.

1. Christians, What conformity is there in you to Jesus Christ in your
Sufferings? It cannot be that a Christian can be a Christian indeed, but he
must be a suffering Christian: if it come not so high as to resisting unto
blood, yet it may come to bonds and imprisonments; if not so high, yet to
scoffs, nicknames, reproaches, for the sake of Christ. Now, Christians, In
your sufferings are you conformed to Jesus Christ? Do you suffer meekly,
patiently, rejoicingly? Christ was patient in his sufferings: He was led as a
sheep to the slaughter, and he opened not his mouth. He prayed for his
persecutors: When he was reviled, he reviled not again; and in that, the
Apostle Petor tells us, He left us an example, that we should tread in his
steps, 1 Pet. 2. 23. Now try your selves whether you are like Christ, or the
world, under sufferings. It is the way of the world, to return like for like,
railing for railing, reviling for reviling; to ^^et, and murmr, and be
impatient under their sufferings. Christians, Jesus Christ when he was on
earth, and in the days of his suffering, was otherwise. Now see to whom you
conform in your sufferings, whether to Christ or the World.

2. What conformity is there is you to Jesus Christ, in respect of Sanctity
and Holiness? Though Jesus Christ be now in Heaven, yet he has left us his
footsteps of that wherein we are to tread* He was one that went about, doing
good. He was abundant in duty, and much in prayer. He was so holy in the whole
course of his life, that he challenged any to convince him of sin. He suffered
wrong, but did no wrong, neither was guile found in his mouth. He was
conformable to his Father's will, and it was his meat and drink to do it. He
was much in self-denial; he denied himself in his dearest things; he laid aside
his own glory: he laid down his own life for the salvation of poor sinners. He
was much in holy and heavenly discourse, ever speaking of the Kingdom of
heaven; and taking occasion from earthly things, to reflect on and discourse of
heavenly things. He was much in instructing, counselling, comforting his
Disciples. He stood up for the honor of his Father, and defended the truth
against all opposition. All this, and much more, did he in the days of his
flesh, when he was on earth, and therein left us an example. He made a holy
close of his life; As he lived, so he died. When the time of his suffering
death drew near, he betook himself to prayer. Under his last sufferings he
behaved himself meekly and patiently. When nailed to the Cross, he prayed for
his persecutors saying, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do
When he was giving up the Ghost, he commended his Soul to God, saying, Father,
into thy hands I commit my spirit. Thus, Christians, you see a short specimen
of Christ's Sanctity when he was on Earth. Now try your conformity to Jesus
Christ, who is now in Heaven? Can you say, My Pattern is in Heaven, as Job said
of his Witness, Job 16. 19 My Witness is in Heaven? Do you tread in those steps
of holiness that Jesus Christ has left? which though we cannot exactly walk
in; yet, Do you strive to come as near in imitating his Example, as you can?
Remember, Christians, The world has found out other ways than the way of Jesus
Christ: There is the way of Cain, and Corah* and Balaam, and Esau, and Ishmael,
in which the most of the world walk. But the way wherein you are to walk, is
that way wherein Jesus Christ walked when he was on earth. Christians are
called to be in this World, as Jesus Christ was in this World.

3. In Heaven are Angels. Angels of Light; who are called holy Angels, and are
the Heavenly Courtiers. These are some of the Inhabitants of the World that is
to come. Christians, You are to try what conformity there is in you to these
heavenly Spirits, and whether you are conformable to Angels of Light, or
Angels of Darkness. Those who are Nonconformists to this world, hold some
conformity to those glorious Angels that inhabit the other world; and the
great and main conformity to them, stands in our doing the will of God on
Earth, as the Angels do it in Heaven; it is one Petition in the Lord's Prayer,
Thy will be done on earth as it is in Heaven. Now try your selves by this.

1. They do the will of God Zealously, with a great deal of heat, fervency, and
intention of spirit, and are therefore called Seraphims. They are zealous for
his work, and zealous in his work. Are you conformable to them in that?

2. Angels do the will of God Cheerfully, with abundance of delight and joy;
and therefore they are said to have Harps, to show it is their Music and
Delight. All the Services God puts them upon, they go about with abundance of
alacrity. Now what conformity is there in you to Angels in this? When you go
to duty, Do you go about it as Angels do about their work? Remember, the most
of the world are never more sad and dull, than when they are set about
Heavenly work; and never so cheerful, as when they are out of God's work, and
freed, from Heavenly employments.

3. Angels in Heaven do the will of God speedily, and are therefore said to
have wings. They never dispute the commands of God; no sooner are they bid go,
but they go. What Messages they are sent about, what Work they are put upon,
they do and execute readily and speedily. Now Christians, How like Angels are
you in doing the Lord's work on earth? The way of the world is to move slowly,
as Pharoah's Chariots when the Wheels were pulled off. But, Christians, if you
are conformable to the Angels, there is a readiness of mind in you to do the
will of God; You stand ready pressed for his Service, and have your Loins
girded up.

4. Angels do the will and work of God with much self-denial: They ascribe all
to God, and give him all the glory; and therefore are said to cast down their
Crowns before the Throne: and in Ezech. 1. 8. they are said to have hands under
their wings, as concealing their own abilities. Now, Christians, see what
conformity there is in you to the Angels, in this particular of Self-denial.
It Is the way of most of the world, when they do any thing that is good, to
boast and be proud of it; as the Pharisee, of his fasting and duties. But those
that are conformable (in this particular) to the Angels in Heaven, do nothing
as of themselves, and give all the glory to God; as St. Paul did, who said, By
the grace of God I am what I am; and not I, but the grace of God which is in me.

5 Angels* do the will and the work of God with abundance of love. There is a
sweet harmony and agreement among them in their Employments; they do not cross
or thwart one another, they are obedient Servants to their Lord, and are in
love and unity among themselves. Ezekiel. 1. 9. we read of the Cherubims, and the
living Creatures, that their wings joined one to another, and they turned not
when they went, and they went every one straight forward; they did not go one
this way, and another that way, but do sweetly and mutually correspond in doing
the will of God. Now, Christians, What conformity is there in you to Angels in
this? Do you sweetly conspire and agree together in serving God on Earth? Oh
that Christians were more Angel-like in this! Remember, Contention and Division
is the way of the world, and the way of carnal men; the Apostle tells us so, 1
Cor. 3. 3. While there are strifes and divisions among you, are you not carnal,
and walk as men. Now, Christians, I have showed you how the Angels in another
world do the will of God; and try your selves what conformity there is in you
on earth, to them.

4. In Heaven are the Spirits and Souls of just men made perfect. These are in
another world, they are in Heaven; they inherit the Promises: and such the
Apostle commands us to be followers of, Heb. 6. 12. Now what conformity is
there in you to them?

1. We have reason to believe there is in them a longing for a full
accomplishment of the number of the Elect, and for a full revelation of glory.
They long for their own perfection, and that of all the Saints. This the world
longs not for, the coming of the Kingdom of Glory. Our Savior tells us how it
was in the days of Noah, they eat, they drank, etc. and says, it would be so
in the days of his Coming. Now see what your conformity is in this particular:
Do you mind the Glory to come? Is there in you a looking for the coming of
Jesus Christ?

2. The Spirits in Heaven are in perfect union. What ever disagreements were
among the Saints on Earth, yet in Heaven they all agree: There Calvin and
Luther, Ridley and Hooper, are agreed. Now see what conformity there is in you
to them? Is it your endeavor to preserve on Earth the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace?

3. The Spirits of just men departed, are with Christ, enjoying his presence,
and rejoicing in it. Tell me, Do you rejoice in the thoughts of it? and do you
long for it, and to be with Jesus Christ?

Thus for the general Queries.

2. Consider some particular Queries; and they are to enquire further what
Conformists you are to another world?

1. Do you speak the language of another world? We read of speaking the
language of Canaan: We know of what Country a man is, by the language that he
speaks. Is your language heavenly? The Primitive Christians were charged with
being affectors of Kingdoms, because they spoke so often of the Kingdom of God.
What shall we think of those whose words are either worldly or wicked? To what
world are they conformed?

2. What life do you live? Is it the life of another world? Is your
Conversation in Heaven? And have you the engravings of Heaven on them? It is
sad to see that most of the world have the engravings of Hell upon their's.

3. What works do you? Do they relate to another world, or only to this?
Praying, hearing, holy meditation, praising God, and religious duties, they
relate to another world, to an heavenly world that is to come. How sad is is to
see how many there are whose works only relate to this world, or to the
infernal world of Darkness.

4. What things do you most eye and look at? Are they the things of another
world, or of this world? The Apostle says (2 Cor. 4. the last), We look not
upon the things that are seen, etc. Do you most eye and long after heavenly
Glory, Treasures, and Possessions, or Earthly?

5. What world is it you make the greatest preparation and provision for? Do
you provide for that world that now is, or for that that is to come? We read
of the fool in the Gospel, that cheered himself with that, That he had goods
laid up for many years. How many are there, that have no thoughts of another
world? That provide for their peace, and safety, and contentment in this
world; that say, What shall we do to be rich? but never ask, What they shall
do to be saved? that lay up for themselves treasures on earth, but lay not up
treasures in heaven?

6. What place, and what world do you look upon as your home? Is it this
world, or that to come? If that to come, then you are in this, as strangers
and pilgrims; you lodge in it as in an Inn; and you walk through it as persons
unconcerned in its sinful lusts and vanities.

7. What Right and Interest do you most rejoice in? Is it, that you have an
Interest in this world? or, that you have an Interest in the world to come? Is
it in that portion you enjoy here, or in that portion that God has reserved
for his in another world? Is it in your Mansions here, or in those that Christ
has provided in his Father's Kingdom for his?

8. Whence do you fetch all your comfort in any sad and cloudy condition? Is
it from this world, or from the thoughts of another world, where there shall be
no more sorrow, nor weeping, nor death, etc.

9. What promises do you most prise? Whether those that are made concerning
this world, or those that concern the world that is to come? The Apostle
tells us, That godliness has the promises of both But he that is a
Nonconformist to this world, does most highly prise the latter, and would not
be without them for a world, to enjoy the former.

10. How do you do the Civil businesses of this world? Do you do them as
relating to another world? Do you so eat, and drink, and marry, and use the
World, as those that think of Eternity, and as those that shortly look for
Eternity? Do you so use this World, as those that must shortly leave it, and
must go hence, to live in another World? It Is sad to see how many there are,
that live in this world as if there were no life to come, nor any other World
to be looked for. Now, Christians, if you are Nonconformists to this World, you
use it with weaned affections, as those whose time is short, and are passing
out of this life into another.

Thus much for the Evidences, Whether we are Nonconformists to this World.

3. Directions what to do; with Considerations propounded, that we may not be
Conformists to this World: With Means and Helps prescribed, How we may be
delivered from such a Conformity.

1. Those that would be Nonconformists to this World, must be much in comparing
both Worlds together, this World, with that which is to come. They must take a
view of both Worlds, and by that means they will come to discern which of the
two is most worthy of their conformity, to which it is most rational to conform.
When we have compared them together, as we shall find this World not worthy to
be compared with the World to come; so neither worthy to be conformed to.

So, consider what a World that is, that is to come; and then see how worthy
that World is of a Christian's conformity. The Scripture gives us some account
of the World to come, what a World it is; and by that light we shall walk, in
making a description of it.

1. The World to come, is an Eternal World. This World is but temporary; this
is but this present world, this now world, which shortly will not be. As David
says of the wicked of the world (Psalm. 37.), Yet a little while, and the
wicked shall not be; thou shall seek his place: So we may say of this World,
Yet a little while, and it will be no more, and its place will not be found:
The great Creator set up this Earthly World to be as a Stage, wherein men (in
their successive generations) are to act their parts for some thousands of
years, and then God will take it down. It is reserved for fire; it is drawing
to its end, as the Apostle Peter says, The end of all things is at hand. The
World to come, is an enduring-world, which will to all Eternity continue, when
this World will be no more. Christians, remember, you are made for Eternity;
and if upon this account you compare both World's together, you cannot but
conclude, its the Eternal world you are to be Conformists to.

2. The World to come is an Unchangeable World; its firm and fixed; a Kingdom
that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. 28. But this World is a changeable World, and
all the things of this World are changeable things. All the men in the World
are changeable Creatures; they are all children of Change: Here one Generation
goes, and another comes. There is no fixedness, setledness, stability here:
Like the Moon, this World has her changes. But the World to come, is the World
that is unchangeable. As with the God of Heaven there is no variableness; so it
is with Heaven it self. Now compare the two Worlds upon this account, and see
which is most worthy of your Conformity.

3. The World to come is a Glorious World. It is the place where Glory dwells.
Heaven is the House of Glory; its called the Kingdom of Glory; all that inhabit
it, are glorious. There is the place where the glorious God (who inhabiteth
Eternity) does and will to all Eternity make the manifestations of his Glory.
When we look upon the visible Heavens (which are but the outside of that
House), and see them so glorious, How glorious then are the Mansions within? As
for this World, it is the place where Misery and Baseness dwells. Now if you
compare the two worlds upon this account, then judge which world is most worthy
of your conformity.

4. The Heavenly World is a Holy World, where no sin dwells. It Is called the
Holy Heavens, Psalm. 20. 5. There dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. We look
for new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. No unclean thing
shall or can enter there. The Apostate Angels, for their sin and disobedience,
were cast out thence, and shall know their place there no more to all eternity.
The Heavenly Jerusalem is described to be a City paved with Gold; to show,
among other things, its purity. Now this world is an unholy world. Gal. 1. 4.
it is there called, this present evil world. It Is an evil world, both in respect
of Misery, and in respect of Sin. But in that world which is to come, as there
will be no suffering, so no sinning. The Inhabitants of that world will to all
Eternity be above both. Now if you compare the two worlds upon this account,
then judge which world is to be conformed to.

5. The world to come is a Quiet and Peaceable World. It Is the world of rest,
where there are no stirrs, no troubles, no disturbances, no disquietments. It Is
the place where rest only is to be found. All Christians, while they are in
this world, must say, Here is not our rest. Rev. 15. 2. the world is resembled
to a Sea of Glass mingled with fire: A Sea of Glass, to show its brittleness
and slipperiness; and mingled with fire, (i.e.) with the fire of afflictions,
troubles, persecutions. This world indeed is a Christian's Hell* Now compare
the two worlds together upon this account, and see which is worthy of your
conformity.

6. The world to come, is the world for which man was chiefly made. Christians,
remember, you are made for another world. This world is to be but only as an
Inn, in which you are to lodge as strangers and travelers, in your way and
passage to another world. Christians must say of it, That here they have no
abiding City, but seek one that is to come; and that is, the world to come. Man
is a Creature made capable of Immortality; he has an immortal Soul; and this
shows he was made for another world. The Apostle tells us (1 Cor. 15. 19), If
in this life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable.
Christians, if you had been made only for this life, and had your hopes only in
this world, and did not expect and hope for the great things of another life,
and world that is to come; you were of all men most miserable. Remember, you
were made for this End, To glorify God, and to enjoy him to all Eternity. And
this shows, that then you must be made for another world. Where can you serve
him for ever, and enjoy him for ever, but in another world? To sing praises and
Hallelujahs to God, will be the work of Saints in the Heavenly world. There
they shall praise God to all Eternity, and show what eternal debtors they are
to Mercy and Free Grace. And then for the other chief End of man, which is, The
enjoyment of God for ever; where can that be but in another world? The eternal
fruition of God, and Christ, must be in a world that is Eternal, which is that
world that is to come. Now, Christians, consider, what you do here in relation
to serving of God, is but the beginning of that work we have to do in Heaven;
and what you enjoy of God here, is but only a taste of that we shall enjoy of
him in another world. Now upon this account consider, Christians, what world is
worthy of your conformity.

7. The world to come, is the world drawing near to us; and the world present,
is the world going from us. Christ, when he began to preach, said, The Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand: where, by the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant the Heavenly
Cospel, which opened and made way to that world that is to come. So, let me
tell you, The world to come, is at hand; the world to come, is the world to be;
this present world, ere long, will not be. It is near parting with us, and we
should be so with it. Eternity is at hand, and we live upon the borders of
it. This world has not long to be, nor we long to be in it: when ye go out
of it, ye enter upon Eternity; you go to an Eternal World, where you must
have an Eternal Being. Now compare these two worlds together upon all these
accounts, and judge rationally which is most worthy of your conformity.

Thus for the first Direction.

2. Direction. That you may be Nonconformists to this world, compare together
the consequences of a Conformity and a Nonconformity to the world. Compare
together the conveniences and inconveniences, the advantages and disadvantages,
the gain and the loss, that you have by conforming and not conforming to this
world. So here are two things to be done: 1. To consider, What you will gain
by being Conformists to the world. 2. What you will lose by not conforming to
the world.


1. Consider, what you vvilt gain by conforming to the world. All you gain,
amounts but to this, The World's good will, and the World's good-word. If
you-be a Conformist to the world, you shall have the love, and favor, and
affection of the world; you shall be hugged in her bosom, you shall sit in her
lap, you shall be accounted her Darlings, when others shall be but her
Outcasts; you shall be high in the world's esteem; the men of the world will
speak well of you living, and (perhaps) well of you when you are dead! They
will speak what a loss they have, what an honest man is gone. This is the most
(for ought I see) a man gains by a conformity to this world, To have the men of
the world's good will and good-word; whereby a man enjoys some outward peace,
and quietness, and freedom from trouble; that (as the Psalmist speaks) he comes
not in trouble like other men. And, besides all this, it may be he is made
partaker of some of the world's Promotions and Preferments. This is the sum of
what a man gains by being a Conformist to this world.

2. Consider, What a man loses by a Conformity to this world. So consider what
that loss amounts to.

1. A loss of inward peace. That man can have no true peace in his own spirit,
that walks by a Rule that is destructive to his own soul, Isa. 57. 27. There is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked. And if no peace to the wicked, then what
peace can there be to those that conform to this world? Conformity to the world
may give a man some outward peace; but it can never give a man that peace that
is true peace, which is peace within, which is the peace of God and not of the
world, a peace passing understanding.

2. Such as conform to the world, lose the favor of God. He that makes himself
a Favorite of the world, makes himself one whom God looks upon as an Enemy:
Jam. 4. 4. The friendship of the world is enmity with God. He that is a friend
to the sinful courses, fashions, manners, and ways of the world, is a professed
enemy to God, and God professes himself an enemy to him. How shall God love
and affect, favor and delight in that man, who forsakes those rules and ways
that he has prescribed him to walk in, and to conform to those patterns and
examples which he has proposed to him to imitate; to close with those ways,
and to follow those examples which he has flatly forbid us to walk in, and to
conform to? So that every Conformist to the world is such a person as loses
the favor of God.

Now come and compare this gain and loss together.

1. The gaining of outward, and the loss of inward peace; and tell me, What
shall it profit a man to gain worldly peace, and lose inward and spiritual
peace? It Is peace in the soul and spirit, that is the true peace. Christ told
his, That in him they should have peace, when yet in the world they should have
affliction. It is not peace from trouble, but peace in trouble; peace within,
when there is trouble without, that is true peace. A man's greatest trouble, is
trouble within, when it is in his own spirit: Prove. 18. 14. The spirit will
sustain his infirmities; but a wounded spirit, who can bear? There are the
lending-parts, and the borrowing-parts, in the body. If the lending-parts, as
the heart, and brain, etc. be wounded; the borrowing-parts, viz. hand, or foot,
cannot relieve them: but if the borrowing-parts be wounded, the lending-parts
can relieve them. A quiet and a peaceable Spirit and Conscience, relieves
against all outward troubles, and helps a man to sustain all his outward
infirmities: But if there be trouble in the spirit, outward peace and
prosperity cannot relieve that. Let the Winds be never so high and blustering,
yet they cannot make an Earthquake; but it is wind gotten into the inwards and
bowels of the earth, that causes that. It is not trouble without, that can
trouble us, while there is peace within; no more than Hailstones rattling on
the Tiles of the House, can hurt us, while we are at a Feast in a dry and warm
House. Alas! what is outward peace without inward! Peace without, when there is
trouble within, can give no peace to the spirit; it reaches not the
leadingpart. The Earth may as soon give light to the Sun, and a Tempest give
rest to the Sea, as outward and worldly peace can give rest to a wounded
spirit. What comfort is there in a man's being assured of freedom from the
World's persecutions, and to be under the apprehension of the pursuits of
Eternal Wrath? Now compare these two together, the loss of worldly and inward
peace, and then consider what you gain by having peace without, and losing
peace within.

2. Compare together the gaining of the world's favor, and the losing of the
favor of God, and see what it will profit to be the world's Favorite, and
God's Enemy. To have the world speak well of you, and to have the Lord speak
against you. To have the world well pleased with us, and to lie uuder the
displeasure of an Almighty God. To be the World's Darlings, and God's
Outcasts. To be the World's chosen ones, and to be God's Reprobates. To have
the world commend us, and God condemn us? Surely, those that have a kindness
for the World's Favors, do little know or consider what the Favor of God is,
which they lose by gaining that. They little think, that in his favor is life;
and, that his favor is better than life. That it is his (...) that makes
Heaven; and his Wrath and Displeasure that makes Hell. Now compare this gain of
the World's Favor, with the loss of the Favor of God, and see what reason you
have to conform to the World.

2. Consider what you lose, and what you gain, by not conforming to this world;
and compare those two together, and see which does preponderate.

1. Consider what is the loss of not conforming to the world. I have spoken
something to this before, and shall be brief in it here. All the loss amounts
but to something that is only outward and temporal, viz. Credit, a good report
from the world, a good repute with the world, worldly peace, freedom from the
world's troubles and persecutions, the World's Favor, and its Preferments. The
highest it can amount to, is but loss of Estate, loss of Liberty, loss of Life.
This is the sum of what a man loses by not complying with, and not conforming
to the world.

2. Next, consider what a man shall gain by not conforming to the world. This
is the great thing every one is apt to enquire after, If I do so, what shall I
get by it? As Peter said, Master, we have left all and followed thee; What
shall we have? So, if any shall say, We indeed hear that it is our duty to be
Nonconformists to* the World; and we know, such a Nonconformity is attended
with many disadvantages; and we would gladly know what advantages do attend
such a Nonconformity; and whether they over-weigh the disadvantages? To
satisfy such, consider what such a one gains who is a Nonconformist to the
World.

1. He gains the love, and esteem, and good report of those that are godly, and
that are really so. Christ has some chosen precious ones in the World,
redeemed from the World, that are not of the world, whose Names are written in
Heaven, who are Virgins, (i.e.) who are not defiled nor spotted with the
World's corruptions and pollutions; you have a description of them, Rev. 14. 4,
etc. such as walk in the steps of Christ here, and shall walk with Christ in
white hereafter. Now consider, Your not conforming to the World, will gain
the good report of these. What the Apostle says, (Heb. 11. 2. By faith the
Elders obtained a good report) may I say, By this Nonconformity you will
obtain a good report from those that are truly and sincerely good. Now compare
this gain with the forementioned loss: What is it to lose the good word of a
Drunkard, a Swearer, a filthy wicked profane person, and to be well reported
of by those that are holy and pious? Let me tell you, Next to God's
Approbation, the Approbation of those that are godly, is most desirable. What
comfort will this give a man upon his dying-bed, that all the Drunkards and
Profane persons in the Country, commend him, and speak well of him? Our
Savior said, Woe to you when all men shall speak well of you: and surely then,
Woe to that man of whom none can speak well, but only such as are wicked.

2. By not conforming to the World, you will not only gain a good report from
godly men, but also from God himself: let me tell you, They are such as God
makes high account of, whom Jesus Christ highly priseth, and whom the Angels
in Heaven rejoice over. Look but into Scripture, and see how highly God
commends those who are Nonconformists to the men of their generation: The
Apostle (in Heb. 11.) speaks of the Faith of the holy men of old, as Enoch, of
whom it is said, he walked with God; and of Noah, who by building the Ark upon
the warning he had from God, condemned the World. Let me tell you what the
Apostle speaks of all them there in relation to their Faith, we may speak of
them in relation to their Nonconformity to the world; that, as the Apostle
says, v. 2* by Faith they obtained a good report; so, by their Nonconformity
to the world. What was Enoch, but a Nonconformist? What was Noah, but a
Nonconformist to the men of his generation? What were Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, but Nonconformists to the world, when it is expressly said of them, v.
13. that they confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth;
that they did look after a better Country, (i.e.) a heavenly one? What was
Moses but a Nonconformist to this World, who refused to be called the son of
Pharoah's daughter; who chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; who esteemed the reproach
of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt? This is an eminent and
high demonstration of his Nonconformity to the World. And so I might speak of
the rest, who were all persons of whom the world was not worthy; who obtained a
good report from God; and of whom we may say as the Apostle does, (Heb. 11.
13.) All these dyed in faith: So all these lived and dyed Nonconformists to the
World. How highly and honorably does the Lord (in Scripture) speak of these
Nonconformists? Non doubt but the men of their generation looked upon them as
men singular, factious, humorous, as such that delighted to be unlike their
Neighbors. But the Lord speaks of them as excellent, and precious, and such of
whom the World was not worthy. Now compare these together, and see whether is
better, To be well reported of by the World, or to be well reported of by God?
What though the World account such precise Fools, if the Lord call such the
only wise in the world? It is not whom the World commends, but whom God
commends, that are praiseworthy indeed. Moses, in the blessing of Joseph,
Deuteronomy. 33. 16. he wishes to him the good will of him that dwelt in the bush. To
have the good will and the good-word of God, is that that is most desirable in
this life.

3. That you may be Nonconformists to this World, Be much in comparing together
Rules and Patterns, Those of the Word, and those of the World. Take a view of
both, and then consider these three things.

First, Which are most worthy your conformity.

Secondly, To which you are most obliged and engaged to conform.

Thirdly, By your conformity to which, you shall most benefit and advantage
your selves.

First, Consider, whether the Rules and Examples of the Word, or of the World,
be most worthy of your conformity. So consider,

1. What the World's Rules, and Commands, and Prescriptions are. You will find
them to be all corrupt, erroneous, base, unclean, unholy. And you will find its
Examples such likewise: The Rules it has, by which it does and acts things,
and by which it judges of things, are all naught. Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean, says Job? And how can a filthy and unclean World, prescribe
Rules that are otherwise? Take a survey of its Rules; 1. For judging of things;
It makes this one of its great Rules by which it judges of things, Whether
they be Good or Evil, by the suitableness or unsuitableness there is in them,
to sinful flesh, and corrupt nature. I might name many other Rules of the like
nature; but for brevity's sake I omit them. 2. For its Rules for practice, they
are sinful and corrupt too. I shall name you some, (viz.) To do as the most do,
is one Rule. To do as the greatest do, is another Rule. To do as our Ancestors
and Forefathers did, (who lived in dark and corrupt times) is another Rule. To
do what respects our outward ease, and credit, and quiet, in this world, that
we may sleep in a whole skin, is another Rule. In a word, To do what is good in
our own eyes, and to do what tends to the pleasing and gratifying of our lusts,
is another Rule. I might name more; but let these suffice.

Next, for the World's Patterns and Examples, take a view of them: You will
find them all corrupt and naught. If you look with a right eye upon them, you
will find they all have ugly, base, sinful inscriptions on them; as of
Profaneness, Drunkenness, Swearing, Covetousness, Pride, Luxury, Uncleanness,
and of all Ungodliness, Atheism, Indifferency in Religion, Lukewarmness,
Denying the power of Godliness, etc. Such are the World's Examples. And so I
have showed you what the World's Rules for judging and practice, are; and what
its Patterns and Examples are, All naught.

2. Now I shall come to show you, what the Rules and Examples of the Word are,
that so upon comparing them together, you may see which are most worthy of your
conformity. As for the Rules of the Word, they are holy, they are pure, they
are perfect; so are all the Rules of the Word, both for judging of things, and
for practice.

1. For the Rules prescribed us in the Word, they are all pure: I might name
many; but among others, take these three.

1. The Word teaches us to judge of things as God judges of them, whose
judgment is according to truth; the judgment of the World is according to
appearance and corrupt fantasy.

2. The Word teaches us to judge of things as they have relation to the Soul.
That, that is good which is good for the Soul, which tends to the making of us
more Holy and Heavenly.

3. The Word teaches us to judge of things to be good or evil, as they relate
to a man's future and eternal state. So, those things to be good, that concern
a man's eternal well being; and those things to be evil, that relate to eternal
misery.

Thus for the Rules of judging of things.

Next, for the Rules of Practice, I shall name some (of many) to you; you will
find them all holy and pure.

1. Is this; Doing what pleases God, not what pleases men. Pleasing God, whom
ever we displease. This is a Rule in the Word, for practice; it tells us, We
should not be the servants of men, to please their sinful humors, and lusts,
and fancies.

2. To do as the best do, and not as the most do: where, by [best] we mean not
the best of the Parish, who are accounted so for their Riches, and Lands, and
Possessions; but the best in respect of Godliness and Holiness.

3. In all things we do, to prefer suffering before sinning. To choose
Affliction rather than Sin. It gives us to consider, that the least evil of
Sin, has more evil in it than the greatest evil of Suffering.

4. In all we do, to respect more inward, than outward peace. To regard (most)
peace in our own Spirits and Consciences. To remember what the Martyr said,
There were no Stocks to the Stocks of an evil Conscience. To have a care to
preserve the Bird in our bosom.

5. Doing good, and avoiding evil, though with disadvantage to our selves, when
the good concerns eternal life, and the disadvantage only this life.

Thus for some of the Rules for practice.

Next, for the Patterns and Examples that the Word of God holds out to us. You
will find them all holy, having the Inscriptions of Heaven and Holiness on
them. So it propounds to us, for our imitation, the Examples, (First) Of Jesus
Christ. Secondly, Of Holy men, and such as were Followers of Jesus Christ.

1. Of Jesus Christ So it holds him out to us as our great Pattern to imitate.
It shows us the steps of his Humility, Meekness, Patience, Obedience, Holiness,
Heavenliness-

2. It holds out to us the Examples of Holy men, for our imitation, more famous
in their Generation than others, for their Faith, Piety, Patience, Holiness,
Zeal, Heb. 6. 12: Be ye followers of them who through faith and patience
inherit the Promises. Consider, the Scripture propounds to us for our example,
such as inherit the Promises of God; the World propounds such as inherit the
Threatenings of God. The Word propounds to us for our examples, such as now are
in Heaven. The World propounds such, who (for ought we know) are either in
Hell, or in the road-way to Hell. Now, Christians, I have given you a brief
specimen and view of the World's Rules and Examples, and of those of the
Word; and now compare them together, and judge which are most worthy of your
conformity. Upon your comparing them together, you will find the result to be
this.

1. That the Rules and Examples of the Word are more high, and noble, and
excellent, than those of the World: The World's Rules and Examples are low
and base; and a Christian debaseth himself in conforming to them; they are
below a Christian's Calling, they are below a Christian's Spirit, they are
below a Christian's Profession, they are below a Christian's Hope and
Expectation; and so must needs be too low for his conformity and imitation. Man
is an excellent Creature, he was made a little lower than the Angels; so that
(next to the Angels) he is the most noble of Creatures. And God, that gave Man
a noble Being, gave him also a noble Rule to live and walk by. As God made not
man to be his own End, neither did he make him to be his own Rule. From whom he
received his Being, he was to receive his Rule. His Rule was, the Will and Law
of his Creator; and herein stood his excellency, in conforming to that Rule.
When man conformed to another Rule, he lost his excellency. God made man
upright, but (as Solomon says) they have found out many inventions. So, God
made Man excellent; but having found out other Rules to conform to, than those
of his Creator, they have lost their excellency. There was a high and noble
Rule, for a high and noble Creature; and that Rule is, the Rule of the Word,
which contains the revealed Will of the Creator.

2. You will find this, upon comparing them together, That the Rules and
Examples of the Word are more pure and holy, than those of the World. Consider
what is said of the Word of God, and what is said of the World: Of the Word of
God the Scripture says, it is pure, very pure, as Gold tried in the fire seven
times. Of the World it is said, that it is sinful, evil, and that it lies in
wickedness. Now, as the Word is, so are its Rules; and as the World is, so are
its: A pure Word has pure Rules; and an impure World must needs prescribe
impure Rules. The higher things are, the purer they are. What is Purity, but a
freeness from all Contagion, and touch of inferior things? That Gold is impure,
that is mixed with dross; and that Face and Garment is defiled, that is spotted
with dirt. Consider, things are pure ex contactu superiorum: the higher they
are, and the more heavenly, the more pure. And things are impure ex contactu
inferiorum; the lower things are, the more impure. Now, upon this account, the
Rules and Precepts of the Word most needs be the purest, because they are must
high, holy, heavenly. There is no scoria, no dross at all in them. And as for
the Examples of the Word, they are holy and heavenly ones, that are propounded
to us for our conformity and imitation.

Obj. It Is true, some may here except against the Examples, and say, What, was
there no dross in them? Had not the best Saints their failings and corruptions?
Were they perfectly pure, without stain or blemish?

Ans. To this we answer: That the Examples and Patterns that the Word of God
holds out to us for our imitation, are (as I told you before) of two sorts:
those 1. Of Jesus Christ. 2. Of Holy men.


1. The Example of Jesus Christ Now his Example is without, and beyond all
exception; it is perfectly pure. He has left us his steps to tread in; and
upon view of them it will never be found that he trod one step awry. He did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. He made this challenge to his most
bitter and observing Adversaries, Which of you convinces me of sin? He was
Jesus Christ the righteous.

2. As for the Examples of Holy men, against whom the Objection most lies, and
of whom it must be confessed, that they had their impurities; yet concerning
them, there is this to be said.

1. That though they had their impurities, yet they had their purity, (i.e.)
something that was precious and excellent. They were Gold, though there were
some dross mixed with it: so that (comparatively) we may say they were pure.
The Examples of the World are altogether impure; they are all dross, and no
Gold mixed with them. They are altogether corrupt, and have nothing of holiness
and purity in them.

2. This is to be considered, That God in his Word, propounding to us the
Examples of Holy men for our imitation, sets them out to us to be imitated by
us in what was good, not what was evil in them. The holiest men were in some
things but men: they had their black, as well as their bright side. Now the
Scripture shows us their black side only for our caution; but their bright side
only for our imitation. In the Scripture we see Saints in their Sins, and in
their Graces; and it is in their Graces only that they are held forth to us as
Patterns for our imitation. The great Apostle himself bids them to whom he
writes, to be followers of him, as he was of Christ. We are to eye Christ as
our chiefest Pattern, and to conform to the Examples of others, as they are
conformable to Jesus Christ. Particular Saints, had their particular Graces and
Excellencies. Thus Abraham was eminent for his Faith, Job for his Patience,
Moses for his Meekness, David for his Zeal; and so for the rest. And in these,
the Scripture propounds them to us as Patterns for our imitation, in their
Excellencies, not in their Frailties. Thus the Objection is answered. And now
consider what Rules and Examples are worthy of your imitation and conformity.

3dly, You will find this, upon comparing them together, That the Rules and
Examples of the Word, have the greatest, and best, and highest approbation;
and in this they exceed those of the World; this I shall show you in some
particulars.

1. They are approved of by God himself, who is the Best and Greatest. And
needs must it be so, when such Rules are of own making, and such Examples of
his own stamping. To these God puts his Seal of Approbation: but to those of
the World, that of his dislike and condemnation.

2. They are those Rules and Examples that all that are godly approve of: by
their dissenting from the other, they have testified their approbation of
these. Read but the 119th Psalm, and see how highly David speaks forth his
approbation of the Law, and Testimonies, and Precepts of God, and how he had
chosen the way of God's Precepts. And this godly men have done under the
greatest persecutions and afflictions; they have then testified their high
approbation of the ways of God, and have not accepted of deliverance upon
condition of complying with the sinful ways of the World: so you read of those
sufferers of old, Heb. 11. what tortures they endured, and all upon the account
of Nonconformity to the world.

3. They are those Rules and Examples that will one day be approved of by all,
both good and bad. There is a day when even wicked men themselves will vote for
them. It is not much to be regarded what wicked men now think or speak of them,
while they are in their prosperity, and in the hot and eager pursuit of their
Lusts. Alas! they are not now themselves; but there is a day when they will be
in cool blood, when they will be themselves, when they will commend the ways of
God, and the Examples of those holy ones they once condemned; and will wish they
had chosen the way of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, etc. and not of Cain, and
Esau, and Ishmael, and such like.

4. You will find this, upon comparing these Rules and Examples together, That
those of the Word are the safest to conform to. In that conformity, there is a
safety for Eternity. In a conformity to those of the world, there is nothing
but danger, they are liable to be condemned with the world; there is no safety
in those ways, wherein there is no salvation to be found. They that live the
life of the World, must expect to perish with the World. The Psalmist says
(Psalm. 125. 5.) As for such as turn aside to crooked paths, the Lord will lead
them forth with the workers of iniquity, (i.e.) God will deal with such, as with
wicked men. Solomon tells us, (Prove. 10. 9.) He that walks uprightly walks
surely. It is a man's conformity to the Rules and Examples of the Word, that
speaks him Upright; and in that lies his safety for Eternity.

5. Upon comparing them, you will find, That a conformity to the Rules and
Examples of the Word, is that that is most becoming Christians. What can more
become a Christian, than to conform to those Rules and Examples that are most
Christian and holy.

1. It becomes not a Christian's Calling. He is called from the world, he is
called out of the world, he is called to be unlike the world, he is called to
be an Heir of another world, he is called to begin Heaven on Earth; to begin it
here in Grace, and to enjoy it hereafter in Glory. Now Christians, How does a
conformity to the world agree and suit with your Calling? Does it become a man
to wallow in the Mire, because a Hog does so?

2. It is unbecoming a Christian's Profession. As your Calling is, so is your
Profession, holy. Do but reflect upon your Baptismal-Covenant; Is not the
World one of those things you promise to forsake and renounce? And if so, How
can you conform to it? How can you that profess your selves to be the servants
of Christ, be the servants of sinful men? How can you that profess your selves
to be of the number of those that are redeemed from the world, comply with, and
conform to the world?

3. Conformity to the world, is unbecoming the Spirit of a Christian. A
Christian is to be one of an excellent and precious Spirit: And what has an
excellent Spirit to do with base and low Rules and Examples? Let me tell you,
there is a holy Gallantry Christians should have, which should set them above
such a conformity, with the greatest disdain and scorn. As it is said of Caleb,
(Numb. 14. 24.) He had another Spirit. What have holy Spirits to do with sinful
Rules? And, What have heavenly Spirits to do with worldly and earthly Examples?

6. Upon comparing them together, you will find, That a Conformity to the Rules
and Examples of the Word, is most Consolative. There is more comfort in
conforming to the Word, than in conforming to the World. What comfort will the
thoughts of your conforming to a sinful wicked World, give you? when you come
to lie on your last and dying-beds, What comfort will a conformity to the World
reflect? Oh that men would consider what will give them peace at the last!
Consider this you covetous Tradesmen, that use false Measures and Balances,
and that deal in false Wares: the saying is, Leight Gains make an heavy Purse;
but take heed they make not an heavy and accusing Conscience in the end. It is
the way of the World to get gain any way, but never consider what the issue
will be, whether it will be comfort and peace at last. It was the saying of a
worthy Judge of this Nation, to his Son when he was a dying, Son, I leave you
but a small Estate, but it was well gotten. Oh that men could say so of their
Estates (whether great or small), That they were well gotten! Let the cunning,
covetous, worldly Tradesman, know, That he may as well rob a man in his Shop,
with a mete-Yard, and a pair of Balances in his hand, as a Thief does with
Sword and Pistol on the Road; and although they are not alike arraigned at the
Bar of Man's Tribunal, yet they will be alike at the Bar of God's Tribunal.
And as for you profane ones, What comfort will the thoughts of your sinful
pleasures, delights, and vanities, reflect when you come to dye? What pleasure
will it then be to you, to remember the sinful jollities and debaucheries of a
fore-passed life? Know this, that one hour spent in communion with God, will
yield a man more solid comfort, than all the days a man has spent in the Tents
of wickedness. He said it, that had proved it, Psalm. 84. 10. A day in thy
Courts, is better than a thousand, etc. And let me tell you, A day spent in
serving God, and conforming to his Will and Word, doing what is well-pleasing
in his sight; will yield more comfort than a thousand spent in complying with,
and conforming to the sinful fashions, pleasures, and examples of the World.
Nay, What sad reflections will the thoughts of such a compliance cause? That
proud Cardinal Wolsey, when he was cast out of the favor of his Prince, and
was under the apprehension of approaching death, said, If I had been as careful
of serving and pleasing God, as I have been to serve and please my King; he had
not now forsaken me in this my misery. And ere long men will wish, they had
been as careful in conforming to the will of God revealed in his Word, as they
have been to the wills of men* and ways of the World; and repent of it when its
too late.

7. Upon comparing these together, you will find, That a conformity to the
Rules and Examples of the Word, is a Christian's Wisdom; and that all
Conformists to the World, will at the last be found but fools, as the Prophet
(Jer. 17. 11). says, He that gets riches, and not by right, at his end
shall be a fool. Consider who in the end will be the veriest fools,
Conformists, or Nonconformists, to the World? Deuteronomy. 4. When Moses had told the
men of Israel of the Statutes of God, this is one Motive he makes use of to
press them to an observation of them, v. 6. This will be your wisdom in the
sight of the Nations. Let me tell you, A Conformity to the Word, and a
Nonconformity to the World, is a Christian's Wisdom. There is a day coming,
when those who now for not conforming to the world, are accounted fools, will
not only be pronounced wife, by the testimony of God, and Christ, and Angels,
but also by those that now esteem and call them Fools. Let me tell you, What is
the judgment and opinion of wicked men now concerning Holiness and Holy ones,
will not always be their judgment; they will one day be of another mind. Now,
indeed, the wisdom of God is foolishness with the world; when, indeed it is the
wisdom of the world that is foolishness with God. In the Word of God, and the
laws and rules which it prescribes, is seen the Wisdom of God: And those must
needs be the wisest who conform to those Rules. Conforming to the World's
Rules, is conforming to the World's Wisdom, which indeed is conforming to the
World's Wickedness; and the wisest of such Conformist* (except they repent)
will ere long call themselves Fools to all Eternity.

Now, having compared all these together, tell me, Whether the Rules and
Examples of the Word, or of the World, are most worthy of your conformity.

Thus much for the First.

Secondly, We come next to enquire, To which you are most obliged and engaged
to conform, To the Word of God, or to the World. And here I shall put this
Question to you, viz. To whom you owe most, whether to God, or the world? So I
must ask you two things: 1. Which has done most for you? 2. Which can do most
for you?


1. Which has done most for you, God or the World? To whom owe you your
Beings? Who created you, God or the world? Then tell me, to whom you owe your
conformity? To whom owe you your Redemption? Who sent a Savior into the world
to dye for you; and by that death to purchase pardon, and peace, and
reconciliation, and eternal salvation? To whom do you owe your lives? Who
endued your souls with life, and has hitherto held your souls in life? Or
whose Mercies is it, that you have not ere this been consumed? Is it of the
Lord's Mercy, or of the World's? From whom have you had protection and
deliverance from dangers? Whose Angels are it that have pitched their Tents
about you, God's, or the World's? From whom do you receive all your blessings,
of health, wealth, food, raiment? Is it from God, or the World? See, by this,
to which you owe your conformity.

2. Consider, which can do most for you. What can the world do for you? Does
it, or can it bid more for your conformity, than God does? As Saul said to his
Courtiers, when he saw they were addicted to David's Party, Can the Son of
Jesse give you Vineyards, or Olive-yards, etc. So let me ask you, Can the world
give you what God can? All that the world can do for you, does but amount, to
what is temporal: But can it give you that which is eternal? Let me tell you,
It is so far from doing that, that though it can give a man Honor, and Riches,
yet it cannot give a man Contentment with them; much less can it give inward
comfort, and peace, and assurance of Eternal Glory and Happiness. All this, God
bids for your conformity to him. And now see to which you most owe your
conformity.

Thirdly, We are next to enquire, By which you will be most advantaged,
whether by a conformity to God, or the world? To this I have spoken largely
before, when I showed you the Gain and Loss of Conformity and Nonconformity to
the world. I shall only here put you upon the consideration of two things: 1.
Which promises most. 2. Which threatens most.


1. Which promises most, the Word or the World: Look over the promises of the
Word, and tell me, whether the World can promise what God in his Word does? Can
it promise you, That by conforming to its Statutes and Laws, it shall be well
with you and your children for ever? The world cannot promise you a long and
happy life here; much less can it promise you eternal life and happiness
hereafter.

2. Consider, which threatens most: whose threatenings are most dreadful and
terrible, those of the Word, or of the World: It Is true, the world can thunder
out threatenings against those that conform not to her: But tell me, Is that
Thunder like, in terror, to that thunder we hear in the word, and the
threatenings of it, against those that conform to a wicked world? The world can
threaten with Bonds and Imprisonments, with Fire and Faggot: But God threatens
with Hell, and everlasting burnings. As the Martyr told the Persecutor that
threatened him with imprisonment, Tu Carcerem, ille Gehennam: Thou threatnest me
with a Prison, but God threatens me with Hell. Remember the counsel of our
Savior, Matt. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul
in Hell. And now you have heard all this, consider seriously of it, and tell
me, whether the world is worthy your conformity; or, whether you are at all
engaged to conform to the world; or, whether it will be any advantage to you to
conform to the world, and not rather an infinite disadvantage?

And thus much for the Directions in general; and in these Directions are
wrapped up the Motives to move us to be Nonconformists to this world.

I shall now close all, with giving you some particular Directions, as further
Means and Helps against Conformity to this world: and that briefly.

1. Consider your natural inclinations, and remember there is, by nature, in us
a strong propensity to a conformity to the world. The world is a tempting,
alluring, bewitching thing, apt to steal away our hearts, as Absalom did the
hearts of the men of Israel. It will court, invite, and tempt; it will flatter
and fawn, to gain a conformity; it has tempting rules, tempting examples,
tempting proffers, and much more, to draw men into a conformity to her. Now,
Christians, you had need be watchful in this case, upon considering in what
danger you are, to be deluded by the world; and that upon two accounts.

1. You live among those that are of the world, and therefore apt to be
infected by them, as Joseph was by living in Pharoah's Court; and Peter, by
being in the High-Priest's Hall. Rivers partake of the nature of the soil
through which they run; and it is a difficult thing to live in the world, and
not to have a taste of the sins and corruptions of it.

2. Remember, you have (even the best) the remainders of corruption in you.
There are the remainders of self, and so a love of worldly Credity, of outward
Ease, of worldly Enjoyments; and these will be as a Byas to the Bowl, which
will incline you toward the world, and a conformity to it.

2. That you may be Nonconformists to this world, Grow and increase in love to
Jesus Christ. The more we love Jesus Christ, the less we shall love the world.
Any sinful compliance with the world, argues either no love, or little love to
Jesus Christ. Love is the great worker of imitation, as Hatred is of
aversation. Those that love Jesus Christ, will live to Jesus Christ; and will
be such to whom the world is crucified, and they unto the world: Such will say
as St. Paul did, To us to live, is Christ. Jesus Christ will be the All of
their lives; all the Rule; and all the End of their living.

3. That you may be Nonconformists to the world, Meditate much of Christ's love
to you; by that you will come to know, you owe all your conformity to Him,
Right thoughts of this, will cause the world to be crucified to you, and you to
the world; that neither the world shall care for you; not you for it.

4. Remember where Christ is: He is no more in this world, in respect of his
corporal Presence; he is ascended into Heaven; he is there preparing Mansions
for his: he has left you steps on earth, in which you are to tread and in
which you are to follow him, if you desire to be where he is. So that, this
considered, a conformity to the world can never consist with a Christian's aims
of being with Christ hereafter, and to behold, his glory. He now being in
Heaven, is drawing the hearts and affections of those up to him, who are to be
for ever with him.

5. Be much in searching the Scriptures: where you may view, as the Rules you
are to walk by, so the examples you are to imitate; you will there have
Glasses, by which you are to dress your selves: you will there find the pure
example of him who was holy, undefiled, without spot and blemish, viz. Jesus
Christ. You will there find the Examples of holy men, who were Nonconformists
to the men of their generation.

6. Be much in prayer, That God would deliver you from this present evil world;
That you may not be led into temptation, but may be delivered from the evil of
it. Pray, that God would carry you above the world, and over all the good and
evil of it, without being infected or hurt by it.

7. Remember what your condition in this world is. If you profess your selves
Christians, then you profess your selves to be strangers and pilgrims in the
world: and a conformity to this world, cannot consist with such a profession.
What have strangers to do with a conformity to that place, through which they
pass only as travelers, and where they lodge only as pilgrims?

8. Remember, you are for Eternity, and that you live upon the borders of it.
Think not so much where at present you are, as where you shortly must be. In
every Conformist to this world, there is a forgetfulness of Eternity. How can
those that think of an Eternal world that is drawing near to them, and they to
it, give up themselves to a conformity to a world that is passing away?
Remember, Eternity now calls on you, and will shortly call for you.

9. Increase in Self-denial, It is the self-denying Christian, that is the
Nonconforming Christian to the world. Such a Christian will regard neither the
world's favors, nor the world's frowns. Such a Christian will say as Luther
did, I despise both the world's favor, and the world's fury. The self-denying
Christian is one whom the world may both flatter and frown on; but he stands
like an immovable Rock, not shaken by either.

10. Increase in the mortification of your worldly lusts. Not mortifying these,
has reduced some to a conformity to the world, who seemed to have escaped the
pollutions of it: This was the undoing of Demas, who forsook both his Ministry,
and the fellowship of St. Paul, to embrace this present world; and (as some are
of opinion) became an Idol-Priest at Thessalonica, upon the account of filthy
lucre, and worldly gain.

11. Strengthen Faith, whereby you will be strengthened to overcome this
present evil world. The Apostle tells us, (1 John 5. 4.) This is the victory
whereby we overcome this world, even our faith. It will make us courageous to
outface a sinful world. It is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. and
will work in us a contempt of the things that are seen. It will be the eye, by
which, with Moses, we shall see him that is Invisible, and thereby keep us from
a conforming to a visible world, upon greatest temptations, though they be the
pleasures and promotions of a Pharoah's Court. The more faith, the less fear;
and it is base fear and cowardice, that often betrays to a sinful compliance
with, and conformity to the world. The more believing Christians are, the less
conforming they are to this world. To close all, let me mind you of what the
Lord speaks to Jeremiah, and that I say to all Christians concerning complying
with, and conforming to the world, Jer. 15. 19. Therefore thus says the Lord,
If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shall stand before me:
And if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth.
Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them.

FINIS.

