THE HISTORY of the COURT of the KING OF CHINA.

Out of French.

London Printed by H. B. for Christopher Hussy at the Flower de Luce in Little
Britain, 1682.

TO THE Truly Worthy, and ever-honored, JAMES QVINE, Esquire
SIR,
VEry much to be commended in my opinion is that Custom amongst the Courtiers
and best educated Persons of China, whereby inst^ad of oral Complements they
use to deliver unto their Friends written Protestations of a sincere and
cordial Amity, to remain as a Testimony against them, if they shall afterward
fall short in performing (as oc^asion requires) the D^voirs of a veritable
Friendship. The Esteem I have for this Practice, so usual amongst them, has
excited me in these few Lines to assure you of the entire Respect and
Veneration, I have for the Amity, wherewith you have been plea^ed to honor me,
and at the same ^ime to present ^ou wit^ this little History of the Chin^se
Court, which having ^r^nslated into our Language, and finding the Subject such,
that I need not be ashamed of having bestowed my time therein, I have thought
fit to c^mmunicate to the Public under the auspicious Protection of your
ever-honored Name. Nor was it possible for me to choose a more suitable Patron
for this Narra^ive of the Grandeurs of a Court, where Learning and Virtue are
had in singular Recommendation, than your noble ^elf, whose profound Science,
Heroic virtues, and generous Nature would easily induce me (did not the
Principles of Christianity forbid me to believe a Pythagorean Metempsychosis)
to think you animated with the Souls of all the greatest Heroes and most
eminent Scholars, whose Fame is at this day celebrated in the Universe: For if
the Heroic Generosity of your Spirit represents to me a Caesar and an
Alexander, your extraordinary Eloquence does at the same time tempt me to think
you a Demosthenes and a C^cero* I might her^ (according to the usual Custom of
Dedications) make a large Enumeration of these many great and virtuous
Qualiti^s, that gain you a most particul^r Esteem in the Hearts of all those,
that have the honor to ^e acquainted with you; but knowing, how offensive this
would be to that Modesty, which you have made your insepar^bl^ ^ompanion* and
being conscious ^lso of min^ own Inability to give to such high Endowments the
Encomium, they deserve, I here put a stop to my Pen, which is ambitious to
honor it self with celebrating your Praises. Receive then, Sir, this little
Present, which I take the boldness to off^r to you, as a pledge of the
unfeigned Zeal, I have for your Service, and believe me, that I shall never
think my self any longer worthy to live, than I shall be ready to embrace all
Occasions of verifying, what I here prot^st, that I am,

SIR, Your most entirely devoted, and most affectionat^ Servant, A. G.

Page 57, Line 19, in some Copies for Judgment read Punishment.

THE HISTORY Of the COURT of the KING of CHINA.
THE Kingdom of the Sinae whose Customs have been related unto us by the
ancient Historians, is called by those of the Country Taybinco, by their
Neighbors Sancley, and by the Europaeans China. It is situated in the Extremity
of Asia, being on the East and South washed by the Waves of the great Ocean, on
the W^s^ bounded with the higher India, and having on the North the Scythians
and Massagetes for its Neighbors. The Circuit thereof is nine thousand five
hundred and sixteen Dias or Miles of the Country, amounting in our account to
three thousand Leagues, the Diameter or Length thereof being eighteen hundred
League^. In this vast and immense space are contained fifteen fair and great
Provinces, five hundred ninety and one Cities, fifteen hundred ninety and three
Towns, and an infinite number of Villages. Fifteen of the Cities are
M^tropolitan or Principal of the Realm, superbly and commodiously built on fair
Seaports, or the fertile Banks of great navigable Rivers. The Provinces are
Paguie Canton, ^oquien, Olan, Cinsay, Susuam, Tolanchie, Cansay, Oquian,
Auch^o, Honam, Xanton, Quincheu, Chequcan, Saxii or Sancii. They are governed
each of them by the wise Administration of a Viceroy, except Paguie and
Tolanchie, which are immediately under the Care of their Sovereign and the
Advice of his Council: For in them he resides, as lying nearest to the Tartars,
their ancient Enemies that the Royal presence, as the Sun of the State, may
dissipate the Mists and Clouds of Troubles, which would obscure the Glory
thereof. The Goodness of the Country is envied by all the rest of the earth:
Men breath there the Air of the Eastern world: Wine, Corn* and Fruits are there
exceeding plentiful* the f^rtil Land producing them th^^e a ye^^: Wool,
Cottons, and silks ar^ th^^e in very great qua^^ity: P^rfumes ^re there
ga^hered, Metals are there found, Gold and Silver do there abound, Diamonds do
there sparkl^* ^earls are there fisht up, the Sea obeys their Navigations: It
is watered by great Rivers, and the Chin^s^s may disdain and slight the Succor
of other men* and the Commodities of their Provinces. They are also enclosed
and shut up as it were in another World, Nature has furnished them with great
Mountains, which lock them in, and Art by the care of King Tzinson has drawn a
Wall five hundred Leagues long, of a very great height, and above five and
twenty Paces thick, which finishes that Enclosure, which Nature seems to have
left on purpose, that knowing their own Strength, they might make themselves a
World apart: although History says, that the Incursions and Ravages, which the
Tartars made upon them on that side, advanced the Project ther^of, and caused
them to hasten the Work.

The principal Laws, under the sage conduct whereof they live in the midst of
an assu^ed R^pose, accumulated with all sorts of Felicities, are

First, that the Scepter of the Chines^ Kingdom can never fall to the Distaff*
the Males only, and not the Females, being capable of s^cceeding to the Crown.

Secondly, that no person of the Country presume to go out of the Ports
thereof into any foreign parts without the express Leave of the King himself,
and not of any of his Officers; and that no other from without be admitted, or
may enter thereinto without the same License: Thus they keep inviolable the
Purity of their good Customs, and with the aid of this great Wall hinder
Strangers from entering into their Realm, and their Vices from their Court,
which are elsewhere the Domestics of Courtiers. If by chance any Forreigner
slips in amongst them, he is soon discovered by every one: For to this purpose
they have long since established a Custom amongst them, which is to crush and
^latten the Noses of their Children at the time of their Birth, so that all the
Chinese are ^lat-nosed: whereby a Stranger in their company has his
Countenance wholly different from theirs.

Thirdly, that State-employes are conferred on none, but such, as are very
capable of them, and endu^d with rare and excellent Qualities. That no man be
esteemed Noble, if he be not Virtuous. That the Children of great Personages
cannot be admitted to the Employes of their Fathers, nor partake the Glory of
their Reputation, if they do not equal or surpass them, fixing thus Nobility to
the Person, and not to the Blood.

Fo^rthly, that the Children of Merchants and Artificers, how rich soever they
be, cannot rise any higher than to the exercise of their Fathers Trade, except
some rich Endowment of Mind so far advantages some one of them above other men,
that he is able usefully to serve the State and Public: Then by the express
permission of the King after long Study and many painful Exercises he is made a
Loytias, that is, a Gentleman with the luster of a pompous Solemnity, whereof
we shall speak in its place.

Fif^hly, that Idleness is punished as a capital Crime, and for to banish it
out of the Realm, they forbid under great Penalties the giving of Alms to
those, that shall demand it: For poor maimed or s^ck persons are sent to their
Relations, whom the Law constrains by force to tax themselves, and make a Purse
for the furnishing of those poor afflicted ones with Food and other
Necessaries: But if their Relations are poor, the Kings Purse, and public
Charity nourishes them in Hospitals, and other Houses, founded for this
purpose; but the Blin^ and Lame, who can work, eat not the Bread of the Poor,
they are forced to ge^ their Living by turning at Mils, and doing other Works,
the Wages whereo^ supplies their Necessi^i^s.

Now this great Realm, under the conduct of so good Laws, is governe^ by one
Sovereign King, who resides ordinarily in the Province of Paguie or Pagule in
the City of Taybin or otherwise Suntien, which signifies in their Language the
City of Heaven: Marcu^ Paulus Venetus calls it also Quinsay, so great, that it
fills with admiration the mind of those that read the Extent thereof; and being
but a small Pattern of the Kingdom, shows manifestly what the Piece is: Its
Diameter o^ Length is as much as a man on horseback can well travel in one
day, for it requires so much time to go from on^ Gate to the other: Its Breadth
is hal^ its Length, and its Circuit very vast: The Suburbs, which are many,
contain all together as much as the Town. The Chinese have heretofore raised
in this City upon the pressing Necessity of an important War, an hundr^^
thousand Foot, and as many Hor^^ I was present in the year 1616. when a Flem^sh
Jesuit, newly arrived from China, related to the King in the Louvre the marvels
of this Royal City, he a^^irmed the Length thereof to be twice as much, as from
Paris to Pontoise: the Rarities, which he recounted thereof, are conformable to
History: Himself appeared in the Kings Closet, clothed in the Chinese Garb, the
Fashion whereof was pleasant and agreeable. Three Royal Palaces are built in
this great Town, one in the entrance toward the East, another in the midst
thereof, and the third at the farther end toward the West. The King of China
has chosen the first for his abode, of so vast a Greatness, that to view the
Particularities thereof will take up no less, than four whole Days. It is
encompassed with seven Walls, so great and spacious, that in the Distances
between them are easily kept ten thousand Soldiers, which make the ordinary
Guard of the Palace. The number of fair Chambers, rich Wardrobes, and costly'
Closets amounts to above five hundred. There are seventy nine Halls, all richly
built, and of admirable Artifice: four whereof make what is most remarkable in
this Palace. The first is made of cast Metal, curiously wrought, with a great
number of Statues: The second has the Floor and the Cieling made of Silver, of
a rich value: The third is of massy Gold, excellently enamelled. But the
Luster, Glory, and Value of the fourth far excels the three others: it is
filled with many Jewels of price: therein shines a Royal Throne, set all over
with Diamonds, and so great a number of Carbuncles, that with the other
pre^ious Stones, they dart forth such Brightness, that the Hall is as light in
the darkest Night, as if it had many Torches lighted therein: This fourth is
called the Hall of the Kings Treasure, which is there also kept. In these four
Halls ^he King gives Audience to the Ambassadors of foreign Princes, and
measures the Honor, he will do them, by their Reception in these Halls. For
those of the lesser Princes, his Tributaries, are received but in the first
Hall: the more eminent in the second: those of great Kings, who acknowledge him
not, in the third and fourth. He keeps also his Court in these Halls, and gives
Audience therein to the Principal Officers of his Crown.

The Queen Mother Maria de M^dicis, a Princ^ss, who was the Honor and
Admiration of her Age, the Luster of whose rare and incomparable Virtues spread
the Glory of her Name in the most remote Regions of the Earth, sent him in the
year 1616. a stately Present of rich Tapestry, and her excellent Piety had for
her Aim in this Present the Glory and Honor of him, who had caused her to be
born the greatest Princess in the World: for she did it, to the end this Prince
might give fre^er Access to those, who wen^ into his Kingdom, to withdraw by
the light of the Gospel deceived Souls from the false worship of Idols, and put
them in the way of their Salvation. He, that had the charge to present it,
which was the Fl^ming, of whom we have spoken, assured me, that the King of
China would cause a rich Hall to be built expressly according to the
dimensions of the Tapestry, where he would cause it to be extended, and would
esteem it the richest Moveable of his Palace: for China, which has found before
us the fairest Inventions of Arts, has not yet that of rich Tapestry. But this
superb Palace affords the King the Delights of walking. There are therein very
curious Gardens, enamelled with all sorts of Flowers, watered with Fountains of
clear water, where the sweet Murmurings of their little Bubbles allure an
assembly of pretty Birds, who by a natural Concert of agreeable Music in the
fair Allies thereof charm the Troubles and Cares, that ^ollow Royalty, and
spring ^p under Crowns. The number of Women, which he entertains, make his most
ordinary Company; He pleases himself by beholding in their beautiful Faces more
Roses and Flowers, than the Parterres of his Gardens do produce. On the sides
of his Gardens are many goodly Orchards, which bring forth all sorts of
delicious Fruits, and farther on are extended great Woods, some trimmed, and
others growing up to a great height, where he sometimes takes the pleasure of
hunti^g. They are in several places compassed with many large Ponds, covered
all over with River-Fowl, amongst which the Swans, who under their white
F^athers have a Skin hideously black, appearing fairest in the Eyes of the
Prince, taci^ly teach him this wise Lesson, that the fair Appearances of the
World and of the Court cover many Deformities, and conceal many Per^idies. The
Kings of China have often experienced this: The Divisions of their State, and
the Troubles thereof, which lasted one and forty years, the Treasons and
Massacres, which were committed even upon the Persons of the Kings under the
unfortunate Reigns of Yanthei, Laupi, G^itgey, Quiontey, and Sontey, are
veritable Proofs thereof in their Histories.

This is the cause that at this day they live very retiredly in their great
Palaces, and instead of Pages and Gentlemen Attendants are served only by
Women, with whom they ordinarily converse, giving them the Care of their
Nourishment, and trusting them with the Conservation of their Health: not but
that their persons are guarded by Men. There are, as we have elsewhere said, ten
thousand armed men in Guard without the Royal Palace, not counting those who
are at the Gates, and on the Stairs of the same Palace, as also in the Hals.
For the Chinese Princes have not been exempted from the malice of Women. King
Tronson, taken with the singular Beauty of his Fathers Widow, found by his
pursuits in the vain Enjoyment of his Love the loss of his Life: This fair
Queen, named Caus^, and who was the Cause of Misfortunes to a whole State,
weary of the Inquietudes of the World, and Vanities of the Court, abandoned
them after the Decease of the King her Husband, for to give her self up, being
removed from them, to the Calm and Repose, wherein the Soul, enjoying it self,
finds its Good and Felicity: She shut her self up in a Monastery of Chinese
Nuns, in which the Devil under the worship of Idols makes himself be adored by
the fairest women of the East: there laying at his Feet the Crown, she had upon
her Head, she veiled her self like the rest, and lived in the simplicity of
this Order. Tronson her Son-in-Law, who was a greater Adorer of her
Attractions, than she was of the false Deities, is advertized thereof: He
follows her, giving ^s thereby an Example, that Kings, as well as other men,
live in their Beloveds: He entertains her at the Grate, caresses her, persuades
her to quit her Vail, and put again a second time the Royal Crown upon her
Head. Cause hearkens to him, believes him, and coming sorth from the Monastery,
shows, that the Devotions of women are frequently like to Crystal Glasses,
which are broken with the first knock: She is married to him. But what Good can
proceed from this unconstant Change and Backsliding from the World to the
Cloister, from the Cloister to the World? Certainly a woman, voluntarily
unfrockt, is a dangerous Animal in a State or Family. Cause reassumes the
Ambition, which she had trampled under foot, and that she might reign alone in
the Name and during the Minority of her Son, causes King Tronson her Husband to
be slain. Then being Mistress of her Will, as well as of the Realm, she
abandons her Reason, her Honor, and the glory of her Majesty to her lascivious
Passions: She becomes the Wife of many Husbands or Gallants* There was not any
great man about the Court, to whom her Embraces were not permitted, ^ay even
proffered. This debauched Life of a Princess, who ought to be an Example of
Virtue in a State, gives offense to every one, as being a public Scandal. To
cover it in some measure, she marries again; but that she may continue her
Enormities, she takes a man of no Quality, who permits her every thing. Vices
follow one another: From Lubricity she proceeds to Cruelty: Her Children, more
careful of her Honor, than her self, testify only by their Regrets the
Displeasure, they conceive at her ill Conduct: She causes their Throats to be
cut, to make way for a Nephew of hers to the Crown of China, who serves her for
a Support, and Upholder in her Lubricities, in which she reigns forty years, a
Reign too long for so wicked a woman. In fine the Chinese grow weary of those
Disorders: they send to search out a N^tural Son of her Husbands, Crown him,
an^ acknowledg^ him for their King. He, named Tantzon, seized this impudent
Woman, brought her to Trial, and put an end to her detestable Lif^ by the hand
of the Executioner. This was the end of the Princess Cause, who had caused so
many Disorders in the State, and was in fine the Cause of her own shameful
Destruction.

But the Kings of China have for some Ages past lived extremely retired in
their stately Palaces. There has been such an one, as never came forth in
public, but on the Day, that he was Crowned King, and took the accustomed
Oath. If the People at any time see them, '^is through an interposed Glass.
They say, they do thus to conserve the Royal Dignity, and the Respect due
th^reunto, and moreover to prevent such Treasons, as might be contrived against
them. This manner of living thus sequestered diminishes not the Love and
Reverence, which the people owe to their persons: for the Governors and
Magistrates well know how to keep it up, and make them observe it: and moreover
in the principal Provinces of the Realm, where the Vice-royes make their
Residence, they are accustomed to hang up in a public place a rich Tablet of
pure Gold, w^erein the Ef^^^ies of their King is represented to the life,
veiled with a Curtain embroidered with Gold.

The Loytias, who are the Knights, and the Officers of Justice go every day
before it to pay their Respects in a solemn and submiss manner, giving the
Public this Example of an exterior Reverenc^ toward their Sovereign, which
oftentimes excites an interior Love. On their solemn Festival Days, which
they celebrate every new Moon, this Tablet is unvailed, the people see it
discovered, and every one runs thereunto, to o^fer up their Submissions.

In the perpetual recess therefore of these delectable Palaces, the Monarchs of
China have ordinarily scar^e any other Conversation or Company, but Women* For
besides those, that serve them, which are in very great number, they have
thirty Concub^^es, the fairest, that can be found in their Re^lm, and on^ only
Queen, whom they espouse, and make Companion of their Scepter. They were
heretofore accustom^d, who^ they had an intent to marry, to invite to a Royal
and solemn Feast all the Knights and great^^^ Lords of ^he Court, and command^^
them to br^ng with them their Sons and Daugh^ers. They were very diligent in
obeying this Command, hoping, they might place in the Throne of China some one
of their Daughters, and therefore advantaged their Beauties by all the
Ornaments of Arti^ice. The Feast being ended, these Virgins were placed in a
great Hall according to the Order of their Birth, and not to the Degree of
their Quality. Then the King, if he were not married, or, if he were, the
Princes his Sons came into this Hall to entertain the Ladies, and to choose
from amongst them those, the Graces and Perfections of whose Beauties were most
capable to captivate their Affections by the sweetness of their Charms. The
Inf^n^aes, Daughters of the King, did the same amongst the young Knights, that
w^r^ at the Fea^t: They had the Liberty to choose ^ut of their Number him, whom
they judged most deserving, to be their Husband. But* all mundane things
passing away, and more espcially those of the Court, this Custom is extinct.
The Kings of China do now all marry with their Kindred, observing only the
first Degree of Proximity, and sometimes the second. After that the King has
th^^ taken his Wife, he chooses thirty Misses, which the Law of his ^eligion
permits him to keep. These a^^ ordinarily the fairest in his State, who not
being capable to arrive at the Honor of being his Wives (he marrying but one)
glory nevertheless in the Enjoyment of his Embraces. They know, that the
Children, which they shall have by him, will be legitimate, and tha^ after his
Death they shall be honorably provided for, and married to the Greatest of the
Court. For he makes his Will in his life time, before ever he falls sick, in
which he assigns them Legacies, and names for their Husbands thirty of the
Principal Knights of the Court, that are unmarried. After he is dead. and his
Funeral Solemnized, his Successor in the Crown causes these thirty wo^en, who
have served his Predecessor, to be magnificently apparelled, and adorned with
all sorts of precious Jewels, and to be placed in rich Chairs in the middle of
this fourth Hall, whereof we have spoken before, their Faces being veiled, so
as they cannot be known. Then he calls into the Hall the thirty Knights, whom
the deceased King has named by his Will, who, according to the order of their
Age, or of their Nomination in the Will, come one after another, and ^ake by
the hand one of these Women, thus veiled, and conduct her without discovering
her Face to their Houses, where they see, what Fortune has given them, and soon
prove, whether the Legacy, left unto them by their dec^^sed Prince, be
agreeable or disagre^able: for from that time ^hey take them for their wives.

The other Ladies of the Court are married, not according to their Desires, or
the blind Passions of Love; but according to the Will of their Parents, who
know how to choose for them Men, whose Age and Merit is not unsui^able to their
Youth and Quality. It is the Custom of China, that the Husbands endow their
Wives at their taking them: for the Women bring them nothing, but their Beauty
and Virtues. They pay down the promised Money, before they espouse them, who
give it to their Parents, as a small Acknowledgment of the Care, they have had
in their educating them. Thus it seems, that the Injustice of this Law forces
men many times to purchase bad Merchandise, when in their Marriages they meet
with indiscreet Dispositions, and unequal and perverse Humors. But another Law
sweetens this Displeasure, if they conceive any thereat: for having bought
them, they are p^rmitted to sell them again. Which nevertheless happ^ns but
very seldom: for the Women of China are so virtuously educated, that they give
their Husbands more cause to cherish them, than to put them out of their
Families. The Merit of their Virtue has brought unto our Country the Glory of
the Reputation of those Women, who are separated so many thousand Leag^es from
us, and inhabit the Extremi^y of the World: for an Example unto virtuous
Ladie^, that the Renown of their Perf^ctions shall never be extinct. The Virtue
of these Chinese Ladies, growing up with them, is rendered perfect by Time: for
from their tender Age they are bred up to the Love of Virtue and hate of Vice.
They are perpetually kept in, and incessantly employed, to the end that
Idleness, the Nurse of Vices, may not soften their Minds, and precipitate them
into some Disorder. This Care to ^ducate them thus is expressly enjoined to
their Parents by a Law, inviolably observed for many Ages in the Kingdom of
Chin^, established by the first King, who swayed the Scepter thereof, named
Vi^ey. This Prince, knowing, that the Idleness of women had caused many
Debauches to spring up in the World, which had ruined Commonwealths,
overthrown whole States, and did in his time a^flict many Kingdoms, ordained
under great Penalties, that the Wives of Artificers should work at their
Husbands Trades, and those of other men should be employed in the works of the
Needle, and spinning of Flax. This Law was so strictly observed, that he would
have even his own Wise obey it. Thus the women of China continually work, and
the Queen her self, who at this day wears the Crown of that Kingdom, is
perpetually employed in spin^ing of Gold or Silk, or making some ^ich
Ne^dlework, which serves for an Ornament to the Altar of their vain Idols. This
is the Reason, that there are s^arce ever seen any women in their Streets, they
are all employed within doors. If any of the Court-Ladies go abroad (which
happens very seldom) it is to visit their near Relations, when they are
dangerously sick. They go in covered Chairs, carried upon Arms, where through
little Grates, delicately made of Gold or Silver, they see without being seen.
Another Invention of the Kings of China, who loved the Chastity of their women;
serves not a little to retrench their Ramblings and vain Gaddings. They
enacted, that the Mothers should endeavor to streight^n the Feet of there
Daughters in the Cradle, to the end they might not grow, persuading their
credulous Sex, that the Beauty of a woman consists in having little Feet, and
in effect they so firmly believe it, and so violently squeeze them in their
t^nder Age, that they are thereby incommodated, and in a sort ^amed, which is
yet another Reason, why they so willingly keep their Houses. It would be very
difficult to persuade them the contrary to this Opinion, and to withdraw their
Minds from this foolish Cruelty of thus racking their Feet in their tender Age:
for if any one of them should have the Face of an Angel, and the Foot
indiff^rently great, she would think her self the most deformed Creature in the
World. It is true, that this vain Belief of esteeming those women fair, who
have very little Feet, is not a thing only of this Day in Asia: some Oriental
Regions have hereto^ore followed it with as much Passion.

Aelian in his various Histories ( l. 13. c. 33.) relates, that the fair
Rhodope of the Town of Naucratium, bathing her self one day in the liquid
Crystal of an agr^^able Fountain, had left h^^ Cloths on the Banks upon an heap
of Roses, which her Woman had gathered, when an Eagle, who was searching after
his Prey, took up one of her Shoes, and carri^d it away. This Bird, who has
been believed to be the Messenger of War, and to carry the Thunders of Heaven,
was then an Envoy of Peace and Love. For mounting up into the Clouds, he flew
on very far even unto the City of Memphis, which is now called the grand Caire,
where he let fall the Shoe at the Feet of the King, who at that time reigned
in Egypt. This Prince, judging the form of the Foot by the Shoe, which was
extremely little, and by the Foot the Perfection of the Lady, believed her fair
enough to merit the being crowned Queen of his Stat^, and Companion of his
Scepter: He sent men on every side to inform themselves, who the Lady was, from
whom an Eagle had carried away a Shoe. They found her (this Fortune was too
great to be avoided by concealing her self) and brought her to their Prince,
who took her for his Wif^.

Thus the Oriental Beauties are smallfooted* and from this follish Opinion the
wi^^ Politicia^^ ^f China have dr^wn this Be^^ht, to kee^ thereby their Wives
within their Houses, They are neatly clothed in Silk, and Cloth of ^old;
Pearls, Diamonds, and whatsoever the Avarice of man has ^ished out of the
Waters, or dug out of the Mines, is in as much use there, as in Europe.
Their Habits do in some measure resemble those of the Spanish Ladies, and their
rich Head-attires are not borrowed, they are made of their own Hair delicately
braided, and interwoven with little Tresses of Gold, and elevated on the Top of
their Head in the fashion of a Crown, closed or girt about with a Fillet
covered with Jewels. All this Pomp, although it depends on the Vanity of the
World, agrees nevertheless with their Chastity: for they have always had, as
we have elsewhere said, the Glory of being very chaste.

The Kings of China scarce ever^dy without Issue Male: the number of Wives,
whereof we have heretofore spoken, sufficiently furnishes them with Heirs to
their Crown. The first, that is born of any one of them, is the lawful
Successor of the State: the others are educated, as are all the Princes of the
Royal Blood, in Towns remote from the Court, which the King assigns them for
their Appennage, where in superb Palaces they live with all ^orts of Pleasure
and Delight. But they are forbidden upon pain of Death to go forth of these
Palaces, or ever to come unto the Court, except the King summons them thither:
The most remote cannot come forth of their Palaces without incurring the same
Penalty. These Prohibitions nevertheless diminish not the Respect, which is due
to their Persons. The Governors of the Province and of the Towns are obliged to
go and visit them every Festival day, which is the first Day of every new Moon.
The ^ame, as also the Magistrates, passing on horseback before their Gate, are
obliged in reverence to dismount, and if they are in Chairs, to come forth, and
go on foot, without Train and Pomp, till such time as they are past the House,
the Gates whereof, to the end no one may be ignorant of it, are painted with
the Princes Livery. Thus the State of China, without the least trouble of Civil
Wars, enjoys the sweetness of Repose: and the Princes of the Royal Blood live
far from the Inquietudes of the Court with the security of their persons in the
midst of all sorts of Pleasures and Recreations, respected and honored like
Demigods, the Care of the affairs of the Province, where they live, never
troubling in any sort the Calm and Tranquillity, which they enjoy.

The Courtiers of the King of China are all Loy^^as, that is to say, Knights:
They are of two sorts: some advanced by the Merit of Learning; others by the
Valor of Arms: and there is not seen amongst them any man, whom the blind
Temerity of Fortune, or the Wind of Court-favor has elevated to this Dignity.
They asc^nd only by the Steps of Virtue, which conducts ^ome in this manner.
The Visitors General, whom the King, by the advice of his Council, ^ends from
three ye^rs to three y^ers through the Provinces of his Realm, have nothing so
much recommended to them, as to look after the young men, that are educ^ted in
the Colleges, for to render them capable to serve the Public: They examine
them, choose the best Wits, and having found them sit to be employed therein,
on the behalf of the King make them Loy^ias, that is to ^ay, Knights, give them
both the Privileges, and Marks thereof. These are a Girdle of Gold and Silver,
and an ^at adorned with ^wo Brooches of Gold in the fashion of ^alm, having two
Labels hanging down ^ehind, like unto those, which are at ^he Miters of our
Bishops. They make them take the solemn Oath, which is, ^aithfully and
carefully to serve the King and the Public in the Charges, wherewith ^hey
shall be honored; that they shall not in ^he exercise thereof take any present
from any person whatsover, but shall content themselves with the Pension, which
the King shall give them, sufficient to serve their N^cessities, and the
Splendour of their Dignities. The Pomp and Magnificences, which are had on the
Day, that ^hese new Knights are made, testify a public Joy, that Virtue is
elevated to ^he Charges of Honor, and that the Em^ire is served and governed by
well-qua^i^ied Personages. Then these Loytri^s depart with the new Marks of
their new^y-received Dignity, and go to Court, where they visit the President
of the Kings Council, and the other Ministers of S^ate, by whom they are
received and caressed. Their Names are immediate^y registered in a Book, which
serves for ^his purpose: They are commanded to ^eside at Court, expecting till
some Employes fall void, wh^reof they may be provided. During this time they
complete themselves, and add to their Acquisition of Learning the Practice of
conversing with men, r^ndring themselves capable to do well. When then
Occasions are offered to provide for them some are sent Governors into one
Province, others Lieutenants into another and some are made Sovereign Judges*
The other sort of Loytias or Knights ar^ made of Grace (say the Chinese) and
b^ the Will of the King, who are the Treasurers of the Realm, and old Captains
that have done worthy S^rvice. But see not any extraordinary Favor in thi^
second Creation of Knights: For al^ though these are not made by Examen as are
the others, who are learned what Grace is done to them, to giv^ them, what
their Valor has well merited in the midst of the ordinary Peri^ and Hazards of
War? The Law also o^ the Court of China ref^ses none ^he Recompense of his
Valor: the lea^t privat^ Soldier may pretend unto it, and obtain it. Should
they ^ee in China a Soldier, lamed in the Trenches, reduced t^ beg Alms
through the Streets of the Towns, they would impute it as Crime to him, that
should suffer it, an^ ^he Realm would be esteemed unwor^hy to have men, which
might serve it at ^ts Necessity. These last Knights are never advanced to the
Governments of Provinces or Towns, the Law of the State gives them to those,
that are learned, who in their Realm are esteemed above all things in the
World. These Loytias or Courtiers are ordinarily clad ^n Silks of diverse
Colors, covered with Robes and Cassocks: The Governors, and those, that have
the principal Em^loys of State, have their Cassocks from ^he Girdle downwards
embroidered with Gold and Silver: They all wear ^ong Bonnets, and have on the
top of their Head a Tuft of long Hair, curi^usly plaited and interwoven with
Gold. Superstition, the Mistress of their Minds, ^as advised them to make use
of this sort of Perruke: They believe, that at their Death they shall be taken
up to Heaven by this handful of Hair. Their Priests, prouder than the rest,
wear none of ^his Lock, but have their Heads quite ^haven: For they preach,
that they have ^ower enough by the Merit of their Condition to ascend of
themselves unto Heaven without being forcibly and violent^y drawn up by the
Hair. But they labor in vain both the one and the other: Heaven receives no
Idolat^rs, whether they wear long Hair, or have their Heads shaven. These
Courtiers* wear also the Nails of their Left hand extremely long for the same
Reason, as they do their Hair, as if it were only Scrambling-work to get up to
Heaven. Surely the Court has been the Abode of many Fools, and the Spirits of
Courtiers forge there strange and ridiculuous Fancies. This difference have I
observed in their Histories, that these men with long Nails and sharp Talons do
not rake and scrape so much, as those of other Countries, that have them
shorter. Their Language is extremely polite, and wholly different from that of
the other people of China. Their ordinary Discourse, when they are together, is
not, ^s elsewhere, of frivolous and foolish Matters, nor of the shameful
Ra^counters and filthy Practices of a Bawdy House; but of Politic and Civil
Affairs: They propose Questions of State, discourse of the Means of preserving
a Realm, relate such, as have served for the Augmentation of it, and confirm
their Discourses by some Example, drawn from their History. Their Deportment is
grave, and their Countenance ^erious. When they go forth in public, they are
carried in Ivory Chairs: They keep their Eye always fixed upon one and the
same Object with the Severity, taught them from their Infancy: Their Guards and
Servants are round about them, and their Friends follow them: There are led
after them many Horses of State, and many Parafols are carried to defend them
from the Heat and Inconvenience of the Weather. If they are already provided of
any Charge or Government in the State, many Officers of Justice go before to
make them way: Some carry great Reeds, hardened in the Fire, to punish those,
whom in their way they shall find convinced of any light Insolence. One of the
Company carries before his Breast a Tabl^t, fringed round about with Gold,
wherein is written in great Letters the Power of him, that goes in this Pomp.
When these Courtiers meet, they salute one another in this manner: They stretch
forth their Arms, bending them in the manner of a Bow, then interlace the
Fingers of their two Hands one within the other, and make a profound Reverence,
accompanied with some honest Complement, as this: Could I as easily m^et ^ith
Occasions of serving you, as I do with your Person, I should sincerely ^estify,
how much I am yours, and should live the most contended man in the Court. They
say also very often: I ^ish you all sorts of F^licities, not so much, as your
Virtues merit (for that would be impossible, the World ^ot having enough) but
as much, as man can enjoy. This Complement finished, they are long in a
courteous Contest, who shall part first, to continue his way. Persons of meaner
Condition, as are simple Citizens, use to salute one another in this manner:
They close their left hand, cover it with their Right, and then laying them
both upon their Breast, bow very low, in sign of Respect, and by some honest
Complement desire him, whom they salute, to believe, that their Amity consists
not only in the exterior Ceremony; but also that it has its principal Seat in
the H^^rt, where they swear inviolably to preserve it: This said, ^hey pass on,
and continue their way. Certainly there is no Nation, how rude and barbarous
soever it be, which has not received and cherished the Laws of Courtesy. And
those, who at this Day rudely reject them, are brutish Spirits, who have
nothing of man, but the Exterior. When the Distance of the places, where they
are, hinders their Complements or Discourse by mouth, they do it by Letters
missive with the Politeness of the Chinese Court: They gild all the Margin of
their Paper, which is v^ry ^ine, and made of the Rind of Reeds: they limn it,
and write in the middle, what their Affection or Courtesy dictates unto them:
They put the Letter, without closing it, into a Purse, made of the same Paper,
curiously gilded and Painted, close it, and seal it. These Missives, thus gilt,
are sold by the Booksellers of the Court, even ready writ, so that there is
nothing to do, but to sign them, and the use thereof is so frequent among the
Courtiers, that at their visits they give them to one another for a greater
Assurance of Friendship. For the Complements, which are made by Words, have no
other Support but the Wind, and those, which are made by Writing, remain for a
Pledge, of what is promised. Thus by the Rules of Courtesy, and a strict
observance of the Laws of the Realm, th^s^ Chinese Courtiers live in Calm and
Repose, and their Discretion has ba^ished from the Court the Temerity of
ill-grounded Quarrels, and the Fury of Duels. Not but that the Insolence, which
has brought other Vices to the Court, has conserved its place there by inducing
thos^, who are most susceptible of its Counsels, to injure others by word:
Which happens sometimes amongst them, when they cast forth Reproaches, which
seem as ridiculous to us, as they are sensible to them, their Offensiveness
being grounded upon the Oracles of their Religion: for one of their Prophets
threatens the Disturbance of their Tranquillity in words of this import, That a
Day will come, that they shall be subject to men, having long Beards, Aquiline
Noses, and great and Cat-like Eyes. Thus these men, described in this manner,
being in their Opinion odious unto them, when they will reproach any one, they
call him, Cats-Ey^s, which is amongst them the greatest Injury, wherewith they
can attack the Honor of an honest man.

When in the Commerce of the Court their Ambition pursues any affair, they will
know the Event thereof, before it happens, and to this end they cast t^eir
ordinary Lot, which they use in this manner. They have two little pieces of
Wood, like unto two Nut-shels, tied together by a Thread, and after they have
invoked the Assistance of their Idol, they ^ast them before it: and if th^se
Pieces of Wood meet both with their hollow part upon the Ground, they hope from
thence in their affairs the Accomplishment of all their Desires: but if on the
contrary they are turned with the hollow side upward, they vomit forth all
sorts of Injuries against their Idol, and begin again to cast their Lot: if it
continues not to fall well, they take their Idol, beat him, souse him in the
Water, and often scorch him at the Fire, and con^inue their Lot till such time,
as it is favorable to them. Then they take again their Idol, embrace him, and
put him with all sort of Honor upon the Altar, sing Hymns to him, and offer him
Wine and the most exquisite Viands, they can find. Certainly in the madness of
these Chinese Courtiers we do in a manner see the Portraiture of the Impiety of
some others, that live in a better Religion, who in the Disorder of their
Affairs accuse the innocent Heaven, as a Party to their Misfortunes. These
Chinese Courtiers have also another manner os Lot: They put in a Vessel many
little Sticks, in every one of which is written a Letter of their Alphabet, and
after they have well shaken the Vessel, they cause one to be drawn out by the
hand of a little Child, they look, with what Letter it is marked, and search
afterward in a Book the Leaf, beginning with that Letter, read it, and
interpret, what they find written therein, to the good or bad Success of their
Designs. Thus every where Men are men, and in all places the Court is a Sea,
where Ambition steers her Course, and plies both Oars and Sails for the
Accomplishment of her Designs, and, for to arrive thereunto, spares no sort of
Invention, how sinister soever.

Their Devotion, which has no Object, but Wood and Stone, carved and fashioned
into Idols, is Court-like, that is, Cold, done in a customary manner, and in
the Languors of a soft Negligence: and their Sacrifices are in some sort the
Image of the Love, proper to Courtiers. They retain the best part, of what they
immolate, and give their Gods, what they would refuse themselves: If they cut
the Throat of an Heifer, or kill a Boar, they give the Altar only the Tips of
the Ears. If they sacrifice Fowls, they offer there the Claws and the Bill, and
eat all the rest: Great Vessels of Wine are there presented, but they drink it
themselves, after they have cons^crated and poured forth only some few Drops
thereof: For at Court all is for themselves, and scarce any thing for Heaven.
History accuses them of Unfaithfulness in their Promises: It says, they
measure the continuance of their Faith only by their proper Interest, and keep
it no longer, than it contributes thereunto: And indeed what Good can be
expected of Men and Courtiers, who are always in Delights. The Fertility of
the Land, the Sweetness and Temperateness of the Air, the Tranquillity of the
State, the Affluence of Riches, and above all the Falsity of their Idolatrous
Religion plunges and bemires them in all sorts of Pleasures, the capital
Enemies of Virtue. The least voluptuous amongst them are these learned Loy^ias,
whom their Condition, and their ordinary Employ in the most important Affairs
of State, keeps always in Business, which, being incompatible with Vices, the
Offspring of Idleness, stifles them in their Birth. When these Courtiers go into
the Country they make use of Coaches, which sail upon the Land as well, and
almost ^s swif^, as Ships upon the S^a: To show, that the Wind guides and
governs all at Court: And if in China the Coaches of the Nobility go with
Sails, the Spirits of Courtiers are elsewhere driven by the Wind: For if the
World be nothing but Vanity, the Court, which is the Quintessence thereof,
sells, gives, follows, and adores the Wind.

The King of China is served and followed by such Courtiers; but his Council
makes the soundest and best part of his Court: For Kings cannot be without it,
which is (when good) the Conservation, yea, the Augmentation of their States,
and without Counsel the most puissant Monarchies are ruined and destroyed by
the weight of their own Grandeur. The King of China chooses his Counselors
from amongst the learned, most experienced, and wisest of his Realm. (...)
the Choice and election of them Favor has no Vote; Merit and Virtue only speak
for them: For this Prince practices as fully, as any other Monarch of the
Earth, the Advice of the wisest of Kings, whose Counsel to his Equals is, Not
to admit into their Councels ill-qualified, ignorant and stubborn Spirits, who
are ^urr^ed, whithersoever their Passions driv^ them. The Counselors of State
in Chin^ ought, besides the Probity of their Life, and the Integrity of their
Manners, to be learned in the Laws of the Kingdom, to have taken the Degree of
Loytias, to be skillful in Moral and Natural Philosophy, and well versed in
Judiciary Astrology. Their Religion expressly requires this last part: because
(says it) those, who are at the Helm of the State, ought by this Science to
have an Eye to the Future, to foresee Tempests and Storms, to avoid Rocks, to
preserve themselves from Shipwreck, and happily to steer the Ship of the
Commonwealth. They are thirteen in number, twelve Counselors, whom they call
Auditors, and a President, who is with them, what the Chancellor is with us.
The Council is held in the Royal Palace; the Hall, where they assemble, is
suitable to the Pomp and Magni^icence of the Chinese Monarch, there are erected
therein for the performance of their Functions twelve stately S^ats, six of
Massy Silver, and six of pure Gold: In the midst of which under a Canopy of
Cloth of Gold, adorned with two wreathen Serpents, woven of Gold, which are the
Royal Arms, shines one of fine and Massy Gold, enriched with Jewels, wherein
sits the President of the Council, or Lord High Chancellor of the Realm.
Certainly this august Furniture of these Counselors of State is worthy the
Matter, wherewith they are concerned: for if Counsel be somewhat divine and
sacred, as inspired by GOD, we must not think it strange, that in China it is
accordingly reverenced. These men, thus magnificently seated, give the best and
soundest Advices for the Glory of their Prince, the Good of hi^ Stato, and the
ease of his People: Their unblameable Life, and the Wisdom of their Minds
furnish them with Lights worthily to serve their King. It is also from such
men, that one learns the wise Maxims of good Government, and not from
Counselors, that are disquieted by Avarice, diverted and corrupted by
Delights, puffed up and swollen with Ambition: For who is he, that would search for
a living Spring in a silthy Bog, or that would draw foul Water to drink, says
a wise Councellor and Chancellor of Antiquity. When any one of these Statesmen
dies, he, that is next in Order of Reception, takes possession of his Place
according to the Law, so strictly observed in China: That the Services of every
one have the Recompense, that their Condition can pretend to. They ascend then
from one Degre^ to another, it not being necessary to demand therefore the
Permission of their Prince. But for to supply the last Place, the Council
chooses the most experienced and wisest man of the Kingdom: If he be absent,
they send for him; being arrived, they present him to the King, who confirms,
or disallows his Election; but the last scarce ever happens. The new chosen
Councellor in this manner takes his Oath between the Kings hands: That he will
render Justice to every one according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and that in
the Administration thereof, as also in the Nomination of Governors, or Judges
of the State, Passion or Affection shall never supplant with him Virtue and
Merit: That he will not receive any Presents: That he will with all diligence
preserve the Peace of the Kingdom, and that he will advertize the King and his
Council, of whatever shall come to his knowledge, prejudicial to his Service.
After this solemn Oath, he is put in possession of his Place in one of the
thirteen Seats in the Councell-Hall. The Royal City celebrates the Solemnity
ther^of, all the Realm keeps Holy Day, and the People rejoice thereat with
Sports and Public Feasts. And surely the Passengers have Reason to rejoice,
when wise Pilots are called to the Government and Steerage of the Vessel: For a
King, who is swayed by Counsel, has need only of wise and well-advised men,
who may counsel him without Passion. The President only of this Council had
the Priviledg^ to speak to the King, when he does, it is always on his Knees
with a singular Respect: When he is sick, then the ancientest Auditor of the
golden Seats performs his Offi^e. Happy indeed are the men of Chin^, who live
in a Kingdom, where Virtue receives its Honors and its Recompense: B^t much
more happy would they be, if the Worship of the tru^ GOD conducted them to
eternal Feli^ity by the means of a better Religion, ^han that, which deturns
them from it. Now although the Kingdom of China be of a very great extent, as
we have already said, nevertheless the Kings Council is advertized ^very
Month of all, that passes in the Provinces thereof, the most remote from the
Court. The Vice-royes or Governors are obliged to give them by the Post
continual Advice thereof. The President of the Council, having r^ceived it,
gives an account thereof to the King, and very exactly informs him of all, that
passes in his Realm: And if the Disorder of any Province obliges the Council
to send thither some one of the Court, it is done with incredible Expedition,
and that Secrecy, which is very often requisite in State Affairs. He, that is
sent, departs without being known, arrives there Incognito, informs himself of
all, that has past, and afterward, if it be necessary, makes himself known,
and shows his Power. Moreover these Counselors of State, not by Dozens as
elsewhere, but twelve in number, keep the first and uppermost Ranks in the
Realm: For there b^ing in China neither Dukes, Marquesse^, Earls, nor other
like Persons of this Illustrious Quality, the Law of the Country removing from
the Court all the Princes of the Blood, they receive in their Places the Honors
and Devoirs, which should be rendered unto them: They are visited with very
great Respects, they are spoken to on the Knee, and every one pays them an
extraordinary Veneration.

By the Advice of these wise Counselors of State, the King commits the Charges
of his Realm to those, whom Virtue and Merit has rendered most worthy thereof.
These Charges or the most eminent of them are six in number. The first is that
of Viceroy of the Province, who in their Language is called Common: He is
Supreme M^gistrate, and represents in his Government the Royal Person of his
Master. The second is the Insuanto: He is after the Common Governor of the whole
Province, as is in our Countries a Lieutenant General for the King. Now in
every Town of the Province reresides a Governor, called Tutan, who besides the
Care, he has to govern the Place, entrusted to him, is obliged also in the
exercise of his Charge to report to the Insu^nto the principal Affairs of the
Place, where he commands; the Insuanto advertizes the Common, and the Common
gives Advice thereof to the King and his Counc^l. The third is the Po^^chasi or
Superintendant of the Treasures, who has under him many smaller Officers, and a
complete Council: He pays with the Money, which is sent him, all the Officers
of the Province, and consigns the Surplusage into the Hands of the Tutan. The
fourth is the Toioc, who is Captain G^neral of the Men of War, that are in the
Province, as well Horse, as Foot. The fifth is the Anchasi, or Lord Chie^
Justice, as well in Causes Civil, ^s Criminal: To him belongs the last Decision
o^ all Differences, brought before him by Appeal from the inferior Judges. The
sixth is the Ay^ao, or President of the Council of War, whose principal Office
consists in levying of Soldiers both by Land and Sea, in furn^shing and
providing with Necessaries the Garrisons, that are upon the Frontiers of the
Realm. Besides this, it belongs to him to take an account of the Strangers,
that arrive in his Province, to question them very exactly, to know, whence
they are, and on what Design they are entered into the Realm, and diligently to
advertize the Viceroy of all. These Charges have in them the bright^st Luster
and Glory of the Realm, and every one of these abovenamed O^ficers has under
him ten Auditors, chosen out of those, who are adjudged to be the most prudent
and most experimented in Affairs, who ^ase them and aid them in the expedition
ther^of. These Auditors are in the Function of their Charges in very great
Consideration through all the Country: They assemble ordinarily in the House
of the Common or Viceroy in a superb Hall, destinated for holding the Council:
Five of them sit on the Right hand of him, that presides, and the five others
on his Left hand: Those, that are on the Right hand, are the ancientest, and
have Place above the others; besides which their Habit also makes their
Difference from the others: for they wear Girdles, garnished with Gold, and
Hats of a pale color; whereas those of the Left hand wear only Silver in the
Garnishment of their Girdles, and have blue Hats. But both the one and the
other, as also the President, wear before their Breast and on their Shoulders
the Arms of the King, which are two Serpents in embroidery of Gold. This Mark
is so necessary to them, that without it they dare not go abroad, nor perform
any Exercise of their Employs. History crowns these Judges and Officers of
China with the Praise, merited by the Virtues, which it recounts of them, and
particularly takes notice of the admirable Patience, wherewith they are endued:
They hear (says it) very patiently the Parties, even in the Heats of their
Passions: and the confused Tumul^ of many, even of those, whom the Vehemence of
Affairs causes to speak with Disorder, troubles no^ in them this fair Virtue of
harkening without Choler to those, that are transported therewith. And their
Speech is accompanied with so incredible a Sweetness, as makes them appear
gracious even to those, whom they condemn. Such are the O^ficers and Judges of
China, whom Virtue and Experience, not Money and Ignorance, advance to the
Dignities of the Realm.

Besides these six principal Officers there are many others, inf^rior and
subordinate to them; as the Cantoc, who is the great Standard-b^arer; the
Pothin, who is the second Tr^asurer; the Pochinsi, or Keeper of the S^als; the
Avizatzi, or great Provost* three Judges of the Court, who are named in their
Employes H^gtag, Tzia, and Tontay, who give Audience in their Houses once a
week, and before the opening of their Gates for that purpose, cause three
pieces of Canon to be discharged, to make known, that they are going to take
their Seats: imitating in the Gravity of their Seats of Justice the Wrath of
the Thunders of Heaven, which serve not only for an Advertisement to the
innocent, but also to strike Terror and Dread into the culpable. They have
under them a great number of Provosts for the Exercise of Justice: but they are
not so absolute in their Judgments, but that they have over them another Judge,
who may reform them. This Judge is called Hondim, which signifies in the
Chinese Language the Repairer of Evil: It is also his Business to repair it by
his Decrees, if the other Judges have done any by their Sentences. There is
also at Court the Tompo, and by the Example thereof his Office is erected in
the remote Towns. His Duty is to make provision for Victuals, and to set the
Price thereof. The Quinchay, which signifies in their Language Golden Seal, is
an Officer that never departs from the Court, unless some important Affair
obliges him thereunto: He makes publication of the Edicts of Peace, and others
of like Nature, established by the King.

This is in general the account of the Chinese Officers: let us now consider
in particular the manner, how they worthily perform their Employs. As soon as
they are invested therein, they depart to go and exercise them: The Charges of
their Journey are at the Kings Expense, so is their House in the place, where
they are to make their abode: Which is so vast, that all the Officers of
Justice dwell therein, for the convenience of the Public, and the ready
Execution of Judgments. The Salary, which they have besides this* is sufficient
for all their Expenses, wherewith they ought to content themselves: For to take
any Present from the Parties, the Law, so rigorously observed in the Realm,
very expressly prohibits them under great Penalties, as also it does the
Parties to give any, who are not p^rmitted to see the Judges in their Houses:
for to have Justice of them, they m^st rend^r themselves at the accustomed
Audi^n^es.

When the Judg^ is in his Sent, the Ushers go to the Door of the Hall, and
there with a loud Voice nam^ him, who comes to have Justice, and also tell,
what he demands: The Party presently enters, kneels down before the Judge,
proposes his Demand: or, if it be by Writing^, gives it to the Clerk, who reads
it: The Judge without delay ordains, what is just, and does himself write his
Judgment with red Ink, to avoid the Faults, committed by the Clerks, the
Inconveniences from which Faults proceeding are in other places sufficiently
proved to the Damage of the Parties. These same Judges are obliged to go
fasting to hold their Audiences, and if their In^irmity demands some Support in
their Weak^esses, they are only permitted to use Conserves in the manner o^ a
M^dicin^: but should they take any Wine b^^^re their Audience, they would be no
(...) punished, than if they had been guil^y of committing some violent
Injus^ice. The Judgments are executed from p^int to point without any fraud: In
all matters the Judg^s proce^d alwai^s by Wri^i^g and if the Affair be
important, ^hey d^ themselves w^ite the A^ts and D^po^^tions of the Witnesses:
W^i^h is (...) caus^, t^^t few men compl^i^ of ^^ei^ Justice, and that there
are v^ry fe^ Appeals to the superior Judges. They number in their Jurisdictions
the Houses of the Places, that resort thi^her, they set them by Tens in a
Tablet, hung up at the Last of the Ten, in which the Names of the Inhabitants
are written, with the Ordinance of the King, which enjoins all persons* of what
Quality and Condition soever they be, to reveal incontinently to the Justice,
what they shall see committed by any of their Neighbors against the public
Good* and even against that of the Delinquents, that the punishment ^hereof may
be speedily inflicted. But if any one of the Ten goes a Jour^ey, quits the
Country, Town, or Stre^t, he must ten days before his Departure ring a Bell,
or a Coppe^ B^son, through all the Quarter, to the end tha^, if he ows any
Money, his Creditors may know of his Departure, o^ if any one has lent him
oug^t, they may come to demand it: but if he will depart unknown, his Neighbors
ought to wa^ch over him: for in his absence ^he Judges constrain them to pay
for him.

But there are very few persons, which become Bank^upts: The Laws, strictly
observed in China, punish them rigorously: They give them Times for payment:
The first Failure is punished by scourging; if they satisfy not at the second
time, their Chastisement is doubled; if they are Affronters to the third, they
are whipped, till they are bloody, and are kept perpetually in Prison. Which
causes, that, when any one is unable to pay his Debts, he implores the Aid of
all people to be quit thereof, and if he cannot bring it about in this manner,
he gives his Liberty, and sells himself to his Creditors, to avoid the smarting
Stripes of the Whip. Now when any Judge appears abroad (which is very seldom,
their Custom being to be very retired, by which means, they say, they are less
diverted, and better preserve their Authority) he goes accompanied with all the
Officers of Justice: whereof the two first, who go in a breast, carry upon
their Shoulders two long Maces of Silver, for a Sign, that they are Officers of
Justice; two others follow them, having each of them in their Hands a long and
strait Reed, which they carry upright, showing thereby, that they ought to do
right Justice, and that such will be done by the Judge, whom they attend; these
are likewise followed by two Officers, who carry also Reeds, which they draw
upon the ground with long red Girdles, these are the Rods, wherewith they
scourge such Criminals, as they meet with; the two following carry two white
Tables, wherein are written the Name of the Judge, his Office, and his Quality:
The rest of the Train are Persons, that follow and accompany the Magistrate, to
do him Honor. This Pomp and Formality of Justice is not a vain Ostentation of
these Officers, they live as they speak, and are such, as they appear, endued
with Virtue, exact and upright in their Employs, and of unblameable Lives. But
Men are Men, and not Gods, who cannot de^lect unto Vices; and the Probity of a
Magistrate, being in an unconstant and mutable Life, may be the same, although
this happens seldomer in China, than elsewhere. The King and his Council have
provided for this Inconvenience necessary Remedies, which punish those, that
offend, and keeping the other in aw, make them con^ain themselves in their
Devoir. The Employs of such* Officers are but of three years duration, which
being expired, they must before certain Judges, named Cha^nes, render an
account of the Administration thereof, Nevertheless the King sends every year
Visitors through the Provinces of his Kingdom, named Lenthis, persons faithful
to his Service, ver^ well experienced in the Af^^irs of the World, and of
signal Honesty. This Delegation is done so secretly, that it is known only to
the King, and the President of his Council, who causes the Secretary of State
to dispatch Letters thereof, leaving a Blank for the Name of the Person, that
is sent, and the Province, to which he goes. There is put in the Letters this
Clause, necessary for the absolute Power of the Visitor, That in what place
soever the Judge or Loytias should come, bringing the present Letters of
Provision, he should be ob^yed, as the King himself. These Letters being
sealed, the President puts in the Name of the Visitor, and of the Province,
whereunto he is sent: He, having received them, departs so secretly from the
Court, and travells so incognito, that no one knows who he is, or whi^her he
goes. He arrives thus unknown in the Province or Isle, which he is to visit,
goes through the Country, travells from one Town to another, and informs
himself with all manner of Care and Diligence of the Deportments of the
Officers from the Viceroy to the meanest Auditor, not letting himself, during
the Labor of ^his exact Information, be known to any one. When he has finished
it, and believ^s, that he has su^^icient Proofs of the Probity of some, and ill
Demeanor of others, he goes to the Capital Town of the Province, and there
expects the Day, that such Officers ass^mble in Council, which is onc^ a
Month at the house of the Viceroy, or, in his absence, at the Tutan's. And
when they are assembled, he comes to the Gate thereof, and commands the Usher
to advertize them, that there is at the Gate a Judge, who will come in, for to
declare unto them a Command of the Kings. The Viceroy, who conceives, what the
Business may be, causes the Gates to be opened, descends from his Seat, and
accompanied with his Offic^^s, goes to receive him, as Superior: Who enters,
carrying in his hands the Letters of Provision. These P^^ents strike Terror
into a part of the Ass^mbly, and the guilty Judges show already upon their pale
Faces the Marks of their Offenses: The Patents are read aloud: Which being
done, the Viceroy rises from his Seat, makes many low Reverences and
Submissions to the Visitor, which is done likewise by all the other. Then he
takes his Seat in the most eminent place, and in a grave and serious Harangue
declares to them the Cause of his Coming, the Care, he has taken, in making his
Visit through the Province, and exactly and truly informing himself of their
Demeanors: He crowns with a thousand praises the Virtue and Probity of those,
that have done well, promises them to make report thereof to the King and his
Council, assuring them of the Recompense, which their good Serv^ces merit, and
in the mean time instals them in the most honorable Places of the Council of
the Province. After that these deserving Persons have thus received from his
mouth and hand this Honorable Testimony of their Virtue, he publicly
r^proaches those, that he has found culpable, with the Filthiness of their
Traffic in the Sale of Justice, shows them the Shamefulness of their
Oppressions, and reckons them up particularly the Number of their Misdeeds. The
Effect follows close this shameful Reproa^h, he fulminates against them the
Sentence of Condemnation, deprives them of their Employs, and despoils them of
the Marks thereof, takes from them in the face of all the Council the Girdle,
and narrow-brim'd Hat. If their Faults merit a greater punishment, he leaves
the Judgment thereof to his Sovereign Prince and his Council: For the Law of
China prohibits all Judges from condemning any one to Death, without the King
be first acquainted therewith, and judge, what is sitting to be done. But '^hus
Justice is exercised in China upon those, that deny it to others. In this
manner Reward being wholly apparent, yea, certain for Virtue and Judgment for
Vice, the greatest part of men ^mbrace that, for ^o enjoy its Crowns, and shun
this, for to avoid the Evils, it brings along with it: and the Re^lm of China
enjoys ^ll sort ofFelici^ie^

This wise ^olicy is practiced in China, for to keep the ^nhabitants within the
Bounds o^ their Duty. But R^alms* lik^ humane Bodies, are not only ass^il^d by
interior E^emies. S^rang^rs and ^^^se without may ruin them: (...) as M^ns
Body is killed by Sword and Spea^, ^s well as by those Diseases, which have
their Source and Cause within the same. This causes the Sovereign Monarch of
China to furnish his Holds with good Garrisons, to cover, when there is need
thereof, the Field with armed men, to keep constant Guards at the Seaports,
and to oppose against forr^ign Violence the best and resolutest Troops of his
State, who know how to defend it against the Designs and Attempts of an
Invader. Let us see first the Vigilance and Greatness of his Forces by Land,
and afterward we shall give you an account of his Strength at Sea. Every
Province has its Council of War, consisting of the valiant^st and most
experi^nced Warriors of the Realm: These dispose of the Soldiers according to
O^casions and Occurrence^, and cause them to be so exactly paid, that they lose
nothing of their Due: for the Treasurers, who keep the Kings C^ff^rs, are
charged to refuse them nothing. Towns are not prese^ved by Bastions, nor
defended by strong Towers. The Monarch of China practices the Advice of that
generous Gre^k, who said, That the best Defenses of a C^^y consisted in the
Valor of the Ci^izens: They have nevertheless very good Walls, encompassed with
deep Ditches, which they fill with Water at their pleasure by the Current of
the Rivers. The best Fortifications, that can well defend them, are the good
Garrisons, that are put therein, which keep a very exact Guard, not permitting
any one to go in or out, without Leave in writing from the Magistrate, or
Governor, that command there. They are careful in shutting their Gates, they
seal up the Locks, and open them not, till the Sun is up* that they may know
their Seals. Their Artillery, which is excellently good (the use whereof was
first known to them, before it ar^ived to us) is usually placed upon the same
Gates. The Captains are Natives of ^he Provinces, which they guard, to the end
that the N^^ural Love of their Country, joined with the Duty of their Charge,
may augment their Cares for the Co^servation of the Places. They lodge upon the
Wal^ of the Towns, where their H^uses are built on purpose, for to be
continually in their Ex^rcises: they do them without any Co^^^adiction, wit^^^^
any ^esistance of the I^habitants of ^he Town^ which they guard: for ^he (...)
of (...) S^ate has taken from them the Means of revol^ing, forbidding them to
bear Arms, or have them in their Houses upon pain of Death, permitting it only
to those, that are in ^he Kings Pay, who succeed in this Quality from Father to
Son. They are distributed into Thousands, whereof every Hundred has its Captain
and An^ient, and all these are commanded by on^ Chief, as is with us the
Colonel of a Regiment. They use often Exercise, to ^eep the Soldier in breath,
and hinder Idleness from rusting his Arms, or abating his Courage. Their Arms
are Harquebusnes, Pikes, Staves headed with iron, and Hatchets. The Horse use
other Arms: the Trouper, when he goes to battle, carries at the Pommel of his
Saddle four Swords, two whereof he takes in his hand, when he sights, and uses
them with admirable dexterity: Arrows and Lances are also in use with them.
They are wont to be environed with a Troop of Servants, that are about them,
when they go to battle, who are nimble, and well armed. Their Valor consists in
Craft, and S^ratagems of War, in which they more employ their Wits, than they
do their Courages in charging the Enemy openly. They are very bad Horsemen, and
manage their Coursers with the Whip and the Voice' having instead of a Bit only
a piece of Iron, which they put cross their mouths. Their Arms are light, and
their Courages heavy.

Their Cavalry also makes not the best part of the Forces of China, which are
so great, that they would suffice for the guard of many Realms. It is true,
that the vast and great Provinces, where they are established, contain, each of
them in its Dimension, the extent of a Kingdom. That of Paguie, where the King
makes his ordinary abode has for its Conservation one and twenty hundred and
fifty thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse. That of Canton has an hundred and
twenthousand Foot, and forty thousand Horse. That of Foquien fifty eight
thousand nine hundred Foot, and two and twenty thousand four hundred Horse.
Olam seventy six thousand Foot, and five and twenty thousand five hundred
Horse. Cinsay, eighty thousand six hundred Foot, and no Horse: because the
Situation of the Country is mountainous and rocky. Oquian has likewise no
Horse: the Guard thereof consisting only in an hundred and twenty thousand six
hu^dr^d Foot. The Province of Susuam I as eighty six thousand Foot, and thirty
four thousand five hundred Horse. That of Tolanchie, neighboring on the
Tartars, with whom the Kings of China have often had great and bloody Wars, is
guarded and strengthened with eigh^ and twenty hundred thousand Foot, assisted
by two hundred and ninety thousand Horse, both the one and the other being the
best and stoutest Soldiers of the whole Kingdom. Cansay has fifty thousand
Foot, and twenty thousand two hundred and fifty Horse. Auchco is guarded by
eighty six thousand Foot, and forty eight thousand Horse. Honan by forty four
thousand Foot, and eighteen thousand nine hundred Horse. Xanton has seventy six
thousand Foot and ten thousand one hundred and fif^y Horse* Quinch^ue forty
eight thousand seven hundred Foot, and fif^een thousand three hundred Horse.
Chequ^an thirty four thousand Foot, and thirtee^ thousand Horse. And Sancii,
the least of all the Provinces, has forty thousand Foot, and six thousand
Horse. All which Forces amount in the whol^ to five Millions eight hundred and
sev^nty thousand eight hundred Foot, and five h^ndred forty eight thousand
Horse. This Multitude of armed men might, if they were valiant, conquer the
rest of the habitable Earth. But History places their Courages much below the
Europae^ns. The most redoubted Commanders of former Ages, who conquered many
Realms in Asia, triumphed over Africa, and struck Terror into Europe, had not
in their Armies any thing near the number of the Chinese Garrisons: And truly I
should suspect the History thereof, and esteem it fabulous, did it not prove
the Verity of its Relation by the great number of the Towns, and the vast
Extent of a Realm, which might contain therein fifteen well-peopled Kingdoms,
every Province of China being equal to a great Monarchy. But these dreadful
Chin^se Forces banish Troubles from their State: For we take Arms, that we may
have Tranquillity, and War is often made for the obtaining of Peace. The
Garrisons of the S^a-ports, and the Guards, which ly in the Chanel for securing
the Merchants, are not in this number. The King maintains many well-armed Ships
of War, which are very vigilant i^ his Harbors, and on his Seas, to preven^ the
^esc^nts or Robberies of Pirates. These Vessels are of diverse sorts: some are
very great, which they call Ioncos* others are less, and like to our Fregates,
and are named by them Bancoens; some are larger than these, and have many
Benches, every Bench has eight Oars, and every Oar ^ight Rowers: These they
call Lanteas.

Now for to d^fray the Expense of so many Soldiers, to pay the Salaries of the
Officers of Justice, and of the Exchequer, and to furnish the Royal Palace
with all, that is necessary, the Sovereign Prince of China needs a great and
puissant Revenue: He levies it upon the Men, the Houses, the Corn, the Mines of
Gold and Silver, the precious Stones, the Pearls, the Porcelane, the Wool, the
Cottons, and the Silks. The Men of the fifteen Provinces are a great part of
them exempt from all Tribute: as the Loytias, Judges, Officers, and Soldiers;
and yet the number of those, that pay, is not small. For the Province of Paguie
contains two. Millions seven hundred and four thousand Tributaries: That of
Canton three Millions and six hundred thousand: Foquien two Millions four
hundred and seven thousand: The Province of Aucheo two Millions ^ight hundred
and forty thousand: That of Olam two Millions two hundred thirty four thousand:
That of Cinsay three Millions three hundred and eighty thousand: Susuam two
Millions and fifty thousand: Tolanchie six Millions and ninety thousand: Cansay
two Millions three hundred and five thousand: Oquian three Millions and eight
hundred thousand: Honan twelve hundred thousand: Xanton nineteen hundred forty
four thousand: Chequean two Millions two hundred forty four thousand: Quincheu
two Millions and three hundred thousand: And Sancij sixteen hundred seventy two
thousand five hundred Tributaries. Each of these Tributaries pays every year
two Mases: the Mase may be in value ten Sols French, so that the annual
Revenue, arising to the King of China, may be fourteen Millions two hundred
fifty three thousand one hundred sixty seven Crowns of France. Besides this,
the other Tributes do much advance his Revenue. The Gold-Mines pay him every
year in Gold, from seventeen to two and twenty Carats fine, four Millions two
hundred fifty six thousand nine hundred Taes, every Tae being of the Value of
an Italian Crown. The Silver-Mines yield him in sine Silver three Millions an
hundred fifty three thousand two hundred and nineteen Taes: Those of Stones
fourteen hundred and seventy thousand Taes. The Fishery of Pearls brings into
his Coffers two Millions six hundred and thirty thousand Taes. The Tax upon
Odors, as Musk and Amber, is worth a Million and ^ive and thirty thousand Taes:
That, which is upon Porcelane, brings ninety thousand Taes: This second Tribute
making in all eleven Millions five hundred eighty four thousand French Crowns:
so that the Revenue, hitherto reckoned, amounts to about six and twenty
Millions of Crowns. But the third Tribute upon Corn, Salt, Wool, Cottons, and
Silks, is yet more worth than all this. This puissant and opulent Monarch gives
to his Subjects a great Quantity of Land, depending upon his D^mean, on
Condition, that they render unto him a part of the Pro^its thereof, which
serves for the necessary Provisions of his Royal Palace, and for those of ^he
Officers of his Realm. Those, who are appointed to collect this Tribute, gather
every year sixty Millions an hundred seventy one thou^and eight hundred and
thirty Measures of White Rice, which is the most ordinary Food of the Men of
China, and their Neighbors: Twenty nine Millions three hundred ninety one
thousand nine hundred eighty two Measures of Barley: Thirty three Millions one
hundred an^ twenty thousand and two hundred Measures of Wheat: Twenty Millions
two hundred and fifty thousand Measures of Rye: Twenty five Millions three
hundred and forty thousand four hundred Measures of Salt: Twenty four Millions
of Measures of Millet: In other Grains and Pulse fifty four Millions of
Measures. Silk, wrought into Cloth, furnishes him with two hundred and six
thousand Pieces of the most curious work, every piece being 14 Else long: That,
which is unwrought, brings him 540 thousand pound weight. He has in Cotton 300
thousand pounds weight the work of Coverings for Beds yields him 8 hundred
thousand and 4 hundred Pieces of the most exquisite: Raw Silk also gives him
the weight of four thousand pounds: the Manufacture of Cotton brings him six
hundred seventy eight thousand Pieces of this Stuff, each fourteen Else long:
Raw Cotton yields him three hundred and four thousand six hundred forty eight
pounds weight: The Value of which Incomes, augmenting the Sum of the Tribute in
Money, causes the annual Revenue of this great Empire to amount to an hundred
and twenty Millions of Crowns.

This great and superb Treasure of the King of China, collected from his
Subjects, and the excellent Prudence, wherewith he governs his State, and
manages so rich a Revenu^, have made him take for his Arms two golden Serpents,
entwined one within the other: and the immense Extent of so vast and fertile a
Kingdom, abounding with all sorts of Felicities, has caused him to put among
his Titles the Style of Lord of the World and Son of Heaven: And truly since
the Country is a World in Greatn^ss and Goodness, he has Reason to call
himself the Lord thereof. Kings are in effect doubly the Sons of Heaven, not
only by the benefit of their Creation, as are other men, but also by the
excellent Privilege of their Sovereignty, which is the living Image of the
celestial Power. But the Monarch of China in the Vanity of his deceitful
Religion, and the false Worship of his Idols lives as a Son of the Earth.
Nevertheless the Greatness of his Treasures, the Puissance of his Forces, the
Fertility of his Country, and the Extent of his State, have carried the Pride
of his Spirit to that degree of Insolence, as to contemn all the rest of Men,
and to esteem only those of China, He says often, and the same Vaunting is in
the mouth of his Sujbects, That the Chinese have two Eyes, the Europaeans one,
and that all the other men of the Earth are blind.

Notwithstanding this Fault, which is common to many Princes, the Amity and
Alliance of so opulent and puissant a Monarch merits well to be sought for by
other Sovereigns. His Neighbors esteem and desire it: The Tartar, his capital
Enemy, requests it, and the King of Spain has judged it profitable for the Good
of his States, and the Glory of his Majesty. So when these Princes send
Ambassadors to him for this purpose, or for to treat of some important Affair,
he r^c^ives them, honors them, and causes all sort of good Reception to be
shown them. When they enter into the Realm, the Governor of the ^lace, through
which they pass, assi^ted by all the Loytias and Captains of ^he Country, goes
to meet them, for to testify unto them by ^loquent Harangue the welcomness of
their Arrival. I^ they come by Sea, although there (...) but a very little
Distanc^ from the Harbor, where they land, to the Town, ye^ are they not at
their Landing permitte^ to set foot to ground: They are receive^ in Chairs,
very richly embroidered wit^ Pearls, covered with Curtains of Clot^ of Gold,
which eight men carry on their Arms, whereof there are some kept i^ the
principal Towns, set apart for the only use: For the Law of China say^s Let a
foreign Ambassador be rec^ived an^ honor^d in the same manner, as the Prin^^
should, by whom he is sent, if he came in^^ the Realm. When they are a^rived,
the^ are lodged in an House, m^de for the^ built like a Palace, royally
furnished and provided with all things necessary where they are served and
treated at (...) Expenses of the King, as likewise all ^long their Journey,
where they are also at the Kings Expenses guarded (...) attended by a thousand
Soldiers. T^morrow after their Arrival, the Gove^nor, who was to receive them,
goes vi^it them, and after many suitable Co^plements, asks them the Subject of
the Ambassy, and having learnt it, d^^patches a Curier to the principal Town of
the Province, to advertize the Viceroy thereof. The Viceroy dispatches the
same Currier to the Court, and writes thereof to the King and his Council, who
send the Ambassadors a Safeconduct for their Journey. Having received it, they
set forwards toward the Court, attended by the number of Soldiers, wh^reof we
have lately spoken: they are maintained, and have their Expenses defrayed by
the Kings Treasurers, and wherever they pass, all sort of Honor is rendered
them. When they arrive at the Royal City of Taybin, the ordinary Re^idence of
the Court, the Kings Co^^c^ll* attended by the principal Knight^, go to meet
them: The Presid^nt of this Royal Council makes a Ba^d apar^ with the Train
and Pomp of a King. If the Am^assadors come from great Monarchs, this great
President go^s on their Left hand: if they come from lesser Princes, h^ takes
the Rig^t, and in this ra^k accompanies them ^o the House, prepared for them,
the Fur^iture wher^of, and the Prepara^ion for the Ent^^tai^ment of the
A^bassadors, are truly b^s^eming the Grandeur and Magnificie^ce of the King of
China. By the way he discourses them of the Rancounters of their Journey, and
the State of their Health, an Interpreter, who is with them, assisting him,
that understands not the Language. When they are arrived before the Palace,
where they are to lodge, the President takes his leave of them, and at his
Departure gives them Power from the King, to create a number of Loytias or
Knights, and to deliver many Prisoners, condemned unto Death, for an assurance
of their Welcome unto that Court. The Law of China exempts them from all sorts
of Inconveniences, that is to say, that whatsoever Crime the Ambassador commits
in the State* his Person cannot be any way therefore punished. He passes some
days in his Palace, before he has Audience, to the end that the Repose, he
^inds there, may free him from the Wearisomness, contracted by his Journey.
During this time he is treated by the great^st of the Court, who let him see
the best Companies thereof, and the Magni^icence of their Feasts: After this a
day is a^pointed for him to come to Audience^ The King, assisted by his
Council, an^ by the Principal of his Courtiers, gives it him in one of those
superb Hals, whereof we have spoken before: There he treats of the Subject of
his Ambassy, and after he has received an Answer thereunto, returns laden with
Presents toward the Prince, who sent him. His Return is as pleasant, as his
Arrival* he is attended by the same Troops of Soldiers, maintained in the
same manner at the Kings Expenses, and wherever he passes, he receives the
sam^ Courtesies and the same Honors.

But all the Ambassadors, that arrive in Chin^, are not received in the same
manner: for those, that ^ome from Princes, or Republics, their Tributari^s,
are rec^ived according to their ^o^di^ion, and as Dependents of the Re^^m. When
they arrive, one only Ju^ge receiv^s them, lodges them, and main^ai^s them at
the King's Charge. At the Court their R^ception is suitable th^^eunto: The
Judge, who receives them, a^ks them the Subject of their Journ^y, they t^ll it
him, he advertizes the P^^sident of the Council thereof* and the President
acquaints the King, who appoints them a Day of Audience: But when they go
thereunto, it is on ^oot, or if their Indisposition permits not that, they ride
on an Horse without a Bridle, having only an Halter for a Mark of Humility and
Vassallage: They have no other Company, but the Judge, that received them, with
whom they take their way to the Royal Palace: When they come before it, they
attend in a great Place a certain Officer of the Kings, that is a Master of
Ceremonies, who from a sufficient Distance makes them a Sign to come on, and
^hews them the Place, where they must begin to put themselves on their Knees,
to join their Hands, and lift them up on high in sign of Adoration, and to
direct their Eyes toward the place, where they are told that the King ^s: Thus
they approach to the Palace, and enter thereinto, after they have made five
other Reverences, or rather ^ive Adorations: They arrive at the first Hall,
being the least of the Palace, where the President of the Council,
Majestically seated, and not the King, whom they see not, gives them Audience,
after which he s^nds them back without making them a^y ^nswer, till such time,
as he has spok^n thereof unto the King: Then his Majesti^s Will is sent unto
them by the Judge, that had the care to conduct them. Thus they return, as they
came, without any kind of Honor, as being in some sort Subjects to the Stat^ of
China. For such Principalities or Republics, as send them, were heretofore
Provinces of the Realm, but being too remote at such time, as the Chinese
withdrew themselves within the Enclosure of the Mountains, which with that
great Wall of ^^ve hundred Leagues long lock them up, they gave these Provinces
to those, who do at this day possess them, upon condition of Tribute and Homage.

But if any Ambassador of a Sovereign Prince brings Presents to the King of
China, and that the Law and Custom of the Country obliges him to expect the
Safe Conduct from the Court in some Port, or some Town of the Realm, the
Governor of the Place, where they stay, receives in the mea^ time the Present.
But he looks upon it in the presence of a Notary, and some Witnesses, seals ^t,
and sends it ^ealed to the Court with that, which is given to himself: As it
happened some years since to the Ambassadors, sent by Philip the second, King of
Spain, into China. For it is expressly forbidden under great Penalties to all
persons, who have Employ in the State, to receive any Presents from any persons
whatever, though they be even their nearest Relations. But thus are received in
China the Ambassadors, who go to treat with the Prince of that Country. Which
shows, that the Chin^ses are polit^, and have as good Qualities, as any other
people of the Earth.

They have also amongst them Lear^ing, and good L^tters, which are the true
Ornaments of the Mind, and the Light, which enlightens men in the obscure
Intricacies of the greatest Affairs. They cause their Children to be instructed
therein from their Youth in the Colleges, ordained ^or this purpose. The
Characters, which they use, have somewhat of the Hieroglyphics of the ancient
E^yp^ians: for each of them signi^ies an en^ire word, and sometimes a Period:
As for example, they call the Heaven Guan^, which is a Word of five Letters,
and nevertheless they write it wit^ o^e only Character, thus delineated. They
call a Town Leombi, and ^his Word is expressed also by one only Letter, or
rather Figure, which is as follows, For which Cause they have a great number
of Letters or Characters, wholly diff^rent, amounting ^o about ^ix thousand.
Their Kingdom contains diverse Idioms and differen^ Lang^ages, nevertheless
they all understand one another by Writing: For although one and the same thing
be differen^ly named in several Provinces, it is nevertheless written in one
and the same manner through all the Country: As a Town, which (as we have
said) is called Leombi at the Court, is in other places called Fu, and is every
where written in the manner, described by us. The People speak the common
Language of the Country; but the Scholars, and Courtiers, who are all so, have
one, wholly p^culiar and familiar to themselves: They call it M^ndarin, which
is, as the Latin amongst our learned men. There are found very f^w men in
China* how mean soever their condition be, but can at least read and write: For
in their Country the Adornments of the Mind are in singular esteem, and Virtue
is greatly honored, and diligently rewarded. They have Printing in perfection:
It was found out amongst them, before the industrious German John Gutt^mberg
taught us the use thereof in the year 1458, which was the first b^ginning th^r^
of in Europe. The first Stamps were made at Men^z: and the first Book, that
came under the Press, was the learned Work of the great St. Au^ustin, entitled
Of the City of GOD: Conrad^ the G^rman carried it from thence into Italy and
other places. Before all this then it had been brought from China by Merchants,
that traffiqued in that Country, who, coming into Arabia Felix, passed the Red
Sea: They were afterward in Russia and Muscovia, where they left Books, printed
in China in the Characters of the Country, which were brought into G^rmany,
and coming to the knowledge of Guttemberg, furnished him with a Pattern, by the
imitation whereof he framed his Stamps. For the Chinese maintain, and there is
appearance, that it is so, that all the rest of the World is indebted to them
for the Invention of Printing. It is very true, that there are found Books,
printed among them above five hundred y^ers, before Printing was known to the
Inhabitants of Europe. The Paper, which they use, is very fine: They make it of
^he Rind of Canes or Reeds. Their Pens are the same Reeds, cut, and pointed at
the End after the manner of Painters Pen^ils. The^ writ^ from the Right hand to
the Lef^, and draw lines from the Top to the Bottom. Through all the Cities of
the Kingdom there are Royal Colleges for the edu^ation of Youth, and in the
Boroughs th^re are Schools, wh^re at the Kin^s Expenses is taught to read and
write, so tha^ the meanest persons cause their most tender Youth to learn these
hon^st and useful Ex^rcises. They teach gratis in the great Colleges Natural
and Moral Philosophy, Astrology, the Laws of the Realm, and many other fine and
curious Sciences. The Reg^nts are there very learned, and the Scholars very
studious: They know, that their great Labors shall not be without Crowns: that
the Study of Letters by the good Qualities, wherewith they imbellish their
Minds, are S^eps to mount up to the great Employs of the Court and Kingdom:
For in the Court of China are not s^^n any Ignorants, and to be so in that
place is a very great Infamy. The Visi^ors, appointed by the King, visit often
enough these Colleges, examine the Scholars, and honor with many Recompenses
those, whom they ^ind diligent in their S^udies. This is the Cause, that this
great Realm abounds with men of Me^it, and that their Minds, pusht on by de^^re
of Glory, which they cannot fail of, labor diligently in their Studies, and
give to the Public the Ben^fit of their rare Works. The Libraries of China are
full of such Piec^s: The Curiosity of Christians has brought them even into
Europe, Heaven permitting it, to the end that the Glory of their Authors may
not be con^ined within the Enclosure of the Mountains, and of the Wall, that
shuts in China. The Library of the Vatican at Rome, and that of the Royal
Monastery of St. Laur^nce in Sp^in, have many fair Chinese Volumes, wher^of
some treat of Astrology, of Mo^al Philosophy, of the number of the Heavens, of
the Motion, and Influences of the Planets, of the Properties of Stones and
Metals, of the S^crets of Physic: Others contain the Laws of the Realm, the
Revenue ther^of, the Art Military, the Means of well governing Navies, and many
other Sciences, the Glory and Utilit^ whereof accumulate ^hina with many
^elicities; and has furnished the men thereof with the Precepts and Means of
governing the State, that they possess, free from the S^orms and Tempe^ts of
Civil Wars, wh^reby many others are shipwracked. For we find in their
Histories, that for above two thousand years they have conserved and maintained
their Monarchy against the Troubles, which might be stirred up within and about
the vast Extent thereof.

But the Virtue of the Chinese is not without Divertisement, and the long
Repose, which they enjoy, with the abundance of Riches, brings forth Delights
amongst them, and conducts their Life in the Charms of Pleasures. The most
ordinary, which robs their serious Employs ^f a part of the Time, that ough^ to
be dear to them, are superb and magni^icent Feasts, where they are deliciously
treated: They manage and make them in this mann^r. They give every one of the
invited, how great soever the Number of them be, ^is ^able apart, where he eats
alone: These Tables are of a very rare Arti^ic^, the Wood thereof is exquisite,
and the Work ^^gular: They are inlaid with Fillets of Gold or Silver, so
dextr^usly en^erlaced, that they r^pres^nt the ^igures of Birds, of
Landschapes, of Huntings of div^rs sorts: For the Arti^icers of China in the
excellency of their Art are wonderfully industrious, and bear the Bell from all
other people of the World. They cover not these Tables with any Tabl^-clothes,
the Cleanliness and Neatness of the Chinese in their Eating has no need
thereof: They spread upon them Carpets of Damask, or like Stuff, hanging down
to the ground: They place upon the four Corners of the Table several little
open Baskets, woven with Threads of Gold and Silver, some full of diverse Flowers
of Sugar, represented to the Natural; others bear an agreeable diversity of
several Beasts, made also of Sugar, as Elephants, Lions, Stags, and Hinds:
some are filled with Birds of the same Stuff. In the middle of ^he Table are
placed exquisite Viands, which make a part of the good Cheer of the Invited:
These are ordinarily all sorts of Fowl and Venison in Plates of Silver and fine
Porcelane: They eat nea^ly, and take their Meat wi^h Forks of Gold or Silver,
not touching it any way with their Hands. The Wine, which they ordinarily ^ill,
is made of Palm, delicious to the Ta^t, and less offensive to the Head. The
Tables are placed in a Circle, to the end that the Invited may see one another.
While they thus make good Cheer, many Musicians and Players on Instruments
banquet their Hearing with the Sweetness of their agreeable Concerts; some
others repres^nt to their Eyes the Rancounters and Inventions of some pleasant
History: Their Fea^ts are never without a Comedy, which is excellently well
performed, the Persons are very dextrous thereat, and the Habits, which they
use, wholly sit for the Representation. The last Course is of all sorts of
Fruits, and Comsits in great abundance, the use wh^reof is very common in
China. The Courtiers and other men of China often pass thus their time in the
Entertainment of these delicious Feasts. But particularly on the Day of the
great Feast of their Religion, which they celebrate the first Day of the Moon
of the Month of March, they give^ to their Senses all the Pleasures, that they
demand: They cloth themselves superbly, and adorn themselves with the richest
Jewels, that they have; They plant at their Gates great Trees, like to the
May-poles in our Coun^r^ys, and hang the Fronts of their Houses with many
Pieces of ^ilk and Cloth of Gold; They crown the Streets with many triumphal
Arch^s; they illustrate the Night with an in^inite number of Lights, which they
hang at these Trees; They banquet and feast without c^asing.

These Exc^sses are yet greater, when the Courtiers, or other Grandees of the
Realm treat their Equals, or feast any Ambassadors of a Sovereign Prince: then
their Magnificence appears in its greatest Splendour. The Invited h^s many
Tables for himself alone, the Number whereof amounts to twenty: He eats at the
first, and all the others are laden with all sorts of raw meat, as Tame an^
Wild Fowl, Venison, Gammons of Bacon, and many others. After the Feast is
ended, the Servants of him, who treated, take them off, and carry them before
the Invited unto his House, where they leave them with great Ceremonies. The
Friends or Kindred of the Family perform the Civilities of the House: For the
Master of ^h^ Feast absents himself, and through Decency, according to the
Cus^om of the Country, is not to be found: Those, that are entrusted by him,
who are nevertheless Persons of Quality, conduct the Invited unto their Places,
where they are seated in rich Chairs under a Canopy of Velvet: And before they
begin to eat, they take every one a Cup, fill it with Wine, and having made
many great Reverences, go to the Windows, where in a place, from whence they
may see the Heaven, they of^er them to the Sun, make a great discourse in
manner of a Prayer, and request of this fair Planet (that can give them nothing
but the Light, whereby they see to drink) constant Prosperities for the
Invited, and that the Amity, which they intend to contract, may be beneficial
and favorable to them both. Dissolute Feasts are tempestuous Se^s, where
amidst the Delights of the Body the Virtues of the Mind are oftentimes
shipwrackt. Wherefore he, that has left* unto men the Rules of good Conduct,
advises them rather to go unto the House of Mourning, and the Accompanying of
Funerals, than to the Pleasures of sumptuous Banquets: Because that in those
they have before their Eyes the Por^rait of man's End, which often ca^se^ in
them an^ (...) of their Vani^ies; but these* b^^i^ching their Minds, rob them
of t^^mselves, and make them forget their Condition. It is true, that the
Chinese have, besides many others, this laudable Quality, that they are no
less skild in politickly managing their State, than in ordering, as they
exc^llently do, the Pomp and Magnificence of a superb Feast: although their
licentious Religion forbids them not the entertainment of the Delights and
Pleasures, that are Enemies to solid Virtue.

These men, who say, that they have two Eyes, and who (as we have already told
you) look upon the greatest part of other men as blind, are themselves so
dim-sighted, as to hold for Gods Pieces of Wood and Stone, fashioned into Idols
by their own hands. For in the Court, as well as in other places of the Realm,
they adore the Works of Painters and Gravers: They keep in their Houses Idols,
which they venerate with a particular Worship, and have Recourse to their vain
Assistance in all their Affairs: Their Temples swarm therewith, there are some,
that contain above two hundred upon diverse Altars, amongst which that of the
D^vil has alwai^s its Place, and receives equal Venerations and Sacrifices: not
but that the Chinese know, that he is the obstinate Enemy of Mankind, and the
Author of the Crimes, that are committed in the World, but they honor him so,
that he may not hurt them, and not through any expectation of his Assistance.
Besides these dumb Divinities, they revere and pray unto a great number of men,
already dead, who have in their Realm surpassed others in the Valor of Arms, in
the Light of Learning, or in the Sanctity of an austere and recluse Life in the
Solitudes of their Religious Monasteries: They call them Paus^os, that is,
Blessed, in the number of which they put also many Women, and of the one and
the other they venerate three with a singular Devotion. The first is called
Sichie, who came (as they say) from the Realm of Tranth^jico, which lies
toward the West, brought into China the Rules of Religious life, and was the
first Inven^or of ^loisters, and of Religious Orders, that live in Community
without being married. He had his Beard and Head shaven, his Followers are also
shaven, and all the Chines^ Monks (...) forth the Glory of his Name, and
eleva^^^ the Merit of his Virtues above a^^ ^he other Saints. The second
Subject in this Rank of singular Sanctity is a Woman, called Canine: She is
also worthy of her Name* for the Devotion, which is born to her in China, does
with an importune Bigottery gnaw the Spirits of the simpler Ladies. They say,
that she was Daughter to King Tzonton, who desiring to marry her to a Prince,
as well as her Sisters, who were all Children of this Monarch, she would never
consent thereunto, alleging for her Reason, that she had vowed unto Heaven a
perpetual Chastity. The Father, offended at her Refusal, revenges it on her,
that made it, deprives her of her Liberty, encloses her in a great House in the
form of a Monastery, and through contempt makes her employ her Time in vile and
abject matters, causes her to carry Water and Wood, and to cleanse a great
Garden, which depended on that place: She does it, and labors therein with a
singular Patience. But Heaven, to which she had made a vow, and for the Love of
which she was thus contemn^d, solages (say the Chin^ses) her Pains, dismisses
from its fair Va^lts its ^^ppy Inhabitants for to comf^rt her, and sends many
Animals to succor her: the Saints of Heaven came to draw water for her; the
Apes served for her Servants; the Birds ^leans^d the Alleys of this Garden with
their Bills, and swept them with their Wings; the Savage Beasts descended from a
neighboring Mountain to carry her Wood. The King her Father, seeing her one day
thus served by these new Domestics, believed her to be a Witch, and resolved
to purge by Flames the Crime of her En^hantments: whereupon he caused this
House to be set on Fire. She seeing, that this ^ine place burnt for her sake,
would have killed her self with a long silver Bodkin, that held up her Hair,
which she set to her Throat: but on a sudden there fell a Shower of Rain, that
quenched the Fire: then she quitted her Design, retired unto the Mountains, and
hid her self in the Caves thereof, where she continued her Penance. Heaven,
which protected her thus, would not leave unpunished the Cruelty of her wick^d
Father: It struck him with a Leprosy, and abandoned his living Body to the
Worms, that gnawed him, and made him suffer many Torments: Canine had a
Revelation thereof, Charity makes her quit her Solitude, for to go and succor
her Leprous Father. As soon as the King saw her, he cast himself at her Feet,
craved her Pardon, and adored her: She, judging her self unworthy of Adoration,
would have resisted it, but not being able to do it by reason of ^he feebleness
of her Body, a Saint of Heaven came and set himself before her, to repair the
Fault, and to let her understand, that the Adoration was performed to him
alone. At the same time she returned to her Cave, and there finished her Life
with equal Sanctity. The Chinese hold her for a great Saint, and pray unto her
ordinarily to obtain the pardon of their Faults. The third is a Wom^n, named
Neome, who, they sa^, ^ss^ed from a very illustrious Family of the Town of
Cuchi, in the Province of Oquiam: And as her Father would have violated the Vow
of Chastity, which she had made, and have constrained her to marry, she fled
away, and retired into the D^sart of a little Isle, which is over against
Ingoa, where she lived very holily, and wrought a great number of Miracles: of
which they relate this, as the most remarkable of them all. They say, that a
great Captain, named Campo, Admiral of the Navy of the King of China, went one
day to wage War for his Master in a neighboring Kingdom: He came with his Fleet
to surge at Boym: When they would depart from thence, the Mariners could by no
means weigh up their Anchors, astonished whereat they all look into the Sea,
and see Neome sitting thereupon, who detained them. The General calls to her,
and prays her, as divinely inspired, to counsel him, what he had to do: She
answers him, that, if he would triumph over his Enemies, and conquer their
Realm, he should take her along with him, because those, with whom he was to
^ight, were great Magicians: He takes her into his Ship, weighs Anchor, sets
Sail, and a few days after arrives on the Coast of his Enemies Country. As
soon as they perceive the Fleet of China, these Magi^ians have recourse to
their Charms, cast Oil into the Sea, and by their Illusions so dazzle the Eyes
of the Chin^ses, that their Ships seem to them all on Fire. N^ome, who was
without doubt an excellent Enchantresse, by her powerful Countercharms undoes
all, that they had done. Thus seeing, that their Magic was weak, and their
Arms unequal to those of China, they yi^lded themselves, and underwent the
Quality of Vassals, and Tributaries to the King of China. Campo, whom the
History marks for a judicious man, and a very wis^ Politician, enters into some
doubt of the S^^ctity of Neom^, and believes her to b^ a Sorceress^: To clear
this, he asks of her some M^rk of her holy Virtue, to carry as a Present to the
King his Master, and prays her to make a dry Stick, which he had in his h^nd,
to become gre^^: She took the S^ick, pronounced over it c^rtain secret words,
rendered it green and budding, and moreover of a very odoriferous smell, and
thus deliv^red i^ ^o this Captain, who, bli^ded with the same Superstitions, as
the other Chinese, attributed the Prosperi^ies of his Voyage, and the Success
of his Arms to the Sanctity of Neome, whose Name has ever since been singularly
honored in China, and particularly by those, that go upon the Sea, who bear her
Image on the Stern of their Ships, and pray unto her, as the Divinity, which
presides over the Waves, commands the Sea it self, and appeases Tempests and
Storms.

The Sun and the Moon are also Subjects of their Adoration: they revere them,
as the Sources of Light, and Causes of Generation here below; but they believe
a greater Divi^ity, that rules over them: for when they s^e, that the one or
other of these Planets suffers an Eclipse, they say, that the Prince of H^aven
has condemned them to death, and that the Fear of Punishment thus tar^ishes
their Light. Then they pray this Sovereign Prince to show them Mercy, and not
to extinguish these celestial Torches, which are so necessary for their Life:
they say, that the Sun is a man, and the Moon a woman. Their B^lief holds
Heaven for the Creator of all, that appears to our Eyes, and of things
invisible: they express it thus by the first Letter of their Alphabet, such as
we have mark^d before, and affirm, that above t^es^ celestial Vaults there
inhabits an immortal Governor, whom they name L^o^on Tzant^y, that is, Gove^^or
of the ^reat GOD: they qualify him unc^ea^^d, incorporeal, eternal, and a pur^
Spirit, they adore him with an ex^^^ordinary veneration, and attribute to him
the care o^ Supreme matters: with whom they plac^ another of the same nature,
called by them Ca^s^y, wh^ has r^ceived from the first the Government of that
part o^ Heaven, which regards the Earth, and holds in his powerful hand the
Life and Death of men. This second has under him three Deputies, all three
Spirits, as the two first: They call them Tanquam, Teiquam, Tzuiquam* These are
aiders and assistants of his great Ministry for the things of this lower
World. For the first, which is Tanquam, is an aquatick Divinity, or rather the
Fountainier of the World, He has the charge of Rains, and his greatest exercise
is to furnish the Earth with Water. Teiquam descends lower toward our inferior
Region: He presides over the Birth of Men, commands in Wars, orders Husbandry,
and causes the Earth to produce the Fruits, which nourish the Men and Beasts,
that inhabit it. Tzuiquam is their great Neptune: He employs his Time in
intending over the Seas, retains or drives forward, as it pleases him, the fury
of the Waves, commands the Tempests, and has a particular care of those that
pass the Seas: Thus all the people of the Marine adore him, the Fishers offer
sacrifice, the Seamen make Vows unto him, and the Sailors at their return from
their Voyages make Plays, and rep^esent Comedies to the honor of his Name.

Now amidst the abominations of this false Worship of the Chin^ses are
discerned some Traces, and ancient Marks (though half effaced) of a better
Religion: For in the diversity of their Images they have one, which they hold
in singular reverence: Its Form is human and Majestic: Out of its Shoulders
grow up three Heads, equal and alike, which incessantly behold one another, for
to let us understand, that they have but one and the same Will. This may be
taken for some Remains of the Mystery of the most holy Trinity, which the
blessed Apostle St. Thomas heretofore preached unto them: when going to the
Oriental Indies, where the Martyrdom, which he suffered, crowned his Life with
an immortal Diadem, he passed through China, as is reported in the ancient
Writings of the Armenians: but finding the Chinese wholly taken up with Wars,
he passed on farther, after he had briefly explicated to them the Verities of
the Gospel. In the same Temple, where this Image with three H^ads is adored,
they venerate Pictures, which are not unlike to those of the twelve Apostles.
The Christians, who observed these Representations, asked the natura^ll
Chinese, what men these twelve Apostles had been, and had no other answer, but
that these twelve Personages had been great Philosophers, who had so ardently
embraced. Virtue in this World, that after their Death it had elevated them up
to Heaven, and made them Angels thereof. For a third Testimony, that they have
heretofore had some Ray of Christian Verity, they venerate also in the same
number of sacred Pictures the Image of a Woman, perf^ctly fair, that bears a
Child in her Arms, which they say, she brought forth without violating her
Virginity, and whose Conception and Birth were not soiled with any Sin: they
know no more thereof. The double Cloud, of Ignorance of the holy Books, and of
the Si^ of Id^latry, has hid the rest from them. Never^heless all these Marks,
explica^^d by the eloquent Mouth of some pious and f^rvent Christian, might
reproach them with being no more, what they have been, and would be no
u^pro^itable Means to render succes^ul the Cares, which should be employed ^or
their Salvation: Besides that the excell^ncy of their Wits, capable of Reason,
would give a freer Access thereunto: and even their Oracles would lend an
helping hand to such Workmen for the effectuating their good Designs: for they
have a Prophecy, that says: That from the West must come the true Faith, which
shall lift them up ^o Heaven, for to be th^r^ made Angels.

Certainly the Court of China would be unto us an agreeable Abode in the
Conversation of its Courtiers, learned and endued with a very excellent Wit,
and amidst the honest Recompenses, which are there given to Virtue; but the
false Worship of Idols, and the abominable Superstitions, which are there
committed, force us to quit it. It is then time to depart thence, to turn our
Thoughts another way, and to besto^ our Labors upon a more holy Employm^nt. We
shall do it with the Divine assistance of him, that has conducted our Works,
after we shall have acquainted you with the Ceremonies which are used at the
D^cease and Funerals of the Sovereign Princes of this great Monarchy. When
their King is dead, they wash his C^^ps with Aromatic waters, perfume his
Royal Habits, and cloth him in the most sumptuous manner, that ever he was in
his Life, they s^at him in his Throne, to the end all his Court may come to pay
him their last Devoirs, and to bewail his Loss. The first, who present
themselves, are the Prince's Children, if he had any: after them the Queen his
Wife, and the nearest of his Relations: they all put themselves on their Knees
before his Body, abide there some time, and then retire with Tears in their
Eyes, and Sighs in their Mo^ths. The Chancellor, or President of his Council,
accompanied with all the Counselors of State, pays there the same Funeral
honors: all the Courtiers and Domestics of the Royal House, being also on
their Knees before the Deceased, bewail the Loss of their Lord. This sorrowful
Ceremony being performed, they take the Body from the Throne, and strip it of
its precious Habits, they put it in a Coffin (It is the ordinary passage of the
Pomps of the World, from their Grandeur to Death) mad^ of rich and odoriferous
Wood, closed in such a manner, that no Air can enter thereinto: they put it
upon a Table in the middle of the Royal Chamber, adorned and hung the most
sumptuously, that is possible; they spread upon it a white Linen Cloth, hanging
down to the Ground, upon which the Portrait of the deceased King is drawn to
the Life: the Autichamber is also superbly adorned, and therein are set many
Tables, with a great number of Funeral Lights, amongst which is served up a
great quantity of Viands for the Priests and Religious of China, who come to
sing after their mode, to pray, and off^r Sacrifices for the Repose of him, who
is dead in eternal Inquietudes. To these vain Devotions they add many
Sorceries, they put upon the Coffin a great number of little painted Papers, a
part whereof they burn, the rest they tie to the Bier with little Cords, they
shake and move them incessantly with such dreadful Cries and Howlings, that it
is difficult to hear them without Terror: They say, that by this frantic
fashion of succoring the Dead, they send the Soul of the dec^ased Monarch into
Heaven, to the number of those, that are happy. This Tintamarre or Spiritual
Charivary of the Priests of China endures the space of fifteen Days, after
which they conduct the Body of the King to the Grave: The Procession is in this
manner: Before the Body go all the Chinese Priests and Religious, that are
found in the Court: they carry in their hands lighted Tapers: The Kindred of
the Prince follow the Corpse, severely clad in Mourning: they have great
Cassocks of wool next their^l^sh, and are gi^t about their Reins with Cords;
their Head is simply covered with great broad-brim'd Bonne^s of wool, like to
our Hats a-la-Mode, such as are worn in our Countries about the end of this
present year 1625, which is strictly observed: For in China Mourning consists
not only in the Mien, ^t pas^es beyond Tears and Sighs, which proceed only from
Decency: The greater Persons, to observe well the Mourning for the Death of a
Father or Mother, deprive themselves of their Offices: and ^he Vice-Royes in
the like sorrow remit into the Kings hands the Governments, that they had
received from him: To do otherwise there, would be no less shameful and
impious, than it would be in our Countries for a Son to laugh, dance, and
rejoice publicly at the Death of his Father. The Council with the honorable
Marks of their Dignity go immediately after these: and all the Officers of the
Royal House and of the Court assist thereat in order, and according to the rank
of their Employs. In this Pomp the Body of the deceased King is conducted to
the Grave, but not interred without Train: they burn at the putting him th^rein
the Pictures of many Slaves, of a great number of Horses, of an heap of Gold
and Silver, and of some Pieces of Silk, which, they believe, follow the
Departed into the other World. In truth, if these Burnings in e^^igie are Marks
of the foolish Superstitions of the Chines^s, they are also Signs of the
sweetness of their Dispositions, more humane, than those of some Barb^rians
their Neighbors, and of some people, which have been ours, who at the interm^nt
of their Princ^s really burnt their Wives, and the Men, who had served them,
and prodigally cast into the fire the Gold, Silver, and Jewels, which they
found in their Coffers. This light Burning being ^inished, and the Pictures
reduced into Ashes, they descend, and close in a little Earth him, who
command^d a World of Men and Land; who might have crowned his Head with fifteen
Diadems: For the Provinces of China, which make this number, are in greatness
and goodness so many Realms: and in doing this, they bring unto Dust the
greatest and most glittering Pomp of the World. And certainly since that all
things of the Court and of the Earth are nothing but Dust, and that of Dust
have the fair^^t and noblest parts of the Universe been formed, when Men, who
are the Kings of the World, go down to their Grave, we put Dust to Dust. For a
Lesson un^o Sovereign Monarchs, that in their superb Thrones the Royal Crown
and Mantle cover only a piece of animated Earth, and an heap of living Dust,
except they have a great Courage, a generous Soul, and a pious Disposition:
Then by these Royal and excellent Qualities, they will draw their Names out of
the Dust of oblivion: and if by the common Law of Nature, the Body, which is
but Dust, descends into the Dust, the Spirit, which was never Dust, will go to
receive in Heaven the immortal Crowns, which are the Rewards of magnanimous and
pious Kings.

FINIS.

