AN ANSWER TO Mr. Dodwell and Dr. Sherlocke; Confuting an Universal Humane
Church-Supremacy, Aristocratical and Monarchical; as Church-Tyranny and Popery:
And defending Dr. Isaac Barrow's Treatise against it.

By Richard Baxter.

Preparatory to a fuller Treatise against such an Universal Sovereignty, as
contrary to Reason, Christianity, the Protestant Profession, and the Church of
England; though the Corrupters usurp that Title.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the
lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1682.

READER,
THough the difference between Mr. Dodwell (and Mr. Thorndike, and such
others), and those condemned by them, be very great, I would not have it seem
greater than it is. The sum of it is as follows:

1. Mr. Dodwell thinks that there is no true Ministry, Church-Sacraments, nor
Covenant-right to pardon and salvation, but where there is a Ministry
delivering the Sacraments, who were ordained by Bishops (in his sense of
Bishops), who had their Ordination from other Bishops, and they from others, by
an uninterrupted chain of succession from the Apostles.

We know, that by this Doctrine he condemns, or unchurcheth, not only the
Reformed Churches, the Greeks and other Easterns, but the Church of Rome it
self, and leaves no certainty of the very being of any one Church on earth.

And we maintain, that the sacred Scripture is the universal Law of Christ, in
which he has described and instituted the office and work of the sacred
Ministry, and appointed the way of their continuance in the world, by necessary
Qualification, Election, Consent, and ordinarily regular Ordination. That as
Presbyters now lay on hands with the Bishop, so senior Pastors are the
Ordainers, as the College of Physicians license Physicians, and the Convocation
of Doctors make Doctors (and man generateth man). But to avoid contention and
division, the Churches have used to make one of these Presbyters or Pastors a
President, and partly a Ruler in each College and Church, and given him a
Negative voice in Ordinations; against which we strive not, but maintain, 1.
That his consent is not so necessary, as that no one can be a true Presbyter
that has it not. As the Clergy at Rome in Cyprian's days long governed when
they had no Bishop; so if the Bishop be dead, or refuse to ordain, or would
ordain none but Here^icks, or incapable men, or would tyrannize and impose men
not consented to, the Ordination is valid that is made without him. And 2. That
the true chief Pastor of every particular formed Church, is a true Bishop,
though Diocesans should deny it. 3. And that even Ordination it self is
necessary but for Order where it may be had, and not to the Being of the
Ministry where it cannot be had on lawful terms, no more than Coronation to the
King, or public solemnization to Marriage. 4. And we are assured, that if
Regular Ordination were interrupted by death, heresy, refusal, neglect, e. g.
at Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople, Jerusalem, etc. Christ's Charter, or
Scripture-Law would presently restore it to persons duly qualified, chosen and
ordained by the fittest there that can be had. 5. If this were not so (as
multitudes of schismatical and unlawful Popes Ordinations at Rome would be
invalid, e. g. John 13. and 21. and 23. and Eugenius 4th deposed as a Heretic
by a General Council, etc.) so every usurping Bishop that pretends falsely,
that he was himself lawfully ordained, would nullify Churches, Ministry and
Sacraments of all ordained by him. And many have falsely pretended to Orders. 6.
And that if men must refuse the Government and Sacraments of all Bishops and
Presbyters that do not prove to them a Regular Ordination uninterrupted for
1600. years, all the Ministry on earth may be refused: and none for so doing
should be called Schismatics. I never yet heard or saw a Bishop prove such a
succession, nor ever knew one that would take his Oath on it, that he was a
true Bishop on such terms.

II. Mr. Dodwell thinks that the Presbyters, yea and Bishops, were not given by
God. Page 60. says he, But where do they find, that God ever gave Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons? Where note, that it is of the Office in specie that we
speak.

But we think that God has made or instituted the Office and its work. And if
he did not, 1. Who did? If men, was it Clerg-ymen or Laymen? If Laymen, was
it Christians or Infidels? And by what Authority? Do the children beget the
fathers, and yet may not Presbyters propagate their species? If Clergymen, who
were they? If not Apostles, or Prophets, or Evangelists, they were none. If
these, then it seems the Apostles did it not as Bishops; for it is the making
of the first Bishops that we question. And what the Apostles did (not as
Bishops, but) as commissioned Apostles, Christ did by his Spirit. And they that
will do the like, must have the like Office, Authority and Spirit. If God gave
not Bishops, because the Apostles made them, then God gave us not the
Scripture, because the Apostles and Evangelists wrote it.

And is not this the same or worse Doctrine than that which the Italian Jesuits
would have had pass at Trent, against Gods making Bishops or their Office?

And if God gave not Bishops or Presbyters, they that reject them, reject no
gift or institution of God.

And if men made them, how come they to be essential to the Church? Did not
Christ and his Spirit in the Apostles, institute so much as the
Church-essentials?

And if men made Bishops and Presbyters in specie, may not man unmake them?

III. Mr. Dodwell maintains, that the power of Presbyters is to be measured
by the intention of the Ordainers who give it them, and not by any
Scripture-institution, charter or description.

We maintain the contrary, that God having instituted and described the Office
of Bishops, Pastors, Presbyters, Gods Law in Scripture is the Rule by which the
office-power, and obligation, and work in the essentials, must be known.
Otherwise, 1. It would be supposed, that God made not the office of Bishops or
Presbyters; which is false.

2. That Ordainers may make new Churches, Bishops or Presbyters in specie; yea,
as many species of them as they shall intend.

3. That they may abrogate or change the ancient species. They may make one
office only for preaching, another only for praying, another only for Baptism,
another only for the Lords Supper, and others for new work of their own. The
Papists themselves abhor this Doctrine.

4. Then no man can know the measure of his Authority, not knowing the
intentions of the Ordainers. Perhaps three or ten ordainihg Bishops may have
three or ten several intents.

5. Then the Bishop may put down Gods Worship or Sacraments, by limiting the
Priests power.

6. It Is contrary to all Ministerial Investitures. The Investing Minister is
not the Owner or the Donor, but delivers possession of what the Owner and
Donor contracted for, or gave. If the Archbishop, Crowning the King, would
infringe his Prerogative, it is a Nullity, because he is not the Giver of it;
nor is his intention, but the Kingdoms constitution, the measure of it. If the
Priest would make the man whom he marries to a woman, no governor of her,
it is a Nullity: for it is not his intent that makes the power.

7. If this were otherwise, I call and call again (but in vain) to Mr. Dodwell,
and all his party, to tell me, how the Bishops and Priests of the Church of
England in the days of Henry the 8th, and Edward the 6th, and Queen Elizabeth
came to have power to put down the Mass, to set up the Liturgy, to take down
Images, and to reform as they did, when it was certainly contrary to the
intention of their Ordainers?

8. And setting this point together with the other, (that Ordination of
Presbyters is null) I ask them, (and ask again, but all in vain;) 1. Do not
Bishops generate their Species, and make Bishops their equals? 2. Who then can
give his Office to the Archhishop, if he have no Superior in England, unless
his Inferiors give it, or you fly to a Foreign Jurisdiction? 3. Whose
Intention is it that gives power to the Pope, if he be greatest? Or to the
General Council, if it be greatest? If there be none above them, either God or
Inferiors give them their power? 4. And what if these Inferiors that make
Popes, Primates, or Councils, by Intention would take down half their power? Is
it then done? What self-contradiction and confusion would some men rather run
into, than grant Christ to be Christ? that is, the only Universal Head and
Legislator to the Church on Earth.

IV. Accordingly Mr. D. holds, that there is a supreme Authority in man over
the Universal Church, from whose intention and sense it is not lawful for us to
appeal so much as to the Sacred Scripture, no nor to the Day of Judgment, for
any practice different from them. See his Reply, p. 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85.

Though we hold that no unjust Appeal should suspend the authorized Acts of a
Governor, this Doctrine seems to me to be worse than Antichristian, and to put
down God.

If God indeed be the Universal Sovereign Lawgiver, and the final Judge; if God
be God, and man be man and not above him, to say that we must not obey him
before man, and disobey man that commands what he forbids, or that we must not
appeal from man's subordinate Law to his supreme Law, nor from man's judgment to
his final judgment; and to say, (as he and Thorndike do) that to do so, and
practice accordingly, is inconsistent with all Government, are things that I
had hoped my ears or eyes should never have seen or heard delivered by a sober
Christian. Papists most commonly abhor it, save some few Flatterers of the
Pope. If ^his be so, a man must not only worship Images, swear to the Pope, and
do all that Councils command; but also curse Christ if the Turkish Rulers bid
him, blaspheme God if Heathen Rulers bid him, and condemn all the Martyrs as
Rebels that did subvert all Government, by practicing contrary to it and
appealing to God. And then man must be every where of the Rulers Religion, and
do whatever wickedness he commands, Dan. 1. and 3.6. and the Church for three
hundred years and more tell us of other kind of Examples.

V. Mr. D. holds this Absolute Destructive Power to be essentially necessary
to the Unity of the Catholic Church: which is the sum of Thorndike's Book.

I would not go further from them or the French, in the point of Unity, than I
needs must. I shall therefore tell you what is our judgment of it.

1. We grant them, that Christ's Church on earth is one, and its Unity is part
of its very essence (as the Unity of the parts of a House, Ship, etc.)

2. We hold that this essential Unity consists in the Union of all Christians
with Christ, the only unifying Universal Head; and that the Unity described
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. suffices to it, viz. One Body (of Christ) one Spirit, one
Hope (of Grace and Glory) one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father,
etc. And that all this is prescribed in the Gospel, and every true Christian
has all this.

3. That all must endeavor to keep this Unity in the bond of peace, and to be
in every lesser matter of one mind, as far as they can: And the Pastors of the
Churches to beautify and strengthen the Church, by as much concord as they can
well obtain.

4. But that perfect concord being the fruit of personal perfection, will never
be had on earth: And the differences of the infirm that cannot be cured, must
be tolerated in tender Brotherly Love. And to persecute or destroy Christians,
who unite in Christ and the Essentials of Christianity, because they are not of
one size of knowledge, and differ in lesser things, is the work of Satan the
Enemy of Love, and the great Destroyer.

5. We believe that Synods or Councils are so far good and useful, as they are
needful to the foresaid strength and concord of the Churches: But that they are
for Agreement, and not for direct Regiment, as Archbishop Usher was wont to
say, Councils are not for Government of the several Bishops by the Majority,
but for Consultation and Concord: And they that cannot in all things consent to
them in Accidentals, or lesser matters, are not therefore cut off from Christ's
Universal Church: But it is a fault peevishly and causelessly to dissent and be
singular, a breach of Christ's general Law, of doing our work as much as we can
in Love and Concord.

Plainly, Reader, do you know the difference between the Senate of Rome or
Venice, and the Assembly at Nimmegen, Ratisbone, or Frankford? The said Senate
is una persona Politica, though plures naturales, and has the Supreme
Government by Vote in Legislation and Judgment; and it is Rebellion there to
disown their Power, and a Crime not to obey it.

At Nimmegen, Ratisbone, etc. many Princes or their Agents meet for Peace and
Christian Concord. It is a sin for any of them to be causelessly against any
Vote that is useful to those ends. But no one of them, nor the major Vote, is
Governor of the rest; nor is any one to be dispossessed of his Dominion, that
sees reason to dissent.

This is plain truth; Though Dr. Sherlock find fault with the Learned and
Judicious Dr. Barrow, for asserting it in his Treatise against the Papacy.

And it being not Regiment but Concord that is the end of Synods (as over
Bishops) there is no more use than possibility of an Universal Council, or one
Universal College; But the necessity and aptitude of Councils for strengthening
concord, must measure their extent.

What Mr. D's opinion is of the degree of corporal punishment, which he would
have used to his ends, I know not: Mr. Thorndike is against Death and
Banishment. For my part, the two greatest things that have alienated me from
Popery are; 1. That it cherishes Ignorance, and I am sure that is the soil of
all wickedness; God, Christ, the Spirit and Scripture, are Light; and Satan is
the Prince of Darkness. 2. That it lives like the Leech on blood, hating and
destroying the most holy persons who differ from them: To these my Soul is
unreconcilable. I hate cruelty to Papists or Infidels, much more to godly
faithful persons, that do hurt to none.

And I think I have convinced Mr. Dodwell himself that I am not inclined for
the avoiding of Popery, to run into any contrary Extreme; nor to imitate them
tha^ ignorantly call Truth, or harmless things, Antichristian or Popish. The
name of Popery does not affright me from any truth of God: What I have written
in many Books, especially in the last part of my Catholic Theology, and what
censures I have suffered for it, (which never moved me to comply with the
Censurers) I think prove it. I again and again profess, That if the Papists, or
such as I now deal with, would but prove, that God ever made or allowed such a
Church as they plead for in the world, that is an Universal Church, constituted
or unified by any one Head or Supreme Governing p^r^ (Monarchical or
Aristocratical) under Christ, the Dispute whether it be Pope, or Council, or
Cardinals, or College of Bishops in all the world, shall not hinder me from a
cheerful and joyful declaring my self a Papist without partiality, fear or
shame, in the sense that the word Papist has still signified with such as I
converse with.

These things I have taken the boldness to ask some of the greatest, that on
the fore mentioned terms appropriate the name of the Church of England to their
Sect or Party, and I could get no answer from them, viz. Whether they took the
Councils of Constance and Basil for Papists? And whether they now take the
Bishops and Church of France for Papists? And whether they took Gerson,
Cusanus, Cassander, Erasmus, for Papists, or not?

2. If yea, What is the difference between the said Papists Church-Form and
Government, and that which these call the Church Catholic, and Dispute for?

3. If not, Then is not the Controversy de nomine, Whether the French Bishops
and Church, and the said Councils being of the same Form and Religion with the
Church of England, (as called by these men) ought to be called Papists, or not?
And for that I shall strive with none: Let every man call them as he sees
cause; or if he will, as they will call themselves. Let them be Papists in
France, and Protestants in England; I contend not for names. But I wonder not
at these Churchmen, if they unchurch the French Protestants, and condemn their
Ministry and Sacraments as none; How else could their Persecution be justified?

And, O that they would tell us, what Churches they be that they live in
communion with? Whether the French, Spanish, Italian, Greeks, Nestorians,
Jacobites, Copties, Abassines, be in their Communion, or not? If yea, Whether
the Reformed Churches be not as worthy of their communion? If not, whether the
Church of England be all the Catholic Church in their account?

O that we could long more for God's righteous final Judgment, (to which we
appeal, though Mr. Dodwell be against it) and for the world of perfect Light,
and Love, and Union!

Dated September. 2. 1681. (appointed a Public Fast for the burning of London.)
I have not time to gather the Errata of the Press; I cast my eye on these,
Page 9. l. 19. for natures, r. names. p. 10. l. antep. dele and. p. 11. l.
antep. r. is in. p. 17. l. 1. for or, r. over. p. 5. l. 29. after
excommunicating, r. Christ's servants for not forsaking their faithful Pastors.
p. 10. l. ult. for of, r. by. p. 16. l. 32. for our r. one. p. 90. l. 12 r.
temerity. p. 139. l. 17. for by, r. to. page 151. l. 4. for by, r. my, etc.

THE CONTENTS.
A Late Letter of Mr. Dodwell's, with the Answer, written since the rest was
printed. Chap. 1. Of Mr. Dodwell's displeasure against me, as if I accused him
to be a Papist, and wronged the Councils of Bishops. p. 1. Chap. 2. His
schismatical Church-destroying Scheme, the sum of his great schismatical book
confuted. p. 7 Chap. 3. The consequents of Mr. Dodwell's foresaid Doctrine. p.
21 Chap. 4. My words of Gods Collation of Ministerial Authority vindicated from
the forgeries and fallacies of Mr. Dodwell. p. 27 What my assertion is of the
cause of Church power. p. 29. The contrary, p. 32. The truth proved, p 33, etc.
His objections answered, p. 36. etc. Bishops are of God, p. 46. etc. His sad
qualification of Ministers, p. 48. Preferring God is no wrong to Government, p.
54. What succession we have, p. 54. Of Aidan and Finans Episcopacy, p. 57. His
assertion of supreme Church Power, from whom there is no appeal to Scripture,
to God, or the life to come, and whose intention is the measure of the power of
all ordained by them, examined, p. 57, etc. Whether the Church on earth be one
visible society under one visible humane Government, p. 59. Whether Divine
Authority may not be pretended for practicing contrary to some superiors, p. 60
Chap. 5. Wherein Mr Dodwell's deceits, and their danger lie. p. 63. Whether
there be but one sense of all terms, which causes obliging men to mean, all
that have skill in causes are to understand, p. 63. Twelve great doctrinal
Articles in which we differ from Mr. Dodwell, p. 65. Some questions put to him,
p. 68 His second Letter to me from Ireland, p. 70. My Answer to it, p. 75.
proving the impossibtlity of just Discipline in the Diocesan way, which I
dissent from. The short Answer to Mr. Dodwell's long Letter (which Dr*
Sherlocke and Mr. Morris extol), which is fully answered in my Treatise of
Episcopacy, p. 90. A Letter sent to Mr. Dodwell Mar. 12 1681. A Letter to Mr.
Dodwell Nov. 15. 1680. Anoth^r to him of July 9. 1677. opening many of our
chief differences. p. 100. Another after a personal conference sent to him, but
returned, because he was gone into the Country; debating with him eleven of our
great differences: in which Mr. Dodwell may be known. p. 118.
An Account of my dissent from Dr. Sherlocke his Doctrine, Accusations and
Argumentation; specially about the essence of the Universal, a National and
Single Church, and the nature of Schism, etc.
CHap. 1. The Historical Proem. Chap. 2. My ^etter and Couns^l to Mr. Sherlocke
many years ago, advising him to expound or retract his words, which seem to
deny the three Articles of our Baptismal covenant, our belief in God the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, p. 162 His Answer, p. 173 Chap. 3. Of the
ill manner of these men's Confutations. p. 174 Chap. 4. The main part of our
difference, viz. what is the essential form of the Catholic, National and
single Churches, p. 182 Chap. 5. What is the Catholic Church, as described by
Archbishop Bramhall, Bishop Gunning, Dr. Saywell, Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Dodwell,
Mr. Sherlocke and the French Papists, p. 193. Some notes on Dr. Saywell's
Communion, p. 198. More on Dr. Sherlocke's. p. 203 Chap. 6. What is the Union
and necessary Communion of the Catholic Church, according to this accusing
Defender? p. 207. His unsatisfactory solutions manifested, and Dr. Isaac
Barrow's excellent Treatise of Church-Vnity, published by Dr. Tillotson,
defended against his vain exceptions. Chap. 7. Of the rest of his book. p. 228.
A late Letter from Mr. Dodwell, calling for more Answer, with the Answer to
it, written since the rest was Printed, though it be here placed.
Reverend Sir,
I Am now in the Country, and as yet in so unsettled a condition, as obliges me
to be a Stranger to new Works. However, by the short view I have when I come
into Shops, I find you put me off for a Reply to Mr. Clarksons little Pamphlet
concerning Diocesan Jurisdiction: I have got it and perused it, and the design
of my writing at present is, to acquaint you with the reason why I think my
self unconcerned in it, if that be all I must expect from you in Answer to my
yet unanswered Letters. You must excuse me, if I cannot think that Book an
Answer, which as it was written before them by your own confession, so neither
does it foresee the accounts given in those Letters, nor provide against them:
Whether it do so, let the Reader judge.

But to return to the account intended, why I cannot think my self concerned in
this new Pamphlet of Mr. Clarkson's, be pleased to understand, that the
excellent Dean of St. Paul's being engaged against you on the same Argument of
my Letters, was pleased to put himself to the trouble of perusing my Papers, as
they came from the Press, purposely that he might avoid repeating what had been
said by me. This being so, you may easily understand how far I am concerned in
what is said to him, when it was indeed wholly distinct from mine. Not that I
should have been unwilling to serve that great Person, but that I know he is in
much better hands already. Mr. Clarkson in this Pamphlet, as he has only
mentioned Dr. Stillingfleets name, so he has confined himself to his
Arguments, and has taken notice of nothing in my Letters not considered by the
Doctor. If he will be pleased to engage further, I confess I like his temper
better than any I have seen of your late Brethren, except Dr. Owen. Such an
Adversary I should desire, as would confine himself to the Cause, without
digressing to personal Slanders. There is one mistake in him, which you may be
pleased to acquaint him with, and that is his translating (...) thousands more
than once, and sometimes where his Argument is grounded on it, that it may
appear to be his mistake rather than the Printers. The mistake is small and
separable from the main Cause, but withal is very evident. But according to his
candor in acknowledging it, so I shall see what candor I may expect from him
in the main Cause, if he think fit to engage with me in it.

As to your Answers to my Objections against your Ministry in our Oral Debates,
had they been unproved Assertions, I should then have thought them sufficiently
answered with Denials. But you know the Assertions are proved in the body of my
Book; and till I see my Principles unravelled, and Answers more distinctly
applied to the junctures, where the proof may seem to fail, I am not likely to
see any reason to change my mind. Till you attempt this, I am content the
Reader judge, whether what you have done, or shall hereafter do in the like way,
deserve the name of a Confutation. If I must never expect any further
satisfaction from you for the Slanders you have raised against me, all the
return I intend, is my hearty Prayer to God, to qualify you for your
forgiveness, not only of that sin, but of the many others of your late
writings, by your reunion to the Church from which you are fallen, on which
account alone I have proved that you can expect forgiveness. I am obliged not
only on my own account, but to the Public, to which you have shown your self
an Enemy on this occasion, to reflect on you; but I desire to leave no
monuments against you to Posterity. God may yet have mercy on you, and let you
see the mischief you are doing, before it be too late. That he will do so, is
the most unfeigned request of him, who, notwithstanding your many and great
provocations, will still endeavor to approve himself

Shrewsbury, Sept. 19, 1681. Yours, as far as is consistent with his Duty to
the Public, Henry Dodwell.
When you have occasion to write to me, send your Lettrs to be left with Mr.
Took




Sir,
I Received not yours of September. 19, 1681. till October. 21. through the
miscarriage of one that should have delivered it. What you have to say to Mr.
Clarkson, write to himself and not to me: As to your call for more Answer to
your Books, you shall have more. I had wrote one long ago, and cast it by: Men
are weary of our Controversies, and had rather all of us gave over. But if I
should show the error and impertinency of every such word in your great Book,
it might be a years work; when I look not to live so long; and it might make so
great a Volume in Folio, that few I think would buy or read! And what great
good will it do the world, to tell them how grossly you abuse the Chuch, and
how confidently and voluminously you err?

As to your charge of Slandering you, and wronging the Church, and being
unqualified for forgiveness, I have the same Accusations from Quakers,
Anabaptists, Antinomians and Papists, almost in the same words: Within these
two hours an ancient Doctor sent me as hard words [ As being a self condemned
person, to be forsaken, as opposing the Commands of God, and the Faith of
Jesus,] for not yielding to his [ asserting of the Seventh-day Sabbath, and
condemning the Lords-days observation.] I have these thirty six years lived
under such Accusations: It is no new thing for Seducers to use affrighting
words instead of proof, and to say, [ Except ye be circumcised and keep the Law
of Moses, you cannot be saved. It Is the cry of most Sects, [ You cannot be
saved but in our way]

Sir, No man living has more cause to be loath to err, and to be willing to
know the Truth. I am as sure, as I can be, if I know any thing of my own mind,
that I am not only willing to know the Truth, but to know it at a far dearer
rate than it was ever like to cost me in this world. I am sure that I have not
been slothful in seeking it: I am sure that I would joyfully recant any Error
that you or any man can convince me of, with hearty thanks for so great a
benefit. I have considered your Books; you are confident of my erring and
wronging the Church; and I am as confident of yours: that you are a Misleader
of an extraordinary size, that would set up an Universal humane Supreme
Government, which Protestants have taken for Popery and Treason against Christ;
and who falsely unchurch the Reformed Churches, and deny them all Covenant-right
to Salvation, while you tol^ me your self, that It is not for the Christian
Interest to hold, th^^ the Roman Bishops Ordination (as you require it) has
had an intercision. Is it a crime to speak truth of you or a slander to say,
That the Doctrine of an Humane, Absolute, Universal Sovereignty, is the most
Fundamental part of Popery? And is it no Sin or Slander for you to condemn so
many Millions falsely, even the purest and holiest of the Churches on Earth? if
not the whole (by self-contradiction?) is it a damning sin not to feed, cloth,
and visit in Prison one of Christ's little ones? And is it a meritorious virtue
in Mr. Dodwell to unchurch, or unchristen, or degrade, if not condemn to Hell
all the Reformed Churches, (nominally but not really excepting England?) Yea,
and to go about with a persecuting Spirit and Diligence, to provoke Magistrates
to lay them in Jayls with Rogues, because they dare not give over Preaching the
Gospel, to which they were devoted in their Ordition? Reproach^ng those
Magistrates as Contemners of Religion, who will not punish us as Deceivers, as
if it were not you that is the Deceiver? Should I presume to judge, that so
many and such men through Christendom, as you condemn, were all so ignorant and
so bad, as not to know the common Verities necessary to the essence of the
Ministry, and to Salvation, and that it is I that can teach it them, by such
media as Mr Dodwell uses, (while he knows that Voetius has answered a far
abler Defender of his Cause) I should sure be reputed a man so extremely proud,
as that no complemental humble deportment would excuse.

As for the Question, Whether you are a Papist, what obligation lies on me to
decide it? Why should you expect that I should say you are none? Do you not
better know your self? And is not your own word fitter to tell your mind? I do
but tell what your Doctrine is.

And I will speak so much plainer than I did, as to say,

That 1. to hold a humane Universal Church-Supremacy, Aristocratical or
Monarchical. 2. And that this Power is so absolute, that there is no Appeal
from it to Scripture, or Gods Judgment. 3. And that this Power does make
universal Laws for all the Church by General Councils. 4. And that the Pope
has the Primacy or Presidentship in those Councils ordinarily. 5. And that he
is the Principium Vnitatis. 6. And that it belongs to the President
antecedently to call Councils, and to him alone; so that they are but unlawful
Routs, or rebellious, if they assemble without his Call.

And that they are Schismatics, who dissent and disobey this Supremacy. 8. And
that the Reformed Churches, for want of your Episcopal Ordination uninterrupted
from the Apostles times* are no true Churches, have no true Ministry, or
Sacraments, or Covenant-right to Salvation; but by pretending them, do sin
against the Holy Ghost. 9 But that the Church of Rome, by virtue of an
uninterrupted Episcopal Succession, is a true Church, has a true Ministry, and
Sacraments, and Covenant right to Salvation. 10. And that the French-Church
(which we call Papists) are safer than the Protestants there. 11. And imply,
that the said French Clergy, and the Councils of Constance and Basil were no
Papists. 12. And that the said Protestants being Schismatics, and sinning
against the Holy Ghost, the Magistrates that will not be Contemners of
Religion, are bound to punish them.

(As if in England and France your bellows were needful to blow the fire.)
These things asserted among you by Bishop Bramhall, Heylin, Mr. Thorndike, and
you and such others, the Protestants have been hitherto used to call Popery:
But I will not dispute with you a mere question of the fitness of the name. If
you had rather, call it Church Tyranny, Cruelty, or Diabolism.

And is all this a Virtue in you? And is it a sin in me to defend Christ's
flock, and the true Unity of his Church, and to detect such Deceivers, and bear
my testimony for Truth, Love and Concord against such Dividers and Destroyers?

It Is a hard case then, that such as ^ are in, that the more unfeignedly we
desire to know God's Will, and the more diligently and impartially we study it,
and the more it costeth us, the greater sinners we are: And no sins have been
so loudly charged on me, as Praying, and Preaching the Gospel, and laborious
vindicating God's Truth and Servants. It does not follow, if you hate them, or
would have them ruined, that every man sins that does not as you do*

And whereas you would get some countenance to your Writings* by the name of
Dr. Stillingfleet, as having perused them, etc. Either he is, or is not of your
mind? If not, this does but add to your deceit. If he be, your Cause will do
more against the Conscience and Reputation of Dr. Stillingfleet, than far
greater Parts and Reputation than his can do for your Cause.

And Sir, what should I get, should I give a Voluminous Answer to all your
books? When I have confuted you as far as I have done, I have but lost my
labor. The Churchmen that I hear from, despise it, and say, What is Mr.
Dodwell to us? He is an unordained man (he knows why), and his book was
rejected by the Bishop of London. His opinions are odd, and the Church of
England is not of his mind: Yea, Mr. Cheny would persuade us, that you are a
singular contemned fellow.

But it is a useful way, to set such an one as you to do men's business, and to
boast, as Dr Sherlocke and Mr. Morris do, of your performance, and yet to
disown you when their cause requires it. But it is an abuse of us that dissent
from you, to connive only at your published Books, and then to boast of them as
unanswerable. And when we have lost our precious time in showing their deceit
and schismatical Love-destroying tendency, then to say to us, You have done
nothing: What is this to us? Mr. Dodwell is an odd disowned man, and none of
the English Clergy.

If God and Conscience would give me leave, I could presently be a good man,
and a pardoned sinner with you: It is but honoring you, and saying as you say;
I could so be extolled by almost any Sect, Papist, Quaker, etc. But it must be
but by one: for all the rest would nevertheless revile, accuse me and condemn
me, as you do the Protestant Churches. And the Quakers, like you, say, we sin
against the Holy Ghost. The old Sabbatarian Dr. before-named, in his first
Letter accused me as aforesaid; and when I professed my self willing to learn of
him, as his Disciple, I was in his next, The unwearied Labourer in Christ's
harvest, and his mavelous joy, etc. And in the rest, when I could not receive
his reasonings, I became worse and more m^serable than ever. It Is a wonderful
meritoriou^ excellency with such men, to become their Proselytes and admirers.

As true Charity and Piety would fain propagate Truth, Goodness and happiness;
so Pride, Self-conceit, and a Sectarian Spirit, are like the inordinate lust of
fornicators, impatient longer than they are propagating their spurious kind.

And indeed the inordinate height of your self-conceitedness and confidence in
gross confounding error, will make chaste souls afraid of your procacious
solicitations. Had you sought my corporal destruction, and not the Churches
ruin, for which you profess a zeal, I might silently have let you take your
course. But the sober world so well knows, that Satan and Papists are so much
against the plain and serious preaching of the Gospel, and so much for blood or
cruelty toward Dissenters, how faithful and truly religious soever, that if
you go on to be like them, 1. In la^bouring us to cease preaching. And 2. To
call for punishment (we know what) to those that will not cease, you will
cherish men in the opinion that you are a Papist, more than all your friends
and talk can make them believe that you are not.

Sir, when sin grows crying and common, I am one that dare not preach
impenitency by hiding it, and saying, it is a doubtful or a little thing,
though I expect that guilt should be impatient, and some Doctors should go on
to say behind my back, that less than this is unchristian and intemperate
passion or abuse.

Methinks you who judge millions of true believers, and lovers of God and
holiness, to damnation; and by Printing this, go about to have all men think
them such, and consequently to love them no better than the damnable should be
loved, should never be so partially tender, as not to endure to be but told
what you say and do.

And will you be angry with sober Christians for startling at such a Doctrine,
that All our other qualifications, though we believe and love God, etc. will
not save us, unless we have the Sacrament from a Minister ordained by a Bishop
of your described species, and he from such another, etc. to the beginning? Can
Christian ears relish the description of such a Hell as contains the
believing Christian lovers of God and Holiness, who called upon his name, and
sought first his Kingdom and Righteousness, and forsook all for Christ, but
were damned for want of an uninterrupted Diocesan Ordination of the Priest that
gave them the Sacrament, and all his predecessors? Sure Christians hitherto
han't believed that Diocesans Sacraments will make a Heaven of wicked ungodly
men, nor the want of them make a Hell of Saints.

And will you be angry with me, for not believing that God is such a one, as
will for ever hate and damn in Hell the souls that loved him above all? Will he
take that love from them when they die? Or do they continue in Hell to love
him, while he hates and tormenteth them? Were not that to call him worse than
the Devil, whom they do not love? You only tell us, that they cannot be saved
for want of your species of Sacramenters. But if you meant not by this their
Damnation, but a Purgatory or Annihilation, it is meet you should deal plainly,
and tell us what it is.

They are Articles of our Faith and Religion, That whoever believes
(sincerely) in Christ, shall not perish, but have everlasting life: And that
there is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents: And that eye has not
seen, etc. what God has prepared for them that love him.

When Dr. VVilkins once preached in Paul's Church an excellent Sermon for peace
and concord, on mutual forbearance, on Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God is not
meat and drink. but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; For he
that in these things serves Christ, is accepted of God and approved of men, he
accosted me at the Pulpit foot with these true words, I am sure this Sermon
pleased you. If Dr. Tillotson will publish that Sermon, as he has done Dr.
Isaac Barrow's, those two books will more shame your love-killing, schismatical
doctrine, than all that I have said against you. And if the forementioned
moderating Doctors, go on to publish me to be a man of unpeaceable provoking
language, for saying, that such doctrines and practices are great sins, they
will seem to me, to take the preaching of Repentance for reviling, and that he
is the sinner that tells men of sin; and that the Laity are far happier men,
who may be called to Repentance for their vices, than the Clergy, or
Church-corrupters, who are heinously wronged if their sins be named, and they
be but entreated to consider and repent; yea, if we but tell the reason, why we
dare not do as they, in a time when we have cause to study such Texts as Ezekiel.
9.4. Perhaps God may permit your principles to get the upper hand. But if he
do, I shall love them never the better, but the worse, and shall better love
the world which forsake not God, nor is forsaken by him.


Mr. DODWEL's LEVIATHAN, or Absolute Destructive Prelacy, the Son of ABADDON
APOLLYON, and not of JESUS CHRIST, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Mr. Dodwel's displeasure against me, as if I accused him to be a
Papist; and accused unjustly the Councils of Bishops.
. 1. WHEN Mr. Dodwell, in a tedious Volume, did null the Reformed Churches,
their Ministry, Sacraments, and Covenant-title to salvation, merely for want of
uninterrupted succession down from the Apostles, of Ordination, by such as he
appropriateth the name of Bishops to, I aggravated his fault, as being one that
professes himself a Protestant. He took this to be an accusation of Popery: I
Published, to satisfy him, that I meant no such thing; but de nomine will call
him what he calls himself, and de re will be no judge of any thing but his books
and words, to which I leave the Reader to know him: This satisfies him not,
but he continues so much concerned, that I doubt he will make men think there
is some tender place that is so impatient of a mis-supposed touch. I have
nothing to do with him, or his Religion, as his, further than he assaulteth us
by his Writings: And he is the Accuser, and the Accusation is of no less moment
than aforesaid, and sinning against the Holy Ghost, and of Schism, and
subverting all Government, if we do but practice differently from the Prelates
will, and alledg Scripture and Gods Authority for it, and appeal to Christ. I
am but on the Defense against all this.

. 2. I profess it is not mere education, prejudices, custom, or worldly
interest which keep me from Popery, or his way of absolute obedience to
Prelates. I have studied what may be said for it as well as against it; and I
never met but with Two Objections, which seemed to me worthy of much further
search: One was, that seeing de facto Popery and high Prelacy have so far and
long ruled in the Church, whether it be credible that Christ would so permit
it, if he hated it, and give his Church, de facto, no better government? 2.
Whether men's great proneness to discord, make not Popery (Italian, or French) a
prudent course.

And to these, 1. I am sure that Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil,
and save his people from their sins, and make them holy, a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, and gather a Church of such out of the world, and rule
them in a Communion of Saints, till he bring them to perfection. Therefore I
have great reason to suspect those men, and that order and course of
government, which cherishes ignorance and sin in Ministers and People, and
hunteth, and silenceth faithful Ministers, and suppresseth, persecuteth,
tormenteth, burns the most conscionable Christians, that for fear of
offending God, disobey them, that turn serious Religion and spiriritual Worship
of God, into bodily exercises, and mere Conformity to their wills, and outward
taking Sacraments, and using commanded Ceremonies and words; under the shadow
whereof, for 1000. years, piety has withered, and impiety prospered.

Christ promised to be with his servants to the end of the world, Mat 28.30.
And I cannot but think that he is most with those that are most acquainted with
his Gospel, and most love him and obey him, and are most holy and heavenly, and
walk not after the flesh, but the spirit, rather than with the ignorant,
fleshly, worldly malignant Persecutors, that set them against serious godliness
and godly men.

. 3. And I take not any notices of the time present from any thing but certain
experience; nor of the Ages past, from enemies, or suspected, but of the eldest
times from all our common Church History, and of the last 1000, or 1200* years,
as to the worst part of their actions, from their own greatest friends and
flatterers, such as Baronius, Binnius, Platina, Petavius, and others.

4. And the matter of fact, I confess, has had much power on my judgment: Had
the Popes, and Lording sort of Diocesans been promoters of love and holiness in
the Church, and not the woeful scandal of it, and the enemies of good men, and
serious piety, I should have been stronglier tempted to own their form of
government to be of God; though I am assured that Nature makes one man, or one
Council incapable of proper government over all the earth; I should never have
opposed that which does good. But destruction, silencing, persecuting,
cruelties, rebellions, worldliness, ignorance, malignity, and cherishing sin,
and suppressing piety, and the very word of God, I am sure are all the work of
the Devil, what name or titles soever are pretended for them.

. 5. And the fact being to me past dispute, I quietly submit to the dreadful
providence of God that permits it, considering,

1. The Church on Earth is no better than the Angels; of Heaven were; and if so
many of the Angels kept not their first estate, but fell by Pride, what wonder
if many Bishops do so?

2. If Adam and Eve both fell from Innocence, and that so soon, it is not
incredible that the Serpent should beguile some Bishops to depart from the
simplicity that is in Christ.

3. And if the first born man, Cain, murdered his righteous brother by
malignant envy for his true Religion, it is no wonder if some Clergymen are
such.

4. And if the whole world so soon was drowned in wickedness, that only Noah
and his house were meet to be saved from the flood, what wonder if the Church
had too great a deluge of iniquity?

5. And to be short, if Noah himself fall after such deliverance, and a Cham be
cursed that had been saved, and their posterity proved so bad, that all the
Canaanites, etc. must be destroyed; if Sodom's flames too, better warned Lot,
or his Wife and Children; if Abraham have an Ismael, and Isaac an Esau, and
Jacob envious Sons, and two Murderers, and two Adulterers; If Israel sin, and
die in the Wilderness; if Aaron after that he had seen, make them an Idol; if
Nadab and Abihu die, as they did; if Eli's and Samuel's Sons proved all so bad;
and in the days of the Judges there were so many revolts and ruins; if the
first King, Saul, so soon revolted; if David so fell, and Absalom so sinned,
and Solomon himself: If Ten Tribes so quickly broke off from David's house, and
left him but Two; if those Two proved as bad as the Prophets tell us, and went
into Captivity: And if the Nation rebelled against Christ, and be cursed and
scattered over the Earth, what wonder if the Pope and proudest Prelate did
corrupt the Church of God? If Christ's chosen Twelve had a Judas among them; if
the rest strove who should be greatest; if Peter denied him, and they all
forsook him and fled; if Heresies swarmed in the Apostles days, and Jewish
Teachers would have subjected the Gentiles to Moses's Law; if all forsook Paul
in his Trial, and many accused him before, and such as Diotrephes cast out the
Brethren, and prated maliciously against John; if Christ tell us of a little
flock, and not many Noble and great are called; if it be as hard for the Rich
to be saved as Christ says; if for Three hundred years the Church was a
persecuted people; and if the Patriarchs and Bishops themselves, for many
hundred years after accused one another in Councils, and accused such Councils
themselves of Heresies, and other crimes, as much as is yet visible they did,
why should I be scandalized at the badness of Bishops and Councils, and the
woeful corruptions of the Church?

Especially considering, 1. That it was chiefly but the worldly proud
domineering sort that thus miscarried, as the very Angels did.

2. That God kept up still a great number of humble and holy Bishops and
Presbyters, that joined not in usurpations and pride with the rest.

3. And that God blessed their labors to the saving of so many Millions of
souls, and propagating true serious Religion to this day. Yea, some of the
great Patriarchs themselves have been holy humble men.

4. And when God preserved, by an humble Ministry, so many Christians, as the
Albigenses, Waldenses, and many among the Papists themselves, from the liking
and guilt of the Roman corruptions.

5. And when God has raised so learned, humble, and holy a Ministry to reform
the Churches, and blessed their labors in Europe, and specially in England, as
he has done; even those that Mr. Dodwell degradeth; yea, many pious Diocesans
here and elsewhere, who yet cannot prove their title by his pretended way of
successive Canonical Ordinations; nor durst have sworn that they had such a
call.

. 6. I am sure that the work of Christ is the restoring of Gods Image, holy
life, and light, and love; and that the destroying of these, by hiding the
Scriptures, unintelligible worships, Imagery, dead hypocrisy, silencing, and
persecuting, and killing Gods servants, making dividing engines to tear, and
Canons to batter the peace of the Church, and this by an ignorant, ungodly,
worldly Ministry, seeking not the things of God, but of men; all this is the
Devils work; and to do the Devils work against Christ, is not a sign of Christ's
servants; he bids us judge of our selves and others by the fruits; His servants
we are whom we obey: If a Peter once give Christ such worldly fleshly counsel,
he shall hear worse than I said of Church-Tyrants, get thee behind me Satan,
thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God,
but those that be of men, Mat. 16.22 hating the good, silencing thousands of
faithful Ministers, excommunicating, and sinning against God, in obedience to
Prelates, and for using the needful means of their own salvation, and serving
God but as Peter and Paul did; this is the Devils work, if he have any in the
world. And Mr. Dodwell must trust more to swords than words to keep it up; for
there is a spirit in true Christians that will never suffer them to believe
that it is pleasing to God, what name soever is pretended for it.

. 7. I will reverence the Jews visible Church, to whom were committed the
Oracles of God, but will not say, that they sinned not in persecuting Christ
and his Apostles; nor say, that they are not now under their own curse, and cut
off from the Church, who once cast out Christians from their Synagogues. I will
give due honor to Primogeniture, and yet not equal Cain and Abel, Ismael and
Isaac, Esau and Jacob, etc. but expect, that as he that was born after the
flesh did persecute him that was born after the spirit; even so it will be now:
And the world was the world still, when it was taken into the Church. The
Heathen Romans were less Persecutors than the Jews, and so are the Turks than
the Papists.

8. I shall, in due place, take notice of Mr. D's confining the Essence of the
Ministry to transacting between God and man, in covenanting, requiring
essentially no more skill than any man is capable of, who is but capable of
understanding the common dealings of the world, p. 73, 74. And that
Immoralities of such men's Lives excuse us not from Schism, for turning from
such to better Teachers, p. 72. contrary to the Epistle of the Carthage
Council, in the case of Martial and Basilides, and even of Popes and Councils,
that forbid hearing Mass from a Fornicator. And his denying the ^cripture to be
intended or designed to be a Charter to appeal to for all future generations,
and for the extent of Offices, and preventing litigious dispute about
government and subjection, p. 80, 81. But that recourse ought now to be had to
the intention of the Ordainers for these. And what he says, p. 81. against
appealing to Writings (as he calls them), against the sense of all the visible
authority of this life, as unreconcilable to the practice of any visible
government on earth, p. 81. And that subjects cannot preserve their
subordination to their superiors, if they practice differently, and defend
their practices, and pretend Divine Authority for them, where he speaks
indefinitely, and excepteth no practices. And if we may not appeal from man to
God and Scripture, we may appeal from Scripture to man. And if man's Law be
above Gods, it is not from him; for the inferior makes not his superior.

And the root of all this i^, p 82* That God has made his Church (and not only
particular Churches that are parts of his Church) a visible Society, and
constituted a visible Government in it. Did I know what Mr. D. takes this one
visible Government to be, whether General Council, or Pope, or all the Bishops
of the world by a major vote, or all the people of the Christian world, or
what, I should know what to say to him. But for this I must not hope.

. 9. But I shall after speak to his securing subterfuge, p. 90. That there is
but one sense of all terms, which causes oblige men to mean; and that every one
ought to know who pretends to skill in causes. Which I am so defective in, that
I know not at all what his cause is till he tell me: Nor know I among many
senses of most of his chief terms, which it is that he means. I know not what
he means by a Papist; and whether he take those for Papists that are, as the
Councils of Constance, and Basil, and the French, for the supremacy of a
Council, the Pope being President, or Principium Vnitatis, and Patriarch of us
in the West. I know not who he means by the Supreme Church Power in the
visible Universal Church. I know not by what he essentiateth the very
Episcopacy which he so much pleads for; no, nor their Ordination. I know not
what he takes to be the Supreme Church Power over the Church of England. And
how can I know by the bare general name, when Dr. Stillingfleet denies any
such thing?

CHAP. II. His Schiswatical Church destroying Scheme Confuted.
. 1. BEcause he deals so falsely with my Doctrine, by pretense of putting it
into his words and order, I will deal better with him, and deal with his Scheme
word by word as he has laid it down. As for his exceptions, that I refel not
his charge of the sin against the Holy Ghost, etc. I am not yet so idle,
(having formerly written a Treatise of that sin.) His wilful refusal to answer
Voetius de desperata Causa Papalus, when he knows that this Plea is the
Papists chief strength, and Iansenius is so fully answered, is but a
dishonorable tergiversation. And it is like he knows how Melancthon in his
Epistles copiously shameth Mr. Dodwell's cause as trusted to by the Papists;
when yet the Protestants here plead Melancthon's judgment for their
Reformation. And though Mr. D. told me, that it is not for the Christian
Interest to hold that the Roman successive Ordination has been interrupted; I
think they that believe their own most flattering Historians, must believe that
the intercision there has been more notorious, than in those Reformed Churches
which Mr. Dodwell nulleth, or than those German and Danish Bishops whom
Bugenhagius a Presbyter ordained.

But I will briefly examine the words of his destructive deceiving Frame.

1. That all are obliged to submit to all unsinful conditions of the Episcopal
Communion where they live, if imposed by the Ecclesiasiastical Governors
thereof. And,

2. That the nature of this obligation is such, as will make them who rather
than they will submit to such conditions, either separate themselves, or suffer
themselves to be excluded from communion by such Governors for such a refusal
of submission, guilty of the sin of SCHISM.

Here are two parts.

a 1. That all are obliged to submit to all unsinful conditions of the
Episcopal communion where they live, if imposed by the Ecclesiastical
Government thereof.

This proved by these two degrees.

1. That the supposition of their being less secure of salvation out of this
Episcopal communion than in it, is sufficient to prove them obliged to submit
to all terms not directly sinful, however unexpedient, rather than separate
themselves, or suffer themselves to be excluded from this communion, chap. 1..
7, 8, 9, 10.

2. That there is indeed less security of salvation to be had even on
performance of the Moral conditions of salvation, out of this Episcopal
communion, than in it.

This proved from two things.

1. That they cannot be so well assured of their salvation in the use of
extraordinary as of ordinary means; nay that they being left to
extraordinaries, is a condition either very hazardous, or at least very
uncomfortable at present, whatever it may prove hereafter, Chapter II.

2. That these ordinary means of salvation are, in respect of every particular
person, confined to the Episcopal communion of the place he lives in, as long
as he lives in it.

This proved from Two things.

1. That these ordinary means of salvation are confined to the external
Communion of the visible Church.

This proved from Four things.

1. We cannot be assured that God will do for us what is necessary for our
salvation on his part, otherwise than by his express promises that he will do
it, Chap. III.. 1, 2.

2. The ordinary means how we may assure our selves of our interest in his
promises, is by our interest in his Covenant, by which they are conveyed to us,
Chap. III. from. 5. to the end.

3. The ordinary means by which we may assure our selves of our interest in
this Covenant with him, is by our partaking in these external solemnities, by
which this Covenant is transacted and maintained, Chap. IV, V, VI, VII.

4. The participation in these external solemnities, with any legal validity,
is only to be had in the external Communion of the visible Church, Chap. VIII.

B. (II.) That this visible Church, to whose external Communion these ordinary
means of salvation are confined, is no other than the Episcopal Communion of
the place where any one lives, whilst he lives there.

This proved in Two parts.

a (1.) That the visible Church, to whose external Communion these ordinary
means of salvation are consined, is the Episcopal Communion.

This proved by these degrees.

(A.) 1. That salvation is not ordinarily to be expected without an external
participation of the Sacraments.

1. Negatively, Not by those other popular means, which ordinary persons are
apt to trust in, to the neglect of the Sacraments; that is,

1. Not by hearing the Word Preached, Chap. IX.

2. Not by private Prayer, nor indeed by any out of the Communion of the
Church, Chap. X, XI, XII, XIII. XIV.

2. Positively, That salvation is ordinarily to be expected only by this
external participation of the Sacraments.

1. Proved concerning Baptism, Chap. XV.

2. Concerning the Lords Supper, Chap. XVI, XVII.

II. That the validity of the Sacraments depends on the Authority of the
persons by whom they are administered, Chap. XVIII.

III. No other Ministers have the Authority of Administering the Sacraments, but
only they who receive their Orders in Episcopal Communion.

This proved by Four degrees.

1. That the Authority of Administering the Sacraments must be derived from God,
Chap. XIX.

2. That though it be derived from God, yet it is not so derived without the
mediation of those men to whom it was at first committed, Chap. XX.

3. That it cannot be so derived from those men to whom it was first committed,
without a continued succession of persons, orderly receiving Authority from
those who had Authority to give it them from those first times of the Apostles
to ours at present, Chap. XXI.

4. That this Authority is not now to be expected any where but in the
Episcopal Communion, Chap. XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV.

b. (2.) That the Episcopal Communion, to which every particular person is
obliged to join himself, as he would enjoy the ordinary means of his own
particular salvation, is the Episcopal Communion of the place wherein he lives,
whilst he lives in it, Chap. XXVI.

b. II. That the nature of this obligation to unsinful conditions of their
Episcopal Communion, is such as will make them guilty of the sin of SCHISM, who
rather than they will submit to such Conditions, either separate themselves, or
suffer themselves to be excluded from Communion by their respective Diocesan
Ordinaries, Chap. XXVII.

Here is Episcopal Communion talked of, without telling what is the Episcopacy,
or what the Communion which he means, and how both are known. Confusion 1.
There are usurping Bishops not truly called or chosen. 2. There are Heretical
Bishops. 3. There may be diverse Bishops in one City or County; which of these
mean you? 4. He may be one fit for others, and not for me, nor am I to take him
for my Pastor. As the Greek Bishop in London, and many Latin Bishops, that
spoke not English heretofore; or his faultiness may make it my duty to choose a
better. 5. What if the King and Law command the contrary? 6. All this is
nothing for submitting to sinful conditions.

2. As it is a duty to refuse sinful conditions, so of many particular Churches
to choose the fittest for our communion. The French, and Dutch, and Greeks in
London, are not Schismatics for not being subject to this Bishop, or locally
communicating with him. 2. You tell us not how a man shall know he is of the
Bishops communion among a thousand Parish-Churches that differ in many things,
and own the Bishop in some things, and not in others. 3. Few of the Diocese
ever locally communicate with our Bishops; and mentally the Nonconformists
communicate in Essentials at least. 4. Most Christians on earth are guilty of
Schism, and yet are not prevalently Schismatics, but still members of the
Catholic Church. 5. The Bishops, e. g. in France, are more guilty of the
Schism than the Protestants. See Dr. Stillingfleet's Defense of Laud.

1. This is false in the fore-excepted cases: 1. If he be a Bishop to others,
and not to me (unless communion include not subjection; for so we communicate
with many other Bishops). 2. If the condition imposed be a thing which a
Superior Power forbids, (King, or in some cases Parents.)

The matter and consequences are so weighty, as tell us it is not well done to
abuse dull Readers thus with the deceitful unexplained nature of Episcopacy,
and Communion. The love of truth and souls forbid such deceit. 1. If some
receive only Parish-bishops (of the old sort) and others also their
Archbishops, and others such Diocesans as put down all Parish-bishops, which of
these have Episcopal communion? 2. When of old, many Ages, Voting, and
Fighting, could not tell men which was the true Bishop among many competitors,
and when at Rome there were often two or three at once; and when the worst often
carried the possession; and Councils themselves were for diverse; whih was the
Episcopal communion? 3. Is communion and subjection all one with him, or
diverse? If diverse, I have communion with many Bishops that I am not subject to*
If the same, how many must each man be subject to? and in what order and cases?
4. Communion is 1. mental or local; and the first, 1. In essentials. 2.
Integrals. 3. Accidents of Christianity. I have communion with all Christians
in Essentials, with the best in most integrals; with none in all, nor in all
accidents. 4. I am more secure in the mental communion of many Bishops, than of
some one, and of All in Essentials, and certain things, than of some one in
suspected things, especially in universal communion with Christ and his whole
Church.

2. He that has no communion with any true Bishops of Gods institution, in his
judgment, will, and profession, has no communion with Christ's Church: But if
they are, 1. of a false species, 2. incapable, 3. unordained, 4. obtruders not
consented to by the Clergy and the Flock, it is safest to disown them. 5. And ^f
they turn wolves, thorns, and thistles, or heretics.

2. It Is dangerous to refuse communion with the true Episcopi Gregis, but not
with such as depose them. 3. And its doubtful as to the Episcopi Episcoporum.

1. It Is but deceit to distinguish only ordinary and extraordinary, in speaking
of the necessity of means. The Gospel written or preached, is an ordinary
means, which to want is hazardous indeed; so is meditation, prayer, and
sacraments, where they may well be had, and Pastors to administer them. But
there are many lesser means that may be wanting or ignorantly refused, where
salvation is safe. The Church of England thinks preaching to be such, which
forbids men to go for Preaching, and from a bare Reader in his own Parish.
And the Indians converted by Frumentius and Edesius, might have certain
salvation before they had any Pastor. And so may they that cannot know among
contenders which is the true Pastor either as to the species or individual.

But 2. Comunion in every lawful thing is no ordinary requisite means of
salvation.

Mark Reader that he said, that suffer themselves to be excluded from Communion
by such Governors, for refusing submission to unsinful things. And Dr.
Saywell, Bishop Gunnings Chaplain, and this man, make such refusal and schism
damnable. Now mark here, how they make all indifferent imposed things
consequently necessary to salvation, and make all such indifferences to be
Articles of faith, or necessary to salvation to be believed. E.g. if Organs,
the Cross in Baptism, Surplices, Church-images, Exorcisms, and five hundred
such, be indifferent, and commanded by the Bishop, he that is excommunicated
for not conforming to them, or withdraws for it, is a damnable Schismatic:
Ergo, it is necessary to salvation to conform to every one of them in that
case: Ergo, it is necessary to salvation to hold them to be lawful (or else to
use them while I verily take them to be sins). To what a mass now have these
men brought the A^ticles or necessaries to salvation! Does any living man know
all lawful things to be such?

1. Then in Abassia, where there is but one Abuna Bishop, local Communion with
him is impossible to most. 2. And how is the Patriarch of Alexandria, who
ordains him of that Place that is another Kingdom. 2. Then in one
Place-Communion with Papists, in another with Greeks, Moscovites, Abisines,
Armenians, etc. is necessary in unsinful things. 3. Who will judge, but the
Excommunicator, what is unsinful as to his act? 4. What a case were men in at
Rome, under Formosus Stephen, Sergius, Eugenius 4. John 12. and 22. etc. and at
Alexandria under Peter, Meletius, Paulinus, Flavianus, and so often in other
Schisms, and Nullities? 5. The Novatians, and Ioannites had the ordinary means
of salvation in Constantinople, under separate Pastors.

But it is true, that the ordinary means are confined to the visible Church, and
its external Communion where it may be had. Of which more anon.

1. Some think that if God had only commanded men to love him, call upon him,
hate sin, seek life eternal, without an express promise, one might be sure it
should not be done in vain.

2 But God has expressly promised salvation to all that truly love, trust, and
obey him, and seek first Gods Kingdom, and are pure in heart, holy, and love
all men, though they were excommunicate for not crossing, subscribing, or
thinking Diocesans unlawful.

Chap. 3. The Promises of God, and his Covenant on his part, are all one. Those
that God promises to save, shall certainly be sav^d: who those are, the Gospel
fully t^lls us, yea, and told men before the particular Churches were fixed
under their proper Pastors, called Elders and Bishops in the Scripture.

3 Transaction is an ambiguous word. 1. It was transacted by making the promise
by Christ on Earth. 2. It is transacted by giving the consenting penitent
Believer a Right, before God, to Christ and salvation, when he first truly so
consents. 3. It is transacted by a solemn M^nisterial Investiture, sealing
and delivering that Right for the fuller comfort of the consenter, and in soro
Ecclesiae, to give the Right of external Communion, as a Tessara, when the
person is baptiz^d. 4. It is transacted by renewed confirmation, and for
further grace, daily in the Eucharist. I love not to offend you; but I must be
true to truth and souls, and therefore tell men, that these Generals and
Confusions are but Cheats.

3. Would you have men believe that external solemnities are necessary to the
Right of Heart* Covenanters before God, as to salvetion? Or that all external
solemnities are of the same necessity? The Church of England takes Confirmation
to de an external solemnity, for assuring men of Gods favor, by the sign of
Imposition of a Diocesans hands; and yet bind you to profess that it is not
necessary to salvation, but the baptized Infants are certainly and undoubtedly
saved without it. Litanies, Processions, and many external solemnities are not
essential to external Communion with the visible Church.

Chap. 8 O tremendous! Is it no other? Is not the universal visible Church,
consisting of all professed Christians, Headed only by Christ, the only
universal Church visible in the world? Is there no Communion with this as such?
Had the baptized Eunuch (by Philip the Evangelist) no Communion with the
visible Church, nor promise of salvation; nor the Iberians, Indians, and many
others that were baptized before they knew, or had a Bishop? Do not baptizing
Presbyters (and Laymen say, Turtullian and the Papists) assure men of
salvation, though they should not hear of a Bishop? Why was not Diocesan
Episcopacy in the Creed, if the belief and obedience be necessary to salvation?

a (1.) 1. Apostles and Evangelists took men into the visible Communion of the
universal Church, before they had particular Church-Bishops. 2. Fixed
Church Communion was exercised universally under Congregational, or Parochial
Bishops or Pastors, without such as our Diocesans. It must be Pastoral, or true
Episcopal regular Communion. 3. Many Individual Bishops, separating from one
another, have been, and may be in one City. 4. If e. g. the Bishop of Lincoln,
have many Counties, and one differing from him, were chosen by the Clergy at
Leicester, Hartford, etc. as he was by the King, which of them is the Bishop on
the place? If Gloucester Clergy and People had chose another when Goodman, a
Papist, was Bishop, which was the Bishop?

1. 1. Salvation is pronounced by Conformists to be certain upon Baptism,
without any other Sacrament. 2. Popes and Papists are as much as any for tying
salvation to Sacraments; and yet a Pope Victor and his Council, at Benevent,
1078. decree, that rather than Communicate with a Simonist, they should persist
without visible Communion, and in mind joined to Christ, have his Communion. 3.
What shall they do ordinarily in Italy, Spain, France, etc. that have none but
Papist Bishops.

1. Wilful neglect of any known means, shows wilful disobedience against God.
But many means may be ignorantly neglected without destroying assurance of
salvation. Turtullian thought children should stay from Baptism, unless in
danger of death: and Nazianzen was for some years delay. This ignorance damned
not the practisers. Apocryphal books, diverse Sacraments, Ceremonies,
Church-Offices, Doctrines, have been controverted means among true Christians.
2. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. Christ blesses them that hear and do it:
Thousands are mentioned as believing by hearing, and salvation is promised to
Faith.

2. 1. Whoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved: Ask and ye
shall have. True faith and conversion, wrought by hearing Gods word, and
working by true love and prayer, has many a promise of pardon and salvation.
2. Is a baptized praying believer out of the Communion of Christ's Church,
though he doubt of Diocesans, or Patriarchs? He is not.

2. 1. Ordinarily faith comes by hearing, and hearing by preaching; and he that
truly believes shall be saved, John 13.16. 2. I think many Score, or Hundreds
of Protestant Divines have proved that Baptism gives not the first Right to
life, but only solemnly confirms, seals, and by Ministerial investiture
publicly delivers that which true Faith received before. See Gataker's two
Tracts on Dr. Ward's and Dr. Davenant's Theses. 3. What Is Baptism to
Episcopacy; till King James altered it, Women might Baptize in England, and
Priests still may. And are men Baptized into the Name, or Belief of Diocesans
(as Bellarmine says, Baptism binds them to the Pope). Prove this if you can.

2. If Baptism undoubtedly save, at what Age does the effect cease? 2. The
Lords Supper is necessary for corroboration, and for expressing true obedience,
and living by Faith on Christ, where it can lawfully be had, and the need and
use of it is understood.

( B.) This is false: If they be given by a Layman, falsely pretending Orders,
or by one who has no Authority through uncapacity, or usurpation; yet the
receiver loses not his Right; he takes it as from God: and if his ignorance
be not culpable, there is not so much as disobedience in it. 2. If I prove that
Papists have no such Authority as you plead for, are all their Baptisms and
Ordinations null?

III. Episcopal Communion is the Cothurnus, the Hose drawn over your ulcer and
snare. 1. We have mental Communion, in Essentials, with all true Bishops in the
world. 2. We have Subject Communion with true Parish-Bishops. 3. And with their
Ruling Bishops, at least as Magistrates. 4. Novatians, Luciferians, Donatists,
and others, in time of Schisms, had all Orders in Episcopal Communion, and so
have Papists, Greeks, Moscovites, Armenians. 5. Parish-Bishops have more proof
of Authority from Christ than the Diocesans, or many hundred Congregations that
have no other Bishops. 6. Authority may be given by God, without any
Ordination, where it cannot be had, or not without sinning.

1. No doubt but all true Authority must be derived from God.

2. Those to whom it was first given, were the Twelve Apostles. They are
considered, 1. As the Inspired Prophetical Declarers and Recorders of the Laws,
and Doctrine, and Promises of Christ. 2. As chief Pastors of the Church, to
gather and rule it. All Gods gifts and graces that come to us by the mediation
of the Gospel, come by the Apostles mediation in the first sense, as declaring
Christ's Will, how Ministers shall be made in all Ages. And as chief Pastors,
gathering, and settling the first Churches, which, by Christ's Charter, shall
call their Pastors, and so others, to the end of the world; they may be said to
be Mediators herein. 3. But they mediate not as the Donors of the Pastoral
power, as being Pastors themselves, but only as Ministerial investers. The
Sacraments come not to us without the mediation of the Apostles, but they made
them not, nor make them effectual, nor make new Apostles to deliver them.

3. This is deceitful confusion. 1. Authority to Administer Sacraments, and
Authority to call others to administer them, are different things. 2. And so is
succession of Apostolical power, and succession of common Ministry. 3. And so
is giving power, as the Donor, and giving it as an investing servant. 4. And
proper giving it, and improper, which is but qualifying the persons to receive
it.

1. Apostolical Prophetical conveyance harh no such succession. 2. The Flock
that have no Authority to Administer Sacraments, partake of the Authority to
call others to do it. 3. Inferiors may have Authority to call Superiors (else
the highest could not be made) 4. None of these people give the power, but
their Election is part of the receivers qualifications, to whom God gives it
by his Law or Charter; And then as ser^ants, they solemnize the Investiture. 5.
The power of this Law or Charter is never interrupted: But if all Pastors were
dead an Hundred years, it would renew Pastoral power in the Church, without
uninterrupted Donors or Investers.

4. This conveying power is wherever Gods Law, and capable receivers are: A
capable receiver is, 1. One personally qualified with sufficiency and
willingness. 2. And that has the Churches and Ordainers necessary consent,
when ordinary for order sake, the Ordainers then must invest him by declaring
him authorized by God, etc.

The regular Ordination (like public Matrimony after contract) is to be by
authorized Ordainers; and most Bishops, Diocesan, Papists, Greeks, Moscovites,
Armenian, etc. are of more doubtful Authority than Congregational, or Parish
Bishops, though the former usurp the name, as appropriated to them.

b. 2. 1. Then men in Rome, Italy, Spain, France, etc. must be of the Papists
Prelates Churches and Communion. 2. Paulinus and Flavian, Donatists, Novatians,
Arrians, etc. may have Bishops in the same place. And the Orthodox, two, or
more at once: Grotius thought as many as there were Synagogues in a City. 3.
Then if I prove the chief Pastor of a Parish, or City-Church, to be a true
Bishop by virtue of Gods Law; and if he have better Qualification, and
Election, and Ordination, to be of surer Authority than the Diocesan, it is his
Communion that we must prefer. 4. But indeed Baptism and Salvation are
ordinarily given before Episcopal Communion of any sort. 5. They that thought
the Pope Antichrist (as most Protestant Bishops long did), thought it a duty to
reject the Communion of the Bishops of the places where they lived: And
Denmark, and other Countries set up others against them that were ordained by
Bugenhagius, and other Prsbyters. 6. Parochial and Diocesan bounds are humane
mutable institutions. 7. If the Bishop of the place be a Schismatic, the
Communion of a better near is better.

b. II. 1. All causleless separation from any Christians, or causleless
disobedience to any Pastor, or neglect of any Christian duty, needful to the
Churches peace and concord, and every opinion and practice that is against them
does make a man guilty of sinful Division, or Schism in some degree. And while
every Christian has many errors and sins, which all tend to some sinful breach
(as the least sore is solutio continui), I cannot see but every man living has
some guilt of Schism; nor that there is any Church on earth that has not some
such guilt: But every degree of guilt denominateth not the man, or Church a
Schismatic, in a predominant or mortal sense. And in Charity, I hope that even
some of those heinous Schismatics may be saved, that divide the Churches by
their usurpation, obtrusion, sinful impositions, and worldly domination; yea,
some that in blind zeal put down Parish-Bishops, and smite and silence the
Pastors, and scatter the Flocks. And if I must have Communion with none that is
guilty of Schism, with what Church or Bishop should I join? And if their
Sacraments be invalid, what a case is Italy, Spain, France, yea and England in?
Must all be baptized again that they baptized?

2. But it is no schism but a duty for the people as far to forsake a sinful
Bishop (much more an usurper) as Cyprian and that Council advised them to do in
the case of Martial and Basilides.

3. And after all this deceitful confusion, note Reader, that he denies not
our disobedience to be lawful in case of sinful conditions imposed. And if we
fully prove not this to be our case, let our accusers silence us, and let our
guilt be our shame.

4. And if people that had Parish-Bishops on the place where they lived,
lawfully called, shall forsake them to obey a Diocesan that is not on the
place, but perhaps Forty, or Fifty, or Sixty Miles off, and never saw them, and
was obtruded contrary to the ancient Canons, which nullify such, and sets
himself to silence faithful Pastors, and persecute them, and other godly
Christians, for not sinning heinously upon deliberate choice and covenant, does
not even this man conclude such to be Schismatics that are out of the ordinary
way and hope of salvation.

CHAP. III. The consequence of Mr. Dodwell's foresaid doctrine.
1. THOSE that live under the Popish Bishops in Italy, Spain, France, etc. must
live in their communion, and under their command in all unsinful things.

2. The Protestant Churches that have not Episcopal Ordination, are no true
Churches, and have no true Ministers or Sacraments, nor any Covenant-right to
salvation.

3. The Protestant Churches are in the same unchurched damnable case that have
Bishops, if they have not an uninterrupted succession of such from the Apostles
canonically ordained.

4. Therefore the Churches of Denmark, Germany, etc. that have Superintendents
ordained at the Reformation by Bugenhagius, Pomeranus a Presbyter, and all the
rest whose succession was interrupted, are in the same case.

5. It is Schism, and rejecting Sacraments, and Covenant-right to salvation, in
all the people that continue in such Protestant Churches, and communicate with
them.

6. It is better for the Protestants in France to join with the Papists, than
to live as they do without Sacraments or Church Communion.

7. Yet (by self contradiction) it will follow, that certainly the Church of
Rome, and all that derive their ordination from that Church, have no true
Bishops, Ministers, Sacraments, Churches, nor Covenant-right to salvation; for
it is certain their true succession has been often interrupted, 1. By such
utterly incapable persons as all History describes, and even Baronius calls
Apostaticos non Apostolicos; and such as diverse General Councils judged
Heretics, Infidels, Simoniaks, etc. e g. Eugenius 4. who yet kept in. 2. By
such whose false ordination the Canons expressly null. 3. By many Schisms, two
or three Popes at once, of whom none can tell who had the right, or whether
any. 4 By the Popes taking on him to be Christ's Universal Vicar, an Office in
specie usurpt, which he makes his Episcopacy, and as such gives his orders.
And all his Presbyters have turned the true Ministry into the false one of
Mass-Priests; and being no true Ministers, can give no true Sacraments by his
rule.

8. Yea it is certain, that few, if any Churches on earth, can prove such an
uninterrupted succession as he and the Papists describe, and most its known
have no such thing.

9. Therefore if any have such a succession, they cannot know it, it being a
thing that cannot be proved; and so cannot be sure that they are true Churches,
etc.

10. For the certainty of any true Ministry, Church, Sacraments and Salvation,
depends on such knowledge of History as is not in the world: viz. To know that
this Bishop and his Ordainer, and his Ordainer, and his Ordainer, and so up to
the Apostles, were every one true Bishops, and truly Ordained; which no mortal
man can know.

11. Men that by a Prince, against even the Nullifying Canons, can but get
possession of Patriarchal and Diocesan Churches, without the Clergy or peoples
choice, have thereby the power of damning men that fear God, at their pleasure.
For, 1. they must pass for the Bishops of the place. 2. They may command any
unsinful thing, and excommunicate him that does not obey. 3. He is a
Schismatic that suffers himself so to be Excommunicate, and so is in a
damnable state. 4. He cannot hinder it, not knowing the thing to be unsinful.

12. For by this whoever will escape damnable schism, must be one that knows
the unsinfulness (as he speaks) of all things in the world that are such, which
a Prelate may command; or else he must do any thing which he judges sin, if a
Prelate command it. But that is wicked Idolizing man.

13. And therefore by this rule, no man living can be saved that a Prelate has
a mind to damn; or from his damning impositions. For no man living knows the
lawfulness of all lawful things, and therefore may take a commanded thing for
sin that is not: and then if he wilfully do that which he judges sin, he
rebelleth against God; if he do it not, the Prelate may excommunicate him, and
unresistibly make him a damnable schismatic.

14. And hereby there are as many hundred new Articles of Faith made, as there
are things lawful which a Prelate will command. For though all is not to be
done that is to be believed, yet all must be believed to be lawful and duty
which must be done as such: e. g. We cannot love God, worship him, hear and
read his Word, etc. as by Divine obedience, unless we believe it to be our duty
by a Divine command. Therefore when as Mr. Dodwell, Dr. Saywell, and such
others tell us what damning schism it is to disobey such commands of the
Bishops, or to suffer our selves to be Excommunicate, it plainly includes that
it is as damning a sin to take any lawful thing to be a sin, and not to believe
it to be lawful whatever the Bishop shall command. And so to how many hundred
indifferent things may the Articles of our Faith be extended, while it is made
ordinarily necessary to Salvation to do them, and therefore to believe them to
be lawful?

15* By this he confounds Communion and Obedience: I may have communion with
many Bishops whom I am not bound to obey: But I cannot hinder them from
Excommunicating me without obeying them.

16. Yea, he makes Communion and Salvation to lie not only on such obedience,
but on such perfection of obedience as reaches to every lawful indifferent
thing. Whereas God himself under the Gospel accepts of sincerity, instead of
perfection which the Law required of perfect man.

17. This is the way to make Bishops absolute Lords of Kings and States, and
all the world, if they can make them believe that on pain of damnation for
schism, all must obey them even in every indifferent thing.

18. If you would ferret him out of his Borough, ask Mr. Dodwell, what if the
Bishop of the place where I live contradict the Archbishop, or the Synod, or
most of the Bishops in the land, which must I obey to escape damning schism?
Doubtless he will allow me to disobey my Bishop. But what if the National Synod
gainsay the Provincial? He will say, I may disobey the Provincial? But what if
a Council of many Nations, called General, gainsay the National? and it be
known that our National Church is gainsayed by the far greatest part of the
Bishops in the world? which must I obey? If the National, why not a Provincial
against them? And why are not they Schismatics for disobeying a General
Council? If it be the greater Council that I must obey, 1. What Is become then
of his doctrine of obeying the Episcopacy of the place where we live? 2. And
then we are brought under a foreign Jurisdiction. 3. And who but the Pope must
call that General Council, preside, approve, etc.? 4. And among all the
erroneous and contradicting Councils called General, how shall all Christians
know which of them to obey? We see whither all will come at last. But says
Bishop Bilson, To such Councils called General, we owe respect for concord, if
they abuse us not by error or usurpation; but subjection and obedience we owe
them none.

19. How hardly will these men ever resolve one's conscience which is to be
taken for the Episcopacy of the place, when there are in the same place both
different species of Bishops, and also diverse Bishops of the same species, and
all pretending to be right. In Ireland both the Papist and Protestant Bishops
pretend to just succession; and so they did in Bohemia, Poland, Transylvania,
Hungary, etc. And does salvation lie on men's knowledge who has right?

20. And how contrary is it to the way of Christ, and the ancient Church (that
made the Baptismal covenant the terms of salvation) for men to make it
necessary for every poor man and woman that will have Covenant-right to
salvation, and escape damning schism, to be able to decide the controversies
between all such pretenders, and to know whether their Bishops be of a true
species, and have true Ordination, and to be such rare Historians as to know
that all the line of Ordainers down from the Apostles to their Bishops, were
truly ordained? O difficult terms!

21. Does he not condemn all those Ancient and Modern Christians as Fautors o^
damning Doctrine, who thought that when there were none of the Clergy to do it,
laymen might baptize and give the Lords Supper? Grotius told us his judgment
for it in Dissertat. de Caenae administrat. ubi Pastores non sunt: And he has
vindicated Tertullian's judgment for it, confessed by Rigaltius. Anton. Govea
tells us it was the case of the Christians of Malabar, etc. called of St.
Thomas, whose Bishops being all destroyed, they caused a Deacon to administer
the Eucharist, as the Bishops and Presbyters had done (which Grotius also
repeateth). Ionan. Antiochenus magnified by Socrates, lib. 6. cap. 3. when at
Antioch there were two Churches, with two Bishops, Meletius and Paulinus, stuck
to Meletius till he died, and after, for three years, would communicate with
neither. Did he by this become a damned Schismatic, or lose his Covenant-right
to salvation?

22. Many of old were chosen for Bishops before they were baptized (the cases
of Ambrose, Nectarius, Synesius, etc. are known): If the Church thought them
all to be in a state of damnation, for want of the Sacrament, it is strange that
they would choose them to be their Bishops (though it was irregular).

Indeed it is true that Grotius says ( ibid. in fine), that Chrysostomes,
Nazianzenes, and others cases tell us, that it was ordinary in the Greek-Church
to delay baptizing even the children of the faithful, till at full years (about
Twenty). Were they all that while without any promise of salvation, or ordinary
hope?

23. What a task will it be for Mr. Dodwell to tell us what state the baptized
are in till they receive the Lords Supper? Baptism saves them once; but yet
till they receive the Lords Supper by a Minister, in successive Episcopal
Orders, they have no Covenant-title to salvation, by his way. But some
Communicate not till Thirty years old, some not till One and Twenty, and in
England scarce any before Sixteen. Are they all this while the children of God,
or of the Devil? And when is it that their Christianity cease for want of the
other Sacrament? I believe that if they truly believe, they are Gods children
before they come to the second Sacrament (or the third, as some call it.) Was
Constantine Mag. in a state of damnation, who was not baptized till near his
death? Or the good Emperor, Valentinian, who died unbaptiz^d, but taken by
Ambrose for a blessed man? What absurdities are men fain to use, to get the
Mastery of the Christian world, by making men believe that they can save or
damn them by the power of Sacraments?

24. And how is this man for Conformity, by which they subscribe assent to the
certain salvation of Infants, so dying without Confirmation; and ordain that
the Lords Supper be not Administered to any till they are ready to be Confirmed,
by learning the Catechism, and recognizing the Covenant? etc.

25. Does he not make the chief Bishops and Reformers of the Church of England,
to be the promoters of the Doctrine which he accounts so damnable, when Dr.
Stillingfleet in his Irenicon recites the words of Cranmer, and others of them,
at a Consultation, downright against not only the necessity of his
uninterrupted succ^ssion, but also even of Episcopal Ordination it self? And I
have elsewhere cited about Fourteen of them, for the validity of Ordination
without Bishops: And Dr. Stillingfleet, Bishop Edw. Reignnolds, and many more,
held that no Form of Government was of Divine determination. Did all these
plead for damning Schism, against all title to salvation?

26. And what could more directly contradict the main tenor of the Gospel,
which tells us of the saving power of the Word Preached, how it converteth
souls, and promises salvation to all that truly believe and repent? Insomuch
that Paul thanks God that he baptiz^d few of the Corinthians, because God sent
him not to baptize, but to Preach the Gospel?

27. But his Doctrine feigneth, that God will damn them that truly believe,
repent, love God, forsake sin, for want of the Sacrament: or else that the Word
converteth none, but only Sacraments convert men.

28. And then it will follow, that none but unbelievers, impenitent wicked men
should be first admitted to the Sacrament; for if that only converteth, then it
is only the unconverted that must first be received to it.

29 When all is done, he does but contradict his end; for it is hard to find a
National Episcopacy on earth, which imposes no unlawful thing on Ministers or
people: And with all such he speaks not for our Communion.

30. Either Ordination, and Collation of Church Power, must be given by
Superiors, or by Equals: if by Equals, why may not Presbyters make Presbyters?
If by Superiors, then who shall give the Pope his Power? Or if you think any
other be the highest, who makes them such? Who gives the Archbishop of
Canterbury his Power?

31. In short, as far as I can understand, these men deny all Covenant-right to
salvation to all men living, and all true Sacraments and Church Communion, or
at least, all knowledge of any such thing; seeing, as it is certain, that in
most Churches such Ordination as they describe, has not had an uninterrupted
succession, so no man is sure that any one Church or man has had such. And
they that silence us for not subscribing, declaring and swearing obedience to
our Diocesans, and other Ordinaries, are bold men, if they dare swear
themselves, that they are true Bishops, and have any Authority to rule and
command us, by an uninterrupted succession of a Canonical Episcopal Ordination
down from the Apostles.

But I have already in my Book of Concord, Part 3. Chap. 9. opened so many
palpable, and pernicious absurdities, and ill consequents of Mr. Dodwell's
Doctrine, which he dare not undertake to answer, but s^ly passes by, that I
must expect the Reader will there peruse them, who will judge uprightly between
him and me; and therefore will hear what both have said. And those that will
judge falsely upon partial trust, to save themselves the labor of trial, are out
of the reach of ordinary means to be saved from deceivers.

CHAP. IV. My words of Gods Collation of Ministerial Authority, Vindicated from
the forgeries and fallacies of Mr. Dodwell.
. 1. CHRIST has taught me to judge of Prophets, or Teachers, by their fruits
more than by their clothing, Mat. 7. And the fruits which are of God, are
those which express the Divine Nature and Image, viz. holy Light and Truth,
holy Love, and holy Life and Practice, and the promoting of these in the world.

And Christ has taught me, that the Devil is, 1. Against holy Light and Truth,
the Prince of Darkness, and a Liar, and the Father of Lies. 2. Against holy
Love, accusing, slandring, and rendering as odious the servants and ways of
Christ. 3. Against holy, righteous, and sober living; and an opposer of it, and
a persecutor and murderer of the Saints.

And those that are likest Satan in these three parts of his Image, and whose
works are more certainly the works of these three Diabolical Principles, I am
taught by Christ to judge of by their fruits* So much as there is in Mr.
Dodwell's labors, of holy Truth, holy Love, and helps to holy living, so much
sure is of God. But so much as there is in his, or any of his Parties cause, of
deceit and falsehood, and defense of ignorance, so much as there is of
Malignity, Calumny, or making odious the servants of Christ; so much as there
is of cruelty and destruction, and silencing faithful Ministers, and promoting
ungodliness, by upholding its defenses, I am obliged to resist, as being from
him, against whom in my baptismal Covenant I was engaged.

. 2. He gives his Reader the sum of my doctrine in this point, p. 29, etc. a
chain of forgeries, or putid falsehoods. Either he knew that he wrote falsely, or
he did not; if yea, then it seems he thinks that God or his Church needed his
lies: if not, how unfit is he to write against what he understands not? But
what made him devise a frame of his own words of above six pages, to express my
words by, if he meant not to deceive those that would believe his writing
without reading mine?

. 3. And whether it be from the Lord of love, or the enemy of love, that he
goes so far to the unchurching and damning of so many of the Reformed
Churches, besides the Churches of the Southern and Eastern parts of the world
(if not of all Churches on earth) let the sons of Love consider.

. 4. And whether his endeavors to persuade all the Nonconformists to give over
preaching Christ's Gospel, and all public Worship of God, till they can
conscionably conform, and his reasonings for that frame that has long excluded
true discipline, and sheltered ignorance and ungodliness, be of God, and all
his copious discourses to that end, are to save souls, or to starve and murder
them, I leave to men's impartial trial.

. 5. I so often and fully repeated my judgment of the Calling of the Ministry,
as leaves his Forgeries inexcusable. The sum is this.

1. There is no power but of God. 2. Gods universal Laws are the prime Laws,
and the only universal Laws of the Church or world. 3. In his Laws God has
established or instituted the work and the species of that Ecclesiastical
Ministry which he will have to teach and guide his Church to the end of the
world. And therein signified his owning of them as sent by him, and promised
them his help and blessing. 4. In that Law he has told us what men they are
that he will thus own and bless, and described the Essentials and the Integrals
of their Receptive disposition or qualifications. 5. He has in that Law told
us who shall be the tryers and judgers of the personal qualifications; and that
ordinis gratia, ordinarily their approbation, choice, or consent, shall be a
relative part of their Receptive qualification. 6. God himself gives all the
personal qualifications. 7 He is ready to help the approvers and chusers to
discern all these, and to judge aright of them. 8. The person being thus made a
capable Recipient by personal qualifications and relative (due Approbation,
Election and Consent) God's Donation or Law does give him Right, and oblige him
to the office-work. And the Electors, Approvers, and Consenters, are none of
the proper efficient Donors or causes of this right and obligation, but only
efficient causes of his relative receptive capacity. 9. That therefore the
right and obligation is immediately from Gods Law by resultancy, as the
established medium of Gods conveyance; but not immediately without any means of
his receptively, to make him materiam dispositam. 10. That all this is true
both of Sovereign Civil Power, and of Church Power in Bishops and Pastors. 11.
That yet besides Approbation and Election, God has for the public notice and
order of the Church, appointed a Regular Ministerial Investiture, by which the
Approved shall be solemnly put into possession (as Kings are crowned, and
Ministers instituted): and Ordination usually contains both the approbation,
part of the election, and the investiture. 12 But this Investiture being but a
Ministerial delivery of possession, proves not the Investor to be any Donor of
the Power to the King, or to the Bishop or Pastor. 13. Nor is it necessary save
ordinis gratia, and in foro ecclesiae, to avoid intrusion and confusion* but
not when it is set against the end, or the end may and must be sought without
it. 14. Who it is that has the power of this Ordination (Approbation and
Investiture) is much of the controversy of these times: some say it is the
Magistrate: but those that say it is the bishops, are not agreed what species
of bishops it is; whether the chief Pastors of each particular Parish true
Church, or only a Diocesan that is the sole bishop of many parishes that are no
true Churches; or only Diocesans that are Archbishops over many true
Parish-churches and bishops. 15. But the Fundamentum juris being Christ's
Statute Law or Grant, and all that is left to man being but qualitatively or
relatively to make the person an immediately capable Recipient, and
ministerially invest him; therefore it follows, that if at Alexandria, Antioch,
Jerusalem, Cesarea, Constantinople, London, all the old bishops were dead or
heretics, a just title may be restored without the ordination of one that had
successive canonical ordination; because there needs no efficient donor but
Christ and his Law, and the receptive capacity may be without such ordination
where it is not to be had (as among Papists that will not ordain one on lawful
terms, etc.) for Order it self is but for the thing ordered, and not against
it: And I will have mercy and not sacrifice ^morals before rituals); and all
power is to edification, etc. are certain rules. And God never made men judges
in partem utram libet, whether there shall be Churches, and Pastors, and
Worship, or none; or whether there shall be Civil Government or none; no, nor
of what the species the Church-Offices shall be. 16. I use to explain this by
many expository, similitudes. 1. If the Laws of God authorize Sovereignty, and
the Constitution of the Kingdom say it shall be Monarchy; were it Elective, the
Electors are not Efficients of power, but determiners of the Recipient: And if
it be Hereditary or Elective, the Investers by coronation, are no efficients of
the power; but Ministerial deliverers of possession, and that but necessary ad
ordinem, and not ad esse potestatis.

2. If the King by a Charter to the University, state the power of the
Chancellor, Vicechancellor, Proctors, and all the Masters of Colleges, and
then tell them who shall be capable, and how chosen, and how inve^ted; here his
power is immediately from the Kings Charter, as the efficient Instrument; and
all that others do is but to determine of the Recipient, and invest him.

3. So it is as to the power of the Lord Mayor of London, and the Mayors and
Bailiffs of all Corporations.

4. So it is in the essential power of the Husband over the Wife; the woman
chooses who shall have it; and the Parson that marries them, investeth him in
it; but God only is the efficient donor of his Law.

17. Therefore it is not in the power of the Electors, Approvers, or Investors,
to alter any of the Power established by God. If both the woman and the Priest
say, that the man shall be her Husband, but shall have no government of her, it
is a nullity; Gods Law shall stand. If the City and the Recorder say, You shall
be Lord Mayor, but not have all the power given by the Kings Charter, its vain,
and he shall have all that the Charter gives him. If the A Bp crown the King,
and say, You shall be King, but not have all the power stated by the
Constitution on the King, this depriveth not the King of his power, (unless he
give away that which God has not stated on him, but men) so if an Ordaining
Prelate, Patron, or Parish say, This is a true Parish Church, and we choose,
and Ordain you the true Pastor of it, but you shall have but part of the true
Pastoral Power stablished on the office by God, it is null: Gods Institution
shall be the measure of his power.

18. But I confess, that if God had left Church Officers as much to the will of
men as he has done the Civil, the case had been otherwise; for Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy, are all lawful: And the King, or other supreme
power may make new Species of Judges, and Magistrates, and Officers, and alter
them as they see cause. And it would have been so in the Church, if as the
Italians at Trent would have carried it, Christ had immediately Instituted only
the Papacy, and left it to the Pope to make Bishops, and to Bishops to make
Priests: And yet I would not wrong the worst. I cannot say, that they would
have empowered the Pope to change the Species of Priests or Bishops. But God
has fixed the Species, by making a settled Law for all the work, and all the
Authority to do it, though Accidentals may be altered in work and Office.

. 6. This is the clear state of my assertions, which how grossly Mr. Dodwell
has falsified in his forged description, I will not stay to open.

But it is a great stress and fabric that he lays on the contrary
supposition, that his Species of Bishops are the givers of the Powers, and so
we can have no other, or more than they are willing to give us: And let him
that thinks he spoke a sentence of truth and sense, to prove it, enjoy his
error. I would quickly prove the contrary to him, if I knew what he denies.

. 7. I. If he deny that God has Instituted the Office of the sacred Ministry,
and Pastorship in his Law, 1. The Scripture will shame him to all that believe,
and understand it. 2. And if it be not divinely established, men may alter it;
and what is all this stir about, to keep up their Domination?

. 8. II. If he think that God has only Instituted Teachers, or Rectors, in
genere, but not in Specie, then I give him the same answer as before. Scripture
will shame him, and men may make new Species of Church-Pastors, and unmake, or
alter them; and how many, or how often, who knows? And who be the men that have
this Office-changing-power, that we may know whether, and how far, and how long
we are bound to obey them?

. 9. III. If he think that Gods Law has not described the Essential
Qualifications of the Recipient, then Prelates may make Pastors of Infidels,
Mahometans, Bedlams, or Blasphemers, if not of Horses or Dogs.

. 10. IV. If he think that Gods Law has determined of no way of Election,
Approbation, or judging who is capable, then every man may make himself a
Bishop or Priest, and the Turk may make Bishops for Christians, or a company of
Lay-enemies and persecutors may do it; and then the Bishops Judgment and
Ordination will have no Divine Authority.

. 11. V. If when the Recipient is duly qualified, and chosen, and capable, he
does not think that Gods Law, or Grant, is a sufficient signification of his
Donative will, and a fundamentum juris, and an obliging instrument, 1. He must
deny the very nature and force of Gods Law, and Grant. And 2. He makes it less
effective than the Laws, Charters, and Donations of men are; For which he
cannot have the least show of true reason.

. 12. VI. Can he devise any other sort of power in the Ordainers, than I have
named? What is it? If he say, that they give the Office-power; I ask, Is the
controversy about the word [ Give] or the Act? If that which I have named be
called giving, let him use his liberty, and call it how he will. 1. But as to
the Thing, what is it more than I have described? It is God, and not man that
made the Office in genere and specie. Did our Bishops make the universal Law,
which stablisheth the Office in the world? 2. And the Bishop never had that
power, and therefore cannot give that which he had not: It Is Dr. Hammond's
reason against Presbyters ordaining, N^mo dat quod non habet. The word Office
or Power and Duty, signifies an Accident, which cannot transire a subjecto in
subjectum. The Orda^ners have their own power, but they have not another man's.
3. Do they give it as Masters and Owners, or only as the Donors Ministers? No
doubt they will say as his Ministers And do I need to prove to Mr. Dodwell,
that servants are not the Donors, and give not their own, but deliver their
Masters? Stewards themselves are but entrusted with the performance of their
Masters will, in delivering his Goods as he requires them.

. 13. And this is so evident a truth, that the Papists themselves, who would
fain have all power flow from the Pope, are yet forced to plead for it, (as you
may see in W Iohnson's, alias Terret's answer to my first) because else they
cannot defend the Papal Power. For the Pope has been sometimes chosen by the
Roman people, sometime by the Roman Presbyters, sometimes by people and
Presbyters, sometime by the Italian Bishops, sometimes by Emperors, and now by
Cardinals; and none of all these were Popes, nor had Papal power; and if they
were the givers, must give what they never had: Whereupon the Papists are
fo^c't to grant that the Electors do but determine who shall be the Recipient,
but that the power flows to him ^m^edi^tely from Gods Law or Institution.

. 14. And the Prelatists must needs say the same, or else grant, that
Inferiors, that never had Superior power, may yet give it others; for how else
shall the supreme Ecclesiastical power, in every National Church, be given? If
it be in a Primate, or a Synod, those that have not the supreme power must give
it; for there is none above them, or equal to do it: And so Archbishops are
chosen, and Councils called.

. 15. And thus almost all Societies, by contract, are formed. e. g. The King
gives Commission to several men to List voluntary Soldiers, and be their
Captains, and command them: Every Soldier chooses his own Captain, and
thereby subjecteth himself to him; but it is not by giving him his power, for
that flows immediately from the Kings Commission; but by making himself a
subject to it, and so ma^ing the Captain Relatively, a Recipient of power from
God, and the King, over this particular man; for the Soldiers have no
governing-power to give, nor are superiors to their Captain*

. 16. And thus Servants imprope^ly only make men their Masters, not by giving
them a Domestic Ruling-power (which they never had themselves), but by making
themselves the Correlate Subjects, and so putting their Masters into the
Relation, to which Gods L^w immediately gives the Ruling-power. All the power
is from God: and God does not first give it the Servant, Soldier, etc. to give
the Master, or Captain, but the Servants, or Soldiers consent is, a Causa sine
quae non, dispos^tiva Recipientis, to make the Receiver capable of it from God.

. 17. And indeed all Kings and Sovereigns thus hold their Sovereignty from God.
Though God has not made the form, in Specie, necessary; all power is of God,
and the Sovereignty from him, by no mediate Efficient below his Law: It Is a
falsehood in politics to say* that the people, as such, efficiently give the
Sovereign his power, and that he is universis minor in Authority, though he is
not universis melior; and therefore their common good is more than his, the
finis regiminis* Nor is it true, that Richard Hooker says, that in defect of
Heirs it escheateth to the people; but only that it belongs to the people to
choose a new Recipient, to whom the power shall flow from Gods Law, and not
from them. I do not think that the King of France, Spain, or England, will
believe that their power is given ^fficiently by, and flows from their
People, Parliaments, or the Prelate that Crowns them. And the case is
evidently the ^am as to the Ministry.

. 18. And the French Papists (by some called Protestants), who are for the
Ecclesiastical Sovereignty of General Councils above the Pope, do not believe
that the Pope gives them their power, though he may call them: But whoever
calls them, or chooses them, they suppose that God only gives them their
power.

. 19. And in all these cases, it is notorious, that an interr^ption of due
Election and Investiture, hinders not the restoration of interrupted power.
If the Law say, whoever is thus and thus chosen to be Lord Chancellor, Lord
Chief Justice, Lord Admiral, etc. shall have such, and such power, and be thus,
and thus invested in the place, if there were an intercision of an hundred
y^ars, the next person, so chosen, will from the Law immediately receive his
power. And the Investiture is but for public Order, and the Investers regular
succession (no nor the act it self), never necessary, ad esse, where it cannot
be had, as I proved against Mr. D. in my Book of Concord. The Archbishops
succession that Crowns him, is not necessary to the power of the King.

. 20. And obligation to the Office-work, is as essential to the Officer, as is
the power to do it: And it is only the Governors that lay on another an
obligation to duty (except what by contract a man lays on himself): and none
are the obliging Governors of the highest Powers, Civil or Ecclesiastical, but
God; therefore theirs must flow only from God. Therefore the thing is not
unusual. And if Bishops were as much superior to Parish-Pastors, as the Lord
Chancellor is to a Constable, yet they were but Governors of them, in tantum
quoad exercitum, and not Donors of their power: The Constables power is
immediately from the Sovereigns Law, and so is the Ministers from Christ; for
he is the only universal Sovereign.

. 21. Mr. Dodwell says, These are bare similies.

Ans. These are plain explications of the conveyance of power from the
Sovereign of all.

He says, That the power is not properly given by the Ordainer, is but begged
by me.

Ans. A begging affirmer may easily write Books at that rate.

But says ^e, They connot give an instance from humane Charters, where the
acts of men, not invested, are valid in Law.

Ans. 1. Will you tell the King so to his saace, that before his Coronation no
act is valid that he does? 2. No doubt but (as public Matrimony after secret
Marriage is necessary, in foro civili ordinis gratia, where it may be had, and
yet when it was done by a Justice, without a Priest, yea, or by the persons
public contract only, it was no nullity, no, nor coram Deo before, so) to
regular order, the most orderly Investiture is needful, but not ad esse, much
less that all the Investers circumstances also, and all his predecessors, have
been regular. 3. Investing here, is the act of a servant only, solemnizing the
entrance, or delivery of possession: But such a servant is not the Owner, and
Don^^ of the power. 4. The Papists and Protestants confess that the power of
Inv^sting is so humane and mutable, that it cannot be necessary, ad esse
potestatis. I told you how often the power of choosing and investing Popes has
beeen changed. And the old Canons make the Act of three Bishops necessary to
Invest, or consecrate one. But did God determin^ of three? Or can you prove on^
Bishops Ordination a Nullity? 5. In the Civil State some Officers are made
without any Investiture (as Constables, Headboroughs, Church Wardens and
others), and some the Charter imposes Investiture on: But whether if
Recorders, Stewards, Town Clerks, that by Charter are to Invest, be dead, or
refuse their Act, the Mayor, Bailiff, or other Officers be therefore none, and
the Government be dead, let Lawyers tell you. 6. Sure I am that Hen. 4. and the
rest of the Germane Emperors, who fought, and strove so long against
Hildebrand, and his Adherents, for the Investing-power, were no Bishops; and
all the Councils of Bishops, who stood for the Emperors, never took them for
Bishops; and therefore thought not that Ivesting was an Act proper to
Episcopal-power. 7. I have before proved, that ancient Writers, and Papists,
and many Protestants agree, that Baptism is valid administered by Laymen, that
I say not women. 8. Mr. Dodwell, self-condemningly says, that a presumptuous
Ordination of the Priest serves to the validity of Sacraments, though indeed he
were not Ordained; and that God is bound to make such Acts to the people good.
9. Mr. D. must beg belief instead of proving it, if he tell us, that the stated
teaching of Gods Word to a Church, is not as truly the work of the Pastor, as
is the Admistring the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper. It is one of
the principal of the Jesuits jugglings, to make the people think, that till
they can prove their Teachers the rightly Ordained Ministers of Christ, they
are not bound to hear them, or believe them. Our Parents (mostly) were never
Ordained Bishops, or Priests: Must not Children therefore hear them, and
believe them ( fide humana)? And has not that God, who appointed Parents to
teach his Law to their children, lying down, and rising up, and to educate them
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, thereby signified, that Parents
instruction is the first ordinary means appointed by God for the conveying of
saving knowledge, and faith? And if the help of Parents, though unordained, be
Gods ordinary means of the first saving faith, shall We say with such men as
Mr. Dodwell, that we have no Covenant right to salvation, till we have the
Sacrament from the hand of a Minister that had a regular Ordination,
uninterruptedly down from the Apostles? 10. Did the Three hundred, Act. 2. and
the Eunuch, Act. 8. refuse Baptism till they were satisfied by proof, that the
Baptizers were rightly called Ministers? Paul tells those that questioned his
Apostolic power, that he was an Apostle to them whatever he was to others; and
that they should know first, whether Christ were in them, and so whether he
were not a true Minister, and not begin at the trying of the Ministry, 2 Cor.
13.4, 5, 6, 7. Gal. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. 11. The Acts of the Parliament, called
irregularly by General Monk, were they that restored King Charles the 2 d and
were confirmed by him as valid, through the defect of a Regular Summons, and by
necessity. 12. I have fully proved in my Treatise of Episcopacy, that the
Species of Bishops, which Mr. Dodwell pleaded for, is not the same which the
Churches had for 200. or 300. years. And then where is his regular succession
from the Apostles?

22. He says also, p. 37. They cannot give an Instance (of any power settled by
Charter), whereupon the Acts of any persons, lawfully Invested, though
confessedly less qualified, are not thought valid: A plain sign that their
Investiture does properly confer such power.

Ans. Words fitted to deceive. 1. He that is unqualified is not lawfully
Invested, and yet the Act of the Invester may be right, had the Recipient been
lawful.

2. He says, Less qualified; when he knew that our question is of the
unqualified.

3. Investiture gives it, as the Act of the Power and Donor, by a servant
delivering orderly possession, but does not make, or prove the Investing
Minister the Owner, or Donor, no more than he was that from the Emperor Henry
delivered the Bishops the Staff and Ring; or the Priest that Marries the
persons

4. Buroughs and Cities choose, and return Burgesses for Parliament by
Charter; yet if they are unqualified when they come thither, the choice is
judged null. If a City choose, and Invest a proclaimed Rebel for Mayor, I will
believe it null, or invalid, though Mr. D. will not: And if he write Forty
Books with such streams of confident words, to prove, that the Election, and
Investiture of the d^^lared Heretic Bishops at Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, and most of the Empire in many Ages ( Arrians, Eutichians,
etc.) were yet judged valid by the Councils of the Orthodox, no man that ever
read the Councils will believe him.

5. Nor will I believe him, that any Bishops Ordination can make a true Bishop,
or Priest, of a Woman, an Infant, or a professed Heathen, Infidel, or proper
Heretic, or any incapable person, any more than he can make a Woman to be a
Husband, or a dumb man the University Orator.

. 23. He says, They cannot give an Instance of any Power settled by Charter,
whereupon a failure of all who are by the Charter empowred to dispose of
Offices, the power must devolve to those who are not by the Charter empowred to
dispose of them and where such a Charter is not thought in Law to fail, by
becoming unpracticable, till the supreme power interpose, etc.

Ans. Still the same fraud: If all empowred to dispose of Offices, is an
ambiguous word. The Prince disposes of them, by giving the Power, and the
Electors by choosing the Receivers, and the Minister by delivering the
Insignia: If Electors, and all die indeed, there are none to determine of the
Receiver: And yet if the Plague kill most of the Electors at Age, and leave not
a due number, when the rest left come to Age, and choose, the Charter will
renew the Office-power. 2. But if it be only the Ministerial Invester that
fails, the sense of the Lawgiver must be judged of by the words, and by other
notices, and the light of common Reason. e. g. Whether it be the meaning of the
Charter which says, that the Recorder shall give the Oath, or the former Mayor
shall deliver the Insignia, that if the Recorder, or Mayor be dead, or sick, or
mad, or wilfully refuse, the City shall have no Mayor; or if no Priest will
Marry folks, all England must live unmarried; or if the Archbishops and Bishops
will Ordain none but Heretics, all the Churches must have no other Ministers.
And here Nature and Christ teach us, that the Means is only for the End, and
Order for the thing ordered; and God will have us understand his own Laws so,
as that Rituals give place to Morals: I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. And
sure if the King of Spains Charter, for the making of Governors at the West
Indies, should not express, or reasonably imply a Remedy, in case of the
failure of circumstances of mere Order, his Country might be lost before they
could send to Spain for a new Charter or new power.

And Mr. D. says, Which is the very case impugned by me of the Nonconformists:
And so judge whether he must not turn a Seeker, and say, that all Ministry,
Churches, and Sacraments cease, till a new Commission comes from Heaven, upon
the failure of every such circumstance; yea, when almost all the Churches
charge each other with failures and intercisions, and the very species of the
Ordainers is so much altered.

If the King send his Army into the Indies (or his Navies), and mention no
power but the Generals, as chief, or no way of choosing a new General, but by
the Field-Officers choice, and giving him an Oath by the Secretary, etc. yet no
man doubts but it was his meaning, that if the General die, or turn Rebel,
yea, and the major part of the Field-Officers, or the Secretary, the Army
should choose another General, rather than perish, and the Kings service
miscarry.

. 24. He adds, They cannot give an Instance of any humane Charter, that ever
allows any person empowered, to extend his own power by a private exposition of
the Charter, against the sense of all the visible supreme powers of the society.

Ans. This opens the Core of the Aposthume.

1. We deny, as confidently as any French, or Italians affirm, that there is
any such thing at a supreme visible power over the universal Church, under
Jesus Christ; and therefore none such is disobeyed, or contradicted.

2. And we maintain, That by Divine appointment there is no visible National
supreme Church Power, but that of the Civil Christian Sovereign; and therefore
none such disobeyed.

3. And we hold, that no man can extend his own power further than Christ's own
Law extends it. False expositions give no power.

4. And therefore we prove by your own Rule, that (Christ being the only
supreme universal Ruler, and having described and specified the Office of a
Pastor, and order of a Church) no Bishops can by their private exposition* turn
a single Church into a Diocesan, or a Presbyter of Christ's description into an
half Presbyter of their own making: But if they make a man a Pastor, his power
and work shall be what Christ says, and not what the Orda^ner will.
Investing-Ministers Acts are null, if they contradict the Order of the Donor:
If the King give you a Parsonage of 300. l. a year, and the Instituter say, you
shall have but 100. l. out of it, it is vain; he instituteth you but as the
Donors instrument in the same Benefice, and power given by him.

25. He adds, p. 38. Where can they find such a Charter for the power of
Presbyters in Scripture as they speak of?

Ans. Nay, then we are far from agreeing, if you think that the very Species of
a Pastors Office is not found in Scripture, as of Christ's institution. Th^n it
seems, the Bishops make the very Species: The Italian Bishops at Trent scarce
gave so much to the Pope. Then why may not the Bishops put down Presbyters, if
they make the Species, or make as many Species as they please? Indeed Dr.
Hammond thought that there was no evidence of the Order of Subject Presbyters
in Scripture-times. And if God instituted none, let us have none. But I have
told you before, and often, where in Scripture the true Pastors Office is
described.

. 26. He adds, They may find some actual practices; but will they call that a
Charter?

Ans. This is indeed to strike at our foundation. If we prove not Christ to be
King, and Lawgiver, and that his Laws, or Governing-precepts, were partly given
by himself, and partly by his Spirit, in his Commissioned Apostles, and these
Recorded, Sealed, and Delivered in Scripture: If we prove not, that these, as
the authorized Agents of Christ, delivered his Will by words and practice, in
settling, and describing the Pastors of his Churches, then take the Ministry,
and spare not for man's invention. I cited you before, the Texts that are our
proof.

But if the Office, which you call Priestly, be of man's making in specie, I
doubt the Diocesans will prove so much more; for many Papists doubt of the
Divine right of Prelacy, that doubt not of the Divine unalterable right of the
Priestly, or Presbyter-power and work. And will this cure men of Schism, to
tell them, that God has not so much as made, and specified the Parish-Pastors
Office, and it is but a humane invention which you forsake?

. 27. And I would crave of this confident man to consider, whether he reach not
high, and horrid Sacriledg, if he make the Invester to be first the Owner, and
then the Donor? Did we devote our selves to Patrons in our Ministry, or to
Diocesans, or immediately to God? If we covenanted only to be Gods Ministers,
for the Churches good, then let them take heed that claim propriety in us as
Priests. And if Tithes and Glebes were devoted to God, and not to Princes, or
Patrons, I doubt he that makes Patrons the Proprietaries, and proper Donors,
will prove Sacrilegious, and be convinced at last, that he should only have
taken Princes and Pastors for such Trustees as determine of the Receiver, but
give not the things.

. 28. If it be otherwise, Princes, Patrons, and Prelates, are greater and
richer than I ever thought them 1. Then, all the Bishoprics in England are the
King's, till he give them. 2. Then all the Tithes, Glebes, and Temples in
England, are the Patrons, till they give them; or else the Bishops, or
Chancellors, who investeth men in them by institution and induction. And the
Patron and Bishop may have a hard suit to determine which is the Proprietor. 3.
And then a Bishop that Ordains a thousand Priests, was the Owner of all their
Relations before; and so as they that are for the pre-existence of souls,
dispute, whether they pre-existed individually, or only in anima universali; so
these that are for the pre existence of Priesthoods in the Diocesans, must
dispute, whether they were in the Prelate a thousand individual Priesthoods
before, or but one common Priesthood, that fell into individuals by Ordination.
If they say, that they were but virtually in the Prelate, that kills their
Cause; for then they did not pre-exist (for existere est esse extra causas).
And this only says, that the Prelate had an effective virtue that could make
them. But the species was made before; and so was the obliging, and Donative
Law; therefore the Prelate had not power to do what God had done before.

. 29. I take it for granted (because I know him), that all this is nothing to
Mr. Dodwell; but to me it is moreover something, 1. That the highest esteemers
of Diocesans Ordination, make it but a Sacrament. 2 And that the Investing
Minister is not the Owner and Donor of the Relation and Gift in any of their
Seven Sacraments.

1. In Baptism God only gives the Right and Relation, which the Minister by
Investiture solemnizeth, but gives it not as his own: Else every Layman and
woman by their judgment, should have multitudes of Christendoms of their own to
bestow.

2. In Confirmation the Priest never pretends to be the giver of the Spirit,
but by his act to fit the person to receive it: The Holy Ghost is said to fall
on them that heard the word (before Baptism), Act. 10.44, 45 and they were
after baptized: He fell on them, Act. 11.15. And Peter and John prayed for the
Samaritans, that they might receive the Holy Ghost, Act. 8.15. and they laid
hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost, v. 17. but not that they gave
the Holy Ghost, though by the laying on of their hands, and their prayers, he
was given, as he was on them without, Act. 2.

3. And in Matrimony it is confessed, that the Priest is not the Owner and Donor
of the Husbands power, but a Ministerial Invester.

4. And in the Eucharist, even they that think the bread is made God, take not
the Priest as the efficient cause, but a disposing instrument; nor that he
gives God to the Receiver, as the Owner, or Donor, but delivers him as a
Minister.

5. The same is true of Penance, Extreme Unction, and therefore must be so also
in Ordination.

If the King send a thousand Commissions to Captains, Judges, Justices, etc.
the Messenger is not the Owner, or Donor of them all; nor may make any
alteration of them: yea, if he entrust the Chancellor to name all the Justices,
he does thereby but determine of the person that shall receive the Commission,
but alters nothing of the Office, nor is the Donor of it. All this is plain
to us, but not to Mr. Dodwell.

. 30. Says he, p. 39. Are not many actual practices grounded on circumstances?
Are not many of those circumstances obnoxious to great mutability? Are not
ordinary Governors the competent Judges of their actual change?

Ans. 1. And did not Christ promise, his Spirit to his Apostles, for the
performance of their Commissions? And were not those Commissions to gather, and
settle his Churches, and teach them all that he commanded them? And did not
Christ by that Spirit make Pastors and Teachers, as is before proved? And did
not the Apostles faithfully perform their trust?

2. And does he not see, that by this he also subverteth his foundation of
Prelatical power also, as having no better institution than the Priesthood? And
then who are those Governors of the Church that he talks of, that must judge?
And how prove they their jugding-power?

3. And it were a kindness, if he would tell us what change it is that the
Diocesans may make in the Priestly Office and work, and tell us the bounds of
their power, if it have any? And whether they may put down the Preaching part,
the Praying part, the Sacraments, or which of them? And whether this be the
power that has put out the Sacramental Cup, and made all the changes that are
made in the Church. To tell us of these ordinary Governors changing-power, is
a hard word to us, that took Christ's Laws, delivered by his Spirit, to be
perfect, and unchangeable; However, some circumstances are changed, which were
noted to be but occasional.

. 31. To return his Consequence, p. 40. Since it is certain, that the power of
O^daining others, was not given to, nor for some hundred years exercised by
that species of Diocesans, who were neither the Bishops of single Churches,
associated for personal present Communion, nor were the Overseers of such
Bishops, but the Bishops of Diocesses, that have many score, or hundred
unbishoped stated worshipping Assemblies, it will follow by his arguing, that
these never had their Office from the Apostles, and much less a continued
succession of it.

. 32. He next pleads the Nullity of the Presbyterians Ordination. 1. Because
if they had Ordaining power, it is only in Assemblies where Bishops are
Presidents, and Edict them. 2. And because they carry it not by Plurality of
Voices. But I am a weary with answering such trifling things, and the later
part is a known mistake. I never heard of one contradicting Voice against the
Ordination of any that was Ordained in our Synods.

. 33. And he has half disabled me to answer him from p. 50. forwards, where he
feigneth me to maintain, that Authority must necessarily result from true
qualifications: For it is taken for uncivil to give his words their proper
name. But if the Reader will pardon the Repetition, I may remind him, how
probable it is, that Mr. Dodwell trusted that his Reader would believe his
words without perusing what I wrote; where he might have seen, 1. That I say,
that the Authority resulteth not from the qualifications, but from Christ's Law,
Grant, or Charter. 2. That personal qualifications (of gifts, or grace) are but
part of the necessary Dispasitio Recipientis; but that moreover there is
needful, 1. Opportunity. 2. And need of his Office. 3. And to a Bishop the
flocks consent, if not election. And ordinis gratia, (where moral necessity
dispenses not with order) the Ordainers approbation and consent. 5. And to
regular possession, where it may be had, a due Investiture; so that there is a
Relative part as well as a Qualitative of the Receptive disposition necessary.
And all the following leaves in which he disputes against me, as maintaining a
power resulting from mere qualities, are so unbeseeming a Divine, and a
C^ristian, that I will not soul my paper with their due confutation. But they
are suitable to that man who thinks himself wise, good and fit enough to
Unchurch and condemn so much as he does of the Christian world, on pretense of
pleading for obedience to the Diocesans.

. 34. And where he adds, p. 50. [ Or that it so depends on them
(qualifications) as that where the persons ordained may want any of them, there
the whole: Ordination must be null, because of the incapacity of the matter.]
This also he denies.

Ans. 1. I still distinguish between the Qualifications necessary ad esse, and
those only ad been esse, or integral. If he would persuade the Reader that I
null Ordination for want of the latter, his weakness, or designed ill intent is
such as warns his Readers to take heed of believing him. If he mean it only
of the former, as I speak, I have before confuted him that dare say that no
qualification is necessary ad esse. Then a Pope Joan, or woman-Priest or
Prelate, or a professed enemy of God or Christ may be a Priest. And he may be a
Pastor of a Church to feed them by the Word, who never heard or know what was
the Word or Church. Cannot the best believer go to Heaven, if all your Priests
will but deny him the Sacrament? and yet may a man be validly a Bishop, and the
Key keeper of Heaven that believes not that there is a God, a Christ or
Heaven, and so professes? This makes me remember the old Roman Canons, how no
Bishop must be deposed for lying with his own Sister, unless a great multitude
of Witnesses testify it; and the Councils that decreed no Layman shall witness
against a Clergyman, etc.

But Election, consent, the Ordainers approbation (ordinarily) are part of my
Qualifications. And if these be unnecessary, what does the man plead for? And
is a false approbation of a man that wants Essentials, more necessary than
having them? How contrary is this to the Doctrine of the Council of Carthage in
the Epistle in Cyprian, of Martial and Basilides; and to many honest Councils?

35. P. 90. At the end of this insinuated false accusation, he asks, [ Where
do we find that God ever gave Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, (though he gave
Apostles, Pastors and Teachers)? those extraordinary Offices indeed seem to
have been made neither of man, nor by man, but by God immediately, etc.

Ans. 1. Has he said a word to prove that Pastors and Teachers are not
ordinary Officers, contrary to the common judgment of the Church in all ages?
2. Whether he mean [ Bishops] in the Dative Case, or the Accusative, I know
not. If the later, let him speak out and say, God gave not Bishops. But how
proves he that Presbyters (and Bishops) are not Pastors or Teachers? 3. The
Text tells you, Ephesians. 4.14, 15, 16. that these offices were given for the
continued stated use of the Church: For the perfecting of the Saints, the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ, till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, etc.
Was this temporary? 4. It seems he disclaimeth Bishops being made, in making
Apostles. 5. Christ by his Spirit in the Apostles ordered the Churches.

. 36. P. 65. he says [ They never find any of those Officers to whom
succession is at present pretended, made immediately by God, but by the
intervention of men, etc.]

Ans. Still deceiving confusion: 1. Intervention is a word of fraud, and may
signify only that act which determines of, and qualifieth the receiver; and
it may signify the Donation, or making of the office. It is this that we speak
of. 2. The Intervention of infallibly inspired men, commissioned to deliver and
record Christ's own will, has an efficiency instrumental in making the office,
in that the Spirit in them does it, and they do make instrumentally the Charter
or Law which gives the power; and Christ does what they did by his Commission
and Spirit. If you can prove that our Diocesans have this Commission, spirit
and power, if they write new Sacred Scriptures, or make new Sacraments, and
Church-forms, and offices, we will obey them. But prove it well.

3. Did any man but Christ send forth the Seventy? Yet most Prelatists hold,
that those were the predecessors of the Presbyters.

4. By this it seems he again denies, that Christ himself instituted the Order
of Bishops, by making Apostles. And if so, he will sorely shake his standing;
for then they must prove all their power from the Apostles (or following
persons) institutions, and not make them successors of the Apostles own Office
(for they made not their own Office). And Dr. Stillingfleet thinks there were
no Bishops, or few made in the Apostles times, as Dr. Hammond thinks of
subject-Presbyters. And if Christ's Spirit in the Apostles made not these
Offices (who made the Scripture, which is Gods Law), I despair of seeing it
proved, that any since them were authorized to make them. And if men only made
the Episcopal and Presbyters Office, men may unmake them.

. 37. A case put to me within this hour, remindeth me, how much these men
prefer Ordination, not only in it self, but in this circumstance of Prelatical
uninterrupted succession, before Baptism, which is our Christning. There are
some godly young men that have Communicated in the Lords Supper, that were the
children of Quakers and Anabaptists; some were never baptized, and some know
not whether they were, or not; and being born near Two hundred Miles hence,
cannot learn or come to any certainty. The question is, Whether these that have
Communicated, should yet be baptized? which is to make Christians of
Christians? Or whether the higher Sacrament do not eminently contain the lower,
as making a man a Bishop, contains making him a Presbyter, and that
contains eminently his Deaconship (as some say)? If they must be baptized,
yet, it implies the Nullity of their Sacramental Communion before: And if so,
Mr. Dodwell must confess, that Priestly exhibition, or investiture is null to
an incapable Subject. But I think most will say, that he should not be
baptized, it being done interpretatively. And if so, is his Prelatical mode of
Ordination more necessary than actual Baptism? Besides, that (as is said) they
make Laymens or women's baptizing sufficient ad esse. And yet the Church of
England professes, that only the Two Sacramens, Baptism and the Lords Supper,
are generally necessary to salvation.

. 38. Page 67, 68. He would persuade us that the Imposition of hands in
Ordination signifies what he asserteth. But he gives us not one word of proof
of it. Was it the Holy Ghost which was in the imposing Apostle or Prelate that
was given by him, and out of him into the Ordained? No, he was never in
Scripture said to be the Ownor, Donor, or efficient conveyer of the Holy Ghost.
But Gods will made the Imposition of the Apostles hand, a conditional act to
qualify the recipient to receive the Holy Ghost immediately from God, as the
Texts before cited, and many more prove. What if it be once said that [(...),]
when many other Texts expound it? It Is well known that (...) signifies many
other causes, mediums, conditions, as well as efficient conveying causes. Is it
like to signify more here than in the Doctrine of Justification, when it is so
often said that we are justified by faith? And yet faith there, is no efficient
instrument conveying or giving us pardon and relative Justification, but only a
necessary qualification of the Recipient (called by Dr. Twisse, Causa
dispositiva, which is part of the Materialis) upon which Gods Covenant
immediately pardons and justifies the believer; so both there and here it is
by or through the Act of man, as a moral qualification of the Recipient, made a
condition by God.

. 39. After all this, the man comes himself page 72. to distinguish of
Qualifications necessary to the being of the office, and to the well-being;
yea, and has the face to say, that I should have distinguished them; as if I
had not ever done it. Is it not an unprofitable toil to dispute with such men
that will pretend that a case by me constantly stated was not stated, and then
will long dispute himself for the unqualified without distinction, and after
all distinguish in the fag end? This beseems not any man that will pretend to
plead for truth.

But yet he will not be over-liberal to us* he says p. 13. All the skill that
is requisite essentially, is only in general to know the benefits to be
pe^formed on Gods part, and the duties to be promised on man's, and the nature
and obligation of Covenants in general; and the particular solemnities of
Ecclesiastical Covenanting. And of this how can any one be incapable, that is
but capable of understanding the common dealings of the world?

Ans. 1. And yet must we have Universities? and must the Holy Ghost be given by
the Bishops for this? And is there any need to open the Bible to know it? and
must so much riches and honor maintain this much? and all be damned
Schismatics that turn to better?

2. Set this qualified Ministry and his great zeal to persuade the
Nonconformists to cease Preaching, and his Unchurching the Reformed Churches
altogether; and it is easy to see what this humble diligent man is laboring
for.

3. Do not many millions understand the common dealings of the world that
understand not the Gospel? The natural man receives not the things that be of
God, for they are spiritually discerned.

4 Is not this a plain design to set up a carnal Kingdom of ignorant, vicious
Clergymen, such as St. Paul says, Romans 8 neither are nor can be subject to
Gods Law, instead of a holy Catholic Church and Communion of Saints? and to
make Mahometans think that they are Saints in comparison of us, and that
Christians are an unholy sort of men?

5. Either he includes all that is necessary to the things named by him, or
not. If not, then his Priest must know the benefits of Gods Covenant, without
knowing what God is, or that Christ is the Purchaser, Covenanter, etc. If yea,
(which I doubt not he will say) then, O what an excellent body of Theology is
included in these few general words! Then he must know all those Attributes of
God and his Relations to man, by which he is said to be our God. He must know
all the necessary articles of faith, about the Person of Christ, as God and man
in two Natures and one Person, his Incarnation, Birth, Life, Sufferings, Death,
Burial! his Doctrine, his Merits, his Resurrection, Ascension, Glory,
Intercession, Kingly and Prophetical office, and last Judgment, and Glorious
Kingdom. He must know what Covenant God formerly made, and man broke; and what
sin, original and actual, and what curse and condemnation followed on mankind.
And Oh how many great and mysterious things are contained in Gods
Covenant-benefits! On Union with Christ, Reconciliation, Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification; The Doctrine of the Holy Ghost as the Third person in
the Trinity, and as the Inspirer of Prophets and Apostles, and Inditer and
confirmer of the Scriptures, and the Witness of Christ, and the Sanctifier and
Comforter of the Elect, besides Resurrection, Glorification, etc. And what a
deal is contained in man's necessary qualification (Faith, Repentance), and
promised duty? And the true nature and use of the Sacraments themselves? And is
all this such a small or easy matter as he seems to intimate?

6. But has he yet proved that a true Minister of Christ has no necessary
work but thus to administer Sacraments? I will yet believe, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. that
he must preach the Word in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort,
partly to convert the unconverted, partly to confirm and guide believers; and
that the people should ask the Law at his mouth as being the messenger of the
Lord of Hosts. And that the very essence of his office is to be a Minister
under the Teaching, Priestly and Ruling office of Christ.

7. And if he had proved that a sorry Priest has all that is essential to his
office, that proves not that I must take him for my Pastor, no not though the
Diocesan command me. Souls are more worth than to be wilfully made the Priests
and Prelates merchandise. If a man have all essential to a Physician, and no
more, I will not trust my life to his skill, which is less than my soul, though
the Bishop bid me. If a woman have all that is essential to a woman, he is a
fool that will take her for his wife, because the Bishop bids him, if she have
no more. The Priests that the Pope sent from Italy into England that could
speak no English, knew what you mention perhaps. But it is necessary also that
the Pastor teach all this knowledge to all the flock, which is not done with
saying few words. This man minds me of the saying of an Atheistical Ph^sician,
What needs there all this Preaching and stir? I can tell them all in three
words, it is but think well, and say well, and do well. Dr. Saywell, and Mr
Dodwell that are so much for our silence, seem to be too near to this man's
mind. But says St. Paul, Who is sufficient for these things!

8. Yet this sort of men that can accept of so little of God in the Priests, so
be it they will but be ruled by the Prelate (who I suppose need ad esse be no
wiser or better himself in their opinion) are the rigidest silencers and
excommunicators of others the wisest and holiest Pastors and Christians, as
Schismatics, or Heretics, if they obey not the Diocesan in every indifferent
thing, or be not of their mind in what they decree; such odds is in their
demands for God, and for the Prelates.

He that does but understand the common dealings of the world, is capable of
saying over the Liturgy of the Sacrament; and a little knowledge, and no honesty
or piety, may serve ad esse. But if the Councils of Prelates, yea or his single
Diocesan command him never so many things as indifferent, which the poor Priest
fears are perjury, lying, false worship, or other heinous sins, he is to be
Excommunicated from Christian society, and cast out of the Ministry, and as a
Schismatic not only to be silenced, but to be damned, if such as Mr. Saywell
and Mr. Dodwell, and their Masters be to be believed.

. 40. But says he, P. 74. How can they prove that Preaching is at all any
essential part of the Office? etc.

Ans. 1. From Christ's own practice, and his command to those whom he called and
sent, and from their practice, and the Holy Ghosts determination by them, Mat.
4.17. and 10.7. and 11.1. Mar. 1.4, 38. and 3.14. Luke 4.18, 19, 43. and 9.2,
60. Act. 5.42. and 10.42. Romans 10.8, 10, 14, 15. Mat. 28.19 Mar. 16.16, 20.
Act. 30.20. and 8 5, 2^, 40 and 9.20. and 13.5, 42. and 20.7, 20, to the end.
Phil. 1.17, 18. 1 Timothy 3.16. 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. 1 Cor 1.21. 2 Timothy
2.2, 24. Tit. 2.3. Where do you find that ever any one in the New Testament was
ordained a Mass Priest, or Sacrament Priest, and not a Teacher?

2. When did you prove that actual giving the Sacrament was essential to a
Bishop or Presbyter? not only; Paul baptized few, but many Parish Priests leave
that work to their Curates, and some Bishop^ leave both the Sacraments to their
Chaplains or Priests. I suppose you know that in the ancient Churches one
Assembly had usually a Bishop with many Presbyters and Deacons; and usually the
Bishop did both preach and celebrate the Eucharist? Can you prove that the rest
did any (...) celebrate than preach?

3. But if you are willing, you may easily know that we take Preaching to ^ave
more modes than making a set Sermon in the Pulpit. The Presbyters of old were
all Preachers; Sometimes in the Pulpit when the Bishop or chief speaker was
absent, sick or required it; Sometimes to smaller parties in Houses or
Chapels, or lesser meetings; sometime by conference, as Christ preached to the
Woman, Job. 4. And if you think otherwise, yet I am confident by experience,
that it is an easier thing, and requires less skill to make a Pulpit studied
Sermon, than to deal convincingly in conference with particular persons that
need our teaching. And a man may learn to say Mass or Liturgies, that has no
tolerable fitness to teach.

4. But if Preaching and Teaching be all one with you as they are with me, is
it not a strange question to ask, How we prove that Preaching, that is,
Teaching, is at all essential to their Office? As if you should ask, How we
prove that Teaching is essential to a Schoolmaster or Tutor? or that to Rule is
essential to a Ruler; or to give Physic essential to a Physician? What can you
take the Office to be that includes not Teaching? Neither Christ's Apostles,
nor the ancient Church ever ordained any to give Sacraments without Teaching,
(however Papists make the essence of the Priesthood to be in the power of
making the body and blood of God.) Nay, how can they celebrate the Sacraments
without Preaching or Teaching? Can they justly baptize the adult, and not teach
them the great Articles of the Creed which they must profess? and the great and
many duties to be done? and the great and many benefits to be received? And
does he think it such a small and easy matter to teach men all the Articles of
the Creed, the sense of the Lords prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the nature
of the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper? It may be h^ will say, that
it is some other Preaching that he means. But he speaks to me, who (in the
hearing of D^ Warmstrie, and of Mr. Th. Baldwin, who is yet living) did offer
Bishop Morley when he ^orbad me to preach in his Diocese, to promise him to
preach only the Catechism-Doctrine, on Baptism, the Creed, the Lords prayer,
the Ten C^mmandments, and the Lords supper. Archbishop Usher in his ^ermon
before King James, on Eph^s 4 3. boldly affi^^^th, That let the learneds^ of
them all try it when they will, they shall find that it requires greater skill
to open to the ^gnora^t intelligi^ly these Cat^chism common truths, than to
handle points of controverted School Divinity.

. 41. It may be objected, 1 Cor. 12. Are all Teachers? and Romans 12. He that
teaches on teaching.

Ans. It Is evident that Teachers or Doctors are there put for some eminently
gifted above others in opening and defending sound Doctrine, and not for all
Teachers in general. For Exhortation is distinguished from it, which yet is the
greatest p^rt of most Sermons. Paul was the chief Speaker, yet Barnabas was a
Teacher. We are more than he is, for many Ministers in each Church, where the
chief Speaker shall usually preach; but the other as assistants in their time
and place, and not to be mere Sacramenters.

. 42. His next recollections run all upon such intimated or expressed untruths
merely forged by him contrary to my copious Explications, and against the rules
of common honesty, that I will not lose my own and the Readers time in
particular answers to them. He would persuade the Readers that I affirm that
power immediately results from gifts, who never had such a thought, but say it
neither resulteth from them, mediately nor immediately. This dealing is so
grossly false, that it is neither credit to his cause nor him. Would he make men
think that I take him to have most authority or power, that has the best
gifts? As if the wisest and best man had right to the Crown or Church Power? If
copious discourses to the contrary will not hinder such busy disputers from
such inhumane slanders, are they meet to be disputed with? I have over and over
said that, 1. Gifts, or the best abilities. 2. And due election or approbation
of the Ordainers. 3. And the peoples election and consent, all set together, do
but make up the Qualification or Receptive disposition of the Recipient. 4.
Yea, and his consent conjoined; and that where all these in the necessary
degree concur, the power resulteth to that cap^ble person from none of them
all, but immediately from God Law, which is his instrument giving power to
persons so qualified. And that besides all these, Ministerial Investiture for
Orders sake, when it may be had, should introduce him into possession; yea, and
the Magistrate must be judge whom he will countenance, protect or tolerate. But
the case of Ordination and Investiture are necessary only where they may be had
lawfully, and without crossing their end; as sacrifice was compared with mercy,
and the Rest of the Sabbath compared to works of charity and necessity.

. 43. And as it is the trick of such dealers, p. 81. he must have Governors to
do his work; and therefore must not leave out that which may make us odious to
them; but tells men, that our Hypothesis is unreconcilable with government in
this life, in that it permits persons to assume Authority, and to extend it as
far as they think fit, by appealing to Writings against the sense of all the
visible authority of this life.

Ans. 1. But ^f this Hypothesis be none of his Adversaries, but come out of the
Meal-Tub, or forge of Inventers, what shall such men be called?

2. We permit no person to assume Authority. But Writings are not so
contemptible to us in comparison of that which you take to be all the visible
Authority of the Church. It is your Richard Hooker that says, that the Law
makes the King, and gives and measures his power, and that it is usurpation
which obliges no man's Conscience, when power is taken, and us^d which the Law
never gave. What I think of this, I have elsewhere showed. The Statutes are not
so contemptible in this case, but the great Lawyers think they may be appealed
to from visible Rulers in several cases. And you must talk at other rates than
you have done in your tedious fallacious Vagaries, before wise Christians will
believe that we may not appeal from Prelates to the written Word of God, when
the power used by them is justly questioned. If not, how ca^e the Reformed
Churches to justify their Reformation? Was it not by appealing to Scripture
against the visible Church Rulers, that were commonly against them? Were not
P^pes, Council, Prelates, and Priests against them, for the far greatest part?
Did it overthrow all Government of the world to appeal from these to the
^cripture? I hereby undertake to prove, that neither Popes, Prelates, or
Priests, have any Church Authority, b^t what God hat^ given them by his Word*
And is it not th^^ necessary to try it by that Word? Must we take th^^r own
words for all that Popes, or Prelates c^^im? And it will put the Pope and
Council hard to it, to prove any Authority from God, if the Scripture do not
give it them: And if it give it them, it may give it others.

44. And when (...), done, we are far from granting, that we have les^ to sh^^
for our succession from the Apostle^, than Popes or (...) have.

1 We are (...) that we have the same ^aptism, Eucharist, Creed, L^^ds Pra^^r,
D^calogue, and Script^re, delivered down from the A^ostles. 2. We are sure that
we have a Ministry of the same species which Christ and his spirit in the
Apostles instituted. 3. We know that our Churches, and Worship, and Doctrine,
are the ^ame that are described, and settled by the Apostles. 4. We know that
our present Ministers are qualified as the Apost^^^ requi^ed. 5. And that they
are Elected, or (...) to by the (...), is the Apostles required. 6. And that
they have as good an Ordination, and Investiture, as the Apostles ever made
necessary to the Ministry: That is,

1. They have the Approbation of senior Pastors, and many of them of Diocesans.
All that were put into any places by the Parliament, when the Bishops were
down, were to have the Westminster Assemblies Approbation under their hands.
And that Assembly, as called, consisted of many Diocesans, with many score
grave Eminent Divines, though the Diocesans were not actually present. And a
signed Approbation, and Allowance, has the Essence of all that is of absolute
necessity in Ordination.

2. They were Ordained by true Bishops. 1. All true Presbyters are Episcopi
gregis, and join in Ordination here in Enggland. 2 The chief Pastors of
City-Churches, having Curates under them, are Episcopi Eminentes vel Praesides,
such as Ordained for above Two hundred years after the Apostles. And 3. The
chosen Presidents of Synods were such Bishops. But all these concurred in the
Nonconformists Ordinations when the Diocesans were down. They were Ordained at,
and by a Synod of Presbyters in some great Town, or City, where the Moderator,
and the chief City-Pastors were part.

3. Many of them were Ordained by Diocesans.

4. Many Ordained, as aforesaid, were after approved by Diocesans, some by
Imposition of Hands, and all by Word, or Writing* for Archbishop Usher did in
my hearing by Word and in Writing more publicly declare his opinion of such
Presbyters Ordination as valid ^though he excused not such as deposed the
Diocesans from the guilt of Schism); and so did the many other Bishops, whom I
formerly cited; yea, even Bancroft himself. And surely all this has all that
is essential to Ordination.

5. And we know that such a Ministry has continued to propagate the Church and
Gospel in the world since the Apostles days.

But we confess, 1. That we cannot prove, that such Ministers have still
succe^ded in the same Towns. 2. Nor that no one, from whom their Ordination
came down from the Apostles, did pretend to have Orders, or Authority when he
had none. 3. Or that no one of them in 1660. years was an Heretic, or a
Schismatic, or a Papist. 4. Or that no one Ordained in wrong words. 5. Or that
no one Ordained contrary to the Canons, out of his own limits, or without three
Bishops, or without the Presbyters. 6. Or that no Competitors were Ordained by
several Bishops. Mr. Dodwell is a great Historian; when he has proved all this
of all, or any of his Clergy-friends, he has done something more than multiply
words.

. 45. But on the other side, we can easily prove, and have proved, 1. That our
Diocesans are not of the same species with those of old. 2 That the Apostles
did not make them. I think Mr. Dodwell will say, that the Presbyters first made
them by consent (the Children begot the Fathers). 3 And Dr. Hammond will defend
it, that there is no certainty, that any Subject Presbyters were made by the
Apostles in Scripture times. So that the very species of their Clergy has no
such succession, as distinct from ours. 4. And he that will read the
Church History, and Councils, declaring the multitude of doleful intercisions
in East and West by Heresies, the Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, Jerusalem and Rome, and most of the chief Seats of Bishops,
having been judged Heretics, Simoniacks, or no Bishops by General Councils;
yea, Roman Bishops judged some of them Infidels, and Diabolical by the Councils
of Constance Bas^l, etc. I say, he that knows this History, must know, that
the Diocesans that from these derive their succession, have certainly had
frequent and notorious intercisions.

. 46. And this leads me to another part of Mr. Dodwell's work: viz. his proof
that Aidan and Finan were Bishops. As if this had been a great part of his
Cause. Such diverting noise is a great part of the art of deceiving. Because I
had said, that Aiden and Finan were not Bishops, but Presbyters, that is, when
they came out of Scotland into Northumberland, I apprehended that some men of
his g^^ius and design, would be willing to mistake me, and therefore Printed an
Explication of the Words in the end of my first Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet.
But Mr. D would have men think that I said, that they were never made and
called Bishops at all; and that I read not Beda, from whom alone (near Five and
Thirty years ago) I took almost all that I assert concerning them. Let the
Reader see my foresaid Explication. If Mr. Dodwell will give us more than noise
and mist about this matter:

1. Let him prove that it was Diocesan Bishops that Ordained these Scots before
they came into England, when Beda says they were sent from those Monasteries
that were ruled by Presbyters, and which would not so much as eat or
communicate with the Roman Bishops.

2. Let him prove that any Bishops in England Consecrated hem, or made them
Bishops here, when Beda tells us that they were the first in the North, and
therefore had none here to Ordain them.

3. Let him prove that they were here made true Diocesan Bishops of our
species: When, 1. they had no Presbyters at first under them, and therefore
ruled none, and had but one Congregation; for one man can be but in one place
at once. 2. Their Church in Lindisfarne was not made of stone, but of wood,
covered or thatcht with reeds, and they are not said to have any other Church
under them. 3. They went indeed to preach all over the Country, but not as to a
Church, but as to Heathens to convert them. 4. Let him prove that ever they
took themselves to be of a distinct order from Presbyters. 5. At a Synod ( Bed.
c. 25.) we find no more but the King and his Son, and Hilda a woman-Abbess, and
three or four of this sort of Bishops, (far below our Ordaining City-Presbyters
and their Synods.)

But unlearned men that value Books by interest and preconceived opinions, may
think that by such talk Mr. Dodwell has done some great matter.

. 47. But (says he, p. 81, 82.) Our Hypothesis obliging inferior Governors
to prove their title to their office, and the extent of it, from the intention
of their supreme Governors, does oblige all to a strict dependence on the
supreme visible power, so as to leave no place for appeal concerning the
practice of such Government (which as it lasts only for this life, so it ought
not to admit of disputes more lasting than its practice), etc.

Ans. Alas for the poor world and Church that will be cheated at so gross a
rate!

1. Did you not know that the grand error that Protestants charge Papists with,
is the asserting of any such thing as a supreme visible power over the Church
universal besides Christ. And did you think that your roteing over the name to
them that deny the thing, would make a wise man change his Religion?

2. By your Hypothesis then no man can prove his title to his Office, who
either believes not that there is any such universal Supreme, or that knows
not who it is (I know no Competitors but the Pope, and General Councils, unless
the Patriarch of Constantinople be one.)

3. And he that knows not the intention of this Supreme power, is still
unable to prove his office.

4. And he that knows the intention of the Ordaining Diocesan, is never the
better if he know not the intention of the Supreme. And what if the intention
of the Supreme, and of the Diocesan are contrary?

5. But by your Hypothesis the Governors may alter the very species of the
Priesthood as they please; and what ever God says of it in his Institution or
Law, it must be to us no other in kind or extent, than the Governors intend.
If they say, I ordain thee to baptize, but not to teach; or to do both, but not
to celebrate the Lord's Supper; or to do that, but not to pray or praise God; or
not to use the Keys of the Church, our power is limited accordingly; Then if
the Prelates make Mass-Priests, their intention is the measure of their power.
Answer the Papists then that ask, Was it ever the intention of the Pope and his
Prelates, that the English Bishops should disclaim the Pope, or the Mass, or
reform without them as they did?

6. Seeing the English Bishops, by you, derive their succession from Willfred,
and Augustine, and Rome, is not the Church of Rome the ^ittest Judge of the
extent of their power, as knowing their own intentions? Nay, if they were so
blind as to intend them power to pull down themselves, may they not recall it?

7. Did ever Protestant preach this Doctrine, That there is no appeal from the
supreme Prelates, to God? O dreadful! what may men come to? and what error so
great that a former may not introduce? Disgrace not the Church of England so
much as thus to intimate, that they set up themselves so as that there is no
appeal to Scripture, or God himself from them? God has commanded Preaching,
Praying, Praises, Baptism, the Lord's Supper, holy assemblies, etc. if the
supreme Prelates interdict and forbid all these, is there no appeal to God? I
have told you how much Robert Grosthead abhorred this Doctrine, and so told Pope
Innocent the 4 th. What absolute blind obedience to Prelates is this!

8. And what a reason brings he, That the practice lasts only for this life,
and therefore, etc? Does any of our actions here last longer than while they
are doing? Praying, Praise, Sacraments, obeying the King, doing good to the
poor, etc. and so swearing, cursing, adultery, rebellion, atheism, blasphemy
here, last only for this life. Must we therefore obey men without appeal to
God, if they forbid us all duty, and command all sin?

9. And what did the man mean when he said, That it ought not to admit of
disputes more lasting than its practice. Is this the rate of these men's wise
disputations? 1. A murderers practice may be disputed at the Assizes when his
act is past. 2. Shall not all the actions of men in this world be examined and
judged of by Christ hereafter? What? no men judged according to their works, or
for any thing done in the body? 3. Or did he mean that God will justify us for
any Villainy that we shall do in obedience to the Supreme Clergy? 4. Or did he
think that by appealing to Gods judgment, we challenge them there to dispute
with us? What to make of this man's demonstrations, little do I know.

. 48. He adds, P. 82. For how fallible soever they may be conceived to be in
expounding Scripture, yet none can deny them to be the most certain, as well as
the most competent Judges of their own intentions.

Ans. 1. That Is true. And if their intentions may make Doctrine, Worship, and
Priesthood, what they please, it much concerns us that they conceal not their
intentions! But I would I knew whose intention this must be; whether the
supreme Clergies, or the Ordainers; and what to do if diverse men's intentions
differ; and what bounds are set to their intentions; and how many hundred sorts
of Priests Doctrine or worship they may make.

2. You touch their fallibility tenderly, as a thing that some may conceive.
But it seems let them never so falsely expound Scripture, their own intentions
still shall prevail against all the word of God? I would you would answer Dr.
Stillingfleet's Rational Account, which confuteth you.

. 49. He proceeds, As certainly therefore as God has made his Church a visible
society, and constituted a visible Government in it, so certainly it is to be
presumed that their Hypothesis must be false, etc.

Ans. 1. Trifle not at this deceiving rate with plain men that love the light.
If by a visible Society with a visible Government, you mean (as we have great
reason to think), With a visible Government over it besides Christ, do not thus
as Mr. Thorndike and others of you do, go on to beg it, and build vast
structures on it, but prove it to us and we will yield; prove to me that the
Universal Church is a Society that must have one vis^ble supreme Government
under Christ, and I here declare to you, that I will turn Papist presently, and
will not wrangle against any man for calling me a Papist (though I may not own
all that Popes say and do, as those do that Grotius called Papists.) I will not
talk with Bishop Gunning of a Collegium Pastorum, governing all the Christian
world per literas formatas; nor be so moderate as those French Papists that
make an Universal Council (which never was, nor ever must be) the supreme
Church Power. I will presently be for the Pope, though not as absolute. But why
answer you not what we have said against it? particularly my Sermon in the
Morning-Lectures against Popery.

2. But if by a visible power in the Church, you mean not one over the Church,
the Independents deny it not; while every City has its proper Mayor, (and so
every Church its Pastor) it is a visible power in the Kingdom, but not over it
as a Kingdom. All the Justices of Peace are visible powers in the Kingdom, but
not Supreme, nor as one Aristocracy over the whole.

Seeing all my dissent from Popery, and from you, is founded in my judgment
against any one universal Supreme besides Christ, (Monarch, Aristocracy, or
Democracy, I seriously entreat you to write your strongest arguments on that
subject to convince me, and answer what I have said to Mr. Johnson, and you may
spare all the rest of your labor as to me. This will do all.

. 50. P. 83. He adds, How can subjects preserve their due Subordination to
their Superiors if they practice differently? and while they defend their
practices, and pretend Divine authority for them?

Ans. 1. As the three Confessors did, Dan. 3. and as Daniel did, Dan. 6. and as
the Apostles did, Act. 2. and 3. and 4. And as all the Bishops and Churches did
for three hundred years. And as the Orthodox did under Valens, Constantine,
Theodosius junior, Anastasius, Philippicus, etc.

2. They may defend it by proving, that there is a God, who is supreme, and
that there is no power but of him, and none against him; and that man is not
God, and therefore has no power but limited; and that to disobey usurpation,
is not to disobey power; and that God must be obeyed before man.

3. This is high language, and harsh to Protestant and Christian ears, What!
are you serious? Must none in Rome, Italy, Spain, France, etc. practice
contrary to their Governors? nor in Turkey neither? Nor in China, Iapan, etc?
Is it unlawful to read the Scripture, to pray, to worship God, to be baptized,
to profess our selves Christians, to speak a good word, or do a good deed, to
feed our Children, or relieve our Parents, etc. if Governors forbid us? This
is far worse than to forbid the Scripture in a known tongue, if when we know
it, we must not obey it if Governors forbid us, nor so much as plead Divine
Authority for doing what Gods word commands us? Is Gods authority so
contemptible in comparison of Prelates. Or does it so little concern us, as
that we may not so much as plead it for any practice forbidden us by
superiors? This Doctrine must needs startle a Christians heart. It Is far
unlike Bishop Bilsons of subjection, and such others. If you really mean so,
that whatever God commands us in Scripture, we must do none of it if the
Governors forbid us, or else we overthrow all Governments, speak it out, and
prove it; but Christians will abhor it. And yet this same man calls the
Martyrs Saints, when his argument makes them rebels. W. Johnson would not have
talked at this rate.

. 51. And I would fain know, whether he that first says, that it subverteth
all Government, and after names [supreme Church-Government] do really mean it
of all, or of Church Government only?

1. If of all, the man is no Papist, I will gratify him to proclaim it; for he
is no Christian. He that thinks that men must not plead Gods Authority for
doing any thing different from the wills of Turkish, Jewish, or Heathen
Governors, surely is no Christian: No, nor if he had confined this power to
Christian Governors.

2. But if he mean it only of Church Governors, how come they to have so
absolute a power more than Civil Magistrates? May we plead Gods Authority
against a King, and not against the Prelates? What proof was ever given of
this? Then the Prelates is far above the Kings: Then the Prelate is an absolute
Governor of the King himself.

Let Kings and Parliaments but understand these men, and we fear not their
deceits. Are they willing to give over all worship of God, and confessing
Christ, and all duties of Religion, Justice, or Charity, if the Supreme Clergy
will but forbid them? See I beseech you, worthy Countrymen, what sort of men
and Doctrine you have to do with.

. 52. And why does the man talk only against different practice? Does he not
know, that Government commands duty, as well as forbids the contrary? Is
not Omission against Government as well as Commission? If the King command
Taxes, Military service, etc. may we disobey, and call it Passive obedience?
What if the Bishops only forbid us to confess Christ, to come to Church, to
Pray, to give Alms, to do any good? May we forbear, sobeit we do not the
contrary? Doubtless if Gods Word and Authority may not be pleaded for any duty
which God commands, and the Prelates forbid, neither may it be pleaded for
the Omission of any Villainy commanded by Prelates (no, not Inquisition,
Torments, or Massacres), which God forbids. But this man has the Gramatical
skill to call Omissive obedience by the name of Passive.

. 53. It Is like he will next say, that I make odious suppositions, That the
supreme Church Power may command any Villainies, and forbid Christian duties.

Ans. 1. I despair of getting any of these designers to tell me, which is the
Supreme Universal Church Power, so as to be well understood. I never heard of
any pretenders but Pope, and General Councils, and as Bishop Guning holds, the
College of all the Bishops in the world. And certainly Pope and Councils have
set up Heresies, and decreed even the exterminating of all that will not
dis-believe all their senses, and deny Bread to be Bread, and Wine to be Wine.
They have decreed deposing Kings, absolving Subjects from their Allegiance,
adoring Images, etc. And what is it that yet they may not do? If they say with
Peter, If all men deny thee, I will not; how shall I know that they say true?
Does not the Church of England tell us, that Councils have erred, etc?

. 54. And be not these very honest Sons of the Church of England, that affirm
it irreconcilable to Government, to alledg Divine Authority of any different
practices, without exception, and at the same time to Subscribe to Art.
21.19.6.18. of the sufficiency of Scripture. That the Churches of Jerusalem,
Alexandria, Antioch, Rome, have erred in matters of Faith; That the Church may
not Ordain any thing contrary to Gods Written Word: That General Councils may
err, and have erred; and that things Ordained by them, as necessary to
salvation, have neither strength, nor Authority, unless it may be declared,
that they are taken out of the holy Scripture: And those are accursed that
presume to say, that every man may be saved by the Law, or Sect which he
professes. And why not, if he must do all that the Governors require, or
nothing diverse to them?

. 55. My Reason forbids me to trace such a Writer as this any further. To tell
men of every vain Harangue, and confident discourse, that is full of gross
error, or false report, is work unworthy of time and labor; but I will a
little more open the Coar of his deceit.

CHAP. V. Wherein Mr. Dodwell's deceits, and the danger of them do consist.
. 1. AS to his Method of disputing, that you may detect his fallacies, he has
got this absurd ptetence, p. 90. That there is but one sense of all Terms,
which Causes oblige men to mean; and that every one ought to know, who pretends
to have skill in Causes.

Ans. Would you have thought that ever a man should publicly use such a
Cothurnus among the Learned? What a man is obliged to mean, is one thing, and
what he does mean is another. And is there any one that knows what humane
Language is, that knows not that almost all words have various
significations? Does he not know by how good reason the Schools oblige
Disputants, first to explain their Terms? And what need there is of Definition
to explain them? He instanceth in the words Bishops, and the Church of England;
And might have added, the Catholic Church. And does he not know that it is the
species of Bishops that we differ about? and will the general name here explain
each parties sense? When we are for one sort of Bishops, and against another?
And is it not such fraud as souls should not be abused by, to refuse wilfully
to define the Episcopacy that he means, and then plead that all should
understand him? And why is it not as much ignorance in him not to understand
me, as in me not to understand him, when I use distinct explication, which he
obstinately refuses?

And does not Dr. Stillingfleet's case shame what he says of the Church of
England, who was hardly brought to explain it, and at last denies the very
being of the Church in Mr. Dodwell's sense? which of you was to blame to meddle
with the Word till you had skill in Causes, to understand it without a
Definition?

And does not Dr. Stillingfleet take it as the Introduction of Popery, to hold
a Constitutive Regent Church Government, National, or Catholic? and so he, and
Mr. Dodwell mean not the same thing by the Church Catholic (nor Bishop Guning,
Mr. Thorndike, or the Church of Rome, who are all for an Universal humane
Supreme power). And who is he that has read Dr. Challoners Credo Eccles.
Cathol. Chillingworth, Bishop Mortons Grand Imposture, Bishop Bilson, Dr.
White, Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Sutliffe, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Carlton, etc.
Chamier, Sadeel, Melancthon, Bucer, etc. who knows not that the Papists and
Prorestants, by the name of the Catholic Church, do mean several things, and
that we deny the very being of any such Church as they call the Catholic? And
is this the bold and happy Disputant, that will save the Schools and World the
labor of explaining Terms, and foreagreeing of the sense, and put men on
disputing, where the Subject is denied, and fill a Book with tedious confident
Harangues, and then hide all the fraud by saying, that there is but one sense
of all Terms, which Causes oblige m^n to mean; and that every one ought to
know, who pretend to have skill in Causes? When the Cause disputed is only
managed by words, as they signify the minds of the Speakers about the real
matters*

2. And as to the material fundamental difference between Mr. Dodwell's party
and us, it lies in these following things: I. We totally differ about the
nature of Gods Government of man. II. And about the use of the Holy Scripture,
and Gods Laws. III. About the nature and extent of all humane Government. IV.
About the form of moral good and evil. V. About the essential form of the
Catholic Church. VI. About Gods ordinary means of saving Grace. VII. About the
use of Preaching. VIII. About the duty of worshipping God in Sacred Assemblies,
or the Communion of Saints. IX. About the difference of Apostles, and the
office of the Bishops. X. About the office of a Presbyter or Parish-Pastor. XI.
About the Necessaries to Ministry, Churches, Christianity, and ordinary title
to Salvation. XII. And about the final Judgment. If all these be little
tolerable differences, why may not we be tolerated? If not, judge Reader who
they be that are intolerable, when you hear them plead against tolleration.


. 3. I. For the first, we judge that there is a God, who is the Governor of the
World by an universal Law, which is above all humane Laws or will, and that he
is the fountain of all power, and there is none but what he gives and
limiteth, and that no man is above him, nor has true authority against his
Laws.

But Mr. Dodwell says, That it is irreconcilable to Government in this life,
or to due subordination of subjects to superiors, to practice differently, and
defend it by pretending Divine authority, and appealing to writings,
(Scriptures is our word by excellency so called). And so God shall be God, and
be obeyed, if the Clergy please.

. 4. II. As to the second, we suppose that the Holy Scriptures are Gods Laws,
indicted and recorded by the Holy Ghost to be the first obliging Rule of Faith,
and holy living, which all men are to be obedient to, before and against all
contrary Laws of men. But Mr. Dodwell as aforesaid, allows no such prime
obligation as will warrant an appeal to the Word of God, from the visible
Church Governors that contradict it.

. 5. III. And for the third, we suppose that all humane Powers are derived from
God, and have no authority but what he gives them, and are more under him and
his Laws, than the Justices are under the King and his Laws, and can oblige no
man against the Laws of God. But how far Mr. Dodwell thinks otherwise, you have
heard. He says not indeed that we must break Gods Laws, but we must not
pretend them, or appeal to them against our Governors. In charity I hope he
means no worse, but that we must take our Rulers word or exposition, and judge
nothing to be in the Scripture, contrary to their commands. And whether he give
them the same dominion also over the Law of Nature, let him tell you. Paul
disclaimed dominion over men's says, and the written Law of God.

. 6. IV. And for the fourth, We take moral good to be a conformity to Gods Law*
and moral evil or sin to be a breach of it. But Mr. Dodwell is for measuring
them by the Clergies or Governors will, though Gods Law be against theirs.

. 7. V. And for the fifth, we take the Catholic Church to have no Supreme
Government but God, and our Glorified Redeemer God and man; and that there is
no such thing as a Catholick-Church of Gods making under any other Supreme
Rulers. But that as God is the invisible King of this visible world, and Kings
are subordinate Supremes in their Kingdom, but neither one of them, or many
conjunct in an Aristocracy, Supreme over all the earth; so Christ is the partly
visible, and partly invisible supreme Ruler of the visible Church of
Christians, and each Pastor is under him over his proper flock (bound to keep
concord and peace); but none under him Supreme over all, whether Monarch (as
the Pope) or Aristocracy, as Councils, Cardinals, or 'others. But Mr. Dodwell
is for a visible Society, with a visible humane Supreme. But who the Supreme
is, I despair of getting him to acquaint us.

. 8. VI. And for the sixth, we suppose that God sent forth Preachers to convert
the world, and turn them from darkness to light, and the power of Satan to God,
and that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word preached, and that
whoever believes shall be saved; and the word of God is powerful to this end,
and sufficient to make us wise to salvation. But Mr. Dodwell thinks that it is
not Preaching, but the delivering men the Sacraments, that gives them the
first true saving grace and title to Salvation. And that none in the world have
this Sacrament or Covenant-title to life, but those that receive it from a hand
that had an Ordination by Bishops in his sense, of uninterrupted succession
from the Apostles by the like Ordination.

. 8. VII. Accordingly we hold that Preaching is for the converting of souls,
and the means of saving faith and holiness. But what he thinks it is good for,
I know not well; nor whether he would send the Indians the Sacraments instead
of Preachers.

. 10. VIII. We take it to be our duty, though men forbid us, to confess Christ,
and assemble for Gods worship, to read and hear the Scripture, and to praise
God: But he thinks we must not practice differently from the ruling Clergies
will, if they forbid us, nor alledg Divine authority for it.

. 11. IX. We suppose that the office of a Prophetical Ministry bringing new
Doctrines or Laws from God, and the office of the Teachers and Rulers by these
Laws, are greatly different, and must necessarily be distinguished. Moses was a
Prophetical Mediator in Legislation, and he confirm^d his Mediation by
uncontrouled Miracles. The Prophets afterward came but on particular
applicatory messages. But the Priests and Levites as such were no Prophets, nor
had power to make any new additions or alterations of the Law, but only to
teach it the people, and as guides apply it to their several cases; so Christ
and his Apostles commissioned to deliver and record all his Doctrines and
Commands to the following ages, did by the Holy Ghost Prophetically deliver to
the world that body of Doctrine and Law, which must rule them to the end, and
judge them; and thus sealed and confirmed all by a multitude of uncontrouled
Miracles; but all following Bishops and Pastors are not to do the like, nor add
or alter, nor are such Legislators, being not Prophets nor workers of Miracles,
but only to teach and apply the Laws already recorded in Scripture, and guide
their Congregations in variable circumstances (time, place, translations, etc.)
according to the general rules of Gods Law. This is the truth.

But how much Mr. Dodwell equals the Bishops and Apostles, and sets their words
above the Scripture as to obligation, you have seen before.

. 12. X. And as he gives Bishops power to silence Presbyters, and forbid the
Preaching of the Gospel, and Gods worship, so how little knowledge or godliness,
or common sobriety or honesty, he requires to a saving Sacramenting Priest,
who must not be separated from, you heard before, contrary to Cyprian, and many
a Councils Canons. But we know that Paul had no power to destruction, but only
to edification. And they have no more.

. 13. XI. We suppose that we must love, honor, and communicate with all such
as true Ministers or Churches, who have true faith and repentance, and sincere
obedience to Christ's Laws, and are able, godly, willing Pastors, chosen or
consented to by the flocks, approved and ordained by senior Pastors,
(especially in Synods where City-Pastors preside), and especially if also
authorized by the Christian Magistrate.) But he thinks if they have not also
successiv^ Ordination from the Apostles by Bishops of his species, they are no
Ministers, or Churches, and have no Sacrament, and Covenant title to Salvation,
but are Schismatics, and by their Ministry sin against the Holy Ghost. And so
destroys all certainty of title to Salvation, and of Church Communion,
Ministry and Sacraments, to all the Christian World.

. 14 XII. Lastly, we think that men shall be judged by their keeping or
breaking Gods Law, and according to what they did in the body. But he would
have us obey the Supreme Clergy, and not plead Scripture or Divine authority
for our different practice; because the Government that lasts but for this
life, ought not to admit of disputes more lasting than its practice.

. 15. I conclude with a request to him to resolve me these doubts.

1. Whether Prophets having immediate messages from Heaven, were not
differenced from the teaching Priests and Pastors.

2. Whether false Prophets were not grievously threatened among the Jews; and
whether Christ did not command us to beware of false Prophets?

3. Whether he be not a false Prophet (worse than a false teacher) that falsely
pretends to that which is proper to a Prophet?

4. Whether it be not proper to a Prophet to deliver as immediately from God,
new Laws to the universal Church, yea or to any Church, which are not in the
Scripture, nor are revealed by it as Gods means, (besides the determination of
circumstances left to humane prudence variable pro re nata) if Moses and the
Apostles in Legislation acted as Prophets, do not they so that pretend to do
the like?

5. Whether the General Councils of Bishops and the Pope have not done the work
proper to the Prophetical office, when they have made Laws for the unversal
Church, and this as by Divine authority, and undertaken to give all the Church
the sense of Scripture, which only shall be obligatory to them thereby? For it
is the maker of the sense that is the maker of the Law; especially when they
pretend to Infallibility, or to be secured from erring in faith, by Divine
inspiration, how ignorant or bad soever they be singly. Is not this pretended
authority and inspiration that of Prophets, as different from mere Teachers and
Guides by Gods Law already made?

6. If it be so, how many such Papal Councils, arrogating such power, have been
false Prophets?

7. But if they pretend not Inspiration, nor Prophetical authority from God,
nor yet authority given them by the Scriptures, or Laws of God already made,
(or falsely pretend such) then is not this to usurp Christ's own authority, and
so instead of being false Prophets, to be partly Vice-Christs, (or Lawgivers
to his universal Church) called commonly Antichrists? I would willingly have
things so cleared, that men may be freed from all such suspicions.

But if you are still confident that the universal Church has a visible
supreme Government besides Christ's, I should be glad, 1. To see it proved. 2.
To know whose it is, and how we may know them. 3. And to know its true extent.
If you intend no fraud, you cannot refuse me this, when I promise you, if
performed, I will let fall the suit, and no more trouble you with lesser
Controversies.

I have no Copy of my first Letter to Mr. Dodwell upon a Book which he sent me.
This is his Answer.

Reverend and Worthy Sir,
I Have received your very kind Letter, wherein I hardly know whether I should
be more thankful for your approbation or your reproof, both of them being in
their kind so useful, and both of them being by you performed with so great
civility. I am confident that if our modern disputes had been moderated with
that candor, men would certainly have been more peaceful, and very Orthodox,
than now we find them. I could very heartily have wished that the opinions
wherein we differ, had not been of that nature as to s^parate Communion, (for
this I look upon as the only circumstance that can make such differences
grievous to a pious person; for as for those others which exasperate many that
Dissenters are not so wise to discern the truth, or so fortunate in avoiding
prejudices, or lighting on faithful informations, in a time when they are
cap^ble of receiving them; or that they are not so submissive as themselves
expect to that Pope which Luther has long since observed in every man's ^eart,
etc. are reasons either sinful, or at least insufficient to excuse the sin of
uncharitableness upon such an account) but as they a^e, considering them as
tempered with that piety and moderation which may expiate their other
malignities, that they are rather alleged as Apologies for your selves, than
as obligations on others, rather to excuse your deformity in assisting at our
Altars, than erecting others in opposition to them; that you are still
i^quisitive and desirous of further information, and ready to lay down your
mistakes where you are convinced that they are such; that still you preserve a
p^aceable mind, and embrace our Communion it self in voto, though perhaps not
actually; these are so valuable considerations, even before God as well as man,
for excusing from the guilt of error, as that whatever I may think of your
op^nions, I hope it shall not hinder me from a cordial respect and veneration
for your person.

As I do very much esteem the good opinion of so great a lover of p^^ce and
piety as your self, and should have been sorry to have given any ju^t occasion
of offense to you* so I am not a little glad that upon a review of the
particulars mentioned in your Letter, I find my self so very innocent. For as
for my Preface, the main parts of it wherein the disrepect of the Clergy is
shown to have been an Introductory to the Atheism of the age we live in; and
that the Conformable Clergy, that is, such as would answer the design of the
Church not only as to their exterior demeanor in public solemn Assemblies, but
also as to the qualifications of their persons, and the conduct of their whole
lives, could not prove either trifling in their Preaching or scandalous in
their examples, and therefore that the Church is not responsible for their
misdemeanors where they prove otherwise; and that the Laity are in their
proportion obliged to the same duties with the Clergy, and therefore may make
use of the advices there prescribed; or where the errors of our modern
School Divinity are touched, and some Proposals made for their reformation; in
these things, I say, I can see no occasion of offense, but rather some
preservatives against it. The only thing I suppose you aim at, is my taxing
some opinions of Nonconformists, and that with as little personal reflection as
I was able, which I conceived prejudicial to Church Authority; which because
you seem to disown, I do not see why you should apprehend your self as
particularly concerned, especially there being nothing in the discourse whereby
you could conclude either your self or any of your moderate temper to have been
intended. I will assure you I intended none but such as were guilty, and with
being so, I charged none particularly. But that not only the old Puritans and
Separatists of Queen Elizabeth's times, etc. but also very many of ours now are
guilty of them, is too notorious to suppose you ignorant of it. I could
heartily wish that the number of better principled and more peaceable
dissenters were greater than I fear it is. Nor do I see that what is there said
can make it unuseful even to the persons truly concerned, that value truth more
than any, however beloved party; seeing it may either let them see the ill
consequence of their Principles, and their influence on that Athei^m and
Profaneness which I am confident themselves do most cordially detest, which I
conceive to be more likely to prevail with them than other arguments, as being
more suited to their pious disp^sitions; or supposing that my fears were indeed
groundless of the introduction of profaneness by the contempt of Government,
or of contempt of Government by their disobedience to it, yet might it at least
warn them from confining on such dangerous consequ^nces, or from coming to them
unawares by an abuse of Principles generally true, but obnoxious to particular
inconveniences when unwarily managed. I mean it may put them in mind of the
greater momentousness of good Government and peace than many of their
differences, and consequently of the great engagements incumbent on them for
their preservation; and that they would therefore so take care to oppose the
particular abusive Constitutions of Government, as not to bring their
Government into contempt, nor to sugg^st unanswerable Apologies to factious
persons for the future, when they are unwilling to be obedient. These are
abuses which I believe your self would wish redressed in the Causers of our
Church-divisions. But if it could not be useful to them, yet could it not be
prejudicial to them, nothing being urged, either invidiously, or imperiously,
and therefore no harm being done if I should prove utterly mistaken.

That you should marvel how Reviving Discipline could by me be expected from
the constitution of our present Ecclesiastical Government, does seem no less
mavelous to me, especially as to the exception you make against it; for if it
were impossible to maintain Discipline under a Government so far Monarchical,
as to appropriate the Decretory power of the Government of many to a single
person, though the execution be entrusted to many; then it would follow, that
the secular Discipline under a secular Monarch of any extent, were impossible
also to be observed, seeing it is as impossible for any such Prince to have a
particular cognizance of every particular Cause, much more of every particular
person in his Dominions, as for a Bishop in his Diocese. As there it appears by
experience (I shall instance in a Scripture-example, because I know that will
be liable to least exception), that David in an extent more vast, and a people
more numerous th^n that of the largest Diocesses, 120. Miles in length, and 60*
Miles in bre^dth, and rather better in David's days, where were accounted
1300000 men sit for War, besides Artificers, and such others, not coming under
that account, was yet able to give a go^d account of his Government, without
particular inspection into all Causes, or Communication of his power to
numerous coordinate Presbyteries; so I do not see, why it may not as well hold
for a possibility of Discipline, under an Ecclesiastical Monarch of a much
narrower extent; for the reason produced by you, seems to proceed from the
nature of Government in general, and therefore must proceed with the same force
in seculars as Ecclesiasticals, there being no ingredient peculiarly rela^ing
to Religion, much less to Christianity* which might alter the case, or argue a
disparity; for certainly Princes, as well as Bishops, are responsible for the
miscarriage of their particular ^ubjects; for they may be prevented by moral
diligence, and yet you will not thence conclude that every particular must come
under his immediate personal care and cognizance; nor is it proved, that the
Bishop is otherwise obliged to such a care upon pe^uliar respects Besides, that
it is plainly against experience, even in Ecclesistasticals; for as it has
fallen out in some places, where there were many Cities, the Bishops were
propor^ionally multiplied, as in Africa and Ireland; so that it was not upon
account of the impossibility of managing the charge of much greater multitudes
than the Inhabitants of those small Cities, appears, in that even in the very
same places the greatness of no City was thought sufficient for multiplying the
Bishops, though it was for the Inferior Clergy. I need not tell you how great
Rome was* and how full of Christians, even in Decius's time, under Cornelius,
which required the united endeavors of above a Thousand Clergies, as appears
from the said Cornelius's Epistle to Fabius, of Antioch, in Eusebius. yet was one
Bishop thought sufficient for all; nay, the erecting another in the same See,
was thought to be formal Schism, as appears from the controversies of those
Ages, betwixt Cornelius, and Novatian, and St. Cyprian, and Felicissimus The
same also might have been shown in several other Cities, exceeding numerous,
and abounding with Christians, as Antioch, and Alexandria, and Carthage* etc.
which even in those early Ages, when Discipline was at the greatest Rigor,
were yet Governed by single Bishops: Nay* whole Nations were sometimes Governed
only by one, as the Got^s by Vlpilas, and the Indians by Aedesius, and the
Arabians by Moses, which is an Argument insisted on by some Presbyterians, for
showing the probability of Ordinations by bare Presby^^rs. Yet are there no
complaints of dissolution of Discipline in such places, upon account of the
greatness of their charge, which to me seem sufficient convictions, that the
multitude of persons governed, is not the reason of our present neglects in
that particular.

When I said, that Ignatius's Epistles were questioned by the Presbyterians, I
never said, nor intended it concerning all (for I knew of Vedelius's Apology
for them), much less did I lay it particularly to your charge: so that if you
had here forborne assuming to your self what was spoken of others, many of whose
Opinions I am confident you will not undertake to justify, there had been no
occasion of this exception. That other Presbyterians, and those by far the
greatest number, have denied them, cannot be questioned.

As for the Reasons for Nonconformity alleged by you, and your Brethren, of
the Savoy Conference in 1660. if I might without offense, presume to interpose
my own thoughts, they are as follows: 1. For the approving, not only
submitting to such things as you disliked, and that by an Oath, I am sure there
are many Conformists themselves, that understand no more to have been intended
by the Church, but only an Exterior submission, not an Internal Approbation of
the Particulars. And particularly, I have been in^ormed by a Letter from a very
worthy credible person, who pretends to have had it from the Bishop himself,
that Bishop Sanderson, who was a Member of your Conference, interposed those
words in the Act of Parliament, where it is required, that Ministers declare
their unfeigned assent and consent to the use of all things in the Book of
Common Prayer, etc. designedly that this Objection might be prevented. The new
Article of Faith, inserted in the Rubric, I do not know, nor can I now get the
Books that past betwixt you at the Conference, to find what you mean. That
Lay-Chancellors were put down, and that the Bishops did more consult their
Presbyteries, I could for my own part h^artily wish. But ^ cannot think abuses
momentous enough to warrant a Schism, and I know your self are for bearing with
some things that are not so w^ll liked of, rather than that the Church of God
should be divided for them. In brief, I do not understand any of the Six
Particulars mentioned as the Reasons that keep you off, though indeed you
disapprove them, both because you do not undertake to determine what they might
be to others, but only what they are to persons of your mind (though I confess,
this may be understood as a modest declining to judge of others); and because
you conceive piety the most likely means to unite us, which could not be if we
imposed any thing on you against your Consciences. So that the only one may be
presumed to have been thought sufficient by you to this purpose, seems to have
been another, which because you intimate somewhat obscurely, I do not know
whether you would be willing that it should be taken notice of. But however I
suppose that it self does I suppose only deprive us of your Clerical, not your
Laical Communion. God give us all to discern the things that belong to peace.
As for other Questions, we may patiently await our Lords leisure, who when he
comes shall tell us all things; and in the mean time preserve Charity, and be
wise unto sobriety. I hope, Sir, you will excuse my freedom, and let me know
whether I may in any thing be serviceable to you; and above all things reserve
a portion in your Prayers for

Trin. Col. near Dublin, December. 14. 1672. Your unfeigned Well-wisher, HENRY
DODWELL.


For the Worthy and much Honored Mr. Henry Dodwell, at Trinity College near
Dublin in Ireland.
Worthy Sir,
I Heartily thank you for your patience with my free expressions, and for your
grave and kind reply. As to the main cause of the Nonconformists, should I
enter upon that which I cannot prosecute, I should greatly injure it, my self
and you: I must again crave your patience with my freedom. The sins which they
fear (whether justly is the question) are so heinous, that they dare not
mention them, lest their condemners and afflicters cannot bear it; and so many,
that to open them justly, will require a great Volume, and therefore not by me
to be done in a Letter. Only to what you have said, let me mind you in transitu.

1. That you mistake me if you think that I excepted against your Preface as
meddling with me, any otherwise than as I am one of those Nonconformists with
whom I am acquainted, who are mostly of my mind. (And I suppose you would take
it for no honor to be thought to be better acquainted with the most of them in
England, than I am.)

2. That your intimations about the old Nonconformists are not to our business,
seeing the name of Nonconformists makes not, nor proves all or many so named
to be of the same mind. Nor is your mention of our Treaty or Papers of 1660,
more pertinent, it being the old Cause only that we had to do with, the new
Laws of Conformity being not then existent, which have made it quite another
thing. Only I assure you, if my superiors would not take it for a crime and
inj^ry to do what Justin, (...) for their mistaken Cause), (...) it, I would
endeavor to show another (...), and Nonconformity, than is commonly taken
(...) also to give you (who so well understand Antiquity) (...) evidence of our
Conformity to the ancient (...) 300, and mostly for 600 years after Christ.
(...) (that I may not say nothing to you) (...) only employ (...) lines about
your sug^^^tions concerning the possibility of tru^ Disc^pline by D^^^esans as
they are with us. And still you m^st pardon my (...) of speech. I must say,
that it is the c^^amity of Churches, when their Prelates and Pastors are men
that never were acquainted with the flocks, but spend one half (...) their days
in Schools and Colle^ges, and the other in Noblen^^^^ or Gentlemen's houses, and
then talk confidently of the p^or people whom they know not, and the Discipline
which they ^^ver tried. Even you whom I honor as a person of extraordinary
worth, constrain me by this your Letter to think that I di^pute as about war
with one that never stormed a Garrison, nor fought a battle; or as about
Navigation with one that was never one month at ^ea.

I. Our first question is, What the Pastoral Office is, and especially
Discipline?

II Our next is, Whether it may be delegated to, or done by one that is not of
Gods Institution for the doing of it.

III. And then we shall soon see whether it be possible for our Diocesans to do
it, or any considerable part of it?

I. If the Erastians be in the right, that none of our Discipline is necessary
besides that by the Sword, (and our Preaching) then we may put up the
Controversy on both sides. But if that be the work of Bishops now, which was
so in Scripture-times, the matter will hold no long dispute. To shorten that
work, I desire you to peruse (its like you have done) Dr. Hammonds Paraphrase
on all the Texts that mention Bishops and Presbyters, with his Treatise of the
Keys, where he will tell you, that it was the Bishops Office to be the ordinary
Preacher, to Pray, to celebrate the Eucharist, to visit the Sick, to keep and
distribute the alms and offerings of the Church, as Curators for the Poor, with
much more work. And that every single Congregation had such a Bishop, that ever
met to celebrate Gods public Worship; and that there was not a mee^ing of a
Christian Church without such (for the said Worship in Scripture-times) for he
says that there is no proof that there were any other Presbyters in
Scripture-times.

And for Discipline, it is past doubt: 1. That as to the matter of (...), i^
must consist of a personal watch over each member of ^he (...); that every one
in it that lives in gross sin, or Infidel, or Heathenish, or Her^tical error
and ignorance, be orderly admonished, first m^re privately, afterward more
openly, and last^y most (...); and that he be by convincing reasons and
^xhortations persuaded to repentance. That the penitent mu^t be (...) and
confirmed, the obstinately impenitent rejected, as u^meet for the Communion of
the Church. And for the manner, it is agreed that it must be done with
condescending tenderness, patience, plain evidence, earnest exhortations, no
means left untried to reduce a sinful miserable soul. And all this with the
time and patience which so great a work requires. (And sure if the
Congregation must avoid the sinner, they should know why.) One such person will
hold the Pastor work from first to last many an hour and day.

N^xt, let us think how many such as by Christ's Law must be th^s dealt with,
are in a Diocese. I had the most reformed people (as to sins of commission and
omission) that ever I knew in England. Our custom being to have each family
come by turns to us to be personally Catechized and instructed. I had full
opportunity to know them all. Many score of them that came daily to Church,
knew not the Essentials of Christianity and Baptism. When I came first to them,
I suppose some thousands lived in gross ignorance, open impiety and
profaneness. And even at last some scores I fear lived in gross sin. Some were
notorious drunkards, raging weekly twice or thrice in the open streets. Some
quieter drunkards. Many profane Swearers. Too many railers, fighters,
slanderers, etc. Three or four Apostate-Infidels. The Parishes about me were
far worse. A great part of the people know not who Christ is, nor what he does,
as the Savior of the world, nor understand one of many Articles of the Creed,
or Petitions of the Lords Prayer; much less do any thing like Christians for
Children or Servants in their Families.

The Diocese that I now live in, has above 1100 Parishes, some have half as
many; some Parishes have 3000, some 10000 People. in London some 20000, 30000,
and the Country smaller Parishes usually about 400, 500, or 1000. I do
warrantably conjecture that in the Diocese where I now live, there may be about
50000 souls that by Christ's Law should be admonished and disciplined for gross
sin. And about 80000, or 100000 that are grossly ignorant of Christianity. It Is
ten to one (experience tells it me) that five Conventions will scarce serve
with each obstinate sinner, to bring the work to the issue of a due
Excommunication or Absolution. Some parts of the Diocese that I am in, are
about 120 miles from other parts. The Diocesan then that does all this himself,
(but there is no such) if he sit half the year, must either speak to 10000, or
20000 persons at once, or in a few minutes, or else he must let all the rest
lie and rot in their sins, till he has done with the first. And indeed (I have
tried it) a sober Pastoral course of conviction and discipline with each one,
will take up so much time, that seven years are not enough for him to go over
all this Diocese if he did as much in a month as ever I knew a Bishop do in his
life, except against Godly Nonconformists, or Conscientious Dissenters.

But if you consider how far every accusing Minister and Churchwarden, and
every accused sinner, have to travel, some 20, some 40 miles, etc.) and that
Witnesses also must travel as far; and how long they must attend, and how few
can bear the charge of this; and that the old and weak sort of sinners are
unable for the journey, and who shall do the Parish Ministers work the while;
and how likely it i^ that of 10000 such sinners, 5000 may be dead, or the
Witnesses at least, before the re^t are tried and well dispatched; or the case
grown old, and the same m^n drunken twent^ times again, before he can be judged
for the first. (...) al^o how strange a course this is to humble, convince, and
save a soul -- wonderful! -- that it should with any man living be a
controversy, Whether one Bishop be sufficient for all this? And what need we
more than common experience? The work is every where undone. Lay the blame
where you will, not one common gross sinner of a thousand is disciplined or
judged as in question. That which can be done, and should be done, some one
good Bishop will do But none that ever I knew did ever see the face, and speak
to one of a thousand gross sinners of his Diocese, (unless perhaps as he
preached to one or few Congregations) nor do I know any that take it for their
work, (if they could do it), but leave it to the Lay-Chancellor as his part.

If you say that Excommunication must not be on many: I answer,

1. The Bishops trying and conviction of gross sinners is first for their
Repentance, and not their Excommunication, except in case of the last
obstinacy, which cannot be foreknown till tried.

2. If Christ would not have such Discipline at all, there needs no Bishop to
do it. If he would, when twenty drunkards, fornicators, etc. are notoriously
guilty, is it his will that one of these only be admonished, convinced,
excommunicated, and all the rest let alone that are equally guilty? Sure the
Law of God does not so distinguish, but say of all alike, If any called a
brother be a fornicator, etc. And will such partiality either reform men, or
honor Religion, or rather make it a scorn, and make him that is singled out,
hate the partial Prosecutor.

If you say it is long of Churchwardens that accuse not men: I answer,

1. And it will be so, while the thing is unfeasable; who will be hated to do
no good?

2. Some Churchwardens of late to some Articles have presented all the Parish
without* exception. And so no man heard of it any more.

II. And whether the Bishop may delegate his Office, or do his work per alios,
would be no controversy if Scripture were our Rule, or it were known what a
Pastors office is. If he may delegate it, either to a Layman in sensu
composito, or to a Clergy man: If to a Layman, than a Layman and a Clergyman
are all one. For there is nothing but the work to define the authority and
obligation by, which constituteth the Office. A Bishop is one authorized and
obliged to do the work of a Bishop, and so is a Layman too by this supposition.
If to a Clergyman, either to one of the same order and office with the Bishop,
or of another. If of the same (before or now made so) datur quaesitum, then he
is not the sole Bishop. If of another in sensu composito, then another Clergy
man is not another; For he that is Authorized to the same work, is of the same
Office.

If you say that he may not delegate the whole work, de specie, but a part; I
ask which part? either the Essential part, or but an Integral common part. If
the former? 1 Either ^o such as God in Scripture by office authorizeth to that
part, or not. If the former, then the Bishop comes too late to that which God
has done already. And then that is no proper work of Bishops which God has
made common to another Office. If the later, than a man may make new Priestly
O^fices and Orders, even to the same work that God has ^ade Officers to do
already. And then we need not say, ^that Orders are Iure Divino] if the Bishop
may make more at his pleasure; but quo jure; and what shall set his bounds and
end? This seems more (in kind) than the Italians at Trent would have given to
the Pope over Bishops. An^ if they do not themselves also that same Essential
part of their Office which they give to others, they degrade themselves For the
ceasing or alienation of an Essential part, changes the specie^.

But I suppose you will say (...) is Pre^byters to whom they may delegate this
work. And (...), either it is a wor^ which God has made part of the Presbyters
Office, or not. If it be, then that Presbyter does his ow^ (...) appointed him
by God, and not another (...) not, (...) he makes a new Officer, who is
neither (...).

But the (...) the Office (...), that it may not be (...) (though Bishop may
Ordain men to an Office of (...) the King or Church may make new Officers
(...), Clock keepers Ostiaries, etc.); (...), and obligation to personal duty,
to be done (...) person^l abi^^ty] as is the Office of a Physician, a Judge, a
School (...), a Pilot, etc where he that Author^zeth and oblig^th another
statedly to do his work, does thereby make that other a Physician, Judge,
Schoolmaster, Pilot, etc. This is but Ordin^tio^.

And if a Bishop be but one that may appoint others to do the Episcopal work,
then 1. Why is not every King a Bishop, for he may appoint men to do a Bishops
work? And why is he not also a Physician, Musician, Pilot, etc. because he may
do the like by them? 2. And then the Bishop appointed by the King, is no more a
Bishop indeed than one appointed by a Bishop is.

But this delegation that I speak against, is a smaller sin than such men
choose. To depute others to exercise Discipline, whom God appointed not de
specie thereto, is but Sacriledg and Usurpation, (by alienating it from the
true office, and setting up a false one): But yet the thing might some how be
done, if any were to do it. But the almost total deposition and destruction of
the Discipline it self, and letting none do it, by pretending the sole
authority of doing it, is another kind of sin.

Now to your answer from the similitude of Civil Monarchs, I reply, It is no
wonder if we never agree about Church-offices, if we no better agree of the
general nature of them, and their work. Of which if you will please to read a
sheet or two which I wrote the last year to Ludov. Molinaeus, of the difference
of Magistracy, and Church Power, and also read the Lord Bacons Considerations,
you will excuse me for here passing by what is there said.

I. The standing of the Magistrates Office is by the Law of Nature, which
therefore allows variety and mutations of inferior Orders, as there is cause.
But the standing of the Clergy is by Supernatural Institution. Our Book of
Ordination says there are three Orders, etc. Therefore man may not alter them,
or make more of that same kind.

II. Kingly power requires not ad dispositionem materiae, such Personal
ability as the Pastoral-office does. A child may be a King, and it may serve
turn if he be but the head of power, and give others commission to do all the
rest of the Governing work. But it is not so with a Judge, a Physician, an
Orator, or a Bishop; who is not subjectum capax of the essence of the office,
without personal aptitude.

III. God has described the Bishops office in Scripture as consisting of three
parts, viz. Teaching, Priestly, (or about Worship and Sacraments) and ruling;
as under Christ's Prophetical, Priestly and Kingly Office. And he has no where
made one more proper to a Bishop than another; nor said this is Essential, and
that is but Integral. Therefore the Bishop may as well allow a Layman to
administer the Sacraments, etc. as one not appointed to it by God, to Rule by
the Keys.

IV. The Bishops Pastoral Rule is only by Gods word upon the Conscience (as
Bishop Bilson of Obed. shows at large, and all Protestants agree), and not by
any mulcts or corporal force. If he use the sword, or constraint, it is not as
a Bishop, but as a Magistrate. But the Kings is by the sword. And will it
follow that because the King may appoint another to apprehend men, and carry
them to prison, etc. that therefore a Bishop appointed by God to Preach,
Worship and Rule, and therein to draw the Impenitent to Repentance by patient
exhortations, and reproofs, etc. may commit this to another, never appointed to
it of God?

V. Either it is the Bishops work (as was said) that is delegated by him, or
some other. If properly his own, than either he makes more Bishops, (and
that is all we plead for), or else a Presbyter or Layman may do a Bishops proper
work. And then what need of a Bishop (to pass by the contradiction.)

VI. But my chief answer to you is, the King as Supreme Magistrate does appoint
and rule by others that are truly Magistrates: They have every one a Judicial
power in their several places under him, even every Justice of Peace. But you
suppose the Bishop to set up no Bishops, nor no Church Governors under him at
all. A King can rule a Kingdom by Supremo Judgment, when he has hundreds of
Judges under him who do it by his authority. And if this had been all our
dispute, whether a Patriarch or Archbishop can rule a thousand Churches by a
thousand Inferior Bishops, or Church-rulers, you had said something? But does
it follow that your Church Monarch can over-see them all himself without any
sub-oversees, or rule them (by Gods word on the Conscience) without any
sub-rulers? You appropriate the Decretory Power to your Monarch; and
communicate only the executive. Hold to that. The whole Government is but
Legislatio and Iudicium; Legislation now we meddle not with, (yet our Bishops
allow it to the Presbyters in Convocation, for they take Canons to be
Church-Laws.) It is a lower power that is denied to them, that they grant the
higher to. Bare execution is no Government. A Hangman is no Governor. A
Governor may also be Executioner, but a mere Executioner is no Governor. The
People are Executioners of Excommunications, while they withdraw from the
Excommunicate, and with such do not eat, etc. as 1 Cor. 5. And the
Parish Priest is an Executioner, while he (as a Crier) proclaims or reads
the Chancellors Excommunication in the Church, and when he denies the
Sacrament to those that he is bid deny it to. I grant you that this is
Communicated. But it is the Judicial power it self which I have been proving
the Bishop incapable of. Exploration is part of the Judicial work. I know you
include not that in execution (which follows it) If you did, it would be a sad
office for a Bishop to sentence all men, upon other men's trial and word. As if
the Bishop must Excommunicate all that some body else says he must
Excommunicate. This turns Decreeing into a Hangman-like Execution.

And the nature of the cause forbids it. No man is to be Excommunicate for
any other crime as such, but for Impenitence in some crime; nor to be absolved
after, but upon Repentance. Now if it were, but whether a man de facto have
been drunk, or fornicated, or perjured, etc. it were hard judging sententially
merely on trust from others; but yet perhaps that might sometimes be done: But
when the case is, Whether the man be penitent, Personal trial is necessary to a
Rational and Ecclesiastical administration of the sentence. I conclude
therefore, that as a King can judge by many hundred Judges, and a General
command an Army by many hundred Commanders, but not without any one by himself
alone, having Executioners under him. So is it here.

VII. And I pray you note one other difference: In the Kingdom it is not one
subject of an hundred, or many hundreds, that has Law suits with others once
in a year, or seven years, or his life. Nor one of some hundreds (where I have
lived) that finds the Magistrate work as Criminal. And in this we differ even
from the Physician, who in a City has not one of many that is sick, but we are
all of a sinning corrupt disposition, and the Pastor has few of his flock that
need not some personal applications in one degree or other. And even as to
gross sins lived in, and ignorance or heresy against the very essence of
Christianity, it is a good Parish where a considerable part of it are not
guilty; so that it is easier for one Justice of Peace to send two or three
thieves in a year to a Gaol, and bind two or three to the good behavior, than
for one Bishop to admonish, exhort, convince and judge 10000 impenitent sinners
in a little time, and hear all the Witnesses, etc.

If you should have said, that the Parish Priest is to reprove, exhort,
convince them first, till he prove them impenitent, and he is to instruct the
ignorant, Infidels and Heretics: I answer, 1. That is more than an executive
power. 2. We desire no more at all from Bishop^ or any, and know no other
Episcopal power over the people, but thus personally to convince men, and
declare to the Congregation upon proof, the fitness or unfitnss of men for
their Communion, by penitence* or impenitence. But this is it that the
Ministers are hindered from, or denied. They have no power to speak with any one
ignorant, Heretical, Infidel, or scandalous sinner in the Parish, but such as
are willing. And few of the guilty are willing. They will neither come to the
Minister, nor suffer him to come to them, but shut their doors on him if they
know that he comes on such a work, or else they will not be within. Or if they
be, will tell him, that they will not answer him. When I came first to
Kederminster, the rabble multitude cursed me in the streets, and rose up against
me, but for saying, That Infants Originally have that sin and misery which
needs a Savior; yet such (if they scorn to speak with us) must be our
Communicants for want of Pastoral power. There is no Law or penalty that I ever
knew of, to constrain any to come to us, receive us, hear us, or answer us, if
we had never so much cause to question them of, or fortify them against
infidelity, heresy, ignorance, or wicked lives. And if any other accuse them
to us (as few will) we must not judge them without trial.

It may be you will say. Would you have them constrained by force to speak with
the Pastor, or give him any account of their faith, life, or knowledge, besides
coming with others into the Church? I answer, No, we would have no force, as we
have none. But then we would not be forced our selves by the Church-Lords and
Monarchs to take our selves for the Pastors of such as refuse our Pastoral
office, and to give the Sacrament, and all privileges of Church Communion, to
every one in the Parish, who upon just suspicion of gross scandal, heresy,
infidelity or ignorance, obstinately refuses to speak to us, and give us any
account, or to be tried. I that have yearly tried my Parish by Personal
Conference, know that thousands and thousands among us know not (and therefore
believe not) whether Christ be God or man, or Angel, or what; nor who the Holy
Ghost is, or why Christ died, rose; nor scarce any supernaturally revealed
article of the Christian faith. And that many that understand them, believe
them not. And I desire no Church Power, but not to take those, 1. For
Christians; 2. And for my especial Christian flock, 1. Who are no Christians;
2. Who themselves refuse it. Without their consent the Minister is forced on
them. They a^e forced by the sword to say that they are Christians, and to come
to Church and Communicate. The old Christian Profession was, I will be a
Christian, and hold Communion with the Church, though I go to prison or death
for it. The Prelatical Christian Profession is, I will rather be a Christian
and Communicate, than I will lie in Gaol, and have all my Estate confiscate.
Seeing then that we have not the due power of a Pastor to deny our
Office-administrations in Sacraments to those that refuse us in the other parts
aforesaid, we are utterly disabled from so much as preparing men for the
Bishops, or Chancellors Examination.

3. But if it were otherwise, that must not satisfy the Church-Monarch, who
must judge himself, and therefore must hear by himself.

But you tell me, It is plainly against experience in Ecclesiastics.

Ans. It Is hard then to know any thing. For I dispute all this while, as if the
question were, Whether men in England speak English. And if I herein err, I am
uncurable, and therefore I allow you to despair of me. You say, The greatness
of no City was thought sufficient to multiply Bishops.

Ans. 1. Gods Institution was, that every Church have a Bishop, Act. 14.23, etc.

2. A particular Church then was, A Society of Neighbor-christians, combined
for Personal Communion in Gods Worship, and holy living, consisting of Pastor
and flock.

3. For 250 years I think, you cannot prove that any one Bishop in the world,
save at Alexandria and Romr, had more such Congregations and Altars than one;
nor these for a long time after the Apostles; nor in many Churches of ome
hundred years longer.

4. At Antioch (the third Patriarchate) Ignatius professes that every Church
had one Altar, and one Bishop with his Presbyters and Deacons, fellow servants.
And that in this one Church the Bishop must enquire of all by name, even
Servant-men and Maids, and see that they absented not themselves from the
Church. Why is not Ignatius confuted if he erred? Vid. Mede on the Point.

5. Alexandria and Rome by not multiplying Bishops as Churches or Converts
needed it, began the grand sin and calamity which has undone us, and therefore
are not to be our Pattern. Orbis major est urbe.

6. Were Bishops necessarily to be distributed by Cities, the Empires that have
few, or no Cities, must have few, or no Bishops; and an Emperor might, aliud
ag^ndo, depose all the Bishops by dis franchizing the Cities.

7. But every Corporation, oppidum, like our Market Towns, was then truly
(...): And if you will but procure every such City with us, to have a Bishop,
and the Office of such Bishops to be to drive men from sin, and not to it, and
to silence Blasphemers, and not faithful Preachers of the Gospel, all our
controversies of Prelacy are then at an end.

8. And you must remember, that great Cities had long but few Christians, in
comparison of the Heathens (till Constantine's time, and mostly long after).
And when Patrick with his own hand Ordained Three Hundred and Fifty Bishops in
your Ireland, they were but Ecclesiarum fundatores, and with them he founded
but septingentas Ecclesias, and Ordained Five Thousand Clerks, if Ioceline be
true, Vit. Patri^. cap. 185. and not rather the far more credible report of
Antonin. in Chr^n. tit. 11. cap. 18. 2. and Vincent. specul. histor. lib. 20.
cap. 23. who say, that Ecclesias fun^avit 365. ^rdinavit Episcopos eodem numero
365. et eo amplius in quibus spiritus Dei crat. Presbyteros autem usque ad
3^00* ordinavit A^ Usher ^^ceth them, de primord. Eccl. Br. p 9^7. which is
Ninius number there. So that here is no more Church^s th^n ^ishops* and about
Nine Presbyters to a Bishop.

You tell me of above One thousand Clergymen at Rome, in Cor^elius's (...).

Ans. 1. This was above Two hundred and Fifty years after Christ's Birth. 2. I
never took all the impotent persons, poor, and Widows in the Church, to be
Clergymen, and Clergy-women. Cornelius his account is, that there are Six and
Forty Presbyters, Seven Deacons, Seven Subdeacons, Two and Forty Acolytes, Two
and Fifty Exorcists, and Readers, with Porters, Widows, and impotent persons,
above One thousand and Fifty souls, considering, 1. How their Meetings were
then obscure, and small, in Houses (as the tolerated Churches in London). And
in so vast a City, in how many distant places. Besides the sub-urbicarian
Assemblies* 4* And how many Presbyters used still to be with the Bishop in the
same Assembly? 5. And that here are in all but Seven Deacons. 6. And that many
then were Presbyters that used not to Preach, but for privater oversight, and
as the Bishops Assessors. 7. And that the poorer sort most commonly received
the Gospel. 8. And that none of these, but the Six and Forty Presbyters, had
any power in the Discipline. 9. And that by all this reckoning, the whole
Church maintained not, besides the Officers, near a thousand poor; we may
probably conjecture, that the whole Church of that Bishop was not bigger than
some one London-Parish ( Stepney, Giles, Cripplegate, Martins, etc.) where are
about Fifty thousand souls. 10. And when none were Christians but persecuted
Volunteers, they were the holiest, and best of men; and I have tried, that Six
hundred such make less work for Discipline, than Ten of the Rabble that are
driven into our Churches, and choose them rather than the Goal.

But when all is done, Two Cities under the power of great temptation, are not
to be our Rule against Gods Word, and the state of all other Churches in the
world, and undeniable experience.

It Is true that you say, that to erect another Altar was counted Schism; that
is, Altar contra altar; because when the Phrase came up, no Church had more
than one Altar.

Your Instances intimated of Antioch and Carthage, I believe not; and can give
you (had I liberty) a Volume of proof from Antiquity, that for Two hundred and
Fifty years, if not much longer, Ignatius's Rule was true, that every Church
had one Altar, and one Bishop, at least, except the two aforesaid.

Vlphilas was but an Arrian Bishop, of a few Goths newly turned Arrians, and
the first that translated the Scriptures into the Gothic Tongue; so that no
Churches among them had the Scripture, till after his translating; and these
few were presently persecuted to the death by Athanarichus (ut socrat. lib. 4
cap. 32.) You may call these few, a Kingdom, if you please.

How few of the Indians were converted when Frumentius (not Aedesius, as you
say) was made their Bishop, it is easy to gather by the History.

Scythia and Persia used to have each a Bishop, and he lived in the Roman
Empire, as near them as he durst, as not being tolerated usually in their Land.
And as few, it is like, Mos^s had among the Arabians; there being no mention in
the History of any thing to persuade us, that he had many Churches under him,
that I remember. And the work of these Bishops was to ordain Presbyters, who
had the power of the Keys, and exceptae Ordinatione, did all that Bishops did,
as Hierome says. So that then a Diocese had not one sole Church-Governour; and
therefore where you gather that yet Discipline was not dissolved: I answer:

1. In all this you leave out a matter of chief consideration: viz. That all
the Presbyters then were assistants in Discipline, and had a true
Church Government over the people, which now they have not.

2. It Is strange that we that have eyes and ears must be sent to the Indians
and ancient History, to know whether one Bishop can hear, and try, and admonish
so many thousands at once, as we see by experience are those Objects of
Discipline which the Scripture describes, and when we see that it is not done.

And after all this, we have talked but of a ^hantasm; for it is not one
Bishop, but one Lay man, a Chancellor, that uses this Decretory power of the
Keys, over all these fouls, so far as they are used, as to the ordinary
Court-tryals and exerci^e; and the Bishop rarely medleth with it.

Again, Nonconformists doubt not to prove, that the Diocesan frame, which they
dare not swear to, 1. Does depose the species of Churches of Gods Institution.
2 And the Discipline it self almost totally. 3. And the species of Presbyters.
4. And the old species of Bishops. And instead of each of these, sets up a
new species of man's invention, wholly different, and inconsistent.

And that they are not willing to Swear, Subscribe, or deliberately and
solemnly enter into a Church Covenant, That in their Places and Callings they
will never endeavor any alteration of this, no not by a request or word, you
may less wonder than if some were then loath to Swear or Covenant never to
endeavor to take down the Priests of Dan and Bethel, or reform the high
places. It Is dangerous making a solemn Ministerial Covenant, Never to obey God
in any one great matter, and never to repent of so doing.

Again, our Reasons at the Savoy were, 1. About another ma^ter: 2. Few of them
received, or ever published to the world. And all that I have said to you is
very little of our Cause; which I will not touch, unless I might prosecute it.

Your information about Bishop Sanderson, and the word, Use of all things, etc.
is as the rest, to conquer our sense and experience. 1. The words in the Act
are most plain, and Bishop Sanderson de Iuram, concludes, That Oaths (and
Covenants) must be taken in the plain and proper sense. 2. It is notorious,
that after the Lords in a Proviso of another Act, would have so expounded the
Act of Uniformity, (that it is meant but of consent to use, etc) and the
Commons rejected it as intolerable, and upon a meeting of both Houses satisfied
the Lords by their Reasons, who acquiesced in the rejection of that Exposition.
And shall we still stretch our sense against the plain words, when the
Parliament long after has rejected such an Exposition?

Sir, it is much more (especially about Separation) which your lines invite me
to say, and the cause requires; but I fear I have wronged you by prolixity
already; and much more by my freedom of speech, which is from my inclination to
speak of things as they are, and is truly joined with a very great respect and
honor of your self, commanded by your excellent Book, and judicious peaceable
style and temper. I rest,

Jan. 5. 1672. Your unworthy Fellow Servants, (worthy to be Silenced), RI.
BAXTER.


The short Answer to Mr. Dodwell's long Letter, fully answered in my Treatise
of Episcopacy.

For the Worthy and much Honored Mr. Henry Dodwell, at Trinity College near
Dublin in Ireland.
Worthy Sir,
I Thankfully received yours of 28 Pages, from the hand of Mr. Teate. That I
may not be again guilty of such hastiness in writing as you take notice of, I
premise this to acquaint you, That your warning, with my backwardness to such
work, and the multitude of Employments in which I am pre-engaged, shall keep me
a while from that error, and you from the trouble. And if I take not your
concluding counsel to avoid both timerity and partiality in this Cause, I shall
notoriously contradict mine own interest. I have studied the point as
diligently as I could, almost thirty years longer than you have lived in the
world, (if the bearer of yours give me a true account of your age.) And yet I
truly think it very possible that one of such admirable parts and diligence as
your self, (evident in your great reading and accurate style) may know much
more in half that time. But if I can know my own thoughts, I have studied with
a desire whatever it cost me, to know the truth. I dare not say, ( Impartially)
altogether. For I have flesh and blood, and who can choose but have a little
partiality for that way which all his worldly interest pleads for? Could I
have proved Conformity lawful (not to have contained a Covenant against the
Church-form, Church-offices, and Church Discipline of Christ's Institutions, and
for upholding that Church Usurpation and Tyranny which began and still
continues the Divisions of the Christian World; nor the deliberate Ministerial
owning of the Perjury of many thousands, etc.) I need not have undergone the
common scorn and hatred that I have born, nor to have been deprived of all
Ministerial maintenance, and silenced for eleven years of that part of my life,
which should have been most serviceable (to add no more); my Reputation with
those on the other extreme, I did voluntarily cast away, by opposing them (when
I could as easily have kept it as most I know) lest it should be any snare or
tempting interest to me. I assure you, This was written long ago.
That I have not wanted bread, is a thing that I owe to thanks to any party
for, either Prelatists, Presbyterians or Independents, etc. I confess I have
read what the Antiprelatists say, such as Beza, Gerson, Bucer, Didoclav.
Parker, Bains, Jacob Blondel, Salmasius, etc. But I have more diligently
studied, since I was twenty years of age, the chiefest on the other side,
Saravia, Bilson, Downham, Hooker, Burges, Covel, Bridge, Bancroft, Whitgift,
Spalatensis, and since Petavius, Hammond, and multitudes more. And I have now,
as you desired, read over all yours, that I might see the end, before I past my
judgment on the beginning. But our apprehensions are various, as our
preconceptions are; I find that we are all forestalled, and readiest to learn
of our selves, who are not always the happiest Teachers of our selves. What we
have first laid in, is usually made the standard of all that follows; and all
must be reduced into a due Conformity and subserviency to our former
sentiments. You have showed great learning, ingenuity and piety, and in a very
fluent style expressed what was in your mind; and made me remember what one
answers him that said, Hooker was yet unanswered, viz. Reduce what you would
have answered, to Argument, and it will soon be done. I find, that it had been
much better to have said nothing, than to have begun in such a manner of
dispute, in which the further we go, the less we understand one another, and
make each other molestation, instead of edification: For plainly I find, that
(though much may be learned out of so rare a discourse as you have vouchsafed
me, yet) it does very little at all to any dispatch of our present
controversy, but might easily deceive me by avocation, if I would forget what
it is that I dispute about: For I perceive, 1. That we agree not in our sense
of the terms which we make use of: And from thence you infer some great and
dangerous errors in my judgment. 2. We agree least of all in common and obvious
matters of fact, which are before our eyes, and the things of which I have had
almost an Ages experience. 3. I find, that a very great part, if not the far
greatest of all your discourse, is written upon a misunderstanding of my Words
and judgment. And if one were to publish such kind of Writings, how tiresome
would it be to the Reader, should I set down a particular account of all your
passages that are besides the question, and all that proceed from such
misunderstanding? I speak not by way of blaming you; for we are not competent
Judges of other men's actions, till we know the Reasons of them: that may be
laudable, which crosses our desires. Perhaps you had Reasons to pass by the
chief part of my explications of my sense, and of the matter of fact, and say
nothing to them: And perhaps you had Reasons when I had told you our
Country-distribution of Acts of Government, into Legislative, and Judicial, and
Executive, to make use still of the Equivocal word Decretory, and to understand
by it (as you saw cause) only the Legislative power, and to leave out the
Judicial, which was all that I controverted: It may be you had Reason, when I
talk of a single, or Parochial Church, to say, I supposed in it but a single
Pastor: You are not accountable to me for such errors, be they never so
causless in my opinion. It may be you had Reason to write against the old
Nonconformists that are in another world; and to think, that for the Names sake
it concerned us: and to plead, that Conformity to all the present Covenants,
and Oaths, and Subscriptions, is necessary, because you could wish the
Discipline more Regular, as if we were to Subscribe to what is in your wishes.
It may be you had Reason to suppose the Parish Priests to have the Government
of the People, even the power of the Church-Keys (and yet sometimes to unsay it
again), without answering my Proof to the contrary, when I take it for the
chief supposition that causes my Nonconformity: And to prove copiously, that a
Bishop may govern a Diocese when he has a Governor under him in every Parish,
without answering my Proofs, that he has no such under him, but has, quantum
in se, half degraded the Presbyters. And when I said, that Discipline is not
possible under such Diocesans as are with us, you might have Reason that I know
not of, to leave out, as are with us, and to prove it possible with other
Diocesans that have governing Presbyters under them. Perhaps you had Reason to
confound the Convincing, Persuasive, Declarative Power of a Judge, with that of
a private man, and thence to raise the supposition which you raise. Perhaps you
know some Medium between corporal force, and Mulcts, proper to the Magistrate,
and Authoritative persuasion, and prevailing on the Conscience by the Reverence
of Gods Laws, though I know none: And you were not bound to teach me what you
know. Perhaps you had Reason to think that I may Subscribe, That no man in
Three Kingdoms that has Vowed it, is bound to endeavor to alter our
Church Government by Lay-Chancellors, because you defend it not, but wish it
altered: And it may be you have Reasons unknown to me, that none but Irregular
endeavors are there disclaimed, and that our Lawgivers spoke universally, and
would be interpreted particularly, with many such like. But abscondita and quae
supra nos, nihil ad nos -- What I may not pretend to understand, I will not
presume to censure, but only say, That I am incapable of being informed by
them. This I am satisfied of, that my Schismatical Principles take into
Church Communion such as you, and those that are in knowledge below, not only
you, but me, even the weakest true Christians But upon your Catholic terms, no
man of my measure of knowledge must be tolerated to be a Preacher, or a
Christian in Church Communion, nor live at least out of Goal, or some such
penalty. And if one at Muscovy can get a Courtier to make him a Bishop, he and
such other are the Church (which why you still put it in the feminine Gender
when it consists of Masculine Court-Bishops, I know not.) And if he command
us to do that which we account the most inhumane perjury, if he think it to be
but the renunciation of an unlawful Oath, as I understand you, we are
Schismatics if we obey him not. Whether in cases of commanded blasphemy, and
all other crimes, we must accordingly renounce our understandings, I know not.
Though there be somewhat of Irony in all this, there is nothing but what is
consistent with the high estimation of your extraordinary worth. And I must
say, that our different Educations, I doubt not, is a great cause of our
different sentiments. Had I never been a Pastor, nor lived out of a College,
(and had met with such a taking Orator) I might have thought as you do. And had
you converst with as many Country People as I have done, and such, I think you
would have thought as I do. My great deceiver is Sense and Experience. I am
inclined to look near me, in judging of present matters of fact: As if our
Controversy were, Whether one Schoolmaster can govern a thousand Schools
without any but Monitors under him, and Teachers that have no Government. And
your way is from old Histories, to prove that some body did so 1400 years ago,
or a thousand, in some places of the world, if stories deceive us not; and
therefore it may be so now. Though none of those excellent men do it, who are
put into the places of the silenced Schismatical Ministers, nor none of the
excellent Bishops that are over us, who are so good that one of them no doubt
would do it, were it possible. But seriously I take it for a great mercy of
God, that honest Christians of little learning have that experience in the
Practicals of Religion, which the studied accurate plausible Orations of
contradictors cannot overcome, though they are not so well skilled at the same
weapons as to answer them. Sir, pardon and accept this short and thankful
acknowledgment, that I have received your Learned Tractate, till I take the
leisure (if I so long live) to return you an answer suitable to your discourse
and expectations. I rest,

Aug. 5. 1673. Your Servant, RICH. BAXTER.


Mr. Dodwell desiring me not to make haste in answering him, I sent him only
this, intending more; but want of time, and the quality of the task, (being put
but to answer a multitude of words) delayed it till he came to London, and then
I thought we might talk it out, which we often tried to little purpose. His great
proof of large Churches, of many Altars, from the only two that swelled first,
Rome and Alexandria, are so fully answered in this annexed Letter which worthy
Mr. Clerkson wrote to me, that I think he needs no other answer; since
published by me: As is a f^ll discourse on the Subject, by Mr. Clerkson
himself, against Dr. St^llingfleet.

A Copy of the Letter to Mr. Dodwell, March 12. 1681.
SIR,
SInce your Speech with me, I have thought again of what you insisted on, and
find it consist of these four Points: 1. Whether I charge you with Popery, or
at least, do not vindicate you when so accused. 2. Your reasons against
answering Voetius and me. 3. Your desire to know my terms of concord. 4. Your
persuading me to give over Preaching. Lest words be mis-understood, or
forgotten, I send you my Answer to each of these.

I. I take it to be none of my business, to tell what Religion other men are
of, till I am called to it: And then I take my self bound to judge every man
what he professes to be, till I can disprove it. 2. I distinguish the Name (
e. g. of Protestant, or Papist) from the Thing. Accordingly, 1. I am sure you
deny your self to be a Papist, and I believe you. 2. What you mean by the word,
I refer all men that talk of it to your Books, which are fitter to tell your
mind than I am, that know no man's heart: Grotius took a Papist to be one that
flattered Popes, taking all to be just which they said and did, and not one
that consented to all the General Councils. 3. You shall choose what Name I
shall call you by: If it be Protestant, far be it from me to deny it you; But
as your Book publishes your judgment to the world, you will give me leave to
tell men what is in it: And to profess my self, that I am no such Protestant,
as takes the Church of Rome to be a true Church of uninterrupted succession,
which gave our Bishops their Office and Power; and that all the Reformed that
have not Diocesan Bishops, are no Churches, no Ministers, have no Sacraments,
no pardon of sin, or hope of salvation, by promise, and known ordinary grounds,
which the Roman Church has. Yea, that they sin against the Holy Ghost: Yea,
and that this is the case of the Episcopal Protestants, that have not had an
uninterrupted succession of Episcopal Ordination; and that the French
Protestants were better turn Papists, than to continue such Protestants as they
are. I take all this for your judgment: But I vindicate you so far as to say,
that you often contradict your self, and so possibly may yet come off. If you
should say, that neither such Protestants, nor Papists, have Sacraments, and
part in the Covenant of grace, pardon, and salvation, you would leave so few
for Heaven, and so many for Hell, as I will not imagine you to be guilty o^.

II. As to the Second, I must tell all, that I take it but for trifling, to
call us to answer the same things again, which are answered so long ago, and
have no reply from Papists, or any other. And I doubt not, but you know that it
is the main charge which the Papists assault the Reformed Churches with, and
put their chief trust in, which you also bring against them: And we still
believe, that Iansenius did it much stronglier than you; and much more than
yours, is by Vo^tius against him fully answered; and your denial moves us not.

III. To satisfy your Third demand, I remember a small Script, which I
published 1659, or 1660, and therewith send it you; by which (with what I read
to you) you may conjecture at my terms, specially if you join my Preface to
Cathol. Theology, I take it for granted, that it will not satisfy you. But
pardon my freedom for saying that, while I perceive your Confidence ordinarily
to go quite beyond your Proofs; and while my Principles call me to love more as
brethren, than yours do, and engage me not to justify persecution of men
better than my self, I shall think never the worse of them for that.

IV. As to your judgment for my ceasing to Preach, I dare not obey it: I think
if I say, these men forbid me, God will not take it for an excuse, after such
charges as Scripture lays down, and such promises as in Ordination I made,
and such necessity of souls as I am sure of, and such encouragements as God
has given me. I fear hearing, Thou slothful servant, etc. as much as the guilt
of other heinous sins: I have not lived idly; and if I silence my self, I
invite God by death to silence me, and judge me, as obeying man against him. I
am past doubt, that Satan and my flesh give me the same counsel as you do. I
have abundant arguments for my Preaching, which I never heard a ^ational answer
of, and which such a poor Objection as, Then there will be no Order, will not
confute, especially when all the Ministers of England are bound to be
Nonconformists, and consequently to ^ease Preaching, if I am so bound. And why
not next, all Christians to cease hearing, and praying, if so forbidden? If it
be only Christ's Gospel that I Preach, I cannot but suspect the voice that
says, Give over Preaching. Accept this account of the sense of

Your Friend, Rich. Baxter.


To Mr. Dodwell, Nov. 15th 1680.
SIR,
YOurs of Oct. 16 th I received, Nov. 11 th, which intimates the Second
Edition of your Letters, which I hear not of; your last Letter to me,
signifying your purpose to publish your long Letter from Ireland to me, caused
me to Print an old Treatise of Episcopacy, which I had cast by, and now send
you as an answer to that Letter. I thank you for your admonition, and desire of
my repentance: It shall make me, if I can, search yet more diligently; but I
find no probability of being able; the like lamentations of my sin, and wrong
to the Church, I have long had from Papists, Antinomians, Anabaptists, and
Separatists, and some Quakers, and Seekers; and I despair of satisfying them;
nor can I be of all their minds: and I find here but one Argument to draw me to
yours, (viz) my taking the Oath of Canonical obedience. And 1. You know not
that I took it: Many Ordained men did not. To tell you the truth, I entered so
rawly, that though I well remember my Subscription, I remember not that I took
that Oath: I remember I took it not for my Ordination, but at the same time
taking a License for a School, some Oath the Register suddenly thrust on me,
and I remember not what it was (which was, and is my sin). 2. If I took it,
surely I never intended to bind my self to any but my true Ordinary. And when
he is dead and the very Order for near Twenty years publicly (though culpably)
put down, and none existent where I lived, I never saw it proved, that I am
sworn to all that after are set up over others, by the King, without the
Clergies, or Peoples choice, or consent, contrary to the Judgment of the Church
for One thousand years, and that without, and against my own consent: And that
he that swears obedience to his present Ordinary, is thereby sworn, though he
never dreamed of it to all that ever shall succeed him, what changes soever be
made, and though judging them Usurpers, I renounce them. If it be said, that I
virtually consent by the Convocation; I deny it, nor did the City of London
consent; for they had not one chosen Clerk there. They chose Mr. Calamy and me,
and we were both refused by the Bishop, and only the Dignitaries of the City
admitted. What if I had sworn obedience in 1639. to the Presbytery in Scotland,
or 1649. in England; and after they are put down, and I find them to be an
unlawful power, and they are restored again, does my first Oath bind me to the
latter stock against my consent? 3. The English Ecclesiastical Law Books, which
I have read, do tell me, that the Chancellor, Official, Commissary,
Archdeacons, and every Iudex Ordinarius is my Ordinary (whatever you say
against it): And some Bishops themselves have judged the Lay-Chancellors
Judgment, by the use of the Keys, to be a great sin. Quest. Whether then an
ignorant Oath to obey such Usurpers, repented of, do bind to obey them still?
What if in France I had sworn obedience to their Bishops, and after see that it
was an unlawful Oath, quod materiam, am I bound by it till death? 4. I swore to
obey them but in licitis and honestis. And I do not know that ever I therein
disobeyed those that I swear to; no, nor the latter reduced stock: Either I
have proved the degenerate sort, described in this Treatise, to be a heinously
sinful depravation of the Church, and its Government, and an injury against
Christ, by deposing his Church Form, Discipline, and Officers, or not: if not,
evince it, and I will thank you; if yea, to comply with such sin, or in any
calling to forbear detecting it by writing, is an Omission which is not licitum
vel honestum. An unlawful Oath against a thing indifferent, will not bind me,
if the King do but command that indifferent thing; much less will an ignorant
Oath to obey Church-Usurpers, and corrupters, oblige me against Christ's
commands. Nor do I think it licitum vel honestum, to renounce my Ministry,
sacrilegiously, and perfidiously break my Ordination-Vow to God, and forbear
Preaching Christ's Gospel to needy souls, because they forbid me.

In a word, Sir, I unfeignedly thank you for your desire to save me from dying
in sin. I have great reason to make it my greatest care. Constant pain and
languor, call to me, neither to dissemble, nor delay: When I cannot know my own
heart so well as you do, I may come to believe you, that it is unruly Pride.
Till then I am past doubt, that could any abasement, any labor, any cost, help
me to know that you are in the right, and I in the wrong, I would most joyfully
undertake it: But such warnings as yours awaken my Conscience, so that I dare
not die in the guilt of active, or omissive compliance with those men, 1. Whose
degenerate state I confidently judge to be the dangerous Malady of the Church,
and destructive to a right Church State, Church Officers and Government. 2.
Whose Canons of Government are such as they are. 3. Who have since I had any
understanding, done that against serious godliness in England which they did,
and these (near) Twenty years, done what they have done, procuring the
silencing, and outward ruin of about Two thousand such Ministers of Christ, as
I know to have been the most pious, faithful, and successful in true
Ministerial work, of any that ever I could know; and such as I am fully
persuaded no Nation under Heaven have Two thousand better. And yours, or other
men's accusations, or contrary judgment, cannot make me ignorant of this, which
experience, and great acquaintance have told me. 4. And Church History, which
tells me what such have done in former Ages, increase my fear of dying in the
guilt of participating of their sin. I know of no other Motives that I have.
The sum of my request to you is; That instead of telling me what the Pope, or
any Usurper may say, that I should be humble and obedient, you will but tell me
what means I should use, which I have omitted, to get my judgment informed, if
I err, and to become of your mind, and as wise as you. I again entreat you to
tell me the way, and I shall give you most hearty thanks. Did I not know your
judgment and mine to be so distant, as puts me out of hope of attaining my end,
I would have sent you Nine or Ten Proposals, for the mere reducing of the
Parish Churches to their necessary state, without altering any thing of the
Diocesans power or grandeur, save only their power of the Sword, which yet as
they are Magistrates we submit to. That your former Letters brought me not to
your judgment, you may see, by the book which I send you, comes not to pass by
hasty judging, nor without that which seems Reason to me after my long and
best consideration. I am fully assured, not biased hereto by worldly interest,
which has long lain on the other side. Accept this Account from

Nov. 15. 1680. Your unfeigned, though dissenting Friend, Ri. Baxter.


July 9. 1677* For my much honored Friend Mr. Henry Dodwell.
SIR,
SINCE the writing of my last to you, your own words have acquainted me, 1.
That you take my Principles to have some inconsistence or contradiction. 2.
That you think I have not yet told you what Church Government it is that I
would have, or how it can attain its end. 3. That you suppose that denying men
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a coercive power sufficient to force
unwilling men to obey Church Governors. 4. That you hold that all Religious
Assemblies not allowed by the Bishops, are unlawful, and therefore that we must
rather use none than such.

I. As to the first, no reason obliges me to believe you till you prove it;
which must be by citing the inconsistent words. How easy is it to tell you or
any man, that you speak contradictions? Is accusing, proving? And you have told
me by experience that mistaking Hearers and Readers understand not men's words
so well as the Speakers or Writers do. When you so widely mistook a speech of
mine, when I had told you that as far as I could learn by my own acquaintance,
and the report of the Members themselves, there was but one known Presbyterian
in the House of Commons when the Wars began, (I named you a credible witness
yet living), and you report that I said, there was but one Presbyterian in the
Assembly of Divines? May not my writing be as much mistaken by you? Prove your
Charge, and I will confe^s my contradictions, and give you thanks.

II. As to the second I was afraid I had used more words than needs; if all
that I have said tell you not what I mean, you may excuse me from adding more,
which are like to be no more significant; you must name me the particulars that
you are unsatisfied in, before I can know what is needful to be added. One
particular you did name, viz. whether I hold a power in the Church to deny men
the Sacrament that would have it? I left you no reason to make a doubt of it.
If this be it, pardon the repetitions which you make me guilty of, and I shall
renew my account.

1. I believe that Christ has instituted the office of the Sacred Ministry
(which the Ancients called Sacerdotium), as subordinate to his Teaching,
Ruling, and Sacerdotal office; and that being obliged to Disciple and baptize
the Nations, and to teach them Christ's commands, and to guide them in holy
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, they are authorized to all that they are
obliged to; and that it is their office-work to administer Baptism and the
Lords Supper, and that they have the Church-Keys to judge whom to take in by
Baptism, what food to feed the children of the Church with, and whom to cast
out of its Communion.

2. I believe that this power is limited and regulated by Christ's own universal
Laws, and that they are not lawless or arbitrary; but he has bound them by a
just description, whom to take in, what food to give them, and whom to cast
out. And that he has given them no power to cross or violate these his Laws.
And if they do it notoriously, it is null and worse, and no act of authority
but of sin. e. g. If Bishops baptize unconverted Infidels, or give the other
Sacrament to such, or to notorious wicked impenitent persons.

3. I believe that if one or many Bishops or Priests do disobey these Laws of
Christ, their sin does not oblige all other persons to rebel or sin with them,
or disoblige them from their duty. e. g. If some Bishops should refuse to
receive penitent believers and their ^eed into the Church by Baptism, others
are nevertheless bound to receive them, and not all the Bishops in the world to
keep them out because some do it sinfully? so if some Bishops would feed them
with un^ound Doctrine, or corrupt Gods Worship, ( e. g. with Image Worship, or
language unint^lligible, etc.) others must not follow them, but do better. And
if some Bishops turn Christ's sheep out of his sold and pasture unjustly,
denying them Communion, others must not do wickedly with them, but must receive
such; else one tyrant might oblige all the Churches to tyranny.

4. But while the power of the Keys is lawfully used, he that is justly cast
out of the Communion of one Church, should not be received to Communion with
any other that has just notice of his Exclusion, till the cause be removed.

5. But the notice of it concerns not those that living out of reach, are
incapable of Communion with that person. If a woman in this Parish be
Excommunicated as a Scold, or a man as a Drunkard, etc. the Bishop is not bound
to send notice of their names and case to Ethiopia or Armenia, nor to all the
Christian World; no nor to all England. Nor do they use to do it to all the
Parishes in the Diocese, but only to that one where the person lives. But I
doubt not but all that Church should know of it, of which he was a
Communicating member, (by the way, why is not all the Diocese told of it, but
that men are conscious that he has not Personal communion with them; and
therefore need not be so Excommunicated?)

6. Therefore men's limited capacity allowing them Personal Communion but in a
narrow compass, there needs no Confederacy of all the Christian World for the
rejecting of those that one of them has first rejected.

7. But in well-ordered agreeing Churches none should be received presently
into the Communion of another Church, without due notice of his aptitude or
capacity; which regularly should be by the Certificates of the Church whence he
came, called Communicatory Letters; or if he was never before admitted to the
Sacrament because not at age, his own Personal profession gives him right; and
so it does in the Countries where through neglect such Certificates or
Testimonies are not in use, sobeit there come in no proof against him, that he
stands Excommunicate, or deserves it. A professing Christian has right to
Communion if he travel through all the Churches in the World, till his
profession be disproved, or his claim disabled by just testimony. If a man be
Excommunicate in, e. g. Lincoln-Diocess in one Parish Church, above a thousand
Parishes more of the same Church Diocesan, may receive him for want of notice,
unless they are bound to receive no stranger of another Parish; and that is a
kind of Excommunicating of all Christians from the Communion of all the
Christian World, except one Parish.

8. The Legal Excommunication, which is only a general pronunciation that such
or such sinners in specie shall be actually excommunicate, is done already by
God himself in his Universal Laws. And no man ought to make Laws to
Excommunicate any that Gods Laws do not decree to be Excommunicate, save that
when there is a difficulty in discerning whether this or that Doctrine or
practice be indeed the sin so condemned in Gods Laws, men's Laws may expound it*
to remove that difficulty. If all were excommunicate that Gods own Laws do
require to be excommunicate, alas! how great would the number be? So little
need is there, that Voluminous Councils should excommunicate many more; and
that Councils should be added to Councils to the end of the world, to make new
Laws for excommunicating men.

9. Where God has commanded all Christians in his Laws, to avoid any sort of
wicked men, and with such not to eat, the fact being once notorious, the person
is so far, ipso jure, excommunicate, as that all are bound to avoid familiarity
with that person, though no Bishop sentence him: But the Pastors having the
Church Keys, we must not go out of the Church, because such a man is there; for
who shall be in the Church, is at his Judgment; but who shall be at my Table,
is at mine.

10. But if the Church it self be essentiated of such as God thus commands
all to avoid, and this be notorious, every Christian must avoid that Church.
The Essentials of a Church are the pars regens and pars subdita, the Pastors,
and the Body of the flock. If either be so far corrupt, the Church is corupt:
When any one essential part is wanting* or depraved, then the Essence is
wanting, or depraved: Therefore where many Pastors make up the pars regens of a
particular Church, it is not the heresy, or wickedness of some one only that
will warrant a separation; because one is but an integral, and not an essential
part: But where one Bishop only is the essential regent constitutive part,
there that one man's heresy, or notorious wickedness (such as we are commanded
to have no Communion with) will allow us to avoid that Church, as a Church,
though not each Member of it, who are parts still of the Universal Church.

If I knew what further explication of my thoughts it is that you desire, I
should be ready to give it you.

III. As to the coercive power which you talk of, it is strange if we can
differ about the nature of it; but we greatly differ, I suppose, about the
extent of it. Pardon me, if to avoid confusion, I first speak of the Name, and
then of the Thing. 1. Though our ordinary use of the words, coactive and
coercive, be to signify that which works either on the Body, and its
provision only, or on the Mind by force upon the Body, or Estate; yet if you
will but tell me what you mean by it, so distinctly that we may not be
entangled with Logomachy, take it in what sense you will. The words which you
use are the signification of your mind: I desire but to understand, and to be
understood: I follow Bishop Bilson (of Christ. Obed.), and others commonly,
that distinguish the power of Magistrates and Pastors, by the Names of the
power of the Sword, and of the Word* By the first, they mean all power of
corporal mul^ts and penalties, directly such (for he that griev^th the mind,
consequently troubles the body). By the latter, they mean all that Official
power of Gods Word and Sacraments which works by the senses of hearing,
seeing and tasting, upon the Conscience, that is, on the Understanding and
Will, and by these reformeth practice. The word is thus de^ivered, either
Generally, by common Doctrine, which is historical, assertive, precepts,
prohibitions, promises or threatenings, or by personal application of these.

1. By mere words, as in personal instruction, precept, threatening, etc. and by
declaration, that this person proved and judged guilty of impenitency, in such
and such sin, is incapable of Church Communion, therefore by au^hority from
Christ I command him to forbear, and you to avoid him. And such a one being
proved innocent or penitent, has by Gods Law right to Communion with his
Church, therefore I absolve him, invite him, receive him, and command you in
Christ's name to hold loving Communion with him.

2. Or it is the application of words and Sacramental signs toget^er, by solemn
tradition and investiture; or the denying of such Sacraments. Briefly,
Magistrates by mulcts, prisons, exile, (...), etc. work on the body; Pastors
have no such power, b^t by General Doctrine and personal application by words
and Sacraments (given or denied) work on the mind or conscience; (...) which
some call a Persuasive power; distinguishing (as Camero (...)) between private
persuasion of an equal, etc. and Doct^ral, Pastoral, Official, Persuasion,
whose force is by the Divine authority of the perswader, used in Teaching,
Disciplinary judging, and Sacraments. If you will call this last coercive, or
by any other name, you have your liberty. I will do my part that you may
understand me, if I may not understand you.

2. Now ad rem, can we disagree how far this constrains the unwilling? Not
without some great neglect or culpable defect. I may suppose then that we are
agreed of all these particulars: 1. That Gods Laws have told us who must or
must not have Sacramental Communion, which we must obey, whatever be the
effects.

2. That Excommunication is not only, nor always chiefly, to bring the person
Excommunicated to obedience (no more than hanging) but to keep the purity and
reputation of the Church, and the safety of the members, and to warn others.

3. That the way by which it is to affect the offender, is, 1. By shaming him;
2. By striking his Conscience with the sense of Gods displeasure declared thus
by his Ministers.

4. So far as the Sacrament is a means of conveying grace, to deny it, is not
to reform but to destroy. But when the person has made himself incapable of
the benefit of the Sacrament, and apt to receive it abusively to his hurt, then
it may possibly humble him to be denied it.

5. If the denial of the Sacrament work not on a man's Conscience morally (as
threatenings do) it no way compels him to his duty, nor saves him from sin.

6. De facto many hundred thousands of ignorant wicked members of Episcopal
Churches are so far from being constrained to goodness by being without the
Sacrament, that they are content to be without it, and loath to be forced to it.

7. The more sin and wickedness any man has, the less true conscience; and the
less conscience, the less does he regard a due Excommunication.

8. The Bishops themselves are conscious of the insufficiency of their
Excommunications alone to compel any to obedience, while they confess that
without the Secular power of the sword to back it, they would be but laughed at,
and despised by the most. Nor durst they ever try to govern by their Church
Keys alone among us without the enforcement of the sword. And at the same time
while they Excommunicate them from the Sacrament, they have a Law to lay them
in Gaol, and utterly ruin them if they will not receive it. How loath are the
Bishops to lose this compelling Law.

9. I think few of my acquaintance in England do believe that any great number
are brought to holy reformation, no nor to Episcopal obedience, by the fear of
being kept from the Sacrament, but that which they fear is the Corporal penalty
that follows; lay by that, and you may try.

10. If you will trust to that spiritual power alone, and valeat quantum valere
potest, without corporal force, few that I know of will resist you, (but many
thousands will despise you, as the Bishops well foresee) bring as many to
obedience by it as you can. But if you mean that you must needs have the
Magistrate to second you, as your Lictor or Executioner, and to imprison, fine,
banish, burn, etc. it would be too gross hypocrisy to call the effects of this
coercive power, the effects of Excommunication, and to call it coercive power
to deny a man the Sacrament, because he fears the sword.

11. De facto, there are supposed to be in the Parish that you dwell in, above
60000 souls, suppose 10000 of these yearly receive the Sacrament (though some
say it is not 5000.) Are the other 40000 compelled to obedience by not
communicating.

12. All those forbear your Sacrament without any sense of coercion or loss, 1.
Who believe (as you do) that Sacramental Communion is a sin, where it cannot
lawfully be had (that is, say you, where the Bishops forbid it; say they, where
Gods Laws forbid it, by reason of adherent sin. 2. And that, take the Bishops
who forbid it them to be Usurpers, that have no true calling (as all the
Papists do of our Bishops, and many others.) 3. Who take it to be more
eligible, yea a necessary duty to hold Communion with purer societies. 4.
Besides all those Sectaries that make light of Sacraments in general. What
Papists, Quakers, Anabaptist, Separatists, etc. are compelled to any good by
the Bishops denying them the Sacrament?

13. Nothing but Ignorance or Impudence can deny that the difficulty of knowing
whose Excommunication it is that is to be dreaded as owned by God, has
encouraged professed Christians so confusedly to Excommunicate one another, as
that this Excommunication has been so far from constraining most to
repentance, that it has made Christianity a horrid scandal to Infidels and
Heathens, by setting the Christian World in the odious confusion of
Excommunicating one another. To give some instances how far Excommunication is
not coercive.

1. Who but the Devil was the gainer of Pope Victor's Excommunicating the
Asians about Easter Day? Did it compel them to obedience?

2. When the Orthodox Excommunicated the Arrians, did it force them to obey?
When they got almost all the Bishops for them, and Excommunicated and destroyed
their Excommunicators?

3. When the Cecilians (or Orthodox) and the Donatists for so many ages
Excommunicated one another, merely upon the difference which party had the true
Ordained Bishops, did Excommunications force them to obedience?

4. (To pass forty other Sects) when Rome Excommunicated, yea and prosecuted
the Novatians, did it compel them to obey? And did not Atticus, Sisinnius and
Proclus win more by allowing them their own Communion, and living with them in
love and peace? Chrysostom since threatened the Novatian Bishop that he would
silence him; but he quickly recalled his word before they parted, and durst not
do it.

5. Did Cyril's Counsel against the Ioannites win them, or harden them? Was it
not Atticus and Proclus love and lenity that ended that division?

6. Did the Excommunicating of the Nestorians by Cyril, compel them to
obedience, when so much of the East are Nestorians to this day, and requite the
Orthodox with their Excommunications?

7. Did the Excommunicating of those that rejected the Council of Calcedon,
(the Eutychians, and Acephali) compel them to obedience, when many Emperors
took their part, and the greater number of Bishops joined with them, and they
equally damned those that received the Council for many Princes reigns. And
when so great a part of Christians as are the Iacobites, Abassines, etc. own
Dioscorus, and condemn that Council to this day?

8. Did the Excommunicating of the old Heretics, Gnostics, Basilidians,
Valentinians, Paulinists, Apollinarians, Eunomians, Aetians, Photinians,
Macedonians, Priscillians, etc. compel them to obedience at all? or did they
regard it?

9. Did the Excommunicating of the parties that were for silence (the Acacians
as to the (...), and those that were for Zeno's Henoticon) compel them to
obedience?

10 D^d the mutual damnations of the Phantasticks, Iustinian's and G^mas party,
and the Corrupticolae, force either to obedience?

11. Did the Excommunications of the Monothelites compel them to obedience?
when in the days of Philippicus they had a Council, says Binnius, of
Innumerable Bishops? And he says, that the General Council at Trul called
Quini^extum was of the same men that were in the approved sixth General
Council, and that they were Monothelites.

12 Did the several Excommunications of the Constantinopolitan Bishop, by the
Roman, and of the Roman again by them, and the Alexandrian, etc compel either
party to obedience?

13. Had the Pope Excommunicated the Africans in the long fraction in the days
of Aurelius and Austin, would it have compeled them to obedience?

14. When the Pope (at last) joined with Iu^tinians General Council against the
Tria Capitula, and condemned the refusers of it, did it compel his own
Neighbor-bishops to obedience, when they so generally forsook him, that there
were not three Bishops to Consecrate the Pope, but he was fain to use a
Presbyter; and when they set up a Patriarch at Aquileia as their chief, and
condemned or forsook the Pope for near an hundred years?

15. Did the Popes Excommunicating of the Goths in Spain and and other parts,
compel them to obey him?

16. Did Augustines rejection of the Britains, and the Britains and Scots long
refusing Communion with the Romanists, compel either party to obey?

17. Did the Excommunicating of Leo Isaurus, Constantine, and the rest of the
Iconoclasts, compel them to obey?

18. Did the Excommunicating of the Albigenses and Waldenses, bring them to
obedience? Or was it not (say some Historians) the murder of about two
Millions, that solitudinem fecit, quam vocarunt pacem?

19. Did the Excommunications of the Emperors, Frederick, Henry, etc. and
their adherents, as the Venetian Interdict, compel them to obedience?

20. Did the Excommunicating of the German Protestants, and Queen Elizabeth,
and the English Protestants, bring them to obedience? How many such instances
may I give you?

If you say, To what purpose is all this? I shall say, No doubt so knowing a
man can tell. It is to tell you why I expect no more coercive power from mere
Excommunication than experience and reason will allow me to expect. And no such
perfect obedience and universal concord by it, as your words import.

And some questions I here crave your Answer of.

Qu. 1. The same that you so much urge on me: Seeing this matter of fact is
undeniable, and Excommunication has done no more than it has done, Is all
Church Government therefore vain? Or what is your own way of remedy?

Qu. 2. Seeing it is Bishops themselves, that for so many hundred years
excommunicated one another as Heretics and Schismatics, how shall they, or
their flocks be certain which Bishops they be, whose excommunications they must
take, as Gods act, and which not? I pray answer it plainly. 1. If any say, It
must be the Majority, or greater number, then so were the Arrians too long, so
were the Eutychians, so were the Monothelites, so were the Iconoclasts; so the
Papists say they are now. If you say, The Bishops in a General Council, that is
almost all one. What Wars were there between many General Councils; and how
long was it the Religion of one side, to be for one, and curse the other; and
of the other side, to curse all that did not receive that? How shall we know
which Council to obey? If you say as Binnius, that all Councils have just so
much power as the Pope gives them, how shall we know that this is true? But I
suppose that will not be your answer. If you say, we must obey that which is
Orthodox, who is the Judge? If every man, then they that judge the
excommunicating-Bishops, or Councils, not Orthodox, will not obey them. Truly I
know not what answer to expect from you.

Qu. 3. Can that man expect, that excommunicating should set all right, and
bring men to obedience now in the end of the world, who is constrained (against
his will) to be certain, that abused excommunications have been the great means
of setting the Christian world into pernicious Sch^sms and Confusions?

Qu. 4. At this day, when the Papal Church unchurches all the Christian
Churches that are not Subjects to the Pope; and when the Greek Church
excommunitcateth the Papal, and most continue damning one another, can you
think, that even excommunicating is the remedy to cure these Schisms, and set
all right?

Qu. 5. If denying men the Sacrament, will constrain men to obedience, why do
not the Episcopal Churches through the world, cure the Peoples sins by keeping
them from the Sacrament, when so great numbers are profane, and sensual, and
worldlings, and wicked, how easy a means of Conversion were it to forbid them
all the Sacrament?

Qu. 6. Is it no contradiction to say, that the Sacrament is Gods means of
giving Sanctification? and yet that keeping men from it is the means?

Qu. 7. But if you mean not constraining to obey God, but only to obey the
Bishop, and not God, what good will such obedience do the man's soul, that will
not save him? I confess the Magistrate that has the Sword, may compel men to
the use of the necessary suitable means of Conversion and Grace; and those
means may further Sanctification.

IV. As to the Fourth Point, I have said enough of it to you heretofore.

1. If no Religious Assemblies for Preaching, Praying, and Sacraments, be
lawful, but what the Bishops allow, then God has put it into the Bishops
power, whether he shall have any such public worship, or any shall be obliged
so to worship him, or not. But the Consequent is false; Ergo, So is the
Antecedent. True Pastors have but the power to promote, and order Gods worship,
but not to exclude, or forbid it to any (much less to all, or 1000.) without
necessary cause.

2. And then if Preaching, and Hearing, and Sacraments, be ordinarily necessary
to men's salvation, then God has left it to the will, or power of the Bishops,
whether any of the people shall be (ordinarily) saved. But that is not so.

3. And then if the King should license, or command us to Preach, Pray, and
Communicate, and the Bishop forbid it, it were sin. But that I will not
believe, unless the Cause, more than the Authority, make the difference.

To cooclude, I hold, that just use of the Keys is very necessary, and that it
is the great sin of England to reject it: But that a false usurped use of
excomunication has been the incendiary of the Christian world, which has
broken it to pieces, caused horrid Schisms, Rebellions, Treasons, Murders, and
bloody Wars.

I. The just use is, 1. When a scandalous or great sinner is with convincing
evidence told of his error, and with seriousness, yet with love and compassion,
entreated to repent, and either prevailed with, and so absolved, or after due
patience, Authoritatively pronounced incapable of Church Communion, and bound
over to answer it at the Bar of Christ, in terror if he repent not, and this by
the Pastor of that particular Church, which either statedly, or pro tempore, he
belongs to.

2. And when this is duly notified to such Neighbour-Pastors as he may seek
Communion with, and they agree not to receive any justly cast out by others,
but to receive and relieve the injured and falsely condemned.

3. And when the King and his Justices, permit not the ejected violently to
intrude, and take the Sacrament, or join with the Church by force, but
preserves forcibly the Peace and Privileges of the Churches.

II. The excommunication that has turned the Church into Factions, and undone
almost East and West, is, 1. When a Bishop, because of his humane Superiory, as
Patriark, Primate, or Pope, claims the power of excommunicating other
Bishops, as his Subjects, whose Sentence must stand because of his Regent power.

2. Or at least, gathering a Council where he shall preside, and that Council
shall take themselves to have a Governing power of the Keys over the particular
Bishop, not only to renounce Communion with them themselves, but to oblige all
others to stand to their judicial Sentence. 3. When Bishops shall meddle
causelessly in other Bishops Churches, and make themseves Judges either of
distant, unknown persons, and cases, or of such as they have nothing to do to
try. Yea, judge men of other Countries, or so distant, as the Witnesses and
Causes cannot without oppression be brought to their Bar.

4. When they disgrace Gods universal Laws of Communion, as ins^ffici^nt, and
make a multitude of unnecessary, ensnaring, dividing Laws of their own,
according to which they must be men's Judges.

5. When these Laws are not made only for their own flocks and selves, but for
all the Christian world, or for absent, or dissenting persons.

6. When men excommunicate others for hard words, not understood, that deserve
it not as to real matter.

7. Or do it to keep up an unlawful usurped power over those Churches that
never consented to take them for their Pastors, and to rule where they have no
true Authority but such as stands on a forcing strength.

8. When Lay-Chancellors use the Keys of the Church.

9. When men excommunicate others wickedly, for doing their duty to God and
man, or unjustly without sufficient Cause.

10. When unjust excommunicators force Ministers against their Consciences to
publish their condemnations against those that they know to be not worthy of
that Sentence, if not the best of their flocks.

11. And when they damn all as Heretics, Schismatics, etc. that communicate
with any that they thus unjustly damn.

12. When they dishonor Kings, and higher Pwers, by disgracing
excommunications; much more when they depose them.

13. When they tell Princes, that it is their duty to banish, imprison* or
destroy men, because excommunicate, and not reconciled; and make Kings their
Executioners. And so of old, when a Bishop was excommunicate, he must presently
be banished: And they say, the Scots horning is of the same nature. If all had
been either banished, or imprisoned, that were excommunicate, and unreconciled
in the pursuit of the General Councils of old, how great a diminution would it
have made of the free Subjects of the Empire? And if Princes must strike with
the Sword, all that stand excommunicate, without trying, and judging the
persons themselves, it is no wonder if such Prelates, as can first so debase
them to be their Lictors, can next depose them. He is like to be a great
Persecuter, that will imprison or banish all that a proud contentious Clergy
will excommunicate.

As corruption optimi est pessima, I doubt not but a wise, humble, holy,
spiritual, loving, heavenly, zealous, patient, exemplary sort of Pastors is the
means of continuing Christ's Kingdom in the World, and such are the Pillars and
Basis of Truth in the House of God (as it is said of Timothy, not of the Church
as is commonly mistaken). So an ignorant, worldly, carnal, proud, usurping,
domineering, hypocritical sort of Pastors, have been the great plagues, and
causes of Schism, confusion, and common calamity: And that when Satan can be
the chuser of Pastors for Christ's Church, he will (and too often has) ever choose
such as shall most succesfully serve him in Christ's Name.

And I doubt not, but such holy Discipline, as shall keep clean the Church of
Christ, and keep off the reproach of wickedness and uncleanness from the
Christian Religion, and manifest duly to the flock the difference between the
precious and the vile, is a great Ordinance of God (which one man cannot
exercise over many hundred Parishes, and unknown people). But an usurped
domineering use of excommunication, to subdue Kings, Princes, Nobles, and
people to the Jurisdiction, Opinions, and Canons of Popes, Patriarchs,
Prelates, or their Councils, I think has done not the least part of Satan's
work in the world.

And I must tell you, that I have lived now near 62. (now near 66.) years, and
I never saw one man or woman reformed or converted by excommunication (and I
hope I have known thousands converted from their sin by Preaching, even by some
that are now forbidden to Preach). All that ever I knew excommunicate, were of
two sorts. 1. Dissenters from the Opinions of the Bishops, or conscientious
refusers of their commands: And these all rejoice in their sufferings,
applying, Blessed are ye, when they cast out your names, etc. say all evil of
you falsely, etc. or they take their censure for wicked persecution. The Papists
laugh at their Excommunicators, and say, What an odd conditioned Church have
you, that will cast us out that never came in, and because we will not come in?
2. Ungodly impenitent sinners: And these hate the excommunicators for
disgracing them, and are driven further off from godliness than before: But
they will say, they repent at any time, rather than go to the Gaol. I never saw
one person brought to public confession in the Assembly, by the Bishops
Discipline; but I heard I was young, of one, or two, that for Adultery stood in
a White Sheet in the Church, laughing at the sport, or hating the imposers.
When there were no Bishops among us, about 1650. many Episcopal, Presbyterians,
etc. agreed, where I lived, to exercise so much Discipline, as we were all
agreed belonged to Presbyters. Hereupon I found good success, in bringing some
to repentance by admonition, but never of any one that stood it out to an
excommunication (so far as we went, which was only to admonish, and pray for
their repentance publicly, and after to declare them unmeet for Christian
Communion, and to require the people to avoid them accordingly, till they
repent). After this they hated us more than before (and one of them laid hands
on me in the Churchyard, to have killed me). And I am sure that they
reverenced those Ministers more than now Lay-Chancellors (if not Bishops) are
by such reverenced: So that experience convinced me, that the penalty of
excommunication is much more beneficial to others, than to the excommunicate.

And how many thousands in your Parish do now voluntarily excommunicate
themselves from the Sacrament, and Church Assemblies, and find no Remorse, or
Reformation by it? And if all of both sorts (conscientious Dissenters, and
profane despisers, and sinners) were excommunicated now by the Church of
England, without any corporal penalty adjoined, what do you think it would do
upon them? Would they not laugh at you, or pity you? Do not the Bishops believe
this, and therefore will not trust to their excommunications at all without the
Sword?

I cannot magnify the Discipline of such men as count themselves the Power of
the Keys to be but a Leaden Sword, a vain thing, without the annexed
enforcement of corporal penalties: If it be but outward obedience to their
commands, which they drive men to* without the heart,

1. Men of no Conscience will soonest obey them, as forced against their
Consciences.

2. And why do they abuse the name of the Keys, as if it were the cause of that
which it is no cause of, but is done only by the Magistrates Sword? It is the
Writ De excom. cap. that does it, and not the Keys. And they that think
unwilling persons have right to the great benefit of Church Communion; yea, all
that had rather come ^o Church than lie in Gaol, shall never have my assent.

If really your meaning be to set up the power of the Keys by themselves, to do
their proper work, and not expect that Magistrates must join their forcing
power, to punish a man merely because he bears the Bishops punishment
patiently, without changing his mind; Let it prevail as far as it can prevail;
who will fear it (save for the Schism that it may cause)? But if it be your
meaning all this while, that under the name of denying the Sacrament, it is
Confiscation or the Gaol that must do the work, I should wish for more of the
Spirit of Christianity, and less inclination to the Inquisition-way.
Persecution never yet escaped its due odium, or penalty, by disowning its
proper name. I am more of St. Martin's mind than of Ithacius's.

V. One word more I add, That I like not your making so light as you seem to me
to do, of the badness of some Ministers and People that are in the allowed
Churches. I know that the Papists speak much of the holiness of a Pope, when
perhaps a General Council says, he is a Murderer, Adulterer, Heretic, etc.
and so call their Church Relatively holy. I deny not that Relative holiness,
which is founded in mere profession: But I believe, that Christ came to gather
a people to another sort of Godliness, and by his Spirit to fill them with
Divine and Heavenly Life, Light, and Love (to God and man). And I believe, that
all that have this (though excommunicate) shall be glorified: And that without
this, all the obedience to Bishops that they give, will never keep them out of
Hell. And I take it to be no great privilege to march in an orderly Army to
damnation, or to be at peace in Satan's power. Hell will be Hell which way ever
we come to it. I confess, were these Bishops in the right, that Sancta Clara
cites, that say, The ignorant people might merit by hating God, as an act of
obedience, if their Pastors should tell them it is their duty; then this
external obedience to them were more considerable: But I had rather go in the
Company that goes to Heaven (as all do that are true Lovers of God and man)
than in that which goes to Hell (as do the most Regular of the ungodly). And
yet I account true obedience, and regularity, a great duty of the godly, and a
great help to godliness.

And therefore I value the Means for the End, Concord for Piety and salvation.
And I cannot think, that there is not now in London, a very laudable degree of
Concord among all those that, though in different Assemblies, and with
difference of opinions about small matters, do hold one Body, one Spirit, one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one Celestial hope, and one God and Father of
all, and live in Love, and Peace and Patience toward each other: This is far
greater Concord than the thousands of people, that deserving excommunication
for their wicked lives, do hold in the bosom of the Church, which receives
them as children thereof. And O! were it not for that uncharitable impatience,
which an ill selfish Spirit does contain, why should it seem to us a matter of
such odium, envy, or outcry, for men to hear the same Gospel from another man,
which for some differing opinion they will not hear from us? Or for men to
communicate, e. g. standing, or sitting in a Congregation of that mind, that
(weakly) scruple to kneel at it with others (the old Canons countenancing their
gesture of standing, more than kneeling) What harm will it do me, if (under the
strictest Laws of Peace) men worshipped God by themselves, that scruple some
word, or action in our worship? E. g. a Nestorian that should think, that it is
improper to say, that the Virgin Mary was (...), and that the denomination
should be a ratione formali, rather than a materiali: Would Liberty in such
matters, with Love and Peace, do more hurt to the Churches than Schismatical
excommunications have done?

And indeed it is hard to make people able to reconcile a Conjunct earn^stness,
in driving the same men into the Church, and casting them out; yea, of
excommunicating them, ipso facto, by diverse Canons ( sine sententia), and
accusing them for not communicating. If it be for not repenting, 1. Can you
bring all the sinners about us to repentance, by excommunications? Why then are
the openly wicked so numerous? 2. Do you think men can change their judgment,
merely because they are commanded, or excommunicated? If a man study, and pray,
and endeavor to the utmost, to know the truth, and you say, that yet he
erreth, will a censure cure his understanding? E. g. a Nestorian, a
Monothelite, an Anabaptist, etc. much less when a man knows that he is in the
right, and the censurer fights againd truth and duty.

Men in some diseases will rage at the sight of certain things, which would not
much trouble them, if the disease were cured. Macedonius, and Nestorius, that
were judged Heretics themselves, could not bear the Bishops, and meetings of
the Novatians; But Atticus could, and they lived together in Christian Love. I
know those places now in England, where a Conformable and Nonconformable
Minister, live in so great love, and the latter go still to the
Parish-Churches, and the former sometimes come to them, as that no considerable
trouble arises by their difference: And I know other places, where the public
Ministers cannot bear any that hear not themselves, yea, or that constantly
hearing them, hear any other that dissenteth. But they seek to win Dissenters,
as Fowlers would bring Birds to the Net, by showting, and throwing stones at
them; and Anglers would catch Fish, by beating the Waters.

VI. I will tell you also, that I much dissent from you, in that when I told
you, that the Tyranny of Prelates has done more hurt than the disobedience and
discord of the People toward them, you said, you do not think so.

Qu. Do you think that Thieves have killed as many men as Wars have done? If it
be true, that Julius Caesar, and his Armies killed 1192000. persons, besides
those that he slew in the Civil Wars. That Darius lost at once 200 000, and
abundance of such instances in lower degrees may be given; sure poor Thieves
and Murderers come far short of this account. And so it is in the present case.
Gregory Nazian* was a wise, and good man, who says, the people were factious,
and too unruly, but (at Constable.) were honest, and meant well. But how sadly does
he describe the Bishops, as rage^ing even in their Councils, and as the far
greater causes of all calamity! Judge by the Twenty instances that I before gave
you, about their excommunication: How few Heresies, or Schisms, were there of
old, that the Bishops were not the notorious causes of? The Samosatinians,
Apollinarians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Acephali, the Monothelites, yea, the
Donatists, Novatians, the Phantasiasticks, and almost all: The Arrians began by
a Presbyter; but if Petavius cites them truly (as he does) too many Bishops led
him the way, and most of the Bishops followed, and were the men that kept up,
and increased the Heresy, far beyond the people, or the Presbyters. Eutychus,
a Monk, began his Cause; but he was quickly contemned by his followers, and did
little in comparison of Dioscorus, Severus, and many hundred more Bishops.

And is it the People, or the Bishops, that now keep East and West in mutual
damnations? Have the Peoples divisions done more harm than the Papal Schism,
and Usurpations, and Cruelties, killing about 2000000. as is said of Albigenses
and Waldenses, the Inquisitions, bloody Wars against the Germane Emperors, and
many English Kings, the Rebellion against the Greek Emperor, Leo Isaurus, and
destruction of the Eastern Empire, our Smithfield Bone-fires, and innumerable
other Cruelties, Desolations, Heresies and Schisms? Are all these less than the
abuse of Liberty by Inferiors, in Praying, Preaching, or Disorders? Judge Hale
says, That he had a friend that stored a very great Pond of Three or Four
Acres, with a great number of Fish, and at Seven years end only put in Two very
small Pikes, and at the draught of his Pond, there was not one Fish left, but
the Two Pikes grown to an excessive bigness, and all the rest with their
millions of fry devoured by the pair of Tyrants. Hale of the Orig. of Man,
Sect. 2. cap. 9 page 208. The Block had been a better Ruler. The Lord forgive
the Presbyterians their over-keenness against Sects, before the Pikes have made
an end of them. Pardon truth to

Your Servant, Ri. Baxter.


For the Learned Mr. Henry Dowell (after a personal Conference with him).
SIR,
COncord and Peace are so very desirable to the ends of Christianity, that I am
glad to hear you speak for them in the general, though I take your way to be
certainly destructive of them; and because you think the like of mine, and so
while we are agreed for the end, we greatly differ about the means, I shall
here perform what I last offered you, viz. I. An explication of my own sense of
the way of Church-concord (because you said I am still upon the destructive
part) viz. 1. My fundamental Principles. 2. The way of concord, which I suppose
to be sufficient, and only likely (as appointed by God) to attain that end. II.
The reasons of my utter dissent from your way. III. A Proposal for our further
debating of these differences.


I. I hope if you are a man of charity or impartiality, it will be no hard
matter to you to believe that I am willing to be acquainted with healing truth
(that I say not as willing as you); and if I be unhappy in the success of my
Enquiries, it is not for want of searching diligence. And your parts assure me,
that it is so with you. But it is the usual effect of one received error, to
let in many more; and it is so either with me or you. And lest it should prove
my unhappiness, I shall thankfully accept your remedying informations.

1. The Principles which I presuppose, are such as these. 1. As God as Creator,
so Christ as Redeemer is the Universal King and Head over all things to the
Church, which is his body, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Ioh. 17.2, etc.

2. He has made Universal Laws to be means of this Universal Government.

3. His Universal Laws are in suo genere sufficient to their proper use.

4. There is no other Universal King or Ruler of the world, or of the Church,
whether Personal or Collective. And therefore none that has power of Universal
Legislation, or Jurisdiction.

5. Much less any that has a superior power to alter Gods Universal Laws by
abrogation, subrogation, suspension, or dispensation. Nor will God himself
alter them, and substitute new ones. As Tertullian says, We at first believe
this, that no more is to be believed.

6. These Laws of our Universal Governor are partly of natural Revelation, and
partly of Supernatural, viz. by himself, and by his Spirit in his Apostles
given in an extraordinary measure to this end, to lead them into all truth,
which is delivered to us in their Scripture-records.

7. Some local precepts, whose matter was narrow and temporary, even the
mutable customs of that time and place were also narrow and temporary; (as the
washing of feet, anointing, vailing women, the kiss of peace, etc) which makes
nothing for the mutability of the Universal Laws.

8. No Pastors since the Apostles, are by office or power appointed to make any
Universal Laws for the Church, nor any of the same kind and reason with Gods
own Laws, whose reason or cause was existent in the Apostles times, but only to
explain the word of God, and apply it to particular persons and cases, as
Ministers under Christ in his Teaching, Priestly and Governing office; nor have
the Apostles any other kind of Successors.

9. Christ made not Peter or any one of his Apostles Governor of the rest: But
when they strove who should be the chief, rebuked that expectation, and
determined, That among them Preeminence should consist in excelling in humility
and service.

10. When the Corinthians were sick of the like disease, Paul rebuked them for
saying, I am of Cephas, and determines that Apostles are but particular
members of the body, of which Christ only is the Head; and not the Lords, but
Ministers and helpers of their faith.

11* No Pastors (as such) have forcing power, either to touch men's bodies, or
estates, or inflict by the sword corporal penalties, or mulcts. But only by the
word (by which the power of the Keys is exercised) to instruct men, and urge
Gods precepts, promises and threats upon their Consciences.

12. The Apostles were Bishops eminenter, in that they called, gathered, and
while they stayed with them, governed Churches. But not formaliter as taking
any one particular Church for their proper charge: But settled such fixed
Bishops over them. And though they distributed their labors about the world
prudently, and as the Spirit of Christ guided them; yet we find not any
probability that ever they divided the world into twelve or thirteen Provinces,
or ever settled twelve or thirteen chief Metropolitical seats in the world,
which their proper Successors as such should govern in preeminence. Nor does
any History intimate such a thing; nor yet that any Apostle took any City for
his proper Diocese, where another Apostle might not come and exercise equal
Power.

13. It seems that Christ's sending out his seventy Disciples by two and two,
and the Apostles staying together much at Jerusalem, and Paul and Barnabas's
going forth together, and after Paul and Silas, and Barnabas and Mark, and
Peter and Paul (supposed) to be together at Rome, etc. that the Spirit of God
did purposely prevent the intentions of any afterward of being the
Metropolitical Successors of single Apostles or Disciples of Christ's immediate
sending, in this or that City as their proper seat.

14. As Grotius thinks that the Churches were instituted after the likeness of
the Synagogues, of which one City had many; so Dr. Hammond endeavors to
evince, not only that Peter and Paul were Bishops of two distinct Churches of
Rome, one of the Jews, and the other of the Gentile Christians; but also that
it was so in other Cities. Dissertat.

15. The Patriarchs were not 12 or 13, but three first, and five afterward; and
none of them pretended to any power as especial Successors of any one Apostle,
but Antioch and Rome of Peter; (and that was not their first claim or title,
but an honorary reason why men afterward advanced them.) Alexandria claimed
Succession but from St. Mark, and Jerusalem from James (no Apostle, if Dr.
Hammond and others be not much mistaken) and Constantinople from none.

16. The 28 Canon of Calcedon tells us enough of the foundation, title and
reason of Patriarchal power, and all Church History that the Metropolitical
Powers were granted by Emperors, either immediately, or empowering Councils
thereto.

17. These Emperors having no power out of the Empire, neither by themselves,
nor by Councils, gave not any power that extended further than the Empire, or
that could by that title continue to any City which fell under the Government
of another Prince.

18 A^ the^e never was a Council truly Universal, so the name Universal or
Oec^menical was not of old given them, in respect to the whole Christian world,
but to the whole Empire; as the power that called them, and the names of the
Bishops subscribed, etc. fully prove.

19. Before Christian Princes did empower them, Councils were but for Counsel,
concord and correspondency, and particular Pastors were bound by their Decrees
only: 1. For the evidence of truth which they made known: 2. And by the General
Law of God, to maintain unity and peace, and help each other. But afterward, by
virtue of the Princes Law, or Will, they exercised a direct Government over the
particular Bishops, and those were often banished that did not submit to them.

20. While Councils met but for Counsel and Concord, and also when afterward
they were but Provincial, or National under Kings, where none of the
Patriarchal Spirit and Interest did corrupt them, they made excellent Orders,
and were a great blessing to the Churches: Of the first sort, e. g. were diverse
African, and of the latter diverse Spanish, and French, when neither Emperor,
nor Pop^* did overruled them, but the Gothish, and French Kings moderately
govern them. But though I deny not any good which the Councils, called General,
did, especially the fir^^ Nicene; yet I must profess, that the History of the
Patriarchal Seats, and the History of the General Councils, and the Church-Wars
then, and after them managed by Four of the Patriarchs especially, and their
Bishops* the confusion caused in most of the Churches, the Anathematiz^ng of
one another, the blood that has been shed in the open streets, of Monks* and
common people; yea, the fighting, and fury of Bishops at the Councils, to the
death of some of them, their ^iring out the endeavors of such Emperors, and
their Officers, that would have kept Peace and Concord among them, do all put
me out of hope, that the Peace and Concord of the Christian world, should ever
be settled by Popes, Patriarchs, or such kind of Councils, which all have so
long filled the Christian world with most calamitous divisions, contentions,
and bloodshed, and made the snares, which continue its divisions and
distractions to this day.

II. I conceive, that the means of Church-concord, appointed by God, is as
follows* But I premise,

1. It must be pre-supposed, That no perfect Concord will be had on earth; yea*
that there will unavoidably be very many differences, which must be born. So
great is the diversity of men's natural Capacity and Temper, their Education,
Company, Teachers, Helps, Interests, Callings, Temptations, etc. that it is not
probable that any Two men in all the world, are in every particular of the same
mind: And every man that grows in knowledge, will more and more differ from
himself, and not be of the same mind as he was when he knew less.

2. Yet must our increase in knowledge, and Concord, be our continual endeavor;
and it is the use of teaching to bring these differences, caused by ignorance,
to as small a number as we can.

3. There is scarce a more effectual means of Division, and Confusion, and
Church-ruin, to be devised, than to suppose a more extensive Concord to be
possible, and necessary, than indeed is; and so to set up an impossible End,
and Means, and to deny Concord and Peace to all that cannot have it on those
terms. If all should be denied to be the Kings Subjects, who dare not profess
Assent, Consent, and approbation of every law, and part, or word of the laws,
or that agree not of the meaning of every law, or that differ in any matters of
Religion, what a Schism, Confusion, and Ruin would it unavoidably make in the
Kingdom? and how few Subjects would it leave the King? Even as if none but men
of the same stature, visage, or wit, should be Subjects.

4* The necessary Union and Concord of Christians, is a matter of so great
importance, that it cannot be supposed, that Christ is the sole Universal
Lawgiver, and yet has not ordained, or determined what shall be the terms of
necessary Christian Unity and Concord: And indeed he has determined it. Viz.

I. He has ordained Baptism himself, to be our Christning, or our visible
Investiture in the Church Universal; that is, our Relation to Christ, as the
Head of his Universal Kingdom, or Body. And every rightfully baptized person
(till by violating that Covenant he forfeit his benefits), is to be taken by us
as a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Heir of Heaven; and we are bound
to love him as a brother, and use him accordingly, in all due Offices of Love.
And because the Church, into which Baptism enters us, consists of Christian
Pastors and People, Apostles and Prophets, having been as Foundations,
infallibly delivering us, now recorded in Scripture the Word of Life; and
ordinary Pastors being appointed to teach, and guide the people in holy
Doctrine, Worship, and Conversation; therefore it is implied, that the baptized
person at Age, understands this, and consents thereunto; that is, to
receive, as infallible, the recorded sacred Doctrine of the infallible persons,
Apostles and Prophets, and the ordinary Ministry of such ordinary Pastors and
Teachers, as he shall discern to be set over him by the Word and Spirit of
Christ. Whether this consent to the Pastoral-Office, be necessary to the Being
of a Christian, or only to the Well-being, is a controversy with which I need
not stop, or length^n in this account. But Baptism, as such, does not enter us
into any particular Church.

II. 1. Christ (by himself, and his spirit in the Apostles) has ordained, that
Christians shall be associated into particular Churches, consisting of the
aforesaid Ordinary Pastors and their Flocks, for Personal Communion in holy
Doctrine, Worship, and Conversation; in all which these Pastors are their
Guides, according to the Laws, or Word of Christ, already delivered by the
in^allible Ministry of the Apostles and Prophets; against, or beyond which,
Christ has given them no power. Their Office is of his own making, and
describing; and their power to determine undetermined useful circumstances in
Gods Worship, and Church Discipline, is but a power to obey Christ's general
commands (to do all things in Love, Peace, Order, Decency, and to Edification),
which they may not violate.

2. Every Christian that has opportunity, should be a Member of some such
particular Church; Statedly, if it may be; if not, yet transiently: But some
may want such opportunity (as single persons converted, or cast among Infidels;
Travelers, Ambassadors, Factors, and other Merchants, (among Infidels) or
where Christianity is so corrupted by the P^stors, as that they will not allow
men Communion without sinful Oaths, Covenants, Professions, Words, or Practices.

3. No one at Age can be a Member of the Universal, or of any particular Church
(and so the Subject of that Pastor) against his will, or without his own
consent (however Antecedent Obligations may bind men to consent).

4. Every such Church should have its proper Bishop; and in Ignatius's time,
its Unity was describ^d by One Altar, and One Bishop, with his fellow
Presbyters, and Deacons.

5. Such Bishops, or Pastors were to be ordained by Senior Bishops, or P^stors,
and received by the E^ection, or Consent of the whole Church; and for many
hundred years no Churches received their Bishops on any other terms. The
Ordainers, and the People or Church receiving him, having each a necessary
consent, as a double Key for the security of the Church; to which afterward
the Christian Magi^^rates consent was added according to Gods word, so far as
protecting and countenancing of the Bishop did require, The senior Bishops must
consent to his Ordination, the people must consent to him as formally related
to themselves as their Pastor; and the Magistrate as to one to be protected by
him.

6 As without mutual consent the relation of Pastor and flock is not founded;
so Gods Providence must direct every man to know what particular Church he
should be of, and whom by consent to take for the guide of his soul. In England
men may freely choose what Church and Pastor they will stand related to; every
man having liberty to dwell in what Parish or Diocese he please, without asking
leave of the Bishop to remove.

7. The individuating or distingu^shing of particular Churches by peculiar
Circuits, or proper spaces of ground, is no further of Gods institution, than
it is the performance of the general commands of doing all in order to
edification, etc. And as in prosperous times under godly peaceable Princes, it
is greatly convenient and desirable; so in several cases of Division,
Church-corruption by Heresy, or Tyranny, Persecution, etc. it is inconvenient,
and it becomes a necessary duty to gather Churches in the same space of ground
where only some other Pastor had a Church before. The cases in which this is
lawful, and the cases in which Separation is unlawful, having written largely
in another paper, I shall offer it to you when you desire it.

8. It is not of absolute necessity that all the members of a particular
Church, do always or usually meet in one place, (though it be very convenient
and desirable where it may be done); for Persecution may prohibit it, or want
of a large capacious place, or the great d^stance of some of the Inhabitants,
or the age, or weakness of others; and therefore in the ancient Churches,
though at first they usually were all assembled in one place, yet after when
they increased, the Canons required all the people to assemble with the Bishop
but at certain chief Festivals in the year, having Chapels or Oratories in the
Villages where they m^t on other days. And with us many Parishes of great
extent have many Chapels of ease.

9. But that the end of the Association be not only for distan^ communion by
Delegates or Letters, or mere relation to one common Ruler as all the Empire
had to the Emperor, but for PERSONAL COMMUNION of Pastor and Flock, so that
they may at least per vices meet together, or live within the reach of each
others personal notice, and converse, and Communion in Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, this is essential to a partiicular Church, primi ordinis, of Divine
Institution, of which I now treat.

III. 1. As Christians must gather into particular Churches, under their proper
Bishops; so these Churches must hold a certain Communion among themselves, so
much as is necessary to their mutual Edification and Preservation, of which
Synods, and Communicatory Letters and Messengers, are the means.

2. An association of several Churches for Communion of Churches, does tota
specie differ from an association of individual Christians into one Church
primae speciei. And it differs in the matter, end, and kind of Communion.

3. If these several Churches agree in the same Baptismal Covenant, in the same
ancient Creed or Articles of Faith, and in the same love and holy desires
summed up by Christ in the Lords-prayer, and in taking the commands of Christ
for the Rule of their conversation, and receiving Gods Revelations recorded in
the holy Scriptures so far as they understand them, renouncing all contraries
to any of this so soon as they perceive them so to be, this should suffice to
their loving and comfortable communion, without any desires of Domination or
Government over one another. And though I will not do any thing unpeaceably
against Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops or Diocesans, if they govern
according to the Laws of God; yet I know no Divine right that any of them have
to be the Rulers of the particular Bishops and Churches. Though a humane
presidency for order we deny not, nor that junior Bishops do owe some respect
and submission to the Seniors.

4. Though the General Laws of Christ (for concord, edification, etc.) do
enable Magistrates by command, or Pastors by contract to choose and make new
Officers of their own (which God never particularly instituted) for the
determining and executing such circumstantials as God has left to humane
prudence, (as Presidents, Moderators, Churchwardens, Summoners, etc.) yet I
deny, 1. That any Officer of mere humane Institution has a superior proper
Ecclesiastical Power of the Keys, to be a Bishop of Bishops, and to govern the
Governou^s of the particular Churches by Excommunications, Depositions, and
Absolutions, seeing ex ratione rei, it belongs to the same Legislator, who
instituted the inferior order, to have instituted the Superior, if he would
have had it. 2. And I peremptorily deny that any such pretended Superior
(Patriarch, Primate, Metropolitan, Archbishop, etc.) has any power (save
Diabolical) to deprive any particular Churches, Bishops, or Christians, of any
of the Privileges settled on them by Christ's Universal Laws, or to disoblige
them from any duties required by Christ.

IV. It belongs to the Office of Princes and Magistrates only to Rule all,
both Clergy and Laity, by the sword or force; even to drive Ministers to do
their certain duty, and to punish them for sin. And they are to keep peace
among the Churches; and (as bad as the Secular Powers have been) had they not
kept peace better than the Bishops have done, I am possessed with horror to
think what a field of blood the Churches had been throughout the world, since
the Exaltation of the Clergy.

V. Christ only is (as the Universal Legislator, so) the Universal final judge,
from whom there is no appeal.

VI. Every Christian as a Rational Agent has a Judgment of discerning, by
which he must judge whether his Rulers commands be according to Christ's commands
or not. And if they be, must obey Christ in them. If not, must not obey them
against Christ, but appeal to him. And if any do this erroneously, it is his
sin; if justly, it is his duty.

These six Particulars I take to be the sufficient means which Christ has
appointed for the concord of the Church; and that the seven points of Concord
mentioned by the Apostle should satisfy us herein, viz. 1. One body. 2. One
Spirit. 3. One hope of our calling. 4 One Lord. 5. One Faith. 6. One Baptism.
7. One God and Father of all. And they that agree in these, are bound to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; as knowing that the Kingdom of
God consists not in meats and d^inks, but in Righteousness, peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost. And he that in these serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
(should be) approved of men, Romans 14.17, 18. Ephesians. 4.6, 7, etc. Nor is it
lawful for any to hate, persecute, silence, or Excommunicate their Brethren
that agree in these; or to divide, distract, or confound the Churches for the
interest of their several Preeminences, or Provinces, which have no higher than
humane authority, perhaps questionable, at least unquestionably below the
authority of God, and null when it is against it.

I am sure by the Church History of all ages since Christ, the great divider of
the Christian World has been the Pride of a worldly (too ignorant) Clergy.

1. Striving who should be greatest.

2. Striving about ambiguous words.

3. Imposing unnecessary things by their Authority upon the Churches; to be
ignorant of this, is impossible to me when once I have read the History of the
Church; which warns me what to suspect as the causes of our distractions; for
the things that had been, are.

And how unexcusable these three evils are, and how contrary to Christ, these
Texts do tell me: I. Luk 22.24, 25, 26 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7,
22. 2 Cor. 1.24. II. 2 Timothy 2.14, 16, 23, 24, 25. 1 Timothy 1.4, 5, 6. III. 2 Cor.
11.3. Act. 15.28. Revel. 2.24, 25, Mat. 15.8, 9. Romans 14, and 15, throughout.

To tell you, that I am not only as you say, on the destructive part, I have
thus told you briefly what I assert as the way to peace. And now I shall
destructively tell you why I differ from your Principles as truly destructive
of truth, unity and peace.

Some of the Principles which I have heard from your mouth, which I dissent
from, are these:

I. That the Church must have some Ecclesiastical Governors that are absolute,
from whom no man may appeal to an invisible Power.

II. That Diocesan Churches are the first in order of Divine Institution*

III. That Diocesan-Bishops by consent may make other Church-forms, as
National, Patriarchal, etc. And that such Churches are not made by Princes, but
by the consent of Prelates.

IV. That these Church-forms of man's making, stand in a Governing Superiority
over those of Gods making.

V. That where by such consent of Diocesans such superior Jurisdictions are
once settled, it is a sin for any to gather Assemblies within the local bounds
of their Jurisdiction without their consent.

VI. That you cannot see how those that do so, can be saved.

VII. That if I preach on the account of my Ministerial office, and the peoples
necessity, to such as else would have no Preaching, nor any public worship of
God, ( e. g. in a Parish where there are 40000 more than can hear in the
Parish Church), though I must conclude that according to the ordinary way of
Salvation such could not be brought to Faith, Holiness and Salvation, for want
of teaching, it is yet my sin to preach to them, and my duty to let them rather
be damned, if I have not the Bishops consent to teach them; and that because it
is the Bishop and not I that shall answer for their damnation.

VIII. That it is disputable with you whether those to whom Church power is
given ( viz. Diocesans) may not change (not only the local temporary
circumstances, but) the very Church-forms, and suspend Laws of Christ.

IX. That Baptism enters the Baptized into some particular Church, and
consequently under this fore-described Church Government.

X. That in the case of Preaching the Gospel, Ministers may in many cases do
it, though Emperors and Kings forbid them, (as in the days of Constantius,
Valens, yea and better men); but not if the Bishop forbid them, or consent not.

XI. That circa Sacra, if the King command the Churches for Uniformity, one
Translation of the Bible, one Version or Meter of the Psalms, one Liturgy, one
Time, or Place of Worship, etc. and the Bishop another, we ought to obey the
Bishop against the command of the King.

XII. That the required Subscriptions, Declarations, Rubricks and Canons, are
primarily the Laws of the Church, which the King and Parliament do confirm by
their Sanction; and therefore the Church is the Expounder of them.

These are some of your Assertions, which I cannot yet receive.

I. My Reasons against the first are these: 1. Because this makes Gods of men,
and so is Idolatry, giving them Gods proper Power and Prerogative.

2. Yea, it takes down God (or his Laws), and sets them above him: For
there cannot be two Absolute Governors that have not one Will. If I must not
appeal from them to God, then I must appeal from God to them; that is, I must
break his Law, if they bid me, or else they are not Absolute.

3. This makes all Gods Laws at the will of man, as alterable, or dispensible:
Man may forbid all that God commands, and I must obey.

4. Then all Villainies may be made Virtues, or Duties, at the will of man: If
they command us to curse God, or Blaspheme, or be perjured, or commit
Fornication, Murder, or Idolatry, it would become a Duty.

5. Then the Power, and Lives of Kings would be at the Clergies mercy; For if
their power be Absolute, they may make Treason and Rebellion a Duty.

6. And all Family-Societies, and Civil Converse, migbt be overthrown, while an
Absolute Clergy may disoblige men from all duty to one another.

7. Then the Council at Lateran, which you have excellently proved in your
Considerations, to be the Author of its Canons, does, or did oblige Princes to
exterminate their Reformed Subjects, and disoblige Subjects from their
Allegiance to Princes that obey not the Pope herein, and are excommunicate. So
of Greg. 7 th's Council. Romans

8. Then did the Church, or Kingdom of England well, to disobey, or forsake the
Roman Power, that was over them?

9. Were not our Martyrs rather Rebels, that died for disobeying an Absolute
Power?

10. How should two contradicting Absolute Powers ( viz. General Councils) be
both obeyed? E. g Nicen. 1. and Arimini* Sirm. and Tyr. or Ephesians. 2 and Calced*

11. How will this stand with the Judgment and practice of the Apostles, that
said, Whether it be meet that we obey God, or man, judge ye?

12. How will it stand with Conformity to the Church of England, that in the
Articles says, that General Councils may err, and have erred in matter of
Faith? etc.

13. Is it not against the sense of all mankind, even the common Light of
Nature, where utter Atheism has not prevailed?

Say not, that I wrong you, by laying all this odium on your self. I lay it but
on your words: And I doubt not, but (though disputing Interest draw such words
from you) on consideration you will re-call them by some limitations.

II. My Reasons against your second, must pre-suppose, that we understand one
another as to the sense of the word, Diocesan Church, which being your ^erm,
had I been with you, I must have desired you first to explain. The word,
Diocese of old, you know, signified a part of the Empire, larger than a
Province, and that had many Metropolitans in it. I suppose that is not your
sense. Sometimes now it is taken for that space of ground which we call, a
Diocese; sometimes for all the people in that space. And with us, a Diocesan
Church, is a Church of the lowest Order, containing in it, a multitude of fixed
Parochial Congregations, which have every one their stated Presbyter, who is no
Bishop, and Vnum altar, and are no Churches, but parts of a Church, and which
is individuated by one Bishop, and the measuring-space of ground, whose
inhabitants are its Members. Till you tell me the contrary, I must take this
for your sense; For you profess to me, that you speak of such Diocesan Churches
as ours (and they have some above a thousand, others many hundred Parishes),
and you say our Parishes are not Churches, but Parts of a Church, and so
Families are.

2. Either you mean, that a Diocesan Church is the first in order of Execution
and Existence, or else in order of Intention, and so last in Existence and
Execution. I know not your meaning, and therefore must speak to both.

I. That a Diocesan Church is first in Intention, is denied by me, and
disproved (though it belong to you to prove it).

1. Intentions no where declared of God in mature or supernatural Revelations,
are not to be asserted of him as Truths. But a prime intention of a Diocesan
Church is no where declared of God: Ergo, not to be asserted of him as truth.

2. It is the end or ultimum rei complementum, which is first in intention
(where there is ordo intentionis.) But a Diocesan Church is not the end or
ultimum rei complementum: Ergo, not first intended.

The Major is not deniable: The Minor has the consent as far I as know, of all
the world. For they are all either for the Hierarchy, or against it. They that
are for it, say that a Metropolitan is above a Diocesan, and a Provincial above
a Metropolitan, and a Patriarchal above a Provincial, and a National (which
has Patriarchs, as the Empire had) above that; and ^ay the new Catholics, an
humane universal above a National Church, as the complement or perfection; and
therefore must be first intended.

But those that are against the Hierarchy, think that all these are
Church-corruptions, or humane policies set up by Usurpation, and therefore not
of prime Divine Intention.

3. If you should go this way, I would first debate the question with you, how
far there is such a thing as ordo intentionis to be ascribed to God. For though
St. Thomas (as you use to call him) assert such intentions, it is with many
limitations; and others deny it, and all confess that it needs much
Explication to be understood.

II. But if it be a priority of Existence in order of execution. that you mean,
it disproveth it self. For,

1. It is contrary to the nature of production, that two, or twenty, or an
hundred stated Congregations, should be before ont; as it is that I should
write a page before a line, and a line before a word, and a word before a
letter.

2. It is contrary to the Scripture-History, which tells us that Christ
called his Disciples by degrees, a few first, and more after; and that the
Apostles accordingly converted men; from the number of 120, they rose to 3000
more; and after to 5000, etc. And that ordinarily the Churches in
Scripture-times were such as could, and often did meet in one place, (though
that be not necessary as I said before) has so copious evidence, as that I
will not here trouble you with it.

3. Either the Apostles Ordained Bishops before subject Presbyters, or such
Presbyters before Bishops, or both at once. If both at once as two Orders, it is
strange that they called both Orders promiscuously by the same names, sometimes
Bishops, sometimes Presbyters, and sometimes Pastors and Teachers, without any
distinguishing Epithete or notice. And it is strange that we never find any
mention of the two sorts of Congregations, one the Bishops Cathedral, and the
other the Parish Presbyters Congregation. If you say that they were the Bishops
themselves, and first Ordained only subject-Presbyters under them, that cannot
hold. For doubtless there were more than twelve or thirteen Churches (the
number of Apostles in their times; nor were they fixed Bishops, but indefinite
gatherers and edifiers of the Churches. And either those Elders first Ordained
by the Apostles were Bishops, or else there were Churches without Bishops, for
they Ordained Elders in every City, and in every Church. And either the Elders
first Ordained by the Apostles had the power of Ordaining others, or not. If
they had, then either they were Bishops, or else subject-Presbyters were
Ordained to be Ordainers; yea to Ordain Bishops (if such were to be after
ordained.) And so indeed it would be suitable to your concei^, that the
inferior order of Diocesans do by consent make superior Metropolitans,
Provincials, Nationals, and Patriarchs to rule them; and with Hieromes report
ad Evagr. that the Alexandrian Presbyters made the Bishops, as the Army does a
General. But this making of Children to beget Fathers, is so commonly denied,
that I need not more dispute against it.

3* But I think most of the Hierarchical way will say, that the Apostles first
Ordained Bishops, that those Bishops might Ordain subject-Presbyters. And if
so, the Churches could be but single Congregation at the first till the
subject-Presbyters were Ordained Yea, Dr. Hammond (as aforesaid) asserteth (in
Act. 11. and in Dissert. etc.) that there is no proof there were any of the
Order of subject-Presbyters in Scripture-times; and he thinks that most of
his party were of his mind; and that the name Bishop, Elder and Pastor in
Scripture signify only those that we now call Bishops. And in this he
follows Dion. Petavius, and Fr. a Sancta Clara de Episcop. who says that it
came from Scotus. And if this be so, then in all Scripture-times there was no
Church of more than one worshipping Congregation. For we are agreed that
Church-meetings were for the public Worship of God, and celebration of
Sacraments, and exercise of Discipline, which no mere Layman might lawfully
guide the people in, and perform as such assemblies did require. And one Bishop
could be but in one place at once. And if there were many Bishops, there were
many Churches. So that according to Dr. Hammond and all of his mind, there was
no Church in Scripture-times of more than one stated ordinary Worshipping
Congregation, because there were no subject-Presbyters.

If you say that yet this was a Diocesan Church, because it had a Diocesan
Bishop; I answer, why is he called a Diocesan Bishop if he had not a Diocesan
Church?

If you mean that he was designed to turn his single Congregation into many by
increase: 1. That must not be said only, but proved. 2. And that supposes that
his one congregation was first before the many. And I hope you ^ake not
Infidels for parts of the Church, because they are to be converted hereafter.
Those that are no members of the Church make not the Church, and so make it not
to be Diocesan. One Congregation is not an hundred or a thousand, because so
many will be hereafter.

If you mean that such a space of ground was assigned to the Bishops to gather
and govern Churches in. I answer,

1. Gathering Churches is a work antecedent to Episcopacy.

2. The Ground is no part of the Church. It is a Church of men, and not of soil
and houses that we speak of.

3. Nor indeed will you ever prove that the Apostles measured out or
distinguished Churches by the space of ground. So that the first Churches were
not Diocesan.

III. As to your Third Opinion, 1. Officers are denominated from the work which
they are to do. There are works to be done, circa sacra, about the holy
Ministerial works, as Accidental: as to (...) to Church buildings, Utensils,
and Lands, to Summon Synods, and Register their Acts; to moderate in
disputations, and to take votes, etc. These the Magistrate may appoint Officers
to pe^^orm; and if he do not, the Churches, by his permission, may do it by
consent.

And there are works proper to the Magistrate, viz. to force men to their duty
by mulcts, or corporal penalties. I deny none of these.

But the works of Ordination, Pastoral Guidance, Excommunication and
Absolution, by the power of the Keys, are proper to the sacred Office, which
Christ has instituted. And I shall not believe, till I see it proved, that any
men have power to make any new Order, or Office of this sort, which Christ
never made by himseelf, or his Spirit in his Apostles; much less that Inferiors
may make Superior Offices: For 1. It belongs to the same power to make one
(especially the Superior) Church-Office, which made the other of the same
General nature. If without Christ's institution, no man could be Episcopus
gregis, and have the power of the Keys over the people, then by parity of
Reason, without his institution no man can be Episcopus Episcoporum, and have
the power of the Keys over the Bishops.

2. Dr. Hammond's argument against Presbyters Ordination is, Nemo dat quod non
habet; which though it serve not his turn on several accounts (both because 1.
They have the Order which they confer. 2. Because Ordination is not giving, but
Ministerial delivery by Investiture); yet in this case it will hold; For 1.
This is supposed to be a new institution of an Office. 2. And that of an higher
power than ever the Institutors had themselves: The King gives all his
Officers their power, but all of them cannot give the King his power. The
Patriarch cannot make a Pope, nor the Metropolitans a Patriarch, that shall
have a power over them, which they never had themselves.

And what I say of Superior Orders, and Offices, I say of Synods; For whether
the power be Monarchica^, or Aristocratical, or Democratical, there is need of
the same power in the Cause that makes it: No man can give that which he has
not to give.

If you should fly to such popular Principles, as the Episcopal Champion,
Richard Hooker, does, and the Jesuits in their Politics, and many; yea, most
other Writers of Politics, and say, That as the people are the givers of power
to the Sovereign, though they are no Governors themselves, so the Bishops give
power to the Episcopi Episcoporum (personal, or Synodical), I answer, The
Principle is false about Civil Policy, as I have proved against Mr. Hooker, in
my Christian Directory, and as Dr. Hammond has proved in the Kings Cause,
against John Goodwin. The power every man has over himself, does so
specifically differ from the power of Governing-Societies, that the latter is
not caused by all men's Contribution of the former; and much more in
Church Government, which God has left less the Will of man (as Mr. Dan.
Cawdr^y has proved).

To conclude, I grant the Superiority of Magistrates, and of their Officers,
circa sacra, but not that Inferior Clergymen may by consent, make a Superior
Species of Rulers (or Episcopos Episcoporum) by the Keys, in eodem genere.

But I confess, that how far Christ himself has made Apostolic Successors, or
Archbishops, as to the ordinary part of governing many Churches, is a question
to me of much more difficulty, and moment.

As for the Patriarchal, and other Superior Church Power in the Roman Empire,
that it was made partly by the Emperors themselves (as the instances of the two
Iustiniana's, and many others show), and partly by Councils, Authorized thereto
by the Emperors, is past all doubt.

IV. As to your fourth Opinion, I include the reason of my denial of it, in the
description of it. Whether you confess particular worshipping Churches, that
have each unum altar, to be of Divine Institution, I cannot tell: but that you
take the Diocesan to be so Divine, you have told me; and that you take the
Superior Ruling-Churches, to be made by them. Now that Churches of man's making
(Universal, or National, or Patriarchal, etc) should be the rightful Governors
(by the Keys) over the Churches of Gods making, must be either jure Divino, or
humano: not jure humano; For 1. Man cannot give the power of the Keys without
God. 2. And man's grant cannot over top Gods. Indeed there is no power but of
God.

2. Not jure divino; For if God give them the power, God makes that Species
that contains that power. For God not to make the Office, and not to give the
power, is all one.

3. At least, what satisfying proof you will give us, that indeed God gives
power to Church Officers of his own making, themseves to make nobler superior
Officers or Churches than themselves, I cannot foresee. And till it is proved,
it is not to be believed. 4. Yea it confounds the Inferiors and the
Superiors. For the Diocesans are so far the Superiors to the Provincial,
National, Patriarchal, etc. in that they make them* or give them their power,
and yet inferior in that they are to be subjects to them.

More Nonconformists do deny the power of men to make new Species of Churches,
and Church Rulers, than their power to make new Ceremonies.

V. Your next mentioned Opinion, (that it is a sin to preach and congregate
people within the local bounds of Diocesan or Provincial, or other superior
Jurisdictions without their consent) falls of it self, if those foregoing
fall, which it is built upon.

1. If it prove true that they that made these superior Jurisdictions had no
power to make them, but gave that which they had not to give, then your
foundation fails.

2. If it be proved that neither Christ nor his Apostles ever made a Law that
Bishops Jurisdictions shall be limited, measured and distributed by space of
ground, as our Parishes and Diocesses are, so that all in such a compass shall
be proper to one Pastor, much less did ever divide our Diocesses or Parishes;
(which me thinks none should deny) then Preaching in that space of ground is no
sin against such an Order of Christ.

3. If it be proved (as I undertake to do) that this distribution by spaces of
ground, is a work that the King and his Officers are to do, (or the Churches by
his permission by way of contract, if he leave it to them), and this in
obedience to Gods General Laws (of Order, Peace, Concord and Edification), then
these things will follow,

1. That if the King give us Licenses to Preach within such a space of ground,
we have good Authority, and break not the restraining Law: And yet such as you
accused us of schism as well when the King Licensed us, as since.

2. That this Law of local bounds does bind us but as other humane Laws do;
which is, say many Casuists, not at all out of the case of scandal, when they
make not for the bonum publicum. But say others more safely, not when they
notoriously make against, 1. Either the bonum publicum, which is finis
regiminis: 2. Or the general Law of God which must authorize them, (being
against edification, peace, etc.) 3. When they are contrary to the great,
certain and indi^pensible Laws of God himself. And that in such cases patient
suffering the penalty which men inflict is instead of obedience to the
prohibition, (and as in Daniels case, Dan. 6 and ^he Apostles, etc.)

Therefore I am (...) to give you, 1. My Concessions in what cases it (...) to
(...) the Magistrate in Preaching where he forbids (...). 2. (...) in what
cases it is a great duty. But to say that it is a sin because that the Clergy
forbids it, must have better proof ^^an I have seen, even, 1. That such
Clergymen are truly called by God. 2. And that they have from him the
assignation of this space of ground. And 3. are by him empowered to forbid all
others to preach on their land. 4. And that even when Gods general Laws do make
it our duty, that they can suspend the obligation of such Laws, even the
greatest: I am ready upon any just occasion to prove to you, that I were a
heinous sinner, if I should have ceased such Preaching as I have used upon all
the reasons that you alledg against it. And woe to them that make our greatest
and dearest duties to pass for sin, and our greatest sin, Isa. 5.20. Were it
but one of the least commands, I would be loath to break it, and teach men so to
do, much less one of the greatest; when men whose consciences tell them, that
they are totally devoted to God; as Christians and as Ordained Ministers, deny
their worldly interest and preferments, and serve him in poverty, beholden for
their daily bread, and to the ruin of their worldly Estates, and the hazard of
their lives in the Common Goals, endeavor nothing but to Preach Christ's Gospel
to save men's souls from ignorance, unbelief, sensuality, worldliness, etc. in
case of the peoples undeniable necessity; I say, when such meet with men of the
same profession, who think not the Common Goals among Rogues, and the
forfeiture of Forty pound a Sermon, as Enacted by Law, to be enough to restrain
them, but also as in the name of Christ they will charge us with heinous sin
unless we will perfidiously break our obligations to Christ, and sacrilegiously
alienate our selves from the work which we are devoted to (many of us under the
Bishops hands) and unless we will be cruel to miserable souls, and shut up the
bowels of our compassion from them, while we see them in need and in danger of
damnation, what fortitude do we need against such kind of Tempters, and such
Temptations? If Drunkards and boys in the street only scorned me as a Puritan,
or Precisian, it were less. If Turkish Rulers did persecute me for my Preaching
Christ, it were less. If mistaken Christian Rulers made me the scorn of the
Nation, and stripped me of all my worldly maintenance, and laid me with
Malefactors in Prisons, it were a less temptation, than for a man to come in
the name of Christ, to tell me that I sin against him, unless I will forsake my
Calling, break my Vows, cease Preaching his Gospel, betray thousands of souls
to Satan and damnation, and encourage all that endeavor it by yielding to all
their temptations, and giving them success. But as Christ must be accused of
sin, as well as crucified, and not allowed the honor of suffering as innocent,
so must his servants.

I will venture upon one argument on the by that may be somewhat by others,
though nothing to you for the invalidating of your accusation. I saw from the
hands of a Noble Lord, The Earl of Orery.
an excellent truly Learned Manuscript said by him to be the Bishop of
Lincolns, to satisfy you who are said to judge it unlawful to subscribe to
Athanasius's Creed. What else you refuse I know not; but by that much I
perceive you are a strange kind of Nonconformist. Now if it be unlawful for you
to subscribe and conform, or unlawful for me, (which I here undertake to prove
before any equal competent Judges) then it is unlawful for all the Ministers of
England;
for none of them may do evil that good may come by it. And then all the
Ministers in England ought to cease Preaching, if I ought to cease, when they
are forbidden. The consequence will be denied by others, though not by you.
(And by the way, How can you take the Bishops for Absolute, from whom there is
no appeal to an invisible power, and yet disobey them, if they bid you
subscribe Athanasius Creed.) If it be a sin in me not to cease Preaching when I
am silenced for Nonconformity, and yet Nonconformity be a duty, then it is a
sin in all the Ministers of England not to be Nonformists, and so not to cease
Preaching. But the latter part of the consequent is false: Ergo, so is the
Antecedent.

2. Yea, directly your assertion puts it in the power of one superior to put
down the Preaching of the Gospel, and all Gods public Worship, in whole
Countries or Kingdoms, (if not in the world), and so Christ must be at their
mercy whether he shall have any Church, and so whether he shall be Christ; and
God, whether he shall have any public Worship In Ethiopia (though Brierwood
says that yet after the decay of the Abassine Empire, it is as big as Italy,
Germany, France and Spain) they have but one Bishop, called their Abuna And if
he forbad all Preaching or public Worship in the Empire, it is a sin to obey
him. And it is a great duty to gather Churches within his Church. It is a sin
in the Empire of Muscovie, that all their Clergy obey their Patriarch and
Prince in forbearing to Preach. If all the Bishops of England should agree to
reduce the Kingdom to one only Bishopric, and one Church, and turn all the
rest into Parish-Chappels, it were a duty to disobey them, and gather Churches
in that one Church. If the Patriarch of Alexandria, Antioch, or Constantinople,
had forbidden all in their limits to Preach and worship God publicly, it had
been a wickedness to obey them. When Severus Antioch, the Eutychian, forbad the
Orthodox to Preach in his Patriarchate, it had been their sin to obey him, (yea
or if Theodosius or Anastasius the Emperors had done it): yea, though a
General Council of Ephesians. 2. (if not Ephesians. 1.) was on his side. If the Pope
(whether as Pope or as Patriarch of the West), Interdict all the Preachers and
Churches in Venice, or in Britain, it were a sin to obey him.

The reasons are, because their power is derived and limited (to pass by the no
power of Usurpers) the greatest have it for edification, and not for
destruction. None of them have power to make void the least (continued) Law of
God by their Doctrines, Precepts or Traditions. All men must take heed of the
leven of their false Doctrine, and must beware of false Prophets, and must
prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. There is no true power but
of God, and therefore none against him. It is better to obey God than men. But
of this you may in season have larger proof, if you desire it.

VI. Your excluding us from Salvation, that will not cease Preaching the Gospel
of Salvation, and worshipping God, remembers us:

1. What a mercy it is that neither Pope, nor any such condemner is made our
final Judge.

2. How most Sects agree (Papists, Quakers, etc.) in damning those that dance
not after their Pipe.

3. What various wiles of temptations Satan uses to hinder Christ's Gospel, and
men's Salvation.

At once I have, 1. A backward flesh, that is the worst of all, that says,
Favor thy self, and expose not thy self to all this labor, obloquie, hatred,
suffering, loss and danger of death for nothing, but that work which thy
superiors think needless, and forbid.

2. I feel Satan setting in with the flesh, and saying the same.

3. Carnal and worldly friends say the same (as Peter to Christ, Mat. 16.)

4. Displeased Sinners and Sectaries wish me silent.

5. What Superiors say and do, I need not mention.

6. And to perfect all, some Preachers in Press and Pulpit, and you in
Discourse, declare us in danger of damnation, as Schismatics, unless we will
give over Preaching the Gospel. O how easy were it to me to avoid that
damnation! And if I incur it, how dearly do I purchase it! It is a sad case
that such poor souls as we are in, that would fain know Gods will whatever
study or suffering it cost us, and after our most earnest search and prayers,
believe that if we forsook our trust, and office, and the peoples souls, we
should be judged as sacrilegious, perfidious hypocrites, and yet we are told by
wiser and greater men, that our labors and sufferings do but damn us; may not
a man be damned at a cheaper rate than Forty pound a Sermon, or the loss of all
his worldly Estate, and lying with malefactors, and perhaps dying in a Goal,
under the published sacred infamy of being Schismatics and enemies of the
public Government and peace, etc? But this also we must be fortified against.
For Satan is sometime utterly impudent, and will say, Damn your selves by
perfidiousness, and let the people be damned quietly, or else you shall be
damned for Schismatics. But the long noise of damning Papists and Quakers have
somewhat hardened or emboldened us. It was an early trick, Act. 15. Except ye be
circumcised and keep the Law of Moses, ye cannot be saved. When lands and
livings will not prevail; when profit, pleasure and honor fail; when poverty,
reproach and prisons will not serve, then comes, You cannot else be saved. How
many Sects say, Say as we say, and do as we do, and follow us, or you cannot be
saved? But says St. Paul, It is a small thing with me to be judged of man, or
at man's day: I have one that judges me, even the Lord, (to whom we will appeal
whatever you say against it.) But you must give me leave to think, that to draw
men from their great duty, and the saving souls, to heinous sin, as in the name
of Christ, and to frighten men into Hell with the fear of damnation, and the
abused Word of God, has heinous aggravations, which enticing men by sensuality
to drunkenness, whoredom or theft, has not.

VII. To the next, the matter of fact, and antecedent Suppositions cannot be
denied, viz. 1. That it is probably supposed that there are inhabitants more
than can hear the Preachers voice in the Parish-Churches, in Martins Parish
about 40000, in Stepney Parish near as many, in Giles Cripplegate 30000, in
Giles in the Fields near 20000, in Sepulchers, Algate, White-chappel, Andrews
Holborn, and many other Out-Parishes very many thousands. The last Bill of
Mortality that I saw, says there died in Stepney Parish as many wanting one,
as in all the Ninety-seven Parishes of London, and in Martins as many within
six, and in Giles Cripplegate as many within eight, or thereabout.

2. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall
they believe if they hear not? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? If
the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: Where Vision fails, the
people perish, even for lack of knowledge.

3. Yet people by our Church Laws must be presented and prosecuted as Recusants
if they come not to Church, and so 40000 or 30000 should be presented and
punished for want of room; but it is a greater punishment to be strangers unto
the Gospel.

4. The Canon forbids them going to, and communicating in other Parishes,
and forbids the Ministers to receive them.

5. The Children of Christians are born with no more knowledge than the children
of Heathens; and need teaching as well as theirs, to bring them to knowledge
when they grow up.

6. God will not save any adult person that is an Infidel, impenitent,
unsanctified, because he is bred up among Christians, and Churches, or born of
Christians, and Baptized; but it will go worse with such unholy persons in the
day of Judgment, that have had the greatest means.

7. If you can cast the fault on the people, and say that they might remove
their dwellings, or (break the Law, and) go to other Parishes, or read at home,
etc. that excuses us not. For the worse they are, the more need they have of
help. If they were faultless, what need had they of us?

8. As to my own case whom you condemn, I have told you, that I have the
Ordination of a Bishop, and the License of the Bishop of this Diocese (not
nulled or recalled) which by your principles one would think might serve if it
had been against Gods own Laws. And yet Gods Law and the Bishops License will
not serve.

9. Some other may say, What Is your case to many others? I answer: To pass by a
great deal not now to be said, Let it be understood that the case is this. Men
are first silenced and excommunicated, and so forbidden the public Churches,
and all public worship of God; and then the Excommunicate are prosecuted and
accused for not coming to Church. Diverse Canons do ipso facto (that is, sine
sententia) excommunicate all that do but say that any thing in the Liturgy or
Discipline is unlawful, or may not be done with a good conscience (which all
Nonconformists hold). And it is not possible for us to repent of that as a
wicked Error, which after all means that we can possibly use, appears unto us
an undoubted truth, that so our Excommunication may be taken off. Now these
silenced men are assured, that God disobligeth them not from the duty of
Preaching; and these excommunicate men are assured that God does not disoblige
them from the duty of public worship and Church Communion. Therefore they must
use it as they can, when they may not use it as they would. Men say the Papists
should not call us Schismatics, because they cast us out, and went from us;
and will you silence and excommunicate men, as they undertake to prove, for
obeying God, and then call them Schismatics for not communicating with you, or
for worshipping God in such Church Communion as they can? Indeed many of us
communicate with you, because we think not our selves bound, though you
excommunicate us ipso facto, to do execution on our selves, or to go further
from you than necessity compels us (though I must profess that Cyprians 68.
Epistle, p. 200. and St. Martin's Separation from the Bishops, confirmed by
Miracle, sometimes sticks in my stomach). But I cannot make so light as you do,
1. Of such Texts as 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I cha^g^ thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his
kingdom, preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine.

2. Nor of the murderous famishing of thousands of souls, when to murder one
child by famine deserves death and hell.

3. Nor of Christ's Law of preferring Mercy before Sacrifice, necessary Morals
before Rituals, Circumstantials or Ordinals, which are all but propter rem
ordinatam. I remember you have told me, That if the Bishop forbad all Gods
public worship in the Assemblies, we must forbear. Such sayings, and this,
That I must let so many souls be untaught though they be damned, because it is
the Bishops fault and not mine, do make me ready to tremble to think of them.
If Christ's works be saving, whose work is it to make so light of man's
damnation? Is it any wonder if such Principles be called Antichristian? I
cannot but perceive from whom they come, when the damnation of poor people must
be so easily submitted to, if the Bishop do but command the means. Methinks you
wrong the Bishops by such odious Suppositions and Assertions, as if you would
make men believe that they are the Grievous Wolves that spare not the flock,
and the thorns and thistles that are made to prick and rend the people. But I
believe that the Bishops faultiness in men's damnation would be no exeuse to me
if I be accessory.

4. And I doubt not but if you unjustly ipso facto Excommunicate men, it
neither depriveth them of the right, nor absolveth them from the duty of
public Worship, and Church Communion. And I am ashamed to read and hear
Preachers publicly reproaching them for not holding constant Communion with
the Parish-Churches, when it is notorious that the Canon has thus
Excommunicated them, yea though it were their duty sometime to intrude.

And I beseech you judge as a Christian or a man, whether you can think such
Arguments should draw the people themselves to be of your mind: Go to them and
speak out, Neighbors, I confess that while you live in ignorance and sin for
want of teaching and public worship, you are in the way to damnation; but it
is the Bishop, and not the silenced Preacher that shall answer for it. Will
they not reply, And shall not the Bishop then he damned instead of us, as well
as instead of the silenced Preacher?

VIII. Your doubt about men's power to change Christ's settled form of
Church Government, is but a consequent of your first, of men's absolute power.

But 1. if they change Gods Laws, or instituted Church-forms or Government, may
they not change their own? And if so, there is some hope of a Reformation. But
why then did the Canons of 1640. in the Et caetera Oath, swear the Clergy never
to consent to change? And why are we now to swear in the Oxford Oath, That we
will never endeavor any alteration of Church Government (though the keys be in
the power of Lay-Chancellors, and though the King may command us to endeavor it)
must the Nation or Clergy swear never (in their own places) to endeavor any
alteration of the Bishops Institutions (as you take them), and yet may the
Bishops alter the very Form of Government, and Churches made by our Universal
King?

2. What an uncertain mutable thing may Christ's Laws or Church Government
prove, while mutable men may change it at their pleasure.

3. To what purpose is Antiquity and Tradition so much pleaded by Hierarchical
Divines, as if that were the Test to know the right Government and Church, if
the Bishops may alter it?

4. If thus much of Christ's Laws and Institutions may be altered by Prelates,
how shall we be sure that all the rest is not also at their will and mercy? or
which is it that they may alter, and which not?

5. Does not this set man so far above God, or equal with him, as will still
tempt men to think that more are Antichristian than the Pope? If you say that
it is by Gods own grant, I wait for your proof, that God grants power to any
man above his Laws: Those that he made but Local or Temporary himself, are not
abrogated or changed by man where they bind not; for they never bound any but
their proper subjects, e. g. The Jewish Laws, as such, never bound the Gentile
world; and the command of washing feet, bound only th^se where the use of going
bare-leg'd with Sandals in a hot Country, made it an office of kindness; and so
of other Temporary precepts.

6. How contrary is this to the common Christian Doctrine, that we must obey
none that command us to sin against God? For by the first assertion, and this,
it seems that it cannot be a sin which the Bishops command.

7. I pray you put in an exception for the Power and Lives of Kings, and the
Laws of the Land, and the Property and Liberty of the Subjects; and one word
for the Protestant Religion. For we Englishmen think God to be greater than
the King, or St. Patrick; and Gods Laws to be firmer than the Statutes of King
and Parliament. And yet I doubt that the King and some Parliament will be angry
if you do but say that the Bishops by consent may change their Statutes, or
lawful Officers and Powers; And Bishops, if you say that Episcopacy may be
changed.

IX. Baptism, as such, enters not the Baptized into any particular Church,
but only into the Universal, headed by Christ; yet a man may at the same time;
be entered into the Universal, and into a particular Church, but that is by a
double consent, and not by Baptism as such. In this I know none that agree with
you but some few of the Independents in New England, and some of the Papists. I
confess Bellarmine says, That by Baptism we are virtually obliged to the Pope,
being baptized by a Ministry, and into a Church, of which he is the Head. But
the contrary is proved,

1. From the express form of the Baptismal Covenant, which only tyeth us to
Christ and his Universal Church, and makes us Christians. But to be a
Christian dedicated to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is one thing, and to be
a part of the Pastoral Charge of A. B. or N. N. is another thing.

2. What particular Church was the Eunuch, Act. 8. baptized into? Not that of
Jerusalem, for he was going from it, never like to see it more. Not that in
Ethiopia, for there was none till he began it. If you say, of Philips Church:
1. I pray you, where was that? 2. And how prove you it? 3. Specially if it was
Philip the Deacon that had no Church, being no Bishop.

3. May not men be baptized in Turkey, or among other Infidels, or Indians,
where there is no Church? And is the first baptized man among them, a Church
himself? Paul thanketh God that he baptized no more of the Corinthians, lest
they should think that he baptized into his own name. And does every Baptizer
baptize to himself, or to his Bishop? A man may baptize out of all Diocesses,
or in another's.

X. As to your next Assertion, I grant, that when a Bishop or a beggar speaks
the Commands of God, and a King speaks against it, we must follow that Bishop
or beggar, rather than the King, because this is but obeying God before men.
But supposing that it is a thing indifferent, and but circa sacra, and not a
proper part of the Agent Pastors Office, I confess to you, I will obey the King
before the Bishop.

1. Because it is a thing that is under the Power of the King to command; and
if so, the King is the Supreme, and not the Bishop.

2. Bishops themselves are Subjects of the King, and owe him obedience.
Therefore rule not over or before him in matters belonging to his Office.

3. Bishops are chosen by the King, (for I suppose no man takes the Dean and
Chapters choice for more than a Ceremony, that knows it); if the King command
me to Preach at one hour, or one place, and the Bishop at another, or to use
for Uniformity such a Translation, Meter, Liturgy, Utensils, Garments, etc and
the Bishops others, I will obey the King before the Bishop. But if either or
both command me to sin, I will obey neither so; and if they would take me off
from that which Christ has made a real part of my own Office (as commanding
that I shall preach and pray in no words but such as they prescribe, etc.) I
think neither has power to do this.

But Bishop Bilson of Christian Obedience, and Bishop Andrews in his Tortura
Toetis, and Buckeridg of Rochester, and Grotius de imprrio sum* Potest. circa
Sacra, have said so much of the Power of Kings about Religion, as that I think
I need not add any more.

And by the same Arguments that you will absolve me from obeying if the King
forbid me to Preach, by the same you absolve, if the Bishop forbid me. If I may
disobey Constantius and Valens, I may disobey Eusebius Nicomed. Theognis Maris.
If I may disobey Theodosius junior, Anastasius, Zeno, Justinian, I may disobey
Petrus Moggus, Dioscorus, Severus, etc. But you will much cross your ^nds if
you tell the Londoners that they may preach and worship God though the King
forbid them, but not at all if the Bishop forbid them. For he that exalts
himself, or is sinfully exalted by others, shall be brought low. If the
reverence of the King were not greater in England than of the Bishops, the
consciences of many thousands would stick but little at disobedience. There are
so many cases first to be resolved. As,

1. Whether such Diocesans deposing all Parochial Churches (and Bishops) and
reducing them to Chapels or parts only of a Church, be not against Christ's Law?

2. Whether they destroy not the ancient order of particular Churches (Bishops)
and Discipline?

3. Who made their office, and by what power?

4. Who chose and called them to it?

5. Whether their Commands be not null, as contrary to Gods?

6* How far Communion with them that silence hundreds of faithful Ministers,
and set up in their stead -- etc. is lawful? Many such questions the people are
not so easily satisfied in, as you are.

XI. And the three last all set together, look with an ill design: The Preface
to Dr. Rich. Cousins Tables, tells the King, That the Church Government here is
the Kings, or derived from him, and dependant on him; and Grotius de Imperio
sum* potest. proves at large the Power of Kings circa sacra, as does
Spalatensis, and many more; and that Canons are but good counsel, till the King
make them Laws. And we know no Lawmakers but the King and Parliament. But if
the Church be the Expounders of the Liturgy, Rubric and Canons, Articles and
Acts of Uniformity, and out of Convocation-time, the Bishops be the Church, and
the Archbishops be the Rulers of the Bishops, (that swear obedience to them)
this has a dangerous aspect: For then it is in the power of the Bishops (if
not of the Archbishops only) to put a sense upon our 39 Articles, Rubricks,
etc. consistent with Popery or Heresy, and so to change the Religion of the
Kingdom, without King or Parliament, or against them at their pleasure.

And thus Officers of man's making, who become a Church of man's devising, may
have advantage by this and the former Articles, to destroy Godliness,
Christianity and Humanity.

Indeed by the Preface to the Liturgy, the Bishop is made the Expounder of any
thing doubtful in the Book; and by the Index the Act of Uniformity is made part
of the Book. But this affrighteth me the more from declaring:

1. Because I must consent to all the Penalties and Impositions of the Act it
self.

2. And the Bishop, Exposition is limited, so that it must be contrary to
nothing in the Book.

Thus I have given you the reasons of my destructive Conference.

If I had been with you, and we had been to enter upon any dispute that tends
to satisfaction, I would have endeavored to avoid the common frustraters of
Disputes, 1. By ambiguous words: 2. And subjects that are no subjects:
Therefore if you desire any such dispute:

I. I entreat you to write me down your sense of some terms which we shall
frequently use, (and I will do the like of any at your desire): As what you
mean, 1. By the word Bishop. 2. By a Church. 3. By a particular Church. 4. By a
Diocese and Diocesan Church. 5. By a National Church. 6. By the Universal
Church. 7. By Church Government and Jurisdiction. 8. By Schism. I shall dispute
no terms unexplained, lest one take them in one sense, and the other in
another, and so we dispute but about a sound of words.

II. I desire that the denied Subject of the Question may not be taken for
granted, instead of being proved.

On these terms (supposing the common Laws of Disputation, especially avoiding
words that have no determinate sense) I shall not refuse whenever you invite
me; and I am able to debate with you any of these points that I am concerned
in; especially, whether my Preaching Christ's Gospel as I do, be my sin, or my
duty? And if our great distance in Principles put either of us upon r^^sons
that seem dishonouring to the person opposed, we shall I hope (...) that it is
the opinion only that is directly intended. But (...) opinion is the persons
opinion, if it be bad, is a dish^n^^r, whi^^ the owner only is guilty of, and
the opponent cannot (...) must not forbear to open the evil of the cause, for
avoiding the dishonor of the owner; but must the rather open it, in hope that
the owner will disown it, when he understands truly what it is. For I suppose
it is evidence of Truth that we desire.

In Conclusion, remember I pray you, 1. That it is not the ancient Episcopacy
(which was in Cyprians days; yea, which agrees with Epiphanius's Intimations,
and Petavius excellent Notes thereon, in Haeres. 69.) which I deny. And I
conjecture that at this day in England there are more Episcopal than
Presbyterian silenced Non-conformists.

2. That what sort of Prelacy or higher Rulers I dare not subscribe to, yet I
can live quietly and submissively under, though not obey them by sinning
against God, or breaking my Vows of Baptism or Ordination, and perfidiously
leaving souls to Satan. Nothing more threateneth the subversion of the
Church Government than swearing men to approve of all th^t's in it. Many can
submit and live in peace, that dare not subscribe or swear Approbation. It was
the and caet^ra Oath 1640, that constrained me to th^se searches which (...) me
a Nonconformist. It is an easy ma^^er for Overdoers to add but a cla^se or two
more to their Oaths and Subscriptions, which shall ma^e almost all the
conscionable Ministers of the Kingdom Nonconformists.

3. Whenever notorious necessity cease by the sufficient number and q^ality
of Conforming Preachers, I will cease Preaching in England (But death is liker
first to silence me.)

Though I take my Conforming to be a Complex of heinous sins, should I be
guilty of it; yet till I am called, I persuade none to Nonformity for fear of
casting them (occasionally) out of the Ministry, preferring their work before
the change of their judgment till such endeavors are clearly made by duty.)
But all your endeavor, as far as ever I perceived, is not so much to draw us
to Conformity, as to persuade us to give over Preaching Christ's Gospel, so
contrary are our designs. 1 These 2.15, 16. Methinks is a fearful Text. And so
are the words of the Liturgy before the Sacrament, If any of you be a hinderer
of Gods Word -- repent -- or take not this Sacrament, lest Satan enter into
you, as he did into Judas, and fill you, etc.

FINIS.

