THE ARROGANCE OF REASON AGAINST Divine Revelations, Repressed.

OR, Proud Ignorance the cause of Infidelity, and of Men's Quarrelling with The
Word of God.



LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Tho. Underhil. 1655.

Romans 11. 33, 34. O The depth of the riches* both of the Wisdom and Knowledge
of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! For
who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Romans 9.
20. Nay but, O man, who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Job 37: 23.
Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out, He is excellent in Power, and
in Judgment, and in plenty of Justice. Job 40. 8* Will thou also disannul my
Judgments, will thou condemn me, that thou may be righteous? Psalm. 73. 16,
17. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me; until I went into
the Sanctuary of God, then I understood their end. Job 42. 2, 3. I know that
thou can do everything, and that no thought can be withheld from thee: Who
is he that hides counsel without knowledge; therefore have I uttered that I
understood not, things too wonderful for me which I knew not. 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19.
Let no man deceive himself; if any man among you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. For the wisdom of this world
is foolishness with God. 1 Cor. 1. 25: The foolishness of God is wiser then
men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men.
Read Isai. 40. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

THE Arrogance of REASON against Divine Relations, Repressed.
JOHN 3. 9. Nicodemus answered and said unto him; How can these things be?
IN the beginning of this Chapter you have a Lecture read by the Great Teacher
of the Church, to a Scholar that was newly entering into his School He is yet
but a Catechumenus in preparation to be a Christian, rather then one indeed;
having good thoughts of Christ, but not believing in him as the Messiah, nor
engaged by Baptism to be one of his Disciples: And accordingly does Christ suit
his Doctrine to his condition, and teach him first the great Principle of
Christianity. What success it had at first, we find in the Text, but not what
was the issue at last: Though by other Texts we may probably conjecture.

First, The Scholar is by name, Nicodemus; by Sect, a Pharisee; by place, a
Ruler of the Jews, or one of their great Council. For the frame of his mind,
the degree of his preparatory knowledge or belief, you may discern it; 1. By
the season of his coming; 2. By the motive that prevailed with him to come; And
3. by the confession that he makes of his belief. From all which you may see,
first, that he believed that there was a God, and that it belonged to God to
teach mankind; and that it was his way to teach by men; and that it was man's
duty to seek after Gods teaching from his Messengers, and come to them and
request it; and that who ever could give sufficient evidence of his Mission
from God, should be heard by men; and that Jesus Christ did truly and
undoubtedly work Miracles; and that such Miracles as Christ wrought, were an
undoubted proof, that God was with him. All these things it is apparent he did
believe by these words, Verse. 2. [ Rabbi we know that thou art a Teacher come
from God; for no man can do th^se miracles that thou do, except God be with
him.]

Secondly, From hence also you see, that it was the evidence of Christ's
Miracles, that had thus far convinced him, and drove him to Christ, as a
Teacher come from God, and consequently one that was to be credited: But that
he was the Messiah, here is yet no confession.

Thirdly, And as his belief was but preparatory, so this change upon his heart
does appear to be no better: For he has ^^t yet learned the lesson of
Self-denial, and preferring the known truth and duty (of seeking after the
mind of God from his Messengers) before the credit of the world, or his life;
and therefore he comes to Jesus but by night, as being afraid to own him in the
face of his enemies.

Yet does not Christ cast this cowardice in his teeth to his discouragement,
but fitteth his medicine to the strength of the Patient, as well as to the
disease: For there was more malice and raging zeal against the truth, among the
Jews, then among the Gentiles; and so more dangers and sufferings, which a
novice might not be so fit to encounter with. And therefore Paul when he went
up to Jerusalem, did Preach the Gospel privately to them of worldly reputation,
which among the Gentiles, and inferior Jews, he preaches publicly; lest
through the prevalency of men's pride or cowardice, his physic should not do
its work, but he should run or labor in vain, Gal. 2. 2.

The first and great thing that Christ presently falls upon, is to let this man
know, that this much will not serve his turn (to confess the Miracles, and so
the Divine Mission of Christ;) but that he must also truly believe the office
that he is sent upon, even to be the Messiah, the Mediator; and the Redeemer of
the World, and must openly be engaged to him as such a one by Baptism, and so
own him and confess him before the World, and receive his renewing Spirit, for
the illumination of his understanding, the purifying and quickening of his
heart, and th^reforming, and afterguidance of his life.

This work Christ calls by the name of the New Birth or Regeneration, and
tells Nicodemus, [That except he be born again of water, and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.] Not that there is the same necessity of
the washing by water, and the purifying by the Spirit. For by [ water] is
principally meant that Covenant which Baptism did sign; even the confession of
Christ, and dedication to him in the relation of redeemed Ones, Children,
Disciples, and Subjects, on our part; and his re-engagement and relation to us:
Yet [ water] it self is the thing nearly signified in the Word, and the use of
it is of Divine appointment, and not to be neglected where it may be used; but
the necessity to Salvation is placed in the relation or thing signified. As its
common to say to a Soldier of the enemies, [ If thou will change thy General,
and take the Princes Colors and fight for him, th^^ may have pardon for thy
rebellion.] Where [ taking Colours] is a duty; but the necessity is placed in
the change of his relation and practice; for if there were no Colors at hand
to give him, yet if he be listed as a Soldier (or if not listed, yet if by open
profession and action, joined to them) it will be accepted; or else as Gr^tius
expounds it, by [ Water and the Spirit] is meant, a washing, clensing Spirit;
of which, see him in Lo^.

This change that is here called the [ New birth] is not the new Creation of a
substance, or destruction of our former substance, or faculties: For we have
still the same natural powers of understanding and willing; But it is the
change of the Disposition, Habits, and Acts of those faculties: And (with
submission to the contrary minded, I conceive that) it is not only our real
qualitative change that is here called the New Birth; but that the word is more
comprehensive (as I before expressed) including our new relation to God in
Christ, as Sons and Disciples to Christ, and Servants, Subjects, or Soldiers
under him; with a removal from our former relations which we were in by
corruption, and are inconsistent with these: So that it comprehends both our
new relations to God, to the Redeemer, and to his Church; where we have a new
Father, Husband, Lord, and Fellow Servants; new Brothers, and Sisters, and
Inheritance (though yet we renounce not our Natural Brethren, Parents, and
Inheritance, as the Popish Monastical Votaries conceive, any further then as
they are contrary to the Interest of Christ.)

The Reasons that persuade me to take Regeneration in this extent* are,

First, Because it is the entrance into our whole New State that is here so
called, without any limiting expression.

Secondly, Because we are said to be born of [ Water] as well as the Spirit:
And certainly Baptism does as nearly and truly signify our Justification, and
Relative Change, and new Covenant Engagements, and Adoption, and Church
Membership, as it does our Qualitative Renovation. Nor do I see how any fair
Exposition can be given of that saying [ Except a man be born of Water] which
shall not include the change of our relations, as well as of our dispositions.
And the like I may say of other Texts, which mention Regeneration, which I will
not now so far digress as to recite.

Having seen what Christ teaches Nicodemus first, let us next see the success
of his doctrine. Nicodemus fastening too much upon the Metaphorical term of
being [ born again,] and withal not understanding the meaning of it, nor the
scope of Christ, he presently expresses his ignorance and unbelief by this
question, [ How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter the second time
into his mothers womb, and be born?] Hereupon Christ returning an Explicatory
Answer, telling him not only the nature of the new birth, but also the
mysteriousness of its causes in the effecting of it, and showing a plain reason
from Natural Agents, Why the mysteriousness of this should not make it seem
incredible; yet does Nicodemus return a second Answer like the first [ How can
these things be?] Which words do import not an absolute unbelief of the truth
of what Christ had said, but a great ignorance of his meaning, and a not
discerning of that evidence fully, which should have caused full belief; but a
strong apprehension of the improbability of the thing affirmed, and thereupon a
great doubting of the truth of the affirmation.

And note here the aggravations of Nicodemus his fault, first, They were the
words of one that he himself confessed to be a teacher come from God, and that
sealed his Doctrine by such Miracles as none could do, except God were with
him. And does God send any Messenger with a lie? or any Teacher that knows
not what he teaches? or will he seal untruths, or senseless absurdities, with
such unquestionable miracles? Sure a man that was once convinced, that God sent
the Messenger, and sealed the message, should be confident, that the matter of
it is divine, and should never once suspect it of untruth!

Secondly, Though Christ did with frequent asseverations, aver the truth of his
Doctrine, yet did Nicodemus stagger through unbelief.

Thirdly, It was the very Catechism and Rudiments of Piety, and Christianity
which was so strange to him.

Fourthly, The term by which Christ expresses Spiritual things, he
understands all in a carnal sense; yea, and after that Christ had told him
plainly what birth he means, not carnal, producing a fleshly Creature, but of
Water and the Spirit, producing a Spiritual Creature, yet does not Nicodemus
understand him for all this.

Fifthly, Yet was this man a Ruler of the Jews, even one of the great Sanedrim,
and one reputed skilful in the Law; one that professed himself a guide of the
blind, a light of them which are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a
teacher of Babes, which had the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law;
one of those that boasted of God, and of the Law, Romans 2. 17, 18, 19, 20. Yet
he that should teach others, had not learnt these Rudiments himself.

Sixthly, And when Christ used a familiar instance, to show him that things are
not therefore incredible, because invisible, or because we know not the nature,
cause, and end of them. We may know that it is, when we cannot know what is it,
or whence, or why it is, or whether it tends, as in the blowing of the wind is
evident; yet does not Nicodemus cease his doubting, on this account, but
asks, [ How can these things be?] the spirituality, and mysteriousness of the
thing, made it seem improbable to his uninformed intellect; and the seeming
improbability made him doubt of the verity. Because it was past his
apprehension to conceive, how it should be, therefore he doubted, whether it
were true, or not: He had not so much rational consciousness of his own
ignorance, or so much confidence in a Teacher sent from God, and sealing his
Doctrine by Miracles, as to acquiesce as a Learner in his Teachers credit,
concerning the verity of the thing, while he was seeking to get a clearer
discovery of its nature, rise, and ends.

So that here were all these sins together manifested in this answer, Great
ignorance, even in a Ruler, unbelief, doubting of the conclusion, when he had
acknowledged the premises; an unteachableness (in part) when he professed
himself to come to learn; an arrogant conceit of the capaciousness of his
understanding, as if Christ's words, or the plain truth should be sooner
suspected, then his shallow capacity.

From this Picture we may well conclude what is the ordinary shape of man's
corrupted disposition; and we may all know our selves by knowing Nicodemus. And
from hence I may raise this Observation of us all.

Doct. The corrupt nature of man is more pron^ to question the truth of Gods
Word, then to se^ and confess their own ignorance and incapacity; and ready to
doubt, whether the things that Christ reveals are true, when they themselves
do not know the nature, cause, and reason of them. They will make every thing
which they understand not, to seem improbable; and all such improbabilities
will make it seem incredible; and the incredibility of a part, makes the whole
seem incredible: And thus men will be Infidels, or seed their infidelity by
every thing that themselves are ignorant of; and make it the chief reason why
they will not believe or learn, because they do not already know, and fully
understand the things to be learnt and believed. And so God must be accused in
every thing that Moles and Worms are ignorant of.

When the Jews acknowledged the Prophets to be of God, and sometime would
profess to receive and obey any message that God should send by them; yet when
they heard what it was in particular which he sent, then if it did not suit
with their interest and carnal Reason, they would not believe it, or obey it,
but rather persecute the Messenger, and think that, sure such a message could
never come from God. So that they must like the particular matter, before they
would believe that it was of God. And so Gods Word shall not be Gods Word,
unless it please the blind and carnal Reason of man.

So you may find they used the Prophet Jeremy, Jere. 42. They entreat the
Prophet to go for them to God, by prayer, and for advice, and bind themselves
with seeming resolution to obey, saying, [ The Lord be a true and faithful
witness between us, if we do not even according to all things, for the which
the Lord thy God shall send thee to us: Whether it be good, or whether it be
evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God, to whom we send thee, that it
may be well with us when we obey, etc.] One would have thought that these men
would have believed, and obeyed any thing that God should send to them, after
such a vow as this: And yet when they heard that the message was contrary to
their own minds and opinions, Chap. 43. 1, 2. its said, That [ all the proud
men] gave this answer [ Thou speak falsely, the Lord our God has not sent
thee to say this.]

A full instance you have of the like corrupt disposition, in John 6. When
Christ does but tell them that he is the Bread that came down from Heaven, the
Jews murmur, Verse. 41. But when he insisted on it, that [ He was the
Living-Bread, and that he would give his Flesh for the life of the World, and
that he that eats him, should live for ever.] These Spiritual things they did
not understand, but understood him carnally; and thereupon reject the truth,
because they understood it not. So that Verse. 52. they fall a striving among
themselves against Christ's words, saying, [ How can this man give us his flesh
to eat?] Even like Nicodemus [How can these things be?] they will not believe
it is true, or that it can be, till they know themselves, How it can be? And
when Christ yet pressed home the same mystery further, even some of his own [
Disciples when they heard this, said, This is an hard saying, who can hear it.]
Verse. 60. And though Christ proceed to open the mystery to them, and speak that
more plainly which he had spoken Allegorically; yet its said, Verse. 66. That [
From that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him;]
insomuch, as he asks the twelve, whether they would go also? intimating the
greatness of the number of revolters, upon this slight occasion; forsooth,
because he spoke that which they understood not, and would have taught them
what they had not, humility and patience enough to learn; and because they did
not reach it at the first hearing, therefore they thought it improbable and
incredible: Many more such instances we might give you from Scripture, but
alas, it is a truth that needs no further proof; there are as many living
witnesses of it, as there are men on earth; the unregenerate being conquered by
this corruption, and the regenerate weakened, and hindered much by the remnants
of it.

For the further improvement of this Observation, I shall, first, open further
the nature and workings of this corruption; secondly, and then show the Reasons
of it; and lastly, make some Application of all.

1. Sometime the weak intellect of man, is stalled at the quiddity or nature of
things; and then being arrogant, as well as ignorant, it will not believe that
there is such a thing, because he cannot reach to know what it is.

On this account some question, whether man have an Immortal Soul, because they
cannot reach to know (as they expect) what that Soul is. And some will not
believe, that there is such a thing as the Spirit of God dwelling in his
people, because they know not what that Spirit is: And some think that there is
no such thing as inheren^ sanctifying Grace, or the Image of God renewed upon
the Souls of the regenerate; but that all talk of these Spiritual supernatural
changes, are mere fancies and conceits; and all, because they know not what
this sanctity and gracious inclination is. They think there is no such thing as
Communion with God, because they know not what it is; nor any such thing as a
Spirit of Prayer, because they know not what it is.

And indeed, if this were a wise and right reasoning, then there should be
nothing in Being, but what we know the formal nature of; which is as gross a
conceit, as most in the World. What if you know not what an Angel or Spirit is?
does it follow that there is none? What if you know not what is beyond the
visible Creatures out of sight? does it follow, that there is nothing beyond
our sight? By this Rule, you may say, that there is no God; nay, all the World
must needs say so, if this were right reasoning; for no man has a true formal
knowledge of Gods Essence; and therefore must say, there is no God, because
they know not what God is: Nay, its a great question, Whether such men must not
deny the Being of almost all Gods Creation. For it is but little that we know
of the forms of things, in comparison of what we are ignorant of. You know not
what the fire is, nor what the light is, nor what the air and wind is; for all
the great pretenses of the world, men are ignorant of the formal nature of
these. And will you therefore say, that there is no such thing as fire, or
light, or air or wind? You know not the formal nature of the Sun or Moon; is
there therefore no Sun or Moon. Alas, there is not a pile of grass, nor the
smallest creeping thing, that you thoroughly know, and yet you know that such
things there are. A Beast knows not what a Man is, and yet he apprehends that
there is such a Creature: And no man thoroughly knows what he is himself, and
yet he knows that he is.

And for the Soul it self, it is a most easy and obvious truth, that we have
such a Soul; but it is not so easy to give a definition of it. A^ the way to
know that you have eyes in your head, and eyesight, is not by seeing those eyes
or eye sight; but by seeing other things by them. For the eye was not made to
see it self, nor do we see the sight of the eye; but by that eye and sight we
see other things, and thereby know that we have eyes and sight. For he that
has not eyes and eyesight, can see nothing at all; so the intellective Soul
was not made directly to understand it self, and it^ own intellection; but to
understand other things, and thereby to know that we have an intellectual Soul.
For he that understands, does understand something, and thereby he
understands that he does understand, and so, that he has an intellectual
faculty: For he that has not an intellectual Soul, can understand nothing at
all; (yet I will not presume to determine the controversy, Whether the
Intellect do know its own, and the Wills elicit acts, by direct intuition of
the act it self?) Its as unreasonable a thing then, to doubt whether we have
such intellectual Souls, because they know not themselves directly o^ fully; as
long as they know other things, as it i^ to doubt, whether we have eyes,
because they s^^ not themselves, as long as they see external Objects.

2. Moreover, this corruption does often di^cover it self, in that men will not
believe the tru^^ of the thing revealed, because they cannot rea^^ to
understand the causes of it; so many w(...) question Gods decrees of
Predestination and P(...)terition, because they cannot reach the cau(...) And
many will deny the very work of Creatio(...) because they cannot know the way
of Creatio(...) They will question, whether they have immor(...) Souls, because
they cannot tell how they ^^^ caused; whether by seminal traduction and
p(...)*pagation, or by immediate Creation? They (...) deny the work of Gods
differencing effect(...) Grace, because they know not how it is given o(...) or
wrought in the Soul.

And as well might they deny, that they have flesh or bones, till they better
know how they were caused in the Womb: And they may as well deny, that they
have any blood in their bodies, any nutrition or augmentation, till they better
know the mystery of Sanguification, and other n^tri^ive works: And as well may
they say, That the Sun does not shine, or warm us, till they know how it is
that these are caused by the Sun. They know not how the Plants are animated,
and specified, nor how they suck their nutriment from the Earth, and yet they
know that such things are: They know not how the silly Snail does form her
Shell, or Nature for her; nor how the Fe^thers of the Peacock are so
beautified; and the several sorts of Birds, Beasts, Plants, Fruits, are so
diversified and adorned; and yet they know that such things are: Or as Christ
tells Nicodemus here, [ The wind* blows where it lists, and you hear the
sound thereof, but know not whence it comes etc.] And do we therefore say,
That there is no win^, because we know not whence it comes, or what is the
inferior cause of it? Will you say, That the Sea does not ebb and flow, or
there are no Earthquake, Thunder, and Lightning, because men do so little know
the causes of them. Faelix qui potuit etc. It is not every man's lot to reach
such causes; nor any man's on Earth to know the causes of all things which he
knows to be; nor fully the causes of any one.

3. Moreover, This folly of man's heart does discover it self thus: In, that men
will not believe the truths revealed by God, because they cannot see Gods Ends
and Reasons, and the use of the things. Many an evident Truth is rejected by
the proud wit of foolish man, because God has not told them why he has so
determined and ordered the business; or if he have told it, yet they understand
it not: So many Infidels and Socinians do deny Christ's Satisfaction as a
Ransom, and Sacrifice for sin, because they cannot see any reason for it, or
necessity of it: They cannot see, but God may pardon sin without satisfaction.
And then, what need of all this ado? or, what likelihood, that God would lay so
much on his Son, or make so great a business of this work, for our good, and
his glory, if all was needless? And thus many deny the Universal extent of his
satisfaction, as being for all mankind, because they are not able to see the
reason and use of it. They thrust in their dead quorsum as a sufficient answer
to the most express words of God: And ask, what good will it do men to be
ransomed, and not saved? They fear not to say, That this is a thing unbeseeming
God, and such a weakness, as men would not be guilty of: So that if we can
prove that such a thing there is* they will not fear to charge it on God as his
unreasonable weakness. The like we might show in many other points.

And must God unlock to us the Reasons, Ends* and Uses, of his Truths and
Works, before we will believe that such things are? We will allo^ Parents to
conceal the Reasons and Ends of many precepts from their Children; and a Prince
to conceal the Reasons of many Laws, and to kee^ to himself the A^cana Imperii,
the mysteries of State; and must God open all before he can be believed? Is not
the Wisdom, and the Will of God, the most satisfying Reason in the World? Must
you have proper Reasonings and Intentions in God? or will you have a cause of
the first cause, or an end of the ultimate end of all? Al^s, how little do the
wisest men know of the use and ends of many a Creature, over their heads, and
under their feet, which their eyes behold? yea, how little know they of the use
and ends of many a part of their own bodies? And yet they know that such things
there are.

What abundance of why's has an Arrogant Infidel, upon the reading of
Scripture, from the beginning of Gene^^s to the end of the Revelation; which
must all be satisfied before he will believe? Of all which, God will one day
satisfy them; but not in the manner as they would have prescribed him.

4. Another expression of this Arrogant Ignorance, is, When men will not
believe the several truths of God, because they are not able to reconcile them,
and place each one in its own order, and see the Method and Body of Truth in
its true Locations and Proportion: Nay, perhaps they will believe none, because
they cannot discern the harmony.

What abundance of seeming contradictions in Scripture do rise up in the eyes
of an Ignorant Infidel? as strange apparitions do to a distracted man; or as
many colors do before the inflamed or distempered eye. These self-conceited
ignorant S^uls, do imagine all to be impossible which exceeds their
knowledge; and because they cannot s^e the sweet consent of Scripture, and how
those places do suit, and fortify ^^ch other, which to them seemed to
contradict each other, therefore they think that no one ^ls^ can see it; no not
^od himself They are like an ignor^nt fellow in ^ Watch-makers sh^p, that
thinks no body can ^^^ all the loose ^eeces together, and make a Wat^h of them,
because he cannot. When he has tried many ways, and c^^^ot hit it, he casts
all by, and concludes, that its impossible.

And upon this account many cast away particular truths* though they will not
c^st aw^y all. Some cannot reconcile the efficiency of the ^p^^i^, with that of
the Word, in the Conversion and Confirmation of sinners; and therefore some
exclude one, and some the other, or own but the empty names; some cannot
reconc^le the Law, and the Gospel: And too great a part of the Teachers, in the
Christian World, have been so troubled to reconcile Gods grace, with man's
^reewill, that of old, many did too much exclude Grace; and of late too many
exclude the natural liberty of the will, upon a supposition of the
inconsistency; only the names of both were still owned.

Many cannot reconci^e the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, with the
necessity of man's endeavors, and inherent righteousness; and therefore one must
be straightened or denied. Many cannot reconcile common love and grace, with that
which is special and proper to the Elect; and therefore some deny one, and some
another. The like might be said of many other cases, wherein the Arrogance of
man's wit has cast out Gods truth: If both parts be never so express, yet they
are upon this unbelieving questioning strain, [ How can these things be?] How
can these agree together? How can both be true? when yet its evident, that God
has owned both.

It is certain, that the Truths of Gods Word are one perfect well joynted Body;
and the perfect symmetry or proportion, is much of its beauty: It is certain,
that Method is an excellent help in knowing Divine things: and that no man can
know Gods truths perfectly, till he see them all as in one Scheam or Body, with
one view, as it were, and so sees the Location of each Truth, and the respect
that it has to all the rest; not only to see that there is no contradiction,
but how every Truth does fortify the rest. All this therefore is exceeding
desirable, but it is not every man's lot to attain it, nor any man's in this
world perfectly, or near to a perfection: It is true, that the sight of all
Gods frame of the Creation, uno intuitu, in all its parts, with all their
respects to each other, would acquaint us with abundance more of the glory of
it, then by looking on the Members peace-meal we can attain: But who can see
them thus, but God? at least, what mortal eye can do it? And we shall never in
this life attain to see the full Body of Divine Revealed-Truths, in that method
and due proportion, as is necessary to the knowledge of its ful^ beauty. It is
a most perfectly melodious Instrument; but every man cannot set it in tu^e, so
as to pe^ce^ve the delectable harmony.

What then? because we cannot know all, shall we know nothing, or deny all?
Because we cannot see the whose frame of the world, in its junctures and
proportion, shall we say, That there is no world, or, that the parts are not
rightly situated* or ^e^gn one to be inconsistent with the rest? We must rather
receive first* that which is most clear, and labor by degrees to see through
the obscurities that beset the rest. And if we first find from God, that both
are truths, let us receive them, and learn how to reconcile them after, as we
can: And if we cannot reach it, its arrogance therefore to think that it is not
to be done, and to be so highly conceited of our own understandings.

5. Another way by which this Arrogant I^sidel^ty works, is this, When men
will not believe any revealed truth of God, unless they can see a possibility
of accomplishing the matter by natural means. And therefore, when ever in
reading the Scripture, they come to a work that ^ass^th the power of the
Creature, the N^^^dem^tes stagger at it through unbelief, and s^y, [ How can
these things be?] And the fixed Infidels with Julian deride it: When they read
of the Scripture miracles; they cannot believe them because they are miracles.
Is this a likely matter, say th^^ that such and such things should be? And why
is it unlikely? Because it is too hard for God? What I does his Creature know
his infinite power? And can you set him his bounds, and say, Thus far God can
go, and no further? Thus much God can do, and no more? Is it ever the more
difficult to God, because it is impossible to such as we? Will you say, That a
horse cannot carry you on his back, because a fly cannot? Creatures may be
compared to Creatures; but between the Creator; and the Creature, there is no
comparison. Have you read how God posed Job in point of power and knowledge? (
Job 38. 39, 40, 41.) But who is he that has posed God? What is that work that
should be difficult to him, that by his Word or Will did make all the Worlds?
Are they greater works then those which he has certainly done, that you speak
of so incredulously? If you had never seen the Sun, or Moon, or Stars, or
Earth, or Sea, and had merely found it written, that God made such a World, it
is like you would as doubtingly have said, [ How can these things be?] If you
had no more seen the Light or Sun, then you have seen the Angels, or Souls of
men its like you would have as little believed, that there is such a thing as
Light or a Sun, as you now do, that there are Angels and Immortal Souls. But I
hope you are satisfied in the things you see; and may not they shame your
incredulity of the things you do not see? You see there is a Sun, and Moon, and
Firmament, and Earth; you know these had either a Maker and Cause* or else were
eternal* and as an eternal cause to themselves. If they were eternal, or made
themselves, then they are the first Being and Cause, and so are gods. And is it
not more reasonable to believe one God, then so many? And to believe that God
is a perfect incomprehensible, superin-tellectual Being, then to believe, that
the s^nseless Earth is a god? Is it not more ^easonable to conclude, That this
one Perfect Eternal God made all things, then that every Stone did make it
self? or, That the Sun or Moon, or any Creature made it self, and the rest? If
you believe, That all things are the Works of God, then you see that with your
eyes that may shame your foolish dark-incre^ulity. Do you see a greater Work,
and think it unlikely, that the same power should do a lesser? Do you see so
much of the World that was m^d^ by a word, and do you ask, [ How can these
things be?] when you read of any miracle or unusual work? If it were your self,
or such as you, that had been the doer of such works, you might well say, [ How
can these things be?] But God is not as man in his Works, or Word.

6. Yea, many times when men do but hear, read, or think of some Objection
against the Truth of Gods revelations, which they cannot tell how to answer
themselves, they presently begin to stagger at the whole Truth, and question it
on every such slight occasion. If any new difficulty arise in their way, they
are in the case of Nicodemus, saying, [ How can these things be?] Though they
have heard never so many Arguments to confirm them, and have been long
receiving them, and seen an evidence of Truth in them, yet every new cavil or
hard Objection does seem to enervate all this evidence.

If men were as foolish and incredulous in the matters of the World, their
folly would easily appear to all men: When a man has studied Physic seven
years, or twenty years, he shall meet with many new difficulties, and doubtful
c^ses; and many old difficulties will never be ov^rco^e: And yet he will not
therefore throw away all, and forsake his study or profession. W^^l a Student
in Law give over all his study, upon every occurring difficulty, or seeming
contradiction in the Laws? If any Students in the Universities should follow
this example, and doubt of all that they have learned, upon every Objection
which they are unable to answer, they would be bu(...) Proficie^^s: Or if every
Apprentice that is learning his trade, will forsake it every time that he is
sta^led, and at a loss* he would be long before he set up shop: On this course
all men should lose all their time lives, and labor, by doing all in v^i^, and
undoing again, by going forward and backward, and so know nothing, nor resolve
of any thing.

It is most certain, that all men are very imperfect in knowledge, and
especially in the highest mysteries; and there is none so high as those in
Theology, about God, and Man's Soul, and our Redemption, and our Everlasting
State. And doubtless where men are so defective in knowledge, there must still
be difficulties in their way, and many knots which they cannot untie* Can you
expect till you are perfect in knowledge, to see the whole frame of Truth so
clearly, as to be able to answer every Objection that is made against it? Why
do you not lay together the evidences on both sides, and consider which of the
two is the clearer case? What if you cannot answer all that is brought by the
Devil and Cavillers, against the Truth? Can you answer all that Christ and his
Servants say for it? I dare say you cannot, unless you take every impertinent
vanity or falsehood for an answer. God needs not you to be the Defenders of his
Truth: He is able to vindicate it himself against all the enemies in the World?
Otherwise, if he had called you chiefly to this work, he would have furnished
you for it. But he first calls you to be Scholars to learn that truth, that
he may help you over all difficulties in his time and way.

We are next to show the Causes of this unhappy distemper; why it is, or whence
it comes to pa^s, that men are so prone to doubt of Gods Truth, upon every
difficulty or mystery* that is in their way? And to question all, when they
are stalled in any thing; and to deny the very things that are certain, when
they are puzzled, and at a loss, but about the Manner, Cause, Reason, or Ends
of them. And among others, the Causes of this great Sin, are these following.

1. Man is naturally desirous of Knowledge, and to see things in their own
Evidence And therefore, he is often an unmannerly impatient suitor to be
presently admitted into the presence Chamber of Truth* and to see her naked
without delay. Nature will hardly be satisfied with believing; which is a
receiving of Truth upon trust from another, no, though he give us the most
convincing Arguments of his Veracity; no, though it be God himself: Nothing
will satisfy Nature, but se^ing. I^ the wisest men in the World tell them,
that they see it, or know it; if the workers of miracles, Christ and his
Apostles, tell them that they see it; if God himself tells them that he sees
it; yet all this does not satisfy them, unless they may see it themselves.
They think this is but to be kept at a distance, without door, and what may be
within, they cannot tell: Every man has an understanding of his own, and
therefore would have a sight of the evidence himself; and so have a nee^er
knowledge of the thing, and not only a knowledge of the Truth of the thing by
the Testimony of another, how infallible soever. And therefore we are all
prone, when difficulties seem great, to say with Thomas, [Except I see, I will
not believe.] John 20. 25. Bu^ [ blessed are they that have not seen, and yet
have believed.] v. 29. How far this desire of knowledge is in nature as from.
God, and how far it is in Nature, as corrupted, I will not stand to debate; but
that it is in us we feel: And this is a preparative Reason of our doubting and
dis-satisfaction, if not a proper cause.

2. This nature of man is yet so much more desirous to know, that though it do
see things in their own proper evidence, yet is it not satisfied, unless it
also see the whole, and comprehend all things with all their Reasons, Causes,
and Modes. Man affects a certain infiniteness in knowledge; he would know all
that is knowable; and so would be as God in knowing. And if he be ignorant of
any part, he rem ineth unsatisfied, and so is ready to quarrel with all; and
like froward children that throw away their meat or clothes, or what else they
have, because they cannot have what more they would have. Every little child
will be asking you, not only what is this? or, what is that? but also, why is
this so or so? and, to what use is it. And so do men in the matters of God: And
if you satisfy them not in all, they will scarce be satisfied in any thing.

Thirdly, Besides this, there is indeed a great dependence of one truth upon
another; and they are (in Morality) as a well framed Building, or as a Clock or
Watch, or the like Engine, where no one part can be missing without g^e^t wrong
to the whole. Now when these m^n cannot see all, they do indeed want those
helps that are necessary to the perfect seeing of any part; and then they have
not the skill of making use of an imperfect knowledge, but are ready to take it
for none, till they conceit it full and perfect; and thus are still detained in
unbelief, and quarrelling with that which they did, or might know, because of
that which they did not, or could not know.

Fourthly, Moreover, it is most certain that when God calls us at first to the
knowledge of his truth, he finds us in darkness; and though he bring us
thence into a mavelous light ( Acts 26. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 9.) yet he does this by
degrees, and not into the fullest light or measure of knowledge at the first;
so that we are at the beginning but Babes in knowledge. It cannot be expected,
that a man that was born blind, with an indisposition of understanding to
spiritual things, and that has lived in blindness long* should presently know
all things, as soon as he is converted: They do not so come to knowledge in
earthly things, which they are more disposed to know, and which are nearer to
them, much less in heavenly things. The Disp^sitive blindness of the best
Convert, is cured but in part, much less his actual blindness. For (as I have
said before) if a man have his eyes never so perfectly opened, who before was
blind, yet he will not see any more then is near him, within sight: If he will
see other Countries, places, or persons, he must be at the pains and p^tience
of traveling to them. And so in this case, when God has opened the eyes of
the blind, they must yet expect to know, but by degrees: O what abundance of
things are young Converts ignorant of, that are fit to be known? They are but
entered into Christ's School to learn; and can they think to know all the first
day or year: But alas, many that are nominally entered, bring not with them the
true disposition of Disciples, and therefore quarrel with their Master and his
Teaching, in stead of diligent seeking after knowledge. Men have not the
patience to stay at School, and wait on Christ's teaching till they have got so
much knowledge, as might dispel their doubts. They must be taught all at once,
though they are incapable of it, and must know all presently, or in a little
time, and with little pains; or else; they will not believe that Christ can
teach them. And so they run away from him, like foolish, impatient Scholars,
because he did not bring them to more knowledge, and will not stay the time
that their own ignorance does naturally require, for so great a work.

Fifthly, And there is also much Diligence necessary, as well as time and
patience, before men ca^ come to so much understanding in the heavenly
Mysteries, as to be able to resolve the difficulties that occur. If you stay
never so long in Christ's School, and yet be Truants and Loyterers, and will not
take pains; no wonder if you remain ignorant. And yet these men will expect,
that they should know all things, and be satisfied in the answer of every
Objection, or else they will suspect the Truths of Christ. Will sitting still
in Christ's School, help you to learning? do you look that he should teach you,
when you will not take pains to learn what he teaches? You know in Law, in
Physic, in the knowledge of any of the Sciences or Languages, no man can come
to understand them, much less to defend them against all opposers, and to
resolve all Objections, without so long diligence and pains taking in his
Studies, as the greatness of the work requires. And shall every young lazy
Student in Theology, or every dull, unlearned Professor, think to see through
all Scripture difficulties so easily? or else will he suspect the Truth which
he should learn? It may be you have been Professors of Christianity long; but
have you studied the Scriptures day and night, and consulted with men of
judgment in such things, and diligently read the writings that should unfold
them to you, and held on in this way, till you came to a ripeness of
understanding, and ability to defend the truth against gainsayers? If not,
what wonder, if every difficulty do puzzle you, after all your unprofitable
duties and profession.

6. Moreover, there is a great deal of other knowledge necessary to the
through-knowing of the sense of Scriptures. Though the unlearned may know so
much as is of absolute necessity to salvation, (and will save, if it be
heartily believed and improved;) yet there is much learning necessary to the
fuller understanding of them, and to the resolving of all doubts and
difficulties that may occur. And this is not because Christ has delighted to
speak obscurely; but because our distance and imperfection, and the nature of
the thing, does make such learning to be necessary. For if Christ speak in the
Syriack tongue, and if the Scriptures be written in Hebrew and Greek, (which
were then fittest to divulge it;) how can it be expected, That Englishmen,
Frenchmen, Germans, or any that understand not those Languages, should
understand them so fully as those that do? For no bare Translation, though
never so exact, can give us the full sense of the Original words. Besides this,
all Countries have their peculiar proverbial speeches, which are familiar with
them, but would seem nonsense, or of a ^ontrary sense to others, that were
unacquainted with them: And Scripture must and does contain ^uch Proverbs, as
were usual with those, to whom ^t was wrote, or the matter spoken. They had
also many peculiar customs of their Countries, which a^e supposed in Scriptures
which if we understand not, ^he pl^in Text will seem dark to us. The like we
may say o^ matters o^ Geography, about the sc^^^uation of plac^s; and of
Chronology, for the due computation o^ times; and of other History, to know the
sta^e of Church and Commonwealth, and many other part^ of learning, which the
v^ry nature of the matter proclaims to be necessary for the res^lving of
Scripture-difficulties. Now when unle^rned men, or young raw Scholars, that
want all or most of these necessaries, will yet expect that they must
understand all and see through all diffi^ulties, and be able to answer every
cavi^; what wonder if they be frequently stalled, and temp^^d to unbelief, and
say, [ How can these things be?]

If you s^y, That ^hen it seems none but learned men must be able to resolve
these doubts, and d^fend the Scriptures against opposers; and we must take all
upon their words:

I answer, You must explicitly know all that is of flat necessity to
Salvation, and learn as much of the rest as you can: But if it be undeniable,
that you do not know more, that is, enough for the resolving of the foresaid
doubts; why should you be offended that we tell you so? Either you do indeed
see through all difficulties, or you do not; if you do, then you are
established, you are none of those that I speak of; you will not suspect the
truth, nor say, [ How can these things be?] but you are able to confute all
that would seduce you. But if you do not see through these difficulties; should
^ou not humbly confess it, and not quarrel with those that tell you so? And for
taking it on others words, you must in reason do it, if you have no other way,
and if you have reason to think that they know that which you do not know: But
if you th^nk that the learned men do know no more then your selves, and are
as unable to resolve ^hese doubts, as you are; you go against the full lig^t of
the who^e worlds experience. Let their writings bear witness, wherein they do
indeed resolve them: and do you call them to a trial, and see whether they are
able or not? and let any that understands the matter, and is competent, be
the Judge.

7. Yea, some men are so far from having all the forement^oned qualifica^ions
for knowledge, that they have not a natural strength of understanding, or
capacity to conceive of difficult things; and yet they will expect that all
should be made plain to them, who cannot understand a plain case in Law,
Physic, or any other Profession, that they are not versed in, no, nor any
great difficulties in the thing, that they are more conversant with.

8. Besides this, it is most certain, that when the best men have done all that
they can, they will here know but in p^rt: Perfection of knowledge is reserved
for the time of our perfect blessedness; and he that knows but in part, is not
like to see through every difficulty. And this imperfection joined with the
corruptions, which we shall anon mention* does cause these suspectings of the
Truth that should be entertained.

9. There are some truths also which are not well understood without
exper^e^ce: And it is only Sanctification that gives that experience. And
therefore the unsanctified take them but for fancies and suspect the truth of
that Word which does assert them.

10. But one of the greatest causes of this sin, is the pride of men's heart,
which makes them forget their great ignorance, shallowness, and incapacity: Men
have such arrogant understandings, that be they never so empty, they think
themselves immediately capable of receiving any truth that shall be delivered to
them. And if they understand not what they read or hear, they never suspect
their own wit, but the writer or speaker: Because they a^e at age, and are now
past childhood, they think they need no more to make them capable. Little know
they the nature of that knowl^dge which they want; and how it must be attained:
They know not that there is a certain order* among truths; and that one
presupposes another; and all the lower are prerequisite to the higher: They
know not how many hundreds of the lower preparatory truths, must be known
before some of the higher can be well understood: They would go to the top of
the stairs, without going up the lower steps: It would make a sober man wonder
to see the impudent Pride and Arrogance of some ignor^nt men; that when they
have need to sit many a year at the feet of some Teacher, and humbly learn that
which they know not, they will as confidently pass a present censure on the
things that they understand not, as if they were as thoroughly acquainted with
them as the best: And if they see not the evidence of a Truth, they will as
confidently and scornfully call it an error, as if they were indeed most
capable of judging of it: When men of true understanding do see that truth as
clear as the light.

If they hear a confident Seducer, that has a glozing tongue, and plausible
cavils against a truth, these arrogant w^^s will presently conclude, that he is
in the right, and cannot be answered; as if no body can do it, because they
cannot: When, alas, men of understanding may presently discern gross ignorance,
and absurdity, in that which sh^llow brains are so confident of. We can scarce
meet with the man so grossly ignorant, but he is confident of his own
understanding, and wise in his own conceit: So that when we may expect that
they should say, [ What ignorant foolish wretchet are we, that cannot
understand the Word of God:] They are ready to accuse or suspect the Word, and
say, [ How can these things be?]

11. And this Arrogance is much increased by the very nature of ignorance,
which is, to be even ignorant of it self. He that never saw the light knows not
what light is, not what darkness is as differing from light. A dead man knows
not what death is: A bruit knows not what bruitishness is, because he knows not
what Reason is.

There is a good measure of knowledge necessary to make some men to know their
ignorance. What can show a man his error, but the contrary truth? This is it
therefore that hinders men's conviction, and makes them confident in their most
false conceits; seeing they want both that Light, and that Humdity which should
take down their confidence. We have as much ado to make some men know, that
they do not know, as to make them know, that which they know not, when once
they will believe that they do not know it: Especially, if men have but any
plausible, natural wit, or a little taste of lea^ning, or a little illomination
in some greater matters, which in gross-ignorance they do not understand, they
presently think that all things should be now plain to them. It is the ruin
(or dangerous ^erverting, at least) of many young zealous Professors, that
formerly lived in great ignorance and ungodliness; That when God has showed
them their error, and brought them to see the excellency of a holy life; the
new Light seems so glorious to them, that they think they know all things, and
need but little more: And now they are illuminated by the Spirit of God, they
think they should understand all truths at the first hearing, and see through
all difficulties at the first consideration: Little knowing how much lamer
table ignorance does yet remain in them; and how much more glorious a Light is
yet before them; and how little they know yet, in comparison of that which they
do not know: So that it is the nature of the ignorant, especially half-witted
men, that have some little knowledge which may puff them up, to think they have
that which indeed they have not; and so to have this ar^ogancy of
understanding, and speak against the darknes^ of truth, when they should lament
the darkness of their own understandings; and to think the Candle is put out,
o^ the Su^ is darkened, because this Web is grown over their eyes.

12. Moreover, I fid^l^^y is a natural, deeprooted, obs^^^^ate sin; and
therefore* no wonder if it be har^l^ overcome, and will be striving in us to
the l^^^. The first sin of m^n, in be^^eving the Servent before God, ha^h ^^f*
a viciou h^^ it in ou^ n^tu^e. M^^ is now so e^^ranged from God, that ^e ^^ the
^e^s acqua^n^ed with ^is voice, and the more dist^ustful of hi^. We are so much
in the dark, that we are the more ^iffident. When a man kn^ws not where he is,
or w^o is near him, he ^s st^ll fear^ul; when he knows not what ground he
stands on, whither firm, or quick- a^ds, he ^s naturally apt to distrust it: A^
unknown God will not be well believe^. Were t^ si^ to cure Infidelity, all
other si^s would be of much more easy cu^e. He is a conquero^ indee^, that
thoroughly conquers his unbelief* But the most are captivated by it to their
perdition.

13. And it somew^at adds to this disease, That man is conscious of
de^e^tfulness in himself, and from thence ^s apt to suspect all others. Because
he finds himself both fallible and fallacious, he is ready to think that God
himself is so too: For corrupt man is prone to question, whether there be any
higher virtue, then he has experience of in himself.

14. Also it is a great occasion of this sin of Infidelity and Arrogance, and
questioning all that men do not understand, that they know not the true nature
of the Christian State and Life, and build not in the order that Christ has
prescribed them. Christ's method is this, That they should first understand and
believe those Essentials of Christianity, without which there is no Salvation;
and then engage themselves to learn of him as his Disciples; and so to set
themselves to School to him, and live under his teaching, that they may know by
degrees, the rest of his will. And his teaching is jointly by his Word,
Ministers, and Spirit. Men must first lay the Foundation in an explicit faith,
and hold to those Fundamentals as of in^allible certainty, and not expect to
know the rest in a moment, nor without much diligence and patience, but wait on
Christ in the Condition of Disciples, to learn all the rest. All this is
expressed in Christ's Commission to his Apostles, Matthew. 28. 19. ^0. 21. Where
he first bids them disciple the Nations (which contains the convincing them (at
age) of the fundamentals, and procuring their consent* and then to baptize
them, that they may be solemnly engaged; and then teach them to observe all
things whatsoever* he commanded them; and this must be the work of all their
lives.

Now here are two gross Errors, contrary to this stablished order of Christ,
which Professors do often run into, to their own perdition. The one is, when they
do not first lay the Fundamentals as ^ertain^ie^, but hold them loosly, and are
ready on all occasions to reduce them to doubtful and uncertain points; or to
question them, though their evidence be never so full, because of some defect
of evidence in other points.

A most foolish and perverse course, which will hinder any man that uses it,
from the true understanding of any Science in the World. For in all Sciences
there are some undoubted Principles which must be first laid, and it must not
be expected, that all points else should be of equal necessity or evidence as
they: But if we should meet with never so much doubtfulness in any of the
superstructure, yet these principles must still be held fast. For he that will
be still plu^king up his Foundation, upon every error in the building, is never
like to perfect his work.

The second common Error, is, That as Professors do not lay the Foundation as
certain, so they do not unseignedly s^t themselves in the true posture of
Disciples or Scholars to learn the ^est, but think themselves past Scholars
when they have gone to School, and engaged themselves to Christ, their Teacher.
This is the undoing of the greatest part of the visible Church.

If they come to the Congregation, it is not as Scholars to School, but as
Judges to pass sentence of the Doctrine of their Teachers, before they
understand it: And if they read the Scripture, it is in the same sort. When
they are at a loss, through any occurrent difficulty, they do not go to their
Teachers as humble Scholars, to learn the true sense of the Word, and the
solution of their doubts: But they go as confident cen^urers, and as boys that
will go to School to dispute with their Master, and not to learn; and
therefore, no w^nder if they turn self-conceited H^r^t^ck^ or ^nfid^l^: For
Christ has resolved, that the most learned and worldl^-w^se, if they will come
to Sc^o^l to ^im as his Disciples, mu(...) come ^s little Children* cons^ious
o^ their ignorance, and humble enough to submit to his Instructions, and not
proudly conceited, that they are wise enough already: And they must wait upon
his Teaching* year after year, and not think, that they are capable of a
present understanding of each revealed Truth.

15. Lastly, Besides all the former causes of this Sin, some men are judicially
deserted, and left to the power of their Arrogance and Infidelity. When God
has showed men the light of Fundamental verities, and instead of hearty
entertaining and obeying them, they will imprison them in unrighteousness, and
receive not the truth in the love of it, that they may be saved: God often gives
them over to believe a lie, and to reject that Truth which would have saved
them, if they had received it.

I have noted many Professors that have lived in pride, flesh-pleasing, or
secret filthiness, or unrighteousness, or worldliness, and would not see, nor
forsake their sin, but hold on in their profession, and their lusts together;
that these are most commonly given over to gross Heresies, or Infidelity: For
when they are once captivated to their fleshly lust, and in^erest, and yet
read and know the dam^ableness of such a sta^^, they have no way left to quiet
the^r Conscience, but either to believe that Scripture is false (and then they
need not fear its threatenings,) or else to leave* their sins with confession
and contrition; which their carnal hearts and interest will not permit.

From what has been said already in the opening Use.
of this point, we may see what a corrupt and froward heart is in man, as to
the matters of God, and his own Salvation: Three notable corruptions are
together comprehended in the diste^pe^ which we have here described, and
ex^^^ss^d in the common incr^dulous questioning, [ How can these things be?]

First, You may hear in this question, the voice of Ignorance. Men have lost
the true knowledge of God, and of his works especially in Spirituals. The
natural man discerns them not; for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.
14. We are as blind men g^oaping in the dark at a loss upon every difficulty
that occurs. Evidence or truth is no evidence to us, because our understandings
are unprepared to receive it, and be shut against it. When we should love the
truth, we cannot find it; when we should glorify the God of Truth, we know
him no^, but in our hearts say as Pilate* What is Truth? And as Pharaoh, Who is
the Lord? We are grown strangers to the way that we should go home in; and
strang^r^ to the voice that should tell us the way, and to the hand that should
guide us in it; and strangers to the everlasting home that we should go to. So
that instead of a cheerful following our Guide, we are crying out at every
turning, [ How can these things be?]

2. And here is comprehended and manifested also, the perverseness of man's
understanding* that will needs begin at the wrong end of his B^ok, and read
backward^: And when he should be first inquiring, [ Whether these things be so
or not?] He will needs be first resolved, [ How they can be so?] And he will
not believe, that they can be so, till he knows, how they can be so. whereas
common reason would teach us in other things to know first, Whether it be so
o^n^, before we come to the How can it be so We may easily be certain of the
Being of a thousand things, when we cannot be certain, How they be.

3. And lastly, here is manifested also the unreverent Arrogance of man, that
will presume to call his Maker to account, and to know of him the Reasons of
his works, and how they can be, before he will believe them; and so he will
needs question the very power of God. For to say, How can it be? is as much as
to say, How can God do it? As if we were fit Judges of his ways* and able to
comprehend his infinite power, and the several paths of his unsearchable
counsels. He is great in counsel, and mighty in work, Jer. 32. 19. He made the
Heaven, and the Earth by his great power, and nothing is too hard for him,
Verse. 17. The Prophet Isaiah's answer should suffice: to all such incredulous
questions, Isai. 28. 29. This comes from the Lord of hosts, who is wonderful
in counsel, and excellent in working.

Hence also we see what unteachable Scholars Christ has in his School, and
consequently, how patient, and gracious a Master he is. When we should be
submissively enquiring, we are incredulously disputing; and we will needs be
wiser then our Master, and question, whether he teach us right or wrong. It is
a wonder of mercy, that he should pardon so great dullness, and unprofitableness
in us; and shall we after this be so insensible of that sin of ours, and of
that grace of his, as to fall a questioning him, and his truth, and lay the
^lame on him from our selves?

Object. But we must not believe all things; and therefore we must enquire, and
try the spirits, whether they be of God, or not, even the Spirit of Christ
himself?
Answ. The Spirit of Christ fears not a just trial: Had not Christ brought
sufficient evidence of his truth, he would not have condemned the unbelieving
world for not receiving it. I have showed you already how fully he has sealed
^is Testament, and with what attestations he has delivered his Doctrine to the
world. But why do you not acquie^ce in these confirmed verities? when once
Christ has given sufficient proof of his Doctrine, must it be questioned
again, because it is wonderful? and because, that the manner of it is beyond
your reach? Inquire first, whether it be a Rev^lation from God, or not: and if
it had no divine attestation, or evident that it is of God, then you might
reject it without sin or danger, when you find it to contein things so far
beyond your reach: But when God has put his Seal to it, and proved it to be
h^^ own; if after this you will be questioning it, because of the seeming
cont^adictions or improbabilities, you do but question the wisdom and power of
the Lord: As if he had no more wisdom, then you can reach and fathom; yea, the^
you can censure and reprove? Or, as if he could do no more, then you can see
the way and reason of, and are fit to take an account of.

I do therefore exhort al^ that fear the Great Name of God, and love their own
Souls, That they take special heed against this dangerous sin: Think not the
Proved-Sealed. Word of God, is ever the more to be suspected, because that the
matters in it do seem strange, and unlikely to your Reason. And think not that
you should comprehend the mysterious counsels and ways of God. Let your
understandings meditate on Scriptu^e* difficulties, that you may learn to
resolve them; but suffer not the apprehension of those d^fficulties to make you
once question the Truth of God; but abhor such a thought as soon as it arises,
and cast it with detestation out of your hearts.

To persuade you the more effectually, I beseech you do but weigh impartially,
besides what is said before, these following consideratio^s

1. Consider, who that God is whose ways thou do so presumptuously pass thy
censure of, and whose Word thou call to the B^r o^ thy Judgment ^^ Is
Infinite wisdom fit to be examined by thee? or the Works of Infinite power to
be tried by thee? If there were nothing wonderful in his Word or Works, they
would not believe the Majesty of God; nor the Savior of the World, whose Name
is Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty G^d Isai. ^ 6. Gods Name mu^t be written
upon his Word and Works, and all must bear some part of his Image; and
therefore have somewhat in them that is incomprehensible. Shall the Infinite
God have no Word or Work, but what may be comprehended by such as we? I
seriously profess, that it often am^^eth me, to think that we should know so much
of God, his Will, and Ways, as we do? When I consider the infinite distance
between him and us, I must admire that we are made so much acquainted with his
mind, and that he has told us so much of his mysteries as he h^th done, and
must say [ What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that
thou so vi test and regardest him.] Psalm. 8 4. Job 7. 17. When I consid^r how
little a poor Worm, or B^rd, or ^east, knows of me that am made of the same
flesh with him; and how much man knows of the mind of God, who is infinitely
distant from him, it makes me admire at the Providence that has so ordered it.
If a Beast could so far consider, and discou^se, would it not be f^lly in him
to call my writings, words, and ways, to the Bar, and to suspect those as false
that are beyond his reach! and to say* [ How can these things be?] Why, alas,
they are ten thousand thousand times nearer to us, then we are unt^ God. O then
let us thankfully open his books and look upon his words and works, and bless
him that has condescended so far to man, and lifted up man so near to himself
in knowledge, in comparison of other inferior creatures; and make much of that
measure of knowledge which we have: But do not think to measure the Creation of
God, not to comprehend his secrets; much less himself. Methinks the reading of
those four Chapters in Job before cited, containing Gods expostulation with
him, might do much to humble an Arrogant wit, and to make it submit to infinite
wisdom. Alas, the very Angels cannot comprehend God, and whether a^^ Creature
can immediately see his Essence, we cannot now affirm: Admirations do better
beseem the highest of his Creatures, then bold expostulations. The flaming
Mount might not be touched. You cannot endure to gaze upon the Sun, which is
Gods Creature: Should you approach too near it, you would be consumed by its
heat. And dare you be so bold with the highest Majesty? It were not greater
folly to imagine that you can span the Earth in your hand, or that you can
reach the Sun with your finger, then to imagine that you are meet to
expo^^ulate with God* and that all must be unreasonable in his Word or Works,
where your wit is not able to discern the Reason. Surely, [ His thoughts are
not as our thoughts, nor his ways as our ways; but as far as the Heaven is
above the Earth, so far are his thoughts and ways above ours, Isai. 55. 7, 8, 9]

And as you cannot comprehend the thoughts and ways of God, so you are surely
unfit to contradict them. The child will submit to the wisdom of his Father,
and the Scholar of his Master, and will believe them when they cannot re^ch
the reason of their sayings: They will not set their wits against them, thought
they be reasonable Creatures, as well as they. It was the humble expression of
men of old, when they would contemn themselves, in comparison of their
superiors, to call themselves [ A dead dog] or [ a flea*] 1 Samuel 24. 14. and ^0.
20. David himself does so to Saul. What may we then call our selves, in
comparison with the Lord, but even nothing and less then nothing, and lighter
then vanity? and should nothing contend with immensity and Eternity? Should a
Flea dispute with a Learned man and say [ How can these things be] How much
less should we s^ dispute with God?

If a man do but look up to the height of the visible Heaven, or look down into
some exceeding depth, it will make him be ready to tremble: with what dread and
submissive reverence then should our minds look to the height and depth of the
Counsels of the Lord? D^re not therefore any more ^o quarrel with his wisdom*
but say as Job when God had non-plus'^ him, Job 42. 2, 3. [ I know that thou
can do every thing, and that no thought can be withholden from thee, who is
he that hides counsel without knowledge? Therefore have I uttered that I
understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I know not.

2. Consider also what we are our selves, as well as what that God is with whom
we do expostulate. The Lord knows we are silly Creatures for such an
undertaking! Can such breathing lumps of earth, such walking dust, such bags of
filth, be fit to enter a dispute with God? And though they are noble souls that
are thus meanly housed, yet never endowed or fitted for such a task. A spoon or
shell may as well contain the whole Ocean, as our narrow understandings
comprehend the counsels of God. Are our understandings infinite, that we should
think to comprehend the Reasons of the words and ways of the Lord, any further
then he has condescended to reveal them? Our eyes may as well expect an
unlimited vision, and think to see beyond the Sun ^s our understandings expect
such a boundless intellection. It Is a wonder that so much knowledge as we have,
should be found in a soul that'^ housed in clay: and shall we presume that we
have so much more then we have? It was the sinful Arrogance of our first
parents to desire to be as Gods in Knowledge: and shall we go so far beyond
them in our Arrogance, as to presume that we are actually such indeed?

And its observable what contradictions there be among s^^ful principles, and
how proud infidelity does condemn it self: These unbelievers have such low
thoughts of men's soul, that they think it does but gradually differ in its
rational power from the soul of a bruit; and therefore think it cannot be
immortal: and yet the very same men that think not the soul so noble as to be
immortal, do think it so capable of disputing with God, and compre^ending the
reasons of his Truths and ways, that they are ready to deny the most confirmed
Truth, if they do not reach the manner and End^ and Reasons of it, and God shall
not be believed, unless their Reasons be satisfied in all these, and unless
they are able to take so full a view of the whole body of Truth, as to answer
all gainsayers, and reconcile all seeming contradictions, they will not take
Gods word to be his word* Yea with the wretched Atheist God shall not be God,
because he cannot comprehended him: He shall not be infinite, in Immensity and
Eternity, because that he cannot comprehend this Immensity and Eternity. And so
wi^h the Infidel, Christ shall be no Christ, and the Trinity no Trinity,
because his shallow brain cannot compre^end the mysteries of the incarnation,
the Hypostatical Union and the Trinity So that the same m^n will have his soul
to be but as the soul of a dog for kind, and yet will have it more
comprehensive then the very Angels in Heaven, and think it so competent a Judge
of Gods Counsels, that he will presume to condemn them, if he see not the
Reasons of them.

3. Consider, Does not certain experience tell you that you are utterly unable
fully to understand the nature and reasons of those works of God, that are
daily visible before your eyes? I will not say, only of the greater and more
distant, but even of the least, or of any one of them. I am confident that
there is not the least fly or worm or pile of grass (much more the Sun and
other Planets) but that which we know of them, is much less then that which no
man knows. And should such poor understandings then be so Arrogant as to think
to fathom the Counsels of God, and reject his plain revealed Truths, because
they see not, How such things can be.

4. Consider, What a stream of experience do you sin against in this Arrogance.
Does not every Study that you fall upon, and every days business that you are
engaged in, most plainly discover the weakness of your understandings? Why else
do you learn no faster, and know no more? Why are you not yet absolnte masters
in all Sciences and Arts? Yea why are you so defective in all? And yet will you
presume to dispute with God, and reject his Truths as unreasonable, after all
this experience of your own infirmity, and of your unfitness for works that are
so much lower?

5. Consider, Whether by this sinful Ar^ogancy you do not equal your
understandings with Gods? For if you must be able to see the Reason of all his
Truths and ways, and will control them because you see not the reason of them,
does not this imply that you suppose your self to equal him in understanding?
And what greater madness can you be guilty of, then such a conceit? So also
when you quarrel with the word as if it contained things that are unrighteous,
and strengthen your unbelief by such conceits, what do you but say, that you
are more righteous then God? Oh think not that the fool^shness of man is wiser
then God, or that our darkness is comparable to his incomprehensible light, or
our unrighteousness to his perfect Justice; or that we are fit Judges of these
his perfections. Hear that voice that Eli^haz heard, from the Spirit that
passed before him in the Visions of the night, Job 4. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21. [ Shall mortal man be more just then God? shall a man be more pure
then his Maker? Behold he put u^ trust in his servants, and his Angels he
charged with folly: how much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose
foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth: They are
destroyed from morning to evening: they p^rish for ever without any regarding
it: does not their excellency which is in them go away? they die, even without
wisd^m.]

6. Consider further, that it is the very nature of Faith to believe the thing
revealed or testified, upon the mere credit of the testifyer or revealer, If
therefore you will have no such implicit belief in God, you will have no faith
at all. To see a thing in its own Evidence, is not to Believe. The formal
object of faith is the veracity of God: Reason assures us first that God cannot
lie: and next it discerns by evidence, that [ This is Gods word, or a Divine
Revelation]: and then we may well build upon this foundation, that each
particular of this Revelation is true. So that it is no true Belief, if the
credit of the Testifyer be not the reason of your Assent. If therefore you must
see the reason of Gods revealed truths, and the very manner and end of all his
works, before you will believe, this is as much as openly to proclaim, that you
will be no believers at all. You will Assent to the words of the false^t Liar,
as long as you see the Evidence of truth in the things themselves which they
report. And will you give no more credit to God then to such a one? Will you
believe God no further then you see a Cogent Evidence in the thing asserted,
which shows that he cannot deceive you therein if he would? Why, thus far you
will believe the worst of men: For indeed this is no beli^ving at all. If you
do not first believe that God cannot lie, and so that all that he says is
true, you have no belief in him at all.

7. If you are Christians, you are Christ's Disciples, and therefore must wait
on him in the humble posture of learners. And he that will no w^it credit this
teacher is not like to learn. If you will not believe him, but assent only to
that which is evident of it self without his word, then how are you his
Scholars?

8. Will you allow your own children or Scholars to do so by you? If they
should dispute with you instead of believing you, and so should reject all that
you tell them as false, that is beyond their capacity as to the reasons and
manner; you would not think that they did their duty When a schoolmaster is
teaching his scholars their lesson, shall they instead of learning, dispute it
with their master, and in every difficulty or seeming contradiction,
unbelievingly say, [ How can these things be]? Be not guilty of that toward
God, which you would not have a child be guilty of to a man.

9. Consider aso, if this course be taken, whether ever you be like to come to
knowledge. For the knowledge of things whose Evidence is all in the Revelation,
and the credit of the Testifyer, can be no other way attained but by believing.
All things seem strange and difficult at first, to those that have not learned
them. If you understand all things already, what need you to learn any more? If
you do not, then all that you understand will appear to you at first as
darkness or contradiction. If now you will be so confident of your own
understandings, as to cast away all that you understand not already, because it
seems contradictory or unlikely, how are you like to know any more? If you will
conclude that all is false which you understand not already, you are like to
make but unprofitable scholars. Well therefore says Solomon, Prove. 6. 12. [
See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool then of
him] For certainly it is a double degree of folly, for a man not only to be
ignorant of the things of God, but also to be so ignorant of his own ignorance.
And we must be at more pains to make such proud men know that they do not know,
then to make the humble to know the truths themselves, which they perceive that
they yet know not. And therefore Paul does not only bid us [ Be not wise in
your own conceits] Romans 12 16 But also, intimates that ignorance is the cause
of such conceits of wisdom, Romans 11. 25. [ For I would not brethren, that ye
should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own
conceits] As Solomon says of the foolish sluggard, that [ He is wiser in his
own conceit then seven men that can render a reason] Pro. 26 16.

10. Consider, Whether in this case you join not impudency and inhumane
ingratitude to your Arrogance? When Christ condescendeth to become your
teacher, and you are loyterers and dullards and will not learn, but have lost
the most of your time in his school, is it not a great mercy now, that he will
yet entertain you and instruct you, and does not turn you out of his school?
And will you, instead of being thankful for this mercy, fall a quarrelling with
his truth, and take on you to be wiser then he, when you have so provoked him
by your ignorance and unprofitableness! Will you fly in his face, with
audacious unbelieving questions, and say [ How can these things be.] As if it
were he that knew not what he said, and not you that did not understand him?

11. Consider, How easily can God evince the verity of those passages which you
so confidently reject, and open your eyes to see that as plain as the highway,
which now seems to you so contradictory or improbable? And then what will you
have to say for your unbelief and Arrogance, but to confess your folly and sit
down in shame? You know when any difficult case is propounded to you in any
other matter, which you can see no probable way to resolve, yet when another
has resolved it to your hands in a few words, it is presently all plain to
you, and you wonder that you could not see it before. You are as one that
wearyeth himself with studying to unfold a Riddle, and when he has given it
over as impossible, another opens it to him in a word. Or as I have seen boys
at play with a ^a^r of tarrying Irons, when one has spent many hours in trying
to undo them, and casts them away, as if it could not be done, another
presently and easily opens them before his face. So when you have puzzelled
your brains in searching out the reasons of Gods ways, and seeking to reconcile
the seeming contradictions of his word, and say [ How can these things be] in a
moment can God show you how they can be, and make all plain to you, and make
you even wonder that you saw it not sooner, and ashamed that you opened your
mouth in unbelief. How plain is that to a man of knowledge, which to the
ignorant seems impossible? If the certain event did not convince them, you
should never persuade the ignorant vulgar, that learned men know so much of the
motions of the Planets, and can so long before tell the Eclipse of Sun or Moon,
to a Minute. But when they see it come to pass, they are convinced. Thus can
God convince thee of the verity of his word, either by a merciful illumination,
or by a terrible execution For there is not a soul in Hell but does believe the
truth of the threatenings of God. And the Devils themselves Believe, that would
draw thee to unbelief.

12. Lastly, Take heed of the very beginnings of this sin; for it is the
ordinary way to total Apostasy; when men have once so far lost their humility
and modesty, and forgot that they are men, or what a man is, as to make their
shallow Reason the censurer of Gods Word, because of certain seeming
improbabilities; and when they will not rest satisfied in the bare Word of God,
that thus it is; but they must needs know [ why, an^ how it can be], this opens
the flood-gate of temptations upon them; for the envious Serpent will quickly
show them more difficulties then their shallow brains can answer; and will cull
out all those passages of Scripture, which are hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable d^ wrest to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 18. He will
show them all the knots, but never show them how to untye them. Such arrogant
questioners and censurers of Gods word, do often run on to utter infidelity;
while they are incompetent Judges, and do not know it, what can be expected
from them but a false judgment? For though the light shines in darkness, yet
the darkness comprehends it no: Joh 1. 5. and therefore presumes to condemn
the light.

O therefore let all young, raw students, and unsettled wits take heed in the
fear of God, that they exalt not themselves, and that they think not their weak
understandings to be capable of comprehending the counsels of God, and passing
a censure upon his word, upon the nature of the matter as appearing unto them.
Nay let the sharpest wits, and greatest scholars stoop down before the wisdom
of God, and be have themselves as humble learners, and enter as little children
into his school and Kingdom, and submissively put their mouths in the dust,
and take heed of setting their wits against heaven, or challenging the infinite
wisdom to a disputation. If they love themselves let them take this advice, and
remember that God delights to scatter the proud in the imagination of their
own hearts, Luke 1. 51. and to pull down ^spiring sinners to the dust. As they
that would set their power against God, would soon be con^inced of their
madness by their ruin; so they that will set their wisdom against him, are
like to escape no better. [ Let no man deceive himself: if any man among you
seems to be wise in this world; let him become a fool* that he may be wise;
for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: For it is written, he
takes the wise in their own craftiness: And again. The Lord knows the
thoughts of the wise that they are vain] 1 Cor. 3 18, 19, 20.

Object. But would you not have men satisfied of the reasonableness of what
they believe? shall men believe that which is unreasonable? this were to make
us mad, and not Christians.
Answ. You must believe nothing but what you have sufficient reason to believe.
But then you must know what is sufficient reason for Belief. Prove but the
thing to be the Testimony of God, and then you have sufficient reason to
believe it, whatsoever it be For Faith proceeds by this Argumentation [
whatsoever God testifyeth is True: But this God testifyeth; Therefore it is
true.] You have as good reason to believe the Major, as that there is a God:
and he that acknowledges not a God, is unworthy to be a man: All that you have
to look after therefore is to prove the Minor, that [ this or that is the word
of God] And as concerning the Scripture in general, it carries sufficient
Reason to warrant and oblige any man that reads or hears it, to believe it,
in the forehead of it. It shines by It shines by its own light, and it
bears the certain seal of Heaven. So that we have goo^ Reason to believe the
Scripture, or Doctrine o^ Christ to be the word of God: And then we have as
good reason to believe it, and every part of ^^ to be true. And then what
ground is there for any further exceptions or objections? When yo^ have seen
the seal of God affixed, and perceive^ sufficient evidence of the verity of the
whole, what room is left for cavils against any part of it?

Object. But it is certain that God never spok^ contradictions. Therefore if I
find contradictions in the Scriptures, may I not rationally argue that they
are not the Word of God?
Answ. Yes, if you could certainly and infallibly prove your Minor, that
Scripture has such contradictions. But that is not a thing that a sober man can
be confident of proving: because all things that men understand not, may seem
to them to have contradictions. And you have far more reason to suspect your
own shallow understanding, then the Word. For those things as I have showed,
may be easily reconcilable by others that understand, which seem most
unreconcileable to you. Are you sure there can be no way of reconciliation, but
you must know it? It Is easy therefore to see that your Minor cannot possibly
be proved.

Yea it may be easily and certainly disproved, even by him that cannot
reconcile those seeming contradictions: For [ God attesteth no contradictions:
but God attesteth the holy Scripture. Therefore the holy Scriptures have no
contradictions.]

The Major is most evident to the light of nature, and granted by your self.
The Minor ^s proved at large, before and elsewhere: Gods attestation is
discernable to Reason.

It is therefore a preposterous course to begin ^t the quality of the word, and
to argue thence, that God revealed it not, when you should begin at the
Attestation or seal of God, and argue thence that he did reveal it: (and indeed
the very quality bears or contains his Image and Seal.) For you are more
capable of discerning the seal of God attesting it (in the spirit of Miracles,
and Holiness, etc.) then you are of discerning presently the sense of all those
passages that seem contradictory to you. You may easily be ignorant of the true
interpretation, for want of acquaintance with some one of those many things
that are necessary thereto: But I can be certain that God has astested the
Scripture to be his Word.

And indeed common reason tells us that we must first have a general proof that
Scripture is Gods word, and argue thence to the verity of the parts, and not
begin with a particular proof of each part: It seems you would argue thus: [
This and that text of Scripture are true: therefore they are Gods word] but
reason tells you, you should argue thus [ This is Gods word: therefore it is
true] If you set a boy at school to learn his Grammar, will you allow him to be
so foolish, as to stay till he can reconcile every seeming contradiction in it,
before he believe it to be a Grammar, or submit to learn, and use its Rules? Or
will you not ^pect, that he first know it to be a Grammar, ^^ then make it his
business to learn to understa^^ it, and therein to learn to reconcile all
s^em(...) contradictions? And should he not in modes^ and reason, think that
his Master can recon^^ that which may seem unreconcileable to him, a^ such
unlearned Novices, as he is?

For my part I am fully resolved, That if (...) Reason could reach to none of
the matters ^^vealed in Scriptures, so as to see them in the ev^dence of the
thing, yet if I once see the eviden^^ of Divine Revelation, I may well be
assured* th^^ it i^ wholly true; how far soever it may transcen^^ my Reason.
For I have Reason to believe all the God reveals and assert^th; and I have
re^so^ to acknowledge the imbe^illity of my Reason and its incompetency to
censure the Wisdom o^ God.

And thus I abhor both the doctrine of then that say, We have no Reason to be
Christians* and that the truth of Scripture is an indemonstrable principle,
that must be believed without Reasons, and not proved by them: And also the
Arrogant infidelity of them that will believe nothing to be a Divine
Revelation, unless their Reason can comprehend the thing it self, or at least,
if there be any thing in it that seems contradictory to their Reason; and so
will begin at the wrong end, and examine the particular matters, by the test of
their blind Reason, when they should first examine the attestations of the
whole, where the evidences are more fitted for the Reason, even of the younger
Christians to discern.

I easily confess that no man should ground^esly believe any thing to be a
Divine Testimony, or believe any man that says, he speaks from God: But when
God has given them sufficient Reason to believe, that the Testimony and
Revelation is indeed from himself, if after that men will still be doubting,
because their Reason is stalled about the Manner, and the Causes, and Ends, and
will believe no more then is within the reach of their Reason in these
respects, nor confess that it is Gods Word, unless they can vindicate it from
all Objections, and know why and how it is, as well as that it is; this is a
mere unreasonable unbelief. It is ordinary with Princes and other Lawgivers,
in wisdom to conceal the Reason of their Laws: Shall Subjects therefore presume
to censure them as defective in Wisdom or Justice, because that they know not
the Reason of them? I say again, If there were nothing in Scripture, but what
the Reason of man could comprehend, it were not so like to be the product of
the infinite Wisdom of God. Let Reason therefore stoop to the Wisdom of our
Maker, and when he has, let us know that it is he that speaks; let us humbly
learn, and not proudly expostulate with him about the rest.

Though I shall not undertake to set upon the resolution of all the Questions
of incredulous men, which they commonly raise against the Word of God; (for
that would take up many large Volumns of it self;) yet as I have dissuaded them
from this Arrogance of wit, so I sh(...) make trial of a few of their commonest
a(...) greatest Objections, to show them that their I^fidelity is capable of a
Confutation, as well (...) of a Dehortation.

Object. 1. You tell us out of Scripture, that ther^ are Devils, most wicked
malicious spirits addict(...) to do evil: Who made these Devils, or, how can
they to be so bad: Certainly, God is good, and therefore made nothing but what
was good; and ever^ thing must have a first cause: If they made themselves
evil, then they were the first cause of their own evil: And then you deifie the
will of the Devil in making it to be absolutely a first cause. ^^ you say as
some, That sin is but a privation, and therefore has no efficient cause, but a
deficient (...) then either that deficiency must be first from Go^ (and then he
should be the first cause of all sin) or from the will of the Devil; and then
either he wa^ before bound non-deficere, or not. If not, it was no sin; if he
were, then first, he could primo deficere, though God did all that belonged to
him to prevent it; secondly, and he could have stood without any more help then
he had when he fell, and so quoad determinationem propriae voluntatis, should
have been the first determining cause of his own perseverance, or
non-deficiency: For if he could not stand, it was no sin to fall, being before
innocent. Moreover, their sin was not a mere privation, but materially an act
(whether velle or nolle) and formally a relation of disconformity to the Law.
Answ. 1: The Devil himself was the first cause of his own pravity. God made
him not evil, but he made himself so. God gave him freewil to be a
self-determining principle; by this he was enabled to stand or fall, and left
in the hands of his own counsel. By a sinful act he averted himself from the
chiefest good, and became disposed to a further aversion, which might quickly
habituate him to all evil. Nor is it any deifying of the Creatures will, to say
it is such a self-determining principle, and so far a first cause, while it had
the power of self-determination from God, and so absolutely is no first cause.
It was the excellency of the Creature, as being to be governed, to have
freewil, or a self-determining power to good or evil: Though it be a higher
perfection to be determined or determinable only to good, which in Patria may
be enjoyed, yet in via for one under Government in the use of means in order to
the end, it is most suitable to their condition to have a liberty of
self-determination: And therefore this was part of the beauty of the frame of
Nature, and therefore not derogatory from the workman. As God intended
sapientially, or per potentiam sapientiae, to govern the rational Creature by
Laws and Objects: So did he sapientially frame him in a capacity for such a
Sapiential Government; and that was by giving ^im a free, that is, a
self-determining will.

Indeed, the Angelical Nature, and Soul of Man, is so exquisit and subtle, and
sublime a thing, that no man can exactly perceive and com^rehend the manner of
its self-determination: ^ut the thing it self is not to be doubted of, though
the manner of it be yet past our reach. We may certainly conclu^e, therefore,
That God made Angels and Men g^o^; but some of those Angels, and M^n, by their
inducement, made themselves evil: For God made them free Agents to determin^
themselves to good or evil. And the ignorance of the nature of re(...)il, does
cause such Infidels to rise up against God with their impious quarrels.

2. And see whether these blind wretches do not wilfully put out their own
eyes, and reason against most certain sense and experience. For I would ask any
of them whether there be indeed any sin, or bad me^ in the world, or not? If
they say, no; then I would wish them not to blame any man as an evil doer, that
shall rob them, o^ slander them, or beat them. The likeliest cure for this
error, is to beat them black and blew, til^ they believe that he that does it,
does ill. And why should not any man do it daily if there be no ill in it? Is
not he mad with infidel^ty, tha^ thinks there is no bad man in all the world,
when there are so many, and so desperately wicked, and when he is so bad
himself? Or is ^e fit to be tolerated in any Society, that thinks there is no
evil? Sure he will think, that he may ^o any thing, and not do ev^^^^* But if
he confess, tha^ any man i^ evil, or does evil, let him ask himself who mad^
him evil? Did God that is good? or did he himself? And if he can find out how
man came to be evil, he may find a satisfactory answer to his question, how
Angels came to be evil. Bu^ what if we could not tell how this evil did first
come? Shall we therefore say, that there is no such thing? Shall we deny that
which we see and hear, and feel, because we know not how or whence it came?
What folly is this? Then let every Murderer, Thief, or other ^ff^ndor at the
Assizes, come off with this Argument, and say, That he has done no evil; for
all things are of God, and God does no evil. As mad as this reasoning is, yet
have I known them that have openly prof^ss^d, that they longed to see the
Devil* and would ride a hundred mile to see him, in m^er confidence, that there
is no Devil; and that upon such vain imaginations as these.

Object. 2. ^he Scripture says, That God made all things of nothing; when of
nothing, nothing can be made. How then can these things be?
Answ. Cannot God do it, unless such worms can tell how he should do it? Does
the Infant know how he is formed in the Womb? But why should it seem
improbable, that the first Infinite Being should create a Finite Being? He that
give all Creatures their Forms, can as well cause the first Matter. What if it
were granted. That Earth, or Water, or Air, were from Eternity? Is it not as
hard to make the Sun and Heavens of one of these, as to make one of these of
nothing?

But me thinks these Infidels should consider, That either God made all things
of nothing, or else, that something of which he made them, must be eternal, and
without any cause. If so, then it is God; and if God, then either the One true
God himself, or some other God. If God himself, then all Creatures should be
his substance, and s^ be God; and so they would make every ^^one to be God. If
any other God, then they will in^ur the sa^^ ^^ conv^^iences; besides, the
feigning of many Gods, ^^cause they will not con^ess the omnipoten^y of One. Is
it not more reasonable to ^el^ev^, th^^ God made a Stone, or Earth o^ no^^ing,
then to believe that it made it self? But thus will Mo^tals ens^are and
bewilder themselves* while they will g^ about to comprehend and question
Omnipotency, and ask their Maker, How he can so make them.

Object. 3. Moses says, That God made the light, and day, and darkness, and
night, before the Sun: When the light is the effect, and the Sun the cause; and
the darkness is but a privation of the light of the Sun. How then can these
things be?
Answ. 1. Whatsoever God can produce mediately by the Sun, or other
Instruments, that he can produce as easily, immediately himself without an
Instrument. Is it not as easy to him, to cause light without a Sun, as to make
the Sun it self, with its light?

2. Are not Philosophers yet unresolved, whether light be not a substance? And
then why might it not be first created alone?

3. However, it might be the effect of the Element of fi^e, disposed of by God
for differencing day and night, without a Sun, till the Sun was made. And is it
not agreeable to the rest of his works, that he should first make the Elements
and general matter before he form particular Creatures h^^e^f? As he made the
water, before he con^in^d it in its banks, and made it a Sea: So might he make
the light or fire, before he contracted so much of it into a Sun: And if he can
distinguish day and night by the (...)un afterward, he might as easily do it by
the Element o^ Fire or Light before. You man see a pr^tence of fu^ther
satisfaction to Reason in this point, in Tho. White his Appendix, The^l. ad
Institut. Peripat. cap. ^. and 4. which (...) (...) (...) recite.

Object 4. M^s^^ says Genesis 1 16. That God made two great Lights, the Sun and
Moon; whereas it is certain* th(...) many (...) Plan^^s are greater then the
Mo^^, therefore he speaks ignoran^ly.
Answ. But though they a^e greater then ^he Moon, they ^^e n^^ g(...) Li^h^s to
the Earth, then the Mo^n, w^i^h is the thing that Moses affirms.

Object. 5. M^s^s makes the Garden of Eden to have a Riv^^ arising i^ it, which
^ivideth it self into four parts. But there is no such place now known in the
world, where four such Rivers as he describes are so near.
Answ. Moses says not, that this River had its rise in Eden, much less in the
Garden; nor that the f^ur divisions or branches of it were in the Garden, but
in Eden. It was not all Eden that was this Garden, nor the Garden called Eden:
But Eden was the name of the Country (at that time when Moses wrote) in which
the Garden was. And this Land of Eden was in Telassar, that is, in the upper
part of Chaldaea, where Babylon is situate; and there the River Euphrates
divides it self into those four st^e^ms which Moses here d^scribe^h; which
River goes through and out of Eden* though the pring or Head be elsewhere: The
four particular Branches you may s^e described by Junius on the Text at large;
and the most pro^^bl^ conjecture of the situation of the Garden, is, ^ha^ it
was in o^ very near the place where Babylon now stands, and from whence came
the Jews suffering, as well as our first sin.

Object. 6. Is it a likely thing that a Serpent should speak to Eve? Or the
subtilty of the Serpent be a reason of the Temptation? Or, that Eve that was
then perfect, should not know that Serpents cannot speak of themselves; and if
she knew that it was the Devil that spak^ by the Serpent, it would have
affrighted and astonished her, rather then have been such a temptation to her?
Answ. 1. Though Eve was perfect as to her natural powers, and capacity, yet
not as to her actual knowledge? She that was n^wly then created, might be
ignorant of the Serpents nature.

2. But suppose that she knew that it was the Devil that spoke by the Serpent
(which seems to me most likely) yet does it not follow, that she should then
dread or abhor him: For ^ow know you that Eve was acquainted with the
Diabolical pravity or malice? How know you when the Angels fell to be Devils?
whether long before? or whether they were but newly fallen, (as Zanchy conceives
by their unbelief) But most certain it is, that they were then no such hateful
or dreadful Creatures in the apprehension of man, as now they are: For it was
upon man's fall, that God put that enmity between them and us, from which our
hatred and dread of them does proceed. When the Devil had showed his malice to
us so far; then d^d God put that fixed enmity in our natures which we all since
perceive. This was not in Eve, and therefore it is no wonder if she had no more
dread of this evil spirit, then we have of one another, especially when it is
most likely that she well knew that there were good Angels, but knew not of
their fall, and of their malice unto her self. And for the subtilty of the
Instrumental Serpent, it was the likelier to be the Instrument of the subtle
deceiver: And it is most likely, that God would not suffer Satan to use any
other Instrument, that so the quality of the Instrument might be fitter to
exci^e a due cautelousness in the woman, Satan himself being a spirit, is
invisible to us; and therefore* when he will appear, it must be in some
borrowed shape; and he usually fitteth that shape to the ends of his
apparition: If it be to terrify, it is commonly in a dreadful shape; and for
the most part, God will not suffer him to appear in any other, that man may the
better know that it is the enemy that he has to deal with. And so before our
fall, when he would deceive, he speaks by a subtle Creature, and is
permitted to do it by no other, that man might have the more reason to suspect
that he came in way of deceit. We are incompetent Judges of the full of these
things, unless we better knew the a^quaintance that man then had with the
angelical nature, and what familia^i^y was between them, or what alteration is
since made in the nature of the instrumen^al Serpent by the ^^^^e. Why then
should we unbelievingly ask, How these things can be? which God reveals, when
we may easily know that we are such incompetent Judges.

Many more of these Objections might be mentioned, and easily confuted, that
are raised by Infidels about the Creation, and fall; but because Junius has
confu^ed 22 of them alre^dy, after his Prelections on G^^. ^3 p. 9^. against an
Antinom an that then urged them from Simplicius the Heathen Philo^^p^^r I shall
ref^r them that need it th^the for (...).

Obj. --. How could a^n f^ye into the Land of Nod, or build a City, G^^. 4. 6,
17. when there was no more m^n ^^ ^^^th*
Ans. 1. At ^^^ It ^^ l^d the Land of Nod not because it was ^^^alled in Gains
time, but in the time when Mo^^^ ^^^^e. ^. It is supposed to be between the
(...) etc. ^wo hundr^^h year of ^is age, that ^a^^ bu^^ this ^^^^, and by some
the 3, ^^ 400. for it is not ^^id tha he did it presently after ^^^ Curs^,
though these things are laid close togeth^r in the concise Narration. And why
might not ^^^^^ posterity be easily m^le plied, in all that time to such a
number as might build and replenish ^ City, ^ea many Cities.

O^^. 8. Is it ^ likely thing that the Red Sea should (...) for the Israelites
to pass through? Or that (...) should stand still in Joshuahs time: and not
(...) be over tu^ned by it? Or that Jonas should live without air in the belly
of a Whale? Or ^ot be digested in his belly as other food is? How ^an these
things be?
Answ And what, must God do none but like^y things? Is it not as easy with him
to do all ^his, as for you to move a finger, and much more? ^s it not as easy
to make the water stand still as love; or to gather it on heaps in the Sea, as
to gather it into the Sea from the rest of the earth, and to keep its course in
ebbing and flowing? And ^s it not as easy to cause the Sun to stand still as
to move? And so to move as it is supposed to do? ^f the Sun had used to stand
still, would you not have taken it for as incredible a matter that it should
move? And have said as unbelievingly, How can this be? And for the disordering
of Nature, it was Sun and Moon with all the moveable frame that stood still
together; and not the Sun alone: And so made no such alteration as is imagined,
it must have done.

And for Jonas, that God that made him and all the wo^ld, and sustaineth it by
his power, could easily do this. Perhaps these Infidels will next say that an
Infant cannot live in the Mothers womb for want of air or breath.

2. Are they not as great works which we every day see, in the Being and Course
of Sun, Moon and other Creatures, as any of these?

3. Is it likely that Moses would have wrote of such a thing as the standing
and opening of the Red Sea* and the Israelites passing through it, to those
same Israelites, and that he would so often have used that as an Argument to move
them to Obedience, and deliver them his Law to be kep^ upon such an Obligation
or Motive, if no such thing at all had been done: would so many thousand people
have believed such a man that told them they were led through the red sea as on
dry land? and would they have followed him forty years through a wilderness,
and so zealously have maintained his Law which was backed with such Motives, if
they had all known these things to be false? Or was it possible they should be
false, and they not know them?

But I Will stand no more in confuting these cavils against the Old Testament but
speak to 2, or 3 which they bring against the Gospel of Christ.

Obj. 9. Is it a lik^ly thing that a Virgin should conceive and have a child?
How can this be?
Answ. Is it not as easy for God to cause conception by the Holy Ghost
immediately, as medidiately by man? Does God enable a (reature to do that which
he cannot do himself, without that Creature? What madness were it to dream that
this exceeds the power of God?

Obj. 10. Is it a likely thing that God should become a man, or that God and
man should be one person, which is more Condescen^ion then for a Prince to
become a fly to save flies ^^om being killed?
Answ. It Is one thing to ask whether this be possible? and another, Whether it
were done? It is indeed the greatest wonder of all the works of God, But there
is no contradiction in it to prove it impossible. The God head was no whit
really abased or changed by this Union, but at the utmost) relatively and
reputatively only. God did not become man, by ceasing to be God, ^r commi^ing
the humane Nature with the Divine. But one^y assumed a humane nature to the
Divine. It is not therefore as if a Prince should become an inferior Creature,
but only as if he should assume such a Creature into so near a relation to him.

2. And that God has indeed done this, his evident Testimonies have proved to
the world: Is it likely or possible that one should assert such a thing, and
seal it in the face of the world with Miracles, and rise himself from the dead,
and send forth a spirit of Miracles and of holiness on his Church, to confirm
his affirmation, if all this were not true which he affirms?

3 Is this the thanks that God shall have for his wonderful condes^ension, that
though he prove it to be true, yet we will not believe the mercy that he shows
us, unless it seem likely to us in the way of us accomplishment?

Obj 11. Is it not a contradiction to say that there are three persons, and but
one God?
Answ No: Because to be a person or subsistence in the Godhead, and to be a God
is not all one. It is no contradiction that the Vegetative, sensitive and
Rational in man, should be three, and distinct one from another, and yet not be
three souls but one. And that Power, Understanding, and Will, should be three,
and distinct; and yet not three souls but one: And that Power, Light, and Heat,
should be distinct in the Sun; and yet not be three Suns, but one. Why then
should the Divine Trinity of subsistences seem a contradiction?

Object. 12. There are many contradictions in t^ Scripture; and therefore it is
incredible. For e^ample; Mark. 14. 30. [Before the Cock Cro^ twice] Mat. and
Luke say [Before the Cock Crow^ And many the like.
Answ. 1. It is mere ignorance of the sense (...) Scripture, that canseth this
conceit of contrad^ction. Expositors themselves are imperfect in the
understanding of them; yet if you will well rea^ them, you shall see how easily
and clearly they reconcile many things that s^en unreconcileable to the
ignorant. Read among others, Scharpius hi^ Symphonia to that end.

2. As to the Text instanced. The second C^^^^ Crowing was then specially and
eminently c^lle^ [ The Cocks Crowing] And therefore Matt^^^ an^ Luke do name no
more but [ the Crowing ^^ the Cock] meaning that second Cock, which was
specially so called; (of which see Grotius on the Text) whereas Mark does more
pr^cisely express the same in suller words: What a vain mind is it that will
pick quarrels with such expressions?

I give but a brief touch of these few common Exceptions, leaving them to seek
the resolution of such doubts, from Commentators that have performed it, or
from their judicious Teachers, who are at hand, and ready to do it.

The Lord acquaint unbelieving sinners with the greatness of their ignorance,
and the shallowness of their capacities that they may know how unfit they are
to expostulate with their Maker, and what need they have to wait upon him as
humble Learners. For the meek will he teach his way. Psalm 25. 9. and unto Babes
does he reveal ^^e Mysteries of his Will. For though the Lord ^ High, yet has
he respect unto the lowly: but ^e proud he knows a far off, Psalm. 138. 6. and
the mysteries of the Gospel which now seem ^credible, he will one day open to
the comfort ^^ his Saints, and the confusion of unbelievers; ^^en at the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which in his times he shall show, who is
the blessed ^^d only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord ^^ Lords: who
only has immortality, dwelling ^^ the light which no man can approach unto,
whom no man has seen or can see: to whom be Ho^or and Power everlasting.

Amen.
FINIS.

