A SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE Blessed Place and State OF THE Saints Above.

In a Discourse upon the Words of our Blessed Savior;

John xiv. 2. In my Father's House are many Mansions; if it were not so, I
would have told you: I go to prepare a Place for you.

By WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

London; Printed by J. D. for I. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churh-yard. M.DC.LXXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
IT is the privilege of Christianity, that Life and Immortality are brought to
Light in the Gospel. The Heathen World sat in Darkness, was secure in Misery:
As one that sleeps is pleased with the Scenes of Fancy; he Dreams of Treasures
of Gold, of Gardens, of Feasts, and thinks the painted Appearances, the
superficial Colors of Good to be Realities: thus whilst Reason was darkened by
Sense, the World was content with pleasant Delusions. Who amongst the many
pretenders to Wisdom, had a convincing knowledge of the Blessed Eternity to
come? Who had a glimpse of that Happiness that results from the sight of God in
Glory? This Instruction so refreshing our Spirits, darkened with Sorrows here,
comes from the School of Heaven: as the Sun revives us by its cheerful
Appearance, and affords that Light, without which it were impossible to behold
it.

During the Legal Dispensation, there was a Mist upon the Future State. The
notice of Eternal Things was a Twilight mixed with Shadows. The Revelation of
the Heavenly Glory was reserved till our Savior's appearing in the World, who
purchased it with the dearest price, and offers it upon such gracious Terms,
that whosoever sincerely desires and seeks, shall obtain it; and none shall be
deprived of it, but for their wilful and guilty neglect. It might be expected
that such a Proposal were sufficient to engage Men with all their Active Powers
to secure such a precious Interest, when indeed their best Endeavors and most
zealous Affections are too slight and faint, with respect to that excellent
Happiness. Are not the first Notions of Things that are written in our Breasts,
sufficient to convince us, that what is for ever, is to be preferred before
what suddenly passes away? Or is it necessary in Matters of Temporal
Concernment, to use strong Arguments to persuade us rather to choose a Treasure
that will enrich us for our Lives, than what will purchase food only for a day?
Yet it is strange to amazement, that in Things of Infinite Weight and
Consequence that respect the Soul, and trivial Things that respect the Body,
Men make as preposterous a Judgment and Choice, as if they were irreconcilable
Enemies to themselves, and obstinately averse from their own Happiness. The
Life to come extends beyond all possible Number of Ages; the Felicity is so
complete and sure, that the least shadow of Evil shall never eclipse it: The
Soul shall be in a state of highest Perfection and Joy; the Understanding
illuminated with perfect Knowledge, with no more study, than opening the Eye and
fixing it on the Glorious Objects, the Will satisfied with the perfect Love and
Enjoyment of the Blessed God: The Body shall be clothed with Light as with a
Garment, and shine with a Beauty that never disflourishes and decays; the
innumerable Assembly of Angels and Saints always affords new and inestimable
Delights; and what is set in comparison against this transcendent Felicity in
Heaven? The poor despicable vanishing Life on Earth: whose Pleasures are so
shallow and empty, that they cannot satisfy the Senses, much less our noble and
comprehensive Faculties: whose Griefs are sometimes so heavy and oppressing,
that all the Comforts of the World are no more effectual to relieve the Soul
laboring under them, than the sounding of Brass, and the tinckling of Cymbals,
usually done by the Heathens, were to free the Moon from its dark Eclipse,
which they fancied to labor in extremity. Yet the petty Preferments, the
deceitful Riches, the vain Pleasures here are chosen, and ambitiously and
eagerly persued, and the infinite everlasting Happiness hereafter undervalued
and rejected. But as the Wonder ceases, that a Man does not see in the clearest
Day, by saying, He is blind: so Carnal Men are without Faith, that is, the
Internal Light of the Mind, they do not steadfastly believe the Reality of the
Divine World, tho so clearly opened in the Gospel. They are under so strong a
Delusion and Error of Sensuality, that they vilify a Spiritual Happiness, a
Glorious Futurity, and present sensible Things, of no price in comparison, have
the highest place in their Esteem and Affections. The proper Means to recover
Man from his woeful Folly, are unceasing fervent Prayers, That the God of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto them the Spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation in the knowledge of him: The Eyes of their Understandings being
enlightened, that they may know what is the Hope of his Calling, and what the
Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints: and to represent this
World, and the next, as they are to their considerate Minds, that their
Interest and Duty, with united Efficacy, may overruled their Hearts, and turn
the Stream of their Endeavors into the right Channel; that the judicious
Comparison between Objects so vastly differing, may be the governing Principle
of their Lives. All Things are vain and transient, within the Confines of Time;
all Things stable and solid in the Territories of Eternity.

JOHN XIV. I. In my Father's House are many Mansions; if it were not so, I
would have told you: I go to prepare a Place for you.


OUR blessed Savior in the words, applies Heavenly Comfort to his Disciples,
to support their drooping Spirits in his absence from them: He foretold his
departure; Chapter 13.33.
Little Children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I
said to the Jews, whither I go, ye cannot come: so now I say unto you. This
tenderly affected their Hearts: But that their Sorrow might not flow into
Despair, he assures them, that their Separation should not be final, and that
it was not the singular Privilege of St. Peter, Ver. 36.
that he should follow him hereafter; but that there were Rooms reserved in
Heaven for them all, and He would return and receive them to Himself. This
Consolation He addresses to them in a very affectionate manner, Chapter 19.1.
Let not your Hearts be troubled: No Work is more Divine, none more proper and
delightful to our Savior, than to comfort the afflicted Spirits of his People.
He directs them, Ye believe in God, believe also in me. God is the Supreme
Object of Faith, his unchangeable Love and Faithfulness, with his infinite
Power in the accomplishing his Promises, is the Security of Believers. Christ,
as Mediator between God and guilty Creatures, is the immediate Object of our
Faith; for he restores us to the Favor of God, therefore it is said, 1 Peter
1.21.
we believe in God by him. After this Preface to calm the unquiet Agitations of
their Minds, and make them more receptive of comfort, he proposes to them;

1. A blessed Doctrine; In my Father's House are many Mansions, capable to
receive all his Disciples.

2. Gives them an infallible assurance of it. 1. From his inviolate Love and
Truth, If it were not so, I would have told you. 2. That his going away, was
not to reign alone in the Kingdom of Glory, but to prepare a place for them.

The Point that I shall discourse of from these words, is this; There is a
blessed Place Above prepared for all the faithful Disciples of Christ, wherein
they shall be glorified with him for ever.

In the managing this Argument, I will endeavor;

1. To represent the Excellencies of this Place specified by his Father's
House, and the state of Felicity that is inseparable from all that dwell in it.

2. Consider the infallible Assurance we have of obtaining it.

1. The Excellencies of this Place may be argued from the Maker of it, and its
Attributes specified in Scripture. (...). Heb. 11.10
First, God is said to be the artificial Builder of this City, to signify a
correspondent Excellency in the Work to the Divine Maker. All the Works of God
have a Divine Impression of his Power and Providence, but in some are more
conspicuous Characters of his Perfections: For the wise Author of all Things,
has ordered their several degrees of Excellence, both in the Matter, and
various Art of adorning them, suitable to the End for which they were designed.
Now the supreme Heaven was made to be the Temple of the Divine Majesty, wherein
he would diffuse the richest Beams of his Goodness and Glory to his chosen
Servants for ever, and accordingly is a most noble Work of his Omnipotent Hand;
and there are two Remarks to be made in its Creation, from whence we may infer
its peculiar Excellency.

1. It Is the beginning of the Creation. Amongst intellectual Beings, the Angels
are the Firstborn of God's Power; and in Natural and Divine Prerogatives excel
Men. From hence it is that the Excellency of any praiseworthy Quality in Men,
is set forth by a resemblance of the Angels. Excellent Wisdom in David, My
Lord, the King, is like an Angel of God. Excellent Eloquence by St. Paul, is
styled the Tongues of Angels. Heroic Virtue, and excellent Holiness in the
Christian Church, The House of David shall be as the Angel of the Lord; for
that which is highest in any kind of Perfection, is the Rule and Measure of the
degrees of that Perfection. And thus in forming the material World, the supreme
Heaven has the precedence in order and dignity, before all the other Parts of
it* Indeed Moses only recites particularly the Creation of the visible World;
and by what gradations this great Fabric with all its Furniture was
completed: And the History of that is instructive of the Creation of invisible
Things, which is expressly specified in the Gospel. But, as Paradise was first
made, and then Man created to be the Inhabitant of it; so we may infer, that
the highest Heaven, the Seat of the Angels, was made before they were created.
Now the Angels (we are informed by Divine Revelation) were present when the
Foundations of the Earth were laid, Job 38.4, 5, 7.
and God stretched his Line upon it: Then the Morning Stars sang together, and
all the Sons of God shouted for joy. They saw the rising World, the variety and
beauty of its Frame, the admirable Order that distinguishes and unites its
Parts, that all Things were divinely done, and transported with wonder and joy
celebrated the praises of the Creator.

2. The Supreme Heaven is the effect of God's immediate Creation. The Earth with
all its Ornaments was formed of preexistent Matter: the Chaos, a confused Mass,
was the Embrio of the sublunary World: but the Supreme Heaven is his more
immediate and exquisit Workmanship, and received its Being and Perfection at
once. You may illustrate this by the Account is given by Moses of the Creation
of Man; God made Man of the Dust of the Ground. Genesis 2.7.
His Body derives its Birth from the low Element; and the Wisdom of the Creator
is wonderful in the artificial structure of it: It Is added, God breathed into
his Nostrils the Breath of Life; and Man became a living Soul. The Earth enters
into the composition of his Body, but his Soul was inspired by the Breath of
God; that is, by his Divine Power immediately created; and in nobility of
Nature, and its spiritual Endowments, incomparably excels the Body. And the
third Heaven, though not a spiritual Substance, yet in the purity of its
Nature, far transcends whatever was formed of gross Matter.

This being premised, I will now consider what the Scripture reveals to us of
that place that is eminently the House of God.

1. The Amplitude of it. Our Savior tells us, The Way is narrow, and the Gate
strait that leads to it, to excite our diligence; but there are many Mansions
in the Celestial Palace to encourage our Hopes. It Is therefore called a City,
a Kingdom. If we look up to the shining Sky, wherein are the Sun, that by the
computation of late Mr. Boil, Of the high Veneration Man's Intellect ows to
God, etc. p. 11.
Astronomers, some thousands of times exceeds the Earth in its magnitude; and
innumerable Stars, and some of that greatness, that they eighty times exceed
this Globe of Earth; tho to the ignorant, and therefore incredulous, they are
judged to be as they appear, (upon the account of that unmeasurable distance
between the Firmament and us) but glistering points of Light: our Minds will be
tired and lost in taking measures of that that seems boundless: and this vast
Expansion, with all the glorious Luminaries, is but the Portal of the House of
God. Therefore Solomon, setting forth the boundless Greatness of God, says,
Behold the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; that is,
neither the Airy nor Ethereal Heaven, nor the Supreme Heaven that encompasses
and exceeds it. It Is a spacious Palace, becoming the Divine Maker's Greatness,
the Image of his Immensity: and the State of Felicity there is answerable. The
blessed God, in whom there is an eternal Union of all Perfections, perfections,
is all in all to his People. The Sun in its brightness may be as truly included
in a Spark, as the Divine Excellencies be measured by created Contemplation.
There is an infinite variety in the Supreme Good, that makes it always rare and
new in the fruition. The universal Love, and universal Fullness of the Deity,
exceedingly satisfies all the Desires, and perpetuates the Delights of the
Saints. He styles himself, in the gracious Covenant with his People, I am God
Alsufficient; walk before me, and be perfect. He is sufficient in all things
that are requisite, to the complete Felicity of the most comprehensive Spirits;
and is sufficient to make all that innumerable Company of Angels and Saints, as
happy as one Person. God is Light, and the Emanations of his Goodness are
sensibly represented by it. Heaven is called, the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. As the Sun (his Almoner) diffuses its Light and Heat so generally, that
every one indifferently enjoys it without prejudice to others. As the Sun
streams forth in Rays every moment, yet (which is a perpetual Miracle in
Nature) without the least diminution of his Luster and Efficacy: thus the Son
of Righteousness dispences his influences of Knowledge, and Love, and Joy, to
all the blessed Assembly above, and is the universal Happiness of all, and the
entire Happiness of every Saint. God is an inexhaustible Fountain of Felicity:
Quantumlibet capacem ventrem afferat Fons vincit sitientem.
As he that drinks of a living Spring, (tho inflamed with thirst) yet leaves it
flowing and full as before, sufficient to refresh a thousand Men without being
dry: Aug.
thus God is able to make many Worlds happy. An earthly Inheritance is either
entirely and peculiarly the first Born's, or is lessened by division: Heb. 12.
but all the Sons of God have the dignity of the first born, Romans 8.
and are Heirs of God, and enjoy an undivided Inheritance. Our Heavenly Father
verifies to every Saint, what the Father in the Parable said to his Son, All
that I have is thine.

2. The stability and firmness of it. The Apostle says, It Is a City that has
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. Cities that are raised by the
greatest Kings, who are corruptible, and mortal, are so slitely built, that
they may be consumed by Fire, battered by Storms, and without external
Violence, yet from an inward principle of Decay, sink into Ruins: but Heaven is
the City of the living God, the Seat of his eternal Empire. This present World
is like a Tent pitched for a time, whilst the Church is sojourning in the
Wilderness: the most solid parts of it, Psalm. 102. 2 Peter Chap. 3.
the visible Heaven, and Earth, shall perish, either by an entire Consumption,
or their ruin shall terminate in a renovation to a better State. But the third
Heaven is above the dominion of the Elements, exempted from all changes, and
for ever remains. It Is an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and fades not
away: The integrity, purity, and glory of it are always the same. It Is the
habitation of God's Throne, Psalm. 2.
He sits in Heaven secure from all the tumultuous Conspiracies of his Enemies,
and derides their impious Attempts, against his Son, and Church. His Throne is
unshaken there, notwithstanding things below are turned about in a vertiginous
Circle. And as the House, so the Inhabitants, and their felicity, are eternal.
Glory, Honor, and Immortality, Romans 2.
are the Reward of all that patiently continue in well-doing. Our Savior
assures his Disciples, Because I live, ye shall live also. He tasted Death for
them, and swallowed it up in Victory. He declared in Vision to St. John,
Behold, Revel. 1.
I am alive for evermore. The Lord of Life will uphold the Saints in that
blessed State for ever: They shall never fall out of the Arms and Bosom of a
gracious God. He will never withdraw his Love, and they shall never forfeit it:
for Sin is from the perverseness of the Will, and disorder of the Affections,
joined with some error of the Mind. But in the Light of Glory, and full
enjoyment of God, the Understanding is so perfectly illuminated, the Will and
the Affections so exceedingly satisfied, that it is impossible they should
apprehend erroneously, or desire irregularly.

This glorious Advantage the redeemed Saints have (by Jesus Christ who obtained
eternal Redemption for them) above the Grace given to Angels and Man in the
first Creation. Heb. 9.12.
The Angels were upon trial of their Obedience, not in a determined state of
Felicity. Their first declination of Love and Subjection, was a downfall from
their blessed Habitation. Woeful change! how unlike themselves in their original
Purity, and Glory? An unparalled Example of the frailty of the Creature that
forsakes God, and of the Divine Severity. Man did but stand in Paradise for a
little while, and had a ruinous fall with all his Progeny. But the glorified
Saints actually sit with Christ in Heavenly Places, and enjoy an unchangeable
happy State. The felicity Above is permanent, as the everlasting Object that
produces and preserves it, and the everlasting Soul wherein it dwells. Blessed
Security! how triumphantly do the glorified in Heaven sing, This God is our God
for ever and ever. Earthly Relations, how near soever, determine in Death; and
the sorrow of losing them, is in proportion to the delightful enjoying them.
But the Heavenly Relation between God and the Saints, is as everlasting, as the
Object on which it is fixed: This God in whom are all amiable Excellencies, all
Sweetness and Beauty to feed Desires and Delights, is our God in strict
propriety, in the dearest and most reviving fruition for ever. Their Happiness
is crowned with Eternity. This is so real an accession to their Felicity, that
without the entire assurance of it, the state of Blessedness were incomplete;
the least jealousy of losing it, would disturb their peaceful fruition, and
joyful tranquillity in Heaven: For as Hope in Misery allays Sorrow, so fear in
Happiness lessens Joy. The apprehension of losing such a Kingdom, would cause
torment. But, as in the contrary state, reprobate Sinners that are in Hell,
under an utter impossibility of deliverance, are racked and tortured by
absolute despair: So the Blessed Above, that enjoy the Beatifick Vision, by the
infallible assurance of its perpetuity, are filled with a Joy unspeakable and
glorious.

3. The Sanctity of this blessed House. It Is separate from the rest of the
World in its sublime Situation, and its unparalled Excellencies. Sanctity of
Place is Relative, and is founded, either upon the manifestation of God's
special Presence, or consecration of it to his Service. It Is consistent with
the Divine Immensity, to be differently present in several places: as the Soul
is in another manner present in the Head, where it performs its noblest
Operations, than in other parts of the Body; and upon any special appearance of
God, a Place is Sacred. Thus when Moses approached to see the Flaming Bush, he
was enjoined, Do not come near hither; Exodus 3.5.
pluck off thy Shoes from off thy Feet, the place where thou stand is Holy
Ground. The visible Testimony of the Divine Presence sanctified the Place, and
the most humble outward Reverence was due, a Sign and Effect of the internal
Respect that is owing to his most adorable Majesty. The sanctity of that Place,
was an extraordinary Relation, and ceased upon the vanishing of the Flame, the
sign of God's Presence. There is also a Relative Sanctity, by the Consecration
of Time or Place for Holy Uses. Thus the Seventh Day, upon the finishing the
Creation, was hallowed by God himself, set apart as the first Fruits of Days
for his Service, and applied to Divine Worship, that Man might more entirely
exercise his Mind in admiring and praising the Creator, whose Glory was visible
in his Works. And in both these respects, the Temple of of Jerusalem was Holy,
as being appropriated to God's Service by his own Election and Appointment; and
being the place wherein he exhibited his Presence in a special manner. Solomon
expresses this as the End of building the Temple, in his Letter to the King of
Tire, desiring his Assistance; 2 Chr. 2.4.
Behold, I build an House to the Name of the Lord my God, to dedicate it to
him, and to burn before him sweet Incense, and for the continual Shewbread, and
for the burnt-Offerings morning and evening, on the Sabbaths, and on the new
Moons, and on the solemn Feasts of the Lord our God. And we read, at the
Dedication of Solomon's Temple, that a sudden thick Cloud obscured the Air, a
sign of God's descending and acceptance, whose invisible Majesty was veiled
under it: and whether from that Sacred Darkness, or fear at the unexpected
Miracle, 2 Chr. 5.13, 14.
the Priests could not minister because of the Cloud. The Sacrifices, Music,
and all the Temple-Service was interrupted. But the Temple built with Hands,
and all its pompous Service, was but an imperfect mutable Shadow of the Holy
Temple Above, Psalm. 11.4.
where God exhibits his Sacred Presence, not in a dark Vapor, but in the
richest Beams of Glory, and wherein that most pure Spirit is worshipped in
Spirit and Truth for ever. The Saints are a Royal Priesthood to God, in a state
of Eminency, and separation from the rest of the World: They now offer up the
Sacrifice of Praise, and the sacred Incense of Prayer, infinitely more pleasing
to God than all the Sacrifice of Beasts, and the most precious Gums, and
Aromatic Spices, that with their sweet Smoke perfumed the Temple. But in the
Holy of Holies Above, (where no defiled thing can enter) they perform Divine
Service in a Divine manner. The perfect Rest in Heaven, Heb. 4.
is a Sabbath's Rest, wherein our fervent Affections, the Springs of Activity,
are in their powerful Exercise upon God. Here our faint Earth clogs our
ascending Affections; and such is the tender Indulgence of our Heavenly Father,
that when the Spirit is willing, tho the Flesh be weak, he pardons and accepts
us. But there our Bodies become Spiritual, qualified for the Exercises of
Heaven, and all our Powers are in a holy Heat and Rapture, admiring and
praising the blessed God. Here the Saints often retire from the World, to
worship the Divine Majesty in their Closets; and the secrecy of the Duty, is an
Argument of the Sincerity. They with more freedom pour forth their Souls into
his Bosom, and he insinuates the gracious acceptance of their Requests: But the
noblest elevation of the Affections, is in communion with all the Saints and
Angels above. The ardent Seraphims were inflamed, crying one to another, Isa.
6.3.
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory.
Here there must be some interval between the solemn Acts of Worship, the
Circumstances of the present State require it; but in the Heavenly Sanctuary,
it is their continual work and delight to celebrate the high Praises of God:
They are before his Throne, and serve him day and night in his Temple. The
Inhabitants of Arabia the Happy, burn, for their common uses, those Aromatic
Trees, that produce Myrrh and precious Balm, of which the Sacred Incense was
compounded: And it is no wonder, because those Trees grow common in their
Country, that is open to the most favorable Aspects of the Heavens, and the
strongest heat of the Sun: But to our Countries, how little of those rich
Perfumes are brought. And such is the Comparison between the Praises of the
Angels and the glorified Saints, and ours here below. They are always in the
noblest Work, excited by the highest Motives. They are always under the direct
Beams of God's Favor, which are vigorously reflected in their Praises. All
their Felicity is, to contemplate his excellent Perfections, all their Pleasure
to love him, all their Glory to obey him. Their affectionate Praises are
renewed without intermission, because the Divine Favors are renewed every
moment. There is a perpetual circulation of Graces from the blessed Creator,
and Thanksgivings from the happy Creature. All their joyful Affections, all
their solemn Thoughts and Reflections are terminated in that great and glorious
Object. The Prophet declares their holy Employment; They continually speak of
the glorious Honor of his Majesty, and of his wondrous Works: They speak of
the Might of his terrible Acts; and they declare his Goodness, and sing of his
Righteousness. The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and
of great Mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all
his Works. All thy Works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints bless thee. They
speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy Power. Thy Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom; and thy Dominion endures through all Generations. They
never cease to love, and admire, and therefore never cease to praise him. Their
Hearts are eternally inflamed, and their Mouths eternally opened to glorify
him. But with the highest veneration they adore his Mercy; that Perfection that
is the special Glory and the dearest delight of God; that which is the supreme
of all the glorious Attributes in our Redemption, that will be the principal
Argument of their Praises. They sing of the Mercies of the Lord for ever; that
Mercy that chose them from Everlasting; that Mercy that in such an admirable
manner conducted them through the World, that never left them, but most wisely
ordered all things below in relation to their future Happiness; that Mercy that
crowns them with Life and Immortality, when the reprobate World feel the most
terrible Effects of revenging Justice. We read of the Jews after their
Captivity, upon their finishing the Temple, that with a transport of Joy, they
cried, Grace! Grace! when God, who is the Author of our Salvation, shall have
finished it, with what a sweet consent shall we celebrate his sacred Praises!
Mercy upon Mercy, all is Mercy. Happy Exercise! Heaven is a State of Joy and
Thankfulness. Blessed are those that are in thy house they always praise thee.

4. The delightfulness of this Place. It Is called Paradise by our Savior. He
promises the penitent Thief, the Companion of his Cross, To day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. Paradise was a Garden planted by immortal Hands, to be the
Habitation of Adam in his state of original Righteousness, when the Favorite
of Heaven: it was the Beauty and Delight, the Flower of the World, and with
abundance, and variety, exceedingly satisfied all the desires of Life: 'twas
watered with four Rivers, to make it always pleasant, and fruitful. But the
Celestial Paradise as much excels it in Beauty and Pleasantness, as in its
sublime situation: and the joyful satisfaction of the Soul in communion with
God, and the blessed Society there, infinitely excels all the innocent Delights
of the natural Life. Heaven is a state of pure, full, and unfading Joy. The Joy
of the Blessed is not mixed with things that may corrupt its excellence. There
is an absolute exemption from all Evils. God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes: and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying;
neither shall there be any more pain. The Joy is full; It Is called our Master's
Joy. Great God, how ineffable is that Joy! It Is the richest Reward infinite
Bounty can give to faithful Servants. As being made like to Christ in Glory, 3 John 3.2.
implies a divine and full Perfection: so the entering into his Joy, implies
the most accomplished and incomprehensible Felicity. It Is a permanent Joy that
none shall take from the Blessed, as our Savior promises his Disciples. Here
below, suppose a Person encompast with all the Good Things of the World, yet
this Felicity is neither without Defects, nor without Dependence upon Casual
Things, that he is never completely happy, but only less miserable: and tho he
lives long in Prosperity, and has a tenor of Health to enjoy it; yet, as the
clearest Evening is presently followed by Night, so the most vigorous old Age
is certainly attended with Death, that extinguishes all sensual pleasures. But
in the Presence of God is fullness of Joy; at his Right Hand are Pleasures for
ever.

To explain this more particularly, let us consider, that Knowledge, Love, and
Joy, are the Perfections and Felicity of immortal Spirits, and are
correspondent to the excellency of the Objects upon which they are fixed, and
the capacity of the Faculties that are exercised, and the degrees of
Satisfaction communicated to them. Now in Heaven, our noblest Faculties, the
Understanding and Will, are raised and enlarged, and entirely united to the
best Objects. What conception can we frame of Joy for an intellectual Creature,
so full and satisfying, as the clear Vision of God invested with all his
attractive Attributes, his glorious Perfections, and in perfect loving the most
lovely Object, and being perfectly loved by him? When the Soul freed from this
mortal muddy Flesh, and the Mind cleared from all terrene Images, conveyed by
the Channels of the Senses, sees God Face to Face; how is it ravished with
wonder and love in the sight of his most amiable Excellencies? How pure a Joy
is infused to the Center of the Soul, and fills all its Desires? How permanent,
like the everlasting Spring from whence it flows? The Psalmist inspired with
the Love of God, breaks forth in an Holy Ecstasy; Psalm. 65.4.
How blessed is that Man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee,
that he may dwell in thy Courts? We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
House, even of thy Holy Temple. Admirable Blessedness! dear Felicity! The same
Heavenly Saint expresses his esteem and affection; How excellent is thy loving
kindness, O Lord! Psalm. 36.8.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House: and thou
shall make them drink of the River of thy Pleasure. Here we do but taste and
see how good the Lord is; and that is so powerful a Cordial, as gloriously
supports the Saints under the heaviest Sufferings. But Heaven is the Element of
Joy. Here a glancing sight of his Goodness, how reviving is it? A living Vein
of Light, Acts 16.24, 25.
from his favorable Countenance, pierced into the miserable Dungeon where Paul
and Silas were chained, and raised their Spirits to that Heavenly pitch, that
they sang Praises to God: the illustrious reflection of Paradise, lightened them
at Midnight, and put a gloss of Joy upon them. But in Heaven, those most divine
and amiable Titles, that God is Light, and that God is Love, are most fully
exhibited, and experimentally understood by the Saints. They see him as he is,
in his essential Glory; and all the secret Treasures of his Wisdom, in his
Works of Wonder are unfolded, and the sweetest Manifestations of his Love are
given to them. That which the Prophet declares of God's tender Affections to
his Church, is verified in the most excellent manner in Heaven; The Lord thy
God in the midst of thee is Mighty: Zeph. 3.17
he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest in his Love, he
will joy over thee with singing. That the blessed God is well pleased in the
glorified Saints, is the supreme degree of their Felicity. How joyful a
Complacency arises from the Communion with the blessed Redeemer, and the Saints
in Heaven? Love is the first Fountain of Joy; and the more intense, the more
ravishing is the Fruition. The Love of Christ to them was so great, that from
Eternity he was infinitely pleased in the thoughts of their Salvation; Prove.
8.31
His Delights were with the Sons of Men, before they delighted in him. If the
Design of that blessed Work was so pleasing, what is the Accomplishment? The
Evangelical Prophet declares, Isa. 53.11.
He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and be satisfied. And the Love of the
Saints to Christ, is a correspondent Affection, according to their utmost
Capacity. All the Affections that were scattered here below, are concentered in
him, Omnia suspiria in Christo anhelent. Ille unus pulcherrimus qui foedos
dilexit, ut pulchros faceret, desideretur.
for he infinitely deserves their Love, having ransomed them with the dearest
Price, and purchased for them an everlasting Inheritance. He loved them in
their foul deformity, that he might superinduce a Divine Beauty upon them, and
prepare them for the enjoyment of himself. He is now their Desire, and in
Heaven where he appears in all his Brightness and Beauty, their everlasting
Delight. We may conceive a little of their ravishing Communion, by the Language
of Divine Love, between Christ and the Church, in the Song of Solomon, and
their harmonious Affections expressed in the most endearing manner; Open to me my
Love, my Dove, my Undefiled: And the inflamed Spouse, in a high and delightful
rapture, breaks forth; I am my Beloved's, and he is mine. If a Propriety and
Interest in him, be productive of such a pure Joy, what will the everlasting
Fruition be? The Scripture represents it by a Marriage Feast, as the most
complete resemblance of that spiritual Joy. Thus the Inhabitants of Heaven are
introduced, speaking; Give Honor to him; for the Marriage of the Lamb is come,
Rev. 19.7.
and his Wife has made her self ready. What Union! what Joy! How will the
Saints rejoice in God their Savior, in the view of the surprising Wonders of
his Love? The Scripture speaks of another accession to the Joys of Heaven, the
innumerable Company of Angels and Saints that live in perfect Concord,
inviolable Love, the sweetest Content, and joyful Complacency. Society is a
principal Ingredient of Joy. What exultation of Joy will there be, when the
whole Family of Heaven shall meet together in their Father's House? We may
conjecture how the Angels are affected to us, by what is recorded concerning
their appearance at the Birth of our Savior; There was a multitude of the
heavenly Host praising God; saying, Glory be to God on High, on Earth Peace,
good Will toward Men. It Is the first time since the Fall of Man, that we hear
of the Angels Song: They were commissioned to punish rebellious Sinners, and
appeared with flaming Swords, the Instruments of revenging Wrath. But when the
Lord of Hosts became the God of Peace, they appeared with Harps in their Hands,
with Praise and Joy, celebrating his Mercy. They foresaw that Peace on Earth
would end in the Glory of Heaven; and the Ruins of their Celestial Country,
would be repaired by our Salvation. And the glorified Saints are all Companions
in the same Joy, and the same Blessedness. For never was there such a
transforming of one Lover into another here, as there is of the Saints in
Heaven: They are all animated by the same Divine Spirit; their Thoughts and
Inclinations are the same, and have the highest satisfaction in the felicity of
one another. Behold, how good, and how pleasant is it for Brethren to dwell for
ever in Unity! Briefly, we find that sensible Joy is in its elevation in the
times of the Harvest and Vintage, and after Victory; when the Blessings of God,
the precious Fruits of the Earth, the Hopes of our Labors, and the Support and
Comfort of the present Life are received, an universal Joy fills the Country.
Now Light is sown for the Righteous, and Joy for the upright in Heart. It Is
sown in Tears, but reapt with Exultation. We gather the Fruits of Blessedness
from Thorns, Poverty, and Mourning, Hunger, and Thirst, and Persecution: and
this gives the more lively tincture to our Joy. The Joy of Victory is
transporting, and that always in proportion to the Danger and Power of the
Enemies subdued, and the rich Spoils taken from them. Now when our Spiritual
Enemies, so numerous, so powerful and irreconcilable to our Souls, Sin, Satan,
Death, are utterly broken, how triumphant a Joy follows? Sed nihil libentius
populus Romanus aspexit, quam illas quas timuerat cum turribus suis bestias,
quae non sine sensu captivitatis submissis cervicibus victores equos
sequebantur. Flor. lib. 1. c. 18.
The Historian relating that most glorious Triumph at Rome, when Pyrrhus, their
proud and potent Enemy was expelled from Italy, observes, That of all the Show,
no part was more joyful, than to see the Elephants that had been so terrible,
and carried Towers on their Backs, to be subdued and led in Triumph. Thus how
joyful is it to see the Prince of Darkness, with all his infernal Legions, not
without the tormenting sense of their Captivity, bruised under our Feet! to see
the humane Nature of Christ raised to the highest honor to which that
rebellious Spirit did proudly aspire. O how delightful a Spectacle! All the
Saints will cast their Crowns before the Throne, and sing the Praises of their
victorious Deliverer.

5. The Glory of this Place is discovered in the Scripture. The Father of
Christ is the God of Glory, and the Father of Glory; and Heaven is his lofty
and glorious Throne, becoming his Excellent Majesty and Universal Dominion. The
Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all.
Glory in its first Notion signifies the brightness and luster of Light, and
from thence metaphorically imports Excellency in any Kind. Thus the Divine
Perfections are expressed, God is Glorious in Holiness, glorious in Power: and
the Joy of Believers is called unspeakable and glorious. Heaven is set forth as
glorious in a transcendent manner; it is called, the Excellent Glory; from
whence a Voice came to the Apostles in that Holy Mount, declaring Christ to be
the Son of God: So it is called, The richly glorious Inheritance; the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. When the Sun rises in its brightness, a
Deluge of Gold overflows the World, and adorns the Universe: but this is but a
Shadow of the inherent Glory of the highest Heaven. 'Twas prepared by God for
the House of his Kingdom, and the Glory of his Majesty. We read of the vast
preparations made by two great Kings for the building the Temple at Jerusalem:
such sums of Gold and Silver, that would empty all the Treasuries of the
Princes of the World; that were it not recorded in Sacred Scripture, it would
exceed belief. The number of the Workmen were seventy thousand, employed seven
Years without intermission; the Materials were very rich and splendid, Gold,
and Cedar, and precious Stones: and the excellency of the Architecture was
such, that no humane Art can equal: for it was modeled by the Divine Mind; and
the delineation of its Parts was sent to David by an Angel. But what are the
Preparations of Earthly Kings, to the Preparation of God? And what is the Glory
of the Temple made with Hands, to that admirable Fabric that received its
Being and Perfection immediately from God? We read of the New Jerusalem, the
Type of Heaven, that the Foundations were precious Stones, the Gates were
entire Pearls, the Streets pure Gold, as it were transparent Glass. The
Expressions are in condescendance to our Capacities, and but a faint
resemblance of the Glory of Jerusalem above. In the Vision of the Prophet
Esaias, the Seraphims cried to one another, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts,
the whole Earth is full of thy Glory. Obstupescit obruiturque miraculis.
It Is a Theater of innumerable Wonders divinely decked, Aug.
and the wise discerning Observer, admires and praises God's Power and
Providence so clearly manifested in it: For the Excellency of the Work is
answerable to the Art of the Maker; and the Glory of the Maker results from the
Excellence of the Work. But what the Apostle says, in comparing the Legal and
Evangelical Dispensation, That if that which was done away, was glorious, much
more that which remains is glorious; and in that degree of eminence as to
obscure the other, may justly be applied to the Glory of God appearing in the
Earth, and the third Heaven: for if the Earth, the lowest stage of the World,
the Habitation of Brute Creatures, and to be continued only for a time, has so
much Glory in it, what an excellent Glory is in the Supreme Heavens, the native
Habitation of the Angels, and that is to continue for ever? The Earth since
Man's Rebellion, does not remain in its Primitive State, but has lost much of
its Beauty and Usefulness. At first it was entirely suitable to the rich
Goodness of the Creator; now terrible mixtures of his Justice appear in all the
parts of it: Barrenness in the Earth, Thorns and Thistles, the Fruits of the
Curse for Sin; Malignant Influences, and Storms in the Air, Tempests in the
Sea, Inundations of Water; and how many Diseases are fatally natural to our
Bodies? But the highest Heaven remains in its original Beauty, and pure
Integrity. The Earth is now the Habitation of his Enemies, where they oppress
his faithful Servants by their bold Injuries: but Heaven is the Habitation of
his Saints. In short, it is a Place becoming the Majesty and Magnificence of
God, and his Love to his chosen Friends. It Is said of the Patriarchs, whose
Desires and Hopes were not centred in that Earthly Canaan, tho flowing with
Milk and Honey; but they desired a better Country, that is, a Heavenly;
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for
them a City. To be styled our God, is a Title of the richest value, and
implies, that all the Perfections of the Deity are to make us happy. It had
been a reflection upon his Greatness and Goodness, if he had only given to the
Patriarchs a Portion in this World. But Heaven is a Place and State of Felicity
becoming his Infinite Majesty, his special Love, and eternal Duration. It Is an
Observation of Tertullian, Totum Deum occupatum, and deditum manu, opere,
consilio, sapientia. Amor dictabat lineamenta.
That God who made other Things by command, by the omnipotent Umpire of his
Will, applied himself with Counsel to form the Body of Adam, which was the
original Model of all Perfections that a humane Body is capable of, for the
beauty of Aspect without, and the artificial order of the Parts within; and the
reason was, Love drew the Lineaments. Thus Love, the Queen of the Divine
Attributes, employed infinite Wisdom, and almighty Power, to build this
Celestial City for the reception of his chosen Favorites. The King of Glory
dwells there in a special manner. The Heaven, even the Heavens are the Lord's;
but the Earth has he given to the Children of Men. By Right and Dominion, the
Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof, and the possession of it is from
his Bounty to Men; but Heaven is reserved for himself, the Place of his
glorious Residence. As a Prince that has many Houses, gives some for to be
inhabited by his Servants, but the Imperial Palace is kept for his own
Dwelling; God manifests himself there in the most refulgent manner. All the
Perfections of the Glorious Deity are revealed to the Saints in their purity
and radiancy. The Divine Presence is the Supreme Glory of Heaven. The Lord
Jesus Christ is there crowned with the Majesty of the Divine Empire. This Glory
is the Reward of his meritorious Obedience and Sufferings. He was made a
Subject and a Servant, and endured the most ignominious cruel Death to satisfy
God's injured Justice. What has not the Son done for the Glory of his Father?
He lost his Life rather than his Obedience: And what will not the Father do for
the Honor of his Son? What Recompense is correspondent to such astonishing
Humiliation? Our Savior in his last solemn Prayer with his Disciples,
addresses himself to God: I have glorified thee on Earth; John 17.4, 5.
I have finished the Work thou gave me to do. And now, O Father, glorify me
with thy Self, with the Glory I had with thee before the World was. The Father
was so highly honored by Christ, that to satisfy his infinite Love toward
him, he has dignified him with a Name and State, that transcends all created
Glory. He is the Lord of Angels, the Head of the Church, and sits at the right
Hand of Majesty on high. In Heaven he appears in his triumphant Glory, of which
in the Transfiguration there was a transient glimpse, when his Face did shine
as the Sun, but allayed and moderated, that his Disciples might sustain his
Presence. There the Angels, the Princes of the Celestical Court, in all their
bright Orders encompass the Throne of God, and pay their humblest Homage to
him. The Saints appear there in their Robes of Glory, for they are transformed
into the glorious likeness of the Son of God: Their Souls radiant with pure
unspotted Holiness, shine through their Bodies, as Sunbeams transmitted
through Crystal. They all reign in Sovereign State for ever. It becomes the
Divine Majesty, that all God's Subjects should be Kings; and the highest
Principality on Earth, is but servitude compared with the Royalty enjoyed by
the Saints above: For how often are the mightiest Monarchs on Earth in perfect
bondage to their lawless Passions, and the Soul in dull captivity to the
sensual Appetites? How often are the strongest Empires dissolved and ruined?
But the Saints in Heaven, by obeying God, reign triumphantly: no Passions, no
Fears, no Desires resist their Will; nothing is able to trouble the sincere
Delight, the perfect Tranquillity of their State. They in their several degrees
of Glory, shine like the Stars for ever and ever.

To sum up all; What is promised to the Church, is fulfilled in Heaven; Isa.
60.19.
The Sun shall be no more thy Light by Day, nor the Moon by Night; but the Lord
shall be thy everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory.

Thus I have endeavored to represent that luminous Palace, and the bright
Inhabitants: but how short is the description of the glorious Realities, all
humane Words are too weak and narrow to express it as it is. The Glory and Joy
of that blessed State are unspeakable, as the Apostle, a Spectator thereof,
certifies. And it is observable that our Savior himself expresses the greatest
Things, by low familiar Terms and Resemblances; as he tells his Faithful
Disciples, they shall eat and drink at his Table in his Kingdom. In his
Promises of Rewards, it was not his intention merely to make a show of his
Power, but to declare his Love: Like a God, he does not magnify the Favors he
will bestow, but leaves it to their Spirits to conceive what becomes Almighty
Goodness to bestow on his Servants. In the plainest manner of promising the
Reward, there is a clear Character of the excellent Greatness of the Giver and
his Gifts.

I will now consider the infallible Assurance we have of this blessed Place and
State. This is built on our Savior's Love to them, and his Truth; and his
going to prepare that Blessedness for them. He says to his Disciples,
Otherwise I would have told you; implying, that his Affection and Sincerity,
make it impossible that he should deceive them with an empty Promise of future
Happiness.

(1.) His Love secures them. He would never have chosen them to be the
Companions of his Cross, never have exposed them as Sheep among Wolves, to
suffer for his sake, and to leave them for ever, and reign alone in Heaven.
Love is a benevolent affection rising in the Breast, and expressing it self in
real Benefits, according to the Power of the Lover, and the Wants or the
Capacity of the Person beloved: and the more intense the Affection is, the more
evident and noble effects of Kindness will proceed from it. All the most
liberal Expressions, without real performance, are but a vain pageant of
Friendship. Now, the Love of our Savior to his Disciples, was not only
sincere, but in such a degree of eminence, that they might safely rely upon his
Promises. His pure Love, was the motive of selecting them from the World, and
dignifying them with the endearing title of his Friends. His Conversation with
them was infinitely sweet, a Miracle of Benignity: and that glorious
performance of his Love for them, and all Believers, in leaving Heaven for
their sakes, is the strongest assurance that he will bring them to his Father's
House above. It Is represented as the peculiar Glory of Theodosius, Amicitiae
nomen privatum non solum intra aulam vocasti, sed indutam auro, gemmisque
redimitam solio recepisti. Lat. Pacat. paneg. ad Theod.
that he seated Majesty and Love in the same Throne: for Love unites and
conforms Persons, and makes them, as it were, Peers: and it seems too low a
submission for a Sovereign to descend from his Throne to a kind of equality
with a Subject, or too high an exaltation to assume a private Person into such
a degree of affection, as to make him as himself; yet such was the
condescension of that great and amiable Emperor. But how distant is the
greatest Monarch in the World from the Eternal Son of God, the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth? Love brought him down from his Throne in Heaven, where he
was adored by the Angels, and united him to our nature in our lowly state, in
order to the raising us to his Kingdom, and uniting us to himself in Glory.
Love unvaluable and incomparable! If Solomon, upon God's descending in a Cloud
to take possession of the Temple, was surpised with heavenly astonishment; But
will God indeed dwell on Earth? with infinite more cause have we, considering
the incarnation of the Son of God, to say, Will God indeed dwell on Earth? For
what was the appearance of a Vapor that might be easily dispelled, to the
coming of Jesus Christ into the World, in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt
substantially? What is so worthy of reverence and admiration? New Things
suspend the actings of the mind, glorious Things overwhelm the Faculty; and
never was there so rare and excelling an Object. This so signal and amazing
Effect of our Savior's Love, gives assurance to Christians, that he will take
them to an everlasting Communion with himself in Glory. As it is more for a
Prince to live with a private Person in a Cottage with complacency, than to
receive that Person into his Court, and invest him with Honor. The Love of our
Savior never abated to his Disciples; when he was in view of Death, with its
troops of Terrors, it is said, Having loved his own, he loved them to the end.
And after his Resurrection to a Heavenly Life, he expressed the same dear
affection, Go to my Brethren! a style as high as Love can rise.

It Is further considerable what was touched on before, that the Disciples of
Christ, besides the common Calamities of Mankind wherein they are involved, are
for his Truth and Cause exposed to Indignities and Injuries of all kinds and
degrees, which the malice of Satan and his Instruments, the perverted World,
can fasten upon them. The complaint of the Church of old is often renewed, For
thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as Sheep for the
Slaughter. And can the Love of Christ, so tender, so compassionate, that the
Love of a Mother to a sucking Infant is not an adequate representation of it;
can such Love let the Saints be separated from him for ever? Then, according to
the Apostle's expression, If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are
of all Men most miserable.

(2.) His Truth gives an infallible assurance that we shall be received with
him in Glory. He declares his own Titles, I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life. If Truth it self be true, and deserves our entire trust, we may rest upon
his Promises, who values his Word more than the World. Mat. 5.
The Pillars of Heaven shall fall, and the Foundations of the Earth be
overthrown, before one tittle of his Words shall be without a full
accomplishment. If any Man serves me, John 12.26.
let him follow me; and where I am, there shall my Servant be. It Is his most
gracious Promise to encourage Obedience: and he assures his Disciples, If I go
away, and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my
self; that where I am, there ye may be also. To show the validity of Christ's
Promise, let us consider, the unchangeable Perfections of God's Nature are the
Foundation of his unchangeable Councils; and from thence the unchangeableness
of his Promises is justly inferred. The Decrees of God are engraven with the
point of a Diamond, and are unretractible. The Counsel of the Lord shall stand:
for such is the perfection of his Knowledge, that he can never be surpised by
any sudden unforeseen Event that should induce a change of his Will; and such
is his Omnipotence, that he gives an infallible accomplishment to his Decrees:
and his Word endures for ever. 1 Pet. 1.25.
The immutability of his Nature, gives firmness to his Counsels; and the
fidelity of his Nature to his Promises. In him there is no variableness, nor
shadow of change: and he is God that cannot ly: He reveals himself by his Name
Jehova to his People, to signify, that he is the same in performing, as in
promising. Now Jesus Christ his Son is equal to the Father in all essential
Perfections. He styles himself the Amen, the true and faithful Witness: If he
deceive his Servants with a false expectation of a joyful glorious State
hereafter, it would be a blemish to his unspotted Holiness, an eternal
reflection upon his inviolate Truth. It Is therefore a faithful Saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, That where Christ is in Glory, there shall his
Servants be with him, otherwise he would have told them.

2. We are to consider the other firm ground of assurance in our Savior's next
words: I go to prepare a place for you. This specially respects his Ascension
into Heaven, but it supposes his Death. He purchased Heaven by his Death: He
prepares it by his Ascension. His Blood shed on the Cross, and pleaded in
Heaven, gives to Believers a right to it here, and actual possession hereafter.

1. His obedient Sufferings are the price of this glorious Inheritance. In our
Guilty State, Heaven is as inaccessible to us, as Paradise was to Adam after
his expulsion, when guarded by a Cherubim with a flaming Sword. For neither the
Divine Wisdom, nor the Law of God would permit that an unpardoned Sinner should
be received into his Kingdom. The Justice of God does not infringe his rich
Goodness, but that he may bestow upon an innocent Creature the most excellent
Blessings, the Testimonies of his Bounty. If Adam had persever'd in his Duty,
God might have translated him to Heaven, and that happy change had been a free
Favor: for his Obedince had not been comparable to the Glory that shall be
revealed in the Saints. But Justice sets up a Legal Bar against the Guilty;
they are excluded from the Heavenly Glory. The Creature must be entirely
innocent, or graciously pardoned, to be capable of enjoying that Supreme
Happiness. When the guilt of Sin is abolished, it has no malignant Power,
either to subject us to Evil, or deprive us of Good. Now our Savior by
Satisfying the Injured Justice of God, has washed away our Sins in his Blood;
and has infinitely pleased God, that we obtain by him, not only redemption
from Hell, Heb. 9.12.
but the possession of Heaven. This was the Design of God's Love, in giving his
only begotten Son, that whoever believes should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. Accordingly the Apostle says, Titus 3.7.
That being justified by his Grace through Jesus Christ, we should be made
Heirs of Eternal Life. And by the gracious unalterable tenor of the Gospel,
these great Benefits are inseparable; it being equally impossible that an
unpardoned Sinner should enter into Heaven, or that a pardoned Sinner should be
excluded. The Connection is indissolvable; Whom he justifies, Romans 8.30.
them he glorifies. Nay, it is more easily credible, that a pardoned Sinner
should be admitted into the glorious Presence of God, than that a guilty Sinner
should be reconciled to him. As supposing the revival of a Phoenix from its
Ashes, it is more easily conceivable that it should take its flight upwards,
which is the natural Motion of a living Bird, than that it should be restored
to Life in such a miraculous manner. In short, Heaven is a free Gift to us, but
dearly bought by our Savior; it is the Gift of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. He had a double Title to Heaven, as the Son of God, he was Heir of his
Kingdom; this Title is incommunicably his own: and he acquired it by his
meritorious Sufferings: This he imparts to Believers, who enter into Heaven by
the new and living Way, which he consecrated for them through his Flesh.

2. He ascended into Heaven to prepare a Place for us. The Actions of our
Savior may be considered two ways; either as terminated in himself, or with a
relative respect to Believers, as the Head of the Church. His Resurrection was
not merely Personal, but has an operative Force in raising all the Members of
his Mystical Body: As David's subduing Goliath, was not his own personal Victory
simply, but was extended in its happy Consequences to all his Nation: for in
him, as their Champion, the Army of Israel overcame the Philistims. Jesus
Christ, as Head of the Church, has broken the Dominion of Death; and by virtue
of his Conquest, the Grave shall restore the Saints at the general
Resurrection. And his Ascension was not a personal Act purely to obtain his own
Right; but as our Forerunner he is entered for us into Heaven. As the High
Priest in his majestic mysterious Habit, with the Names of the Children of
Israel upon his Breast, entered into the Holy of Holies; so Jesus Christ
entered into the Eternal Sanctuary as our Representer, to take possession of it
for us. The Language of Despair is silenced for ever. Who shall ascend up to
Heaven to raise us thither? Christ is lifted up to the highest Glory, and will
draw all his People after him. The first Adam was from the Earth, Earthly; but
Christ is the Lord from Heaven, and is returned to Heaven: and shall Earth
destroy what Heaven cannot restore? The Apostle tells us, That Believers sit
with Christ in Heavenly Places; that is, as he is the Head of that Sacred
Society, his Church; and his Promise is expressed, To him that overcomes, will I
grant personally to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also am set down with
my Father in his Throne. After victorious Obedience, the Saints shall be taken
into Sovereign Alliance with Christ, and reign for ever. In short, his
excellent Merit is the Foundation of our glorious Hope: and his prevailing
Intercession introduces us into actual Possession. He that purchased Heaven,
disposes of it by his last Will; thus he addressed to his Father immediately
before his Death; Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may see my Glory: And he has Power to accomplish his own
Testament. What he has done already for Believers is an uncontrollable
Evidence, and invincible Assurance of what he has promised. There is a vaster
distance between the Deity and Misery, than between Man and the Heavenly Glory.
For the Sun to go backwards ten Degrees, was miraculous and astonishing; but to
ascend the Horizon, is according to natural Order. The abasement of the Son of
God was stupendous, but his advancement to the highest Glory is most becoming
his Divine Relation, and infinitely due to his exuberant Merits, and a firm
Foundation of Hope, that all his redeemed Saints shall be where he is, and be
conformed to him in all supernatural Divine Excellencies of Soul and Body for
ever.

The Application.
1. LET us adore the unconceivable Love of God, who has prepared such a Place
of Joy, and Glory for his Children when they leave the World. The Father
prepared it in his Decree from Eternity, and by his creating Power from the
Foundation of the World: and we are assured it is such a Place and State, as
fully answers the Design of God's Love, that is, to make a reasonable Creature
as happy as it is capable to be. When Man was turned Rebel against his Creator,
when so changed from the Divine Resemblance impressed at first upon him, into the
disgraceful likeness of the Beasts that perish, as the Psalmist justly
reproaches him; then to pardon us, and prefer us; to restore us to his Favor,
and Image, and the nearest communion with himself in his Palace above, is such
an astonishing Mercy as is only proper to God who is Love. And the Love of our
Redeemer is equally admirable; when we were expelled Paradise, he makes a
reentry for us, and intercepts the stroke of the flaming Sword that had
destroyed us. We neither know the depth of our Misery from whence we are freed,
nor the height of Glory to which we are raised by our Redeemer. In what Heart
but that of the Son of God, could ever such compassion and charity be
conceived? He took our Flesh to Heaven to prepare it for us, and
interchangeably left his Spirit on Earth to prepare us for Heaven. How just is
the solemn and terrible denunciation of the Apostle, He that loves not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha. And how are we obliged to God for
the blessed and glorious Gospel, that infinitely excels all humane Books in the
matter it contains, the everlasting Happiness of Man, and the certain way to
obtain it, and in the manner of conveying those great and Sacred Truths by
Divine Revelation? And what an Argument of thankfulness is it to consider the
distinguishing Grace of God; that when the most are so blind in the clear Light
of the Gospel, as not to discover the luster of the Pearl of Price, and so
immersed in Vanities as to disrelish Heavenly Joys, that he is pleased to
inlighten the Eyes of our Mind, that we may know what is the Hope of his
Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. The
number of Fools that understand not the Price that is put into their Hands, in
comparison of the truly Wise, is greater than of common Stones that lie in the
Mire of the Streets, to precious Stones of the highest value, Diamonds and
Rubies: How affectionately should we give thanks to the Father who has made us
meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. But we have such Allays by the
Relics of Carnality, that without the Heavenly Spirit's inspiring our cold
Earth, we shall never be ardent and lively in the Praises of our Blessed
Benefactor. Even David himself was fain to call upon his Soul with repeated
fervency, and excite every Faculty within him, to bless the Lord, who had
forgiven his Iniquities, and redeemed his Life from destraction, and crowned
him with loving Kindness, and tender Mercies.

2. From hence we may infer the great Guilt of Unbelievers in the Christian
Church; and such are all those who implicitly despise and reject Heaven for the
present World. This will aggravate the Sin and Sentence of the Carnal and
Worldly, that they despise such glorious Realities for empty Vanities.
Desperate Gamesters, that venture a Kingdom at every Throw! What blindness of
Mind, or rather perverseness of Heart is it, that Men pursue with their best
strength and desires, the fading and false World, and slight Heaven an
inestimable and everlasting Treasure. Certainly when Death shall open their
Eyes, they will have changed thoughts of Things. It Is related by a wise
Historian, Plut.
That a Citizen pleaded his own Cause of great moment before Philip King of
Macedon, who slept during the Plea; and a little after passed an unrighteous
Judgment against him; the injured Person replied, I appeal from your Sentence.
A word that seemed so presumptuous to an Independent Sovereign, that with
indignation the King asked him, To whom he appealed? He answered, From the King
sleeping, to the King waking. Thus Men who are led by Sense, are asleep, whilst
the Cause of infinite Concernment, eternal Salvation, is faithfully pleaded by
the Advocates of their Souls; and they determine for the Interest of the Flesh
against the Spirit: but their waking Thoughts will discover the unrighteousness
of their carnal Judgment. In the next State how will they with restless Anguish
remember their foolish Bargain, to exchange an everlasting Treasure for fading
Toys? We may a little conjecture the Torments of the Damned, by the Terrors of
the Dying; then the enlightened guilty Conscience makes them cry out, O that we
had been wise, so to use the World that we might enjoy God! O that we had been
so careful to have obtained an Interest in Heaven, as we have been to gain the
Earth! Then the stinging Remorse begins that shall never end.

3. Let us make it our fixed Aim, our zealous constant Endeavor to secure our
Title to this heavenly Inheritance. Let Eternity be our Counselor, and guide
our Choice. Let us not build our Felicity on the Sand, but on the Rock that
cannot be shaken. Such is the excellent Goodness of God revealed in the Gospel,
that every Person that sincerely and regularly seeks Heaven, shall obtain it,
and no Person shall be deprived of it, but for his wilful neglect. Now our
Blessed Savior, who opened the Eternal Kingdom, has declared to us upon what
terms it may be obtained, in his conference with Nicodemus; John 3.
Verily, verily I say unto thee, Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. Natural Birth, and Accomplishments, tho never so high and
noble, are of no advantage there. The degeneracy of Man from his Primitive
Holiness, makes him both unworthy and incapable of having a right or possession
of Heaven, without a Divine Change, a Spiritual Regeneration. The supernatural
Inheritance is annexed to the being born of God: that is, the receiving a
Principle of Life, and Actions suitable to the Life of God, in universal
Holiness and Righteousness. It Is not a ground of Title to Heaven, that we have
a natural alliance to God, as the Father of Spirits in the first Creation, but
we must be his Offspring by a new and more excellent Creation, according to
our Savior's words, That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. We must be
renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, spiritualized in our Affections, before we
can obtain an interest in his Love, which was forfeited by our Rebellion, and
consequently in his Kingdom. Adoption into God's Family, and the Line of
Heaven, is always in conjunction with the renovation of the Divine Nature and
Image in us. The Holy Spirit witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the
Children of God: but his witnessing is always consequent to his working in us
those Graces that constitute us to be the Children of God: an humble Fear to
offend him, a Care to please him, a Zeal for his Glory, delight in Communion
with him, resignation to his Will and Wisdom, trust on his Fatherly Love, and a
desire to be in his Blessed Presence. By the discovery of these filial
Affections, our Divine Relation is made sure. The Apostle infers, If Sons, then
Heirs. Holiness is the infallible Evidence of Election; for the Vessels of
Mercy are prepared by Holiness for Glory; the Seal of Adoption, whereby God's
Children are distinguished from the World; and the Earnest of their Inheritance
for Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.5.
is a blissful State of Purity; and the Graces with the Comforts of the Spirit,
are the beginnings of it here. It Is further to be observed, that our right in
the Heavenly Inheritance, depends upon our union with Christ. He instates his
Members in the same Relation with himself to God. Thus he declares to his
Disciples, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God, and your God.
Christ's Relation has precedence in Point of Dignity and Causality; and he
derives a Right to us in his Father's House: We are Coheirs with Christ. Now
it is universally and necessarily true what the Apostle says, Whoever is in
Christ, is a new Creature. For our vital Union with him, is by the Sanctifying
Spirit on Christ's part; and by Faith and Love on our part. Briefly, Without
Holiness no Man shall see God. The Exclusion is absolute and universal of all
unsanctified Persons. It Is impossible God should admit them into Heaven; for
the Rights of Justice are inviolable: we must come to Christ's Tribunal before
we come to his Throne: Heb. 12.23.
We must come to God the Judge of all, before we are admitted into the number of
Just Men made perfect. According to our Works the Reward will be: and Men are
incapable of enjoying Heaven without Holiness. The Wisdom of God appears, in
that the various sorts of Creatures live in the Elements from which they were
produced, and have Natures suitable to the Places of their Residence. The
Beasts that were formed from the Earth, walk and rest there: the Birds and
Fishes that were produced out of the Waters, the one sort flies in the Air,
that is, rarefied Water; the other swim in Water, that is, the thickest Air;
and that Wisdom more evidently appears in suiting the everlasting States of Men
to their moral Dispositions. Thus we must be born from above, (...).
if we would joyfully live above. The Apostle tells us, That Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. The natural Body must be spiritualized
and invested with Celestial Qualities, before it can enter into that Glorious
Place: and the Reason is more strong, that earthly sensual Souls can never
enter into Heaven, there being an absolute Contrariety, and Opposition between
the habitual constitution of such, and that place and state: they must be Holy
and Heavenly, to be prepared for the Divine Presence, and to converse with the
purified Assembly Above; 'till they are wrought for that blessed End, 2 Cor. 5.
cleansed, and purified, and endued with Holy Qualities, till they are made
meet, they cannot possess the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. How vain and
impossible are the hopes of unrenewed Sinners? The Presence and Conversation of
the Saints is now an offense to them, damps their carnal Jollity and wild
Mirth, for it upbraids their neglect of Serious Religion. How fearful will the
sight of God be to them? If the unpurg'd Eye cannot bear the Light of a Candle,
how will it sustain the glorious Light of the Sun? The Lord's Day, in its
Sacred employment, is their burden; how can they expect to enjoy an everlasting
Sabbath Above? How can there be a lively Hope of Heaven, that implies
perfection of Holiness, when they neither seriously desire, nor endeavor to be
Holy? They may have a Cobweb Hope that will be swept away, but Hope that is as
an Anchor to secure the Soul, has always a purifying influence on the Heart
and Life. 1 John 3.3.
Whoever has this Hope of being like to Christ in Glory, purifies himself even
as he is pure. In short, as the Jews had a carnal conceit of the Messiah, and
transformed him into a temporal Prince coming with Pomp and Splendour, to free
their Nation from Bondage, and exalt it to the highest Dominion in the World:
and this Conceit so strongly possessed them, that when the Son of God, who was
Holy, Harmless, and Undefiled, and separate from Sinners, appeared in an humble
state to reform and save Mankind, they rejected him: Thus the unregenerate have
a carnal conceit of Heaven: They can only fancy it as a place of visible Glory,
and a Sanctuary and Refuge from the Torments of Hell, and in that Notion desire
it; but as the Place wherein that Holy God is enjoyed and glorified by the
Saints, they cannot desire nor delight in it.

4. From hence we should be induced to regulate our Minds, Affections, and
Conversation, becoming our present State and future Hopes. Our Father's House,
our Everlasting Home is Above, and here we are Strangers in Condition, and
should be so in Disposition to present Things. This should lessen our Esteem,
our Desires and Delights, and moderate our Endeavors with respect to the
present World. It Is the wise and earnest counsel of St. Peter, Dearly beloved
Brethren, I beseech you, as Pilgrims and Strangers, abstain from fleshly Lusts,
that war against the Soul. Sensual Lusts darken the Mind, that it does not
rightly value Things, nor make judicious Comparisons between superficial
fleeting Things of Time, and the sure and solid good Things of Eternity. The
lower Appetites are not capable nor careful to obtain a Spiritual and Future
Happiness, but intensely applied to what is present and sensible. But the
serious Thoughts of our present Tenure, how frail, how uncertain, and of the
next State how unchangeable and fixed, would be effectual to frame our Hearts
that we may manage the World with indifferent Affections; To rejoice in it, as
if we rejoiced not; to buy as if we possessed not; to use it so as not to abuse
it. How does the Faith of the Saints under the Law upbraid our Infidelity. They
had not so clear a revelation of the Heavenly State, yet they confessed they were
Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth, and desired a better Country. And David not
only when he was as a Patridg chased upon the Mountains, but when seated on the
Royal Throne, acknowledges, We are Strangers, as all our Fathers were; and his
Affections were accordingly weaned from the World. Was ever Passenger so
foolish, that being to pass over a narrow Strait of the Sea of a days sailing,
makes Provisions for a Voyage of a Year? or that will be at great cost to paint
an Inn, and adorn it with rich Furniture, where he is to lodge but a Night?
It Is incomparably more reproachful folly, to spend the best of our Time, and
Strength, and Spirits for the gaining the present World, as if we were to
continue here for ever. How many are sensual, and secure in their earthly
Enjoyments, 'till as the rich Voluptuary, that was clothed in Purple, and fared
deliciously every day, they unexpectedly die, and irrecoverably drop into Hell.
Just like a Traveller, that lays himself under the shadow of some Trees in his
way Home, and sleeps till the Night with its Darkness and Dangers surprises
him, and he is destroyed by Robbers or wild Beasts. How plain and necessary a
Lesson is the vanity and shortness of the present Life? but how few effectually
learn it? The Psalmist addresses himself to God for Instruction; So teach us to
number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. Let Men fancy what
they please of their Tenure here, they are but Strangers, and have no
continuing City here; and the consequent Duty is most clearly and strongly
urged by the Apostle, Let them seek one to come.

5. Let our Conversation be in Heaven, whilst we are upon the Earth. Every
Thing in Nature, has a tendency to its Original and Perfection. Rivers that
come from the Sea, are in a living Motion returning thither; If you stop their
Course, and confine them, though in Receptacles of Marble, they corrupt and
die. The Divine Nature in the Saints has a strong tendency to Heaven from
whence it came, and raises the Soul by solemn Thoughts, and ardent Desires, to
that Blessed Place. A Philosopher that was asked of what Country he was;
replied, He was a Citizen of the World. The Scripture corrects the Language,
and teaches us that we are Citizens of Heaven; we are passing to the Jerusalem
Above, the Land of Promise, the true Land of the Living: and all our Aims and
Endeavors should have a final respect thither. Our Hearts should be where our
Treasure is. How joyful, how advantageous is a Heavenly Conversation? The
serious and believing Contemplation of Heaven, is a temperate Ecstasy, and
brings the Soul into the Divine Presence: anticipates the Joy of it by a sweet
foretast, by a supernatural elevation of Mind: by frequent lively Thoughts of
our Glorious Inheritance, we gradually enter into it: the prospect of that
causes in the Saints, a Holy Contempt of the World, as not worthy our Ambition
and Diligence: it causes such a self-denial from the inviting temptatations of
Sense, that Men, whose Portion is in this Life, are forced to admire their
restraint from those Objects that ravish Carnal Hearts. A Heavenly Christian
will improve sensible Things for spiritual Ends; as Feathers that have a
natural Weight inclining to the Center, yet planted in the Wings of a Bird, by
a living Motion, carry it aloft in the free Air. Our rising in the Morning, is
an Emblem of the Resurrection from the Grave, to behold the bright Day of
Eternity. All the Refreshments and Comforts of the present Life, should be an
advantage to raise our Minds to God, who is the Supreme Good, whose Fullness
eminently contains all Good, and infinitely exceeds all our Expectations.
Heavenly Love will dry up the Vanity of our Thoughts and Affections, and rescue
the Mind from the prostitution to sensible Things, and most pleasantly exercise
it upon Things Above. Love between Friends is maintained by immediate Converse,
or by Letters, when absent: thus is Love between God and the Soul: And if God,
that is to himself his own Blessedness, his own Kingdom and Glory, yet is
pleased in his gracious Communications to his Children on Earth; how much more
should they by frequent and affectionate Duties, address to him who is their
eternal lnfinite Good. Thus they are acquainted with him, and enjoy a sweet
Peace, and obtain an humble Confidence of appearing before him in his Holy and
Glorious Habitation: whereas those who live without God in the World, are
justly fearful of Death; for then the Spirit returns to God that gave it.
Briefly, let us with zealous Affections, and persevering Diligence prepare our
selves for the Presence of God, and the Society of Blessed Spirits in our
Father's House: Let us always abound in the Work of the Lord, knowing our
Labor is not in vain: Let us join Works of Charity with Works of Piety; employ
the fading Riches of the World for the Relief of the Saints; that as our
Savior Promises when we shall fail, when in the Hour of Death our Flesh and
Hearts shall fail us, and our Souls be dislodged from our Earthly Tabernacles,
Luke 16.9.
we may be received into Eternal Habitations. The Everlasting Judge, that
dispenses Rewards and Punishments, has acquainted us with the Rule of Judgment
at the last Day: Those who mercifully relieve him in his Members, shall inherit
the Kingdom of Glory; and those who neglect that Duty, shall be cast into the
Lake of Fire. Though many who are wretchedly careless of doing Good according
to their Ability, now satisfy themselves that they are not injurious to others:
Yet it will be a small mitigation of their Sentence at last, that they are
condemned, not for the Defect of Justice, but of Charity.

6. Let the belief that there are Mansions of Rest and Joy prepared for the
Saints in their Father's House, gloriously support them under their heaviest
Troubles here. This World is the Devil's Circuit, wherein he is always ranging
about seeking to devour: The pleasant Things of the World are his Temptations
to ensnare the Carnal; the Men of the World are his Instruments to oppress the
Saints; and were it not for the Restraints of the Divine Power, what
Desolations would be made in God's Heritage? Sext Empirie cont. Mathem.
'Twas a strange and barbarous Custom among the Persians, that upon the Death
of the Emperor, for five days the Empire was left without Government. And as
upon removing the Stone from the Fabulous Cave of Aeolus, the Winds broke out
in their fury: so by taking away the authority of the Laws, license was given
to all Licentiousness, and the whole Kingdom was in mortal Paroxisms. All were
in Arms, some to do Injuries, others to revenge them: the Chastity of none was
secure, but concealed, nor the Estates of any but defended: the Bridle of Fear
was taken off, no Wickedness but was boldly committed, or attempted, and the
Kingdom became a Field of Bloody War. But when the new King was proclaimed, all
things were immediately reduced to Order, that the Advantage of Government
might be set off by the experimental Confusions and Mischiefs of Anarchy. But
if God left the perverted World, and Satan the Prince of it, one day to their
rage against his People, did he not shut it in with Doors, and Bars, as he does
the impetuous Ocean; so swelling and diffusive is their Malignity, that it
would, like the Deluge, drown all, and not a Remnant of the Saints would be
left. Yet God wisely permits many Temporal Evils to be inflicted on his
Servants by their Enemies, for the trial of their Fidelity, and their noble
Resolution to glorify him whatever they suffer for his sake. And it becomes
them, with an undisturbed serenity of Mind, and harmony of Affections, with an
invincible Patience, to bear all the Scorn and Contempt, all the Malice, and
Fury to which they are exposed upon a Christian account. Let them remember they
are Strangers and Sojourners here, and live by other Laws than the World does,
which causes their hatred: But in their Father's House there will be perfect
Rest. St. Paul, who had experience of both in a singular manner, declares, I
reckon that the Sufferings of the present State, are not worthy to be compared,
to the Glory that shall be revealed in us. In that State of pure Felicity,
there are no remains of Afflicting Evils; all is Peace, and Joy, and Glory.

Seneca the Philosopher, when an Exile, and confined to the Mountains of
Corsica, entertained himself with the contemplation of the Heavens, Dum oculi
mei ab illo Spectaculo cujus insatiabiles sunt, non abducantur, dum mihi lunam,
solemque intueri liceat, dum caeteris inhaerere Syderibus, and dum cum his sim,
and Coelestibus qua homini fas est miscear, dum animam ad cognitarum rerum
conspectum tendentem in sublimi semper habeam, quantum refert mea quid calcem?
Consol. ad Hier. c. 9.
and the bright Luminaries, in their various but regular Motions: Thus when
banished from the Court and City, he dwelt amongst the Stars, and casting his
Eyes down upon the Earth, despised all Humane Greatness and Possessions, (that
are so vainly magnified by figurative Flatteries) as we do a grain of Sand. Did
Philosophy inspire him with such Principles of Patience and Fortitude? yet it
ascended no higher than the visible Heavens. How much more should Faith that
raises a Christian, by high and steady Thoughts, to the Supreme Heaven where
the Divine Glory shines, comfort him in all the Troubles of this World. Add
further, That it is an excellent Preservative from Envy and Fretfulness at the
Prosperity of the Wicked, to consider that their Felicity is as transient and
vanishing as the Trouble of the Saints: Psalm 37.35, 36.
I have seen the Wicked in great Power, and spreading himself like a green Bay
Tree: yet he passed away, and lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, and he could
not be found. All the Riches, and Greatness, and Pleasures of the World are
weighed, numbered, and measured by the Psalmist, and found to be as light and
fading as Vanity. Naked they came into the World, and naked they must go out;
and how much more tormenting will it be to be stripped of all their Enjoyments;
how much more sorrowful will they be to go from their great Possessions, than
for one that leaves the World, and never had them? Their Hopes are like the
giving up of the Ghost, and expire with their Breath for ever. I went into the
Sanctuary, Psalm. 73.
says the troubled Saint, then understood I their End: The End of their
Felicity, and the Miseries of the Righteous. Besides the Evils suffered for
Righteousness-sake, there are innumerable Sorrows that befall the Saints here.
How many afflicting Diseases, sad Occurrences, vexing Passions harras them?
Some Afflictions are so wounding to their Spirits, that no Balm that growns on
Earth can heal. But the lively Hope of Heaven is an Universal Cure for all
their Troubles. Let the mourning Christian consider the wise Providence of God,
that orders all Events, and believe his Love in sending, and his End in all
their Afflictions. Such is the Divine Power that God could immediately free us
from all Troubles, as easily, as turn the Wind from a blasting Quarter of the
Heavens, to the most Benign and Refreshing. Are we pained with Diseases? he can
more easily change the Tone of Nature in a sickly Body, and make it healthy;
than one can change the stop in an Organ that presently alters the sound: but
his Love dispenses bitter Things to us, that are necessary for our Spiritual
and Everlasting Good. His End is to prepare us for Heaven, that is prepared for
us. The Apostle declares, He that has wrought us for the self-same thing, is
God: that is, made us fit for the Heavenly Glory. The Divine disposal of Things
here to the Saints, has a certain Order to their Eternal State. He purges out
our vicious guilty Affections to the World by sharp Physic, that our Hopes of
Heaven may be more pure and vigorous, more actuated by serious Thoughts and
intense Desires, that we may feel the sense of the Psalmist's Expression, O
when shall we come and appear before God!

In short, Art thou in the Vale of Tears, languishing in Sorrow, and dying
every Day? by Faith ascend to the Mountains of Spices, the Blessed Place Above,
and thou will find the Comforts of God to revive and delight thy Soul.

7. Let this reconcile Death to us. The Pale Horse is sent to bring us to our
Father's House. The Apostle expresses the true Christian Temper: 2 Cor. 5.
In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed with our House that is from
Heaven: And we are willing rather to be absent from the Body, and present with
the Lord. Every Saint in the present World is both a Prison and a Captive: his
Soul is detained from the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, by confinement
to his Body. Therefore methinks he should not merely be content to die out of
the Necessity of Nature, when he can live no longer, but desire the happy
removal, and say with the Psalmist, I rejoiced when they said to me, Let us go
into the House of the Lord. It Is true, Nature will recoile, and the
extinguishing the present Life, with all its sensible pleasant Operations, is
uneasy to us: but as when the Candles are put out, the Sun rises in its
brightness, so when the Natural Life ceases, the Spiritual Life springs forth
in its Oriency and Glory: When the Earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, the naked
separate Soul shall be received into a Building not made with Hands, Eternal in
the Heavens. Our joyful Affections, in leaving the World, and ascending to
Heaven, should be in some manner suitable to our reception there. What a joyful
Welcome will entertain us from God himself? Our Savior comforted his Disciples
with a Heavenly Valediction, I go to my Father, and your Father; to my God, and
your God. The Gracious Relation sweetens the Glorious. He that joyfully
receives the rebellious, but penitent Son to Grace, will joyfully receive his
obedient Sons to Glory. He that now receives their Prayers with the Affection
of a Father, will receive their Persons with the dearest Expressions of Love.
His Fatherly Providence watched over them in the Way, and will triumphantly
bring them Home. Here many Blessed Testimonies of God's Love are given to the
Saints, that produce such a spiritual sweetness in their Hearts, that they
esteem his loving Kindness as better than Life, more worth than all the World;
but the full revealing of his Love is only in Heaven. And as a Child knows by
Experience the Love of his Father, but the Degrees and Strength of his
Affection he does not understand till arrived at mature Age, and sees the
Inheritance his Father enstates upon him. Thus in Heaven only the Saints shall
know the excellent and perfect Love of God to them, when they are possessed of
that Glorious Kingdom, his most free and rich Gift, which transcends all their
present Thoughts. And our blessed Redeemer, that by so many Titles has an
Interest in us, that is not contented in his own Personal Glory, without our
partaking of it, that by his Resurrection opened the Grave, and by his
Ascension opened Heaven for us; how dearly will he receive us? He esteems
Believers to be his Joy and Crown, and with an ecstasy of Affection will present
them to his Father; Behold I, and the Children that God has given me. The
Angels and Saints Above overflow with Joy; when the Soul, as a pure Spark freed
from its Ashes, ascends to the Element of Spirits, how joyfully is it
entertained by that Glorious Assembly? The Angels that rejoice at the
Conversion of a Sinner, will much more at the Glorification of a Saint; and the
Saints have a new accession to their Joy, upon the reception of any of their
Brethren to that State of Felicity.

The Saints of all Ages may be resembled to a Fleet of Merchantmen that are
bound for the same Port, some arrive sooner, others later, according to the
time of their setting out: but those who arrive first, how do they welcome
their Friends that come safely afterward? An imperfect resemblance how dearly
and joyfully the Saints that are gone before us welcome those who arrive in
Heaven every day, knowing the dangerous Seas they have past through, where so
many have been cast away and lost for ever. All Heaven is in Music,
celebrating the Praises of God, and expressing their joyful sense, when a
Victorious Saint is come to receive his Reward. How does this Consideration
upbraid us, that we are so unwilling to be dissolved, and to be with our best
Friends in the best Place? that our Tears and Sorrows for leaving the Earthly
Tabernacle, and the low Comforts of this Life, should continue till we come to
the Gate of Heaven? How can we be content with the Imperfections of the present
State? Here we are as distant from complete Happiness, as the highest Heaven is
from the Earth. Where is our Faith in the Promises of God? Where is our Love to
our Redeemer and our Souls? The lothness of a Sincere Christian to die, and be
with Christ, is a deflection from his Christianity.

Lastly, This should refresh our Sorrows for the loss of our dearest Friends
that die in the Lord. Here is a mournful parting, when they are laid in the
cold, dark and silent Mansions of the Earth: when those whom we loved as our
own Souls, are finally separated from us, and we shall see their Faces no more.
And as one that is directed by the Light of a Torch in the Night, when it is
taken away, is more sensible of the Darkness, than if he had not been
enlightened by it: So when those dear Friends are taken away, whose Conversation
was the Light and Joy of our Lives, we are more darkened with Sorrow, than if we
had never enjoyed them. But if we duly consider Things, there is more reason of
Joy, than Sorrow, at the departure of the Saints. Our Savior tells his
Disciples, that were mourning for his signifying that he must go away, If ye
loved me, ye would rejoice, because I say I must go to my Father to reign with
him in Sovereign Glory. Sincere Love will make us more to rejoice in their
Gain, than to grieve for our Loss. Especially considering within a little while
we shall be inseparably united in the Kingdom of Glory, where Love reigns for
ever.

FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
A Second Volume of Sermons, on Mat. 25. John 17. Romans 6, and 8 th Chapters,
etc. Preached by the late Reverend and Learned Tho. Manton, D. D. In two Parts.

The vanity of the World, with other Sermons. By Ezekiel Hopkins, now Lord
Bishop of Londonderry in Ireland.

A Paraphrase, with Notes and a Preface, on the 6 th of St. John, showing that
there is neither Good Reason, nor Sufficient Authority, to suppose that the
Eucharist is discoursed of in that Chapter, much less to infer the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation from it.

Grotius his Arguments for the Truth of the Christian Religion, rendered into
plain English Verse.

A Sermon on 1 John 5.4. [ This is the Victory over the World, even our Faith.]
Preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, etc. July 18. 1686. By
James Fen, M. A. and Vicar of Goudhurst in Kent.

A Discourse of Bosom Sins. A Sermon (on Psalm. 18.23.) Preached before the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, etc. October. 10. 1686. By Peter Newcome, M.A. and
Vicar of Alderham in Hertfordshire.

The present State of the Ottoman Empire; containing the Maxims of the Turkish
Polity; the most material Points of the Mohammedan Religion; their Military
Discipline: With an exact computation of their Forces both by Sea and Land. By
Sir Paul Rycaut Knight.

A Complete Journey through Italy; Containing the Character of the People;
Description of the chief Towns, Churches, Monasteries, etc. By R. Lassell Gent.

The Great Evil of Health-Drinking; or a Discourse wherein the Original, Evil,
and Mischief of drinking of Healths are discovered and detected: With Remedies
and Antidotes against it, in order to prevent the sad Consequents thereof.

The Best Fence against Popery; or a Vindication of the Power of the King in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, being an Answer to the Papists Objections against the
Oath of Supremacy, by a Learned Divine.


