THE Upright Christian DISCOVERED; By keeping himself from his Iniquity, and
Resignation to the Divine Will. By way of QVESTION and ANSWER.

Gathered out of the judicious Treatises of William Bates, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church
Yard, 1693.

The Upright Christian Discovered, etc.
Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright before him; and I kept my self from MINE
Iniquity.

Mat. 26.39. He fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but AS THOU WILL.


Quest. 1. WHat Sin may be named a Man's own?

Answ. Generally, every one that he commits, may be named his own. All are
Offsprings of the Lust, that St. James calls his own. The Devil can fasten
no Guilt upon us without the consent of our Wills. But yet some Sins be more
peculiarly and more eminently to be called our own. Namely, such as there is a
stronger tendency in us to commit, than others; such as our Wills and
Affections are more engaged unto, than unto others.

These are of different kinds in the several unregenerate Persons; in all of
whom they do reign. The Discovery of them, that is most level to the lowest
Christians, is made by their Causes, and by their Effects.

Their Causes are either Natural or Moral. Natural, from the different
Temperaments of Men's Bodies and Connection of their Passions. These be the
secret Springs of special Inclinations and Aversions. It is true, corrupted
Nature includes all Sin. But there is not an equal inclination in every person
unto all Sin. In waste Ground some Weeds be ranker than others, from the
quality of the Soil: And in the Lives of Men, some Sins be more predominant
than others, by reason of peculiar Dispositions. For bodily Dispositions
incline the Soul. We see Men of Sanguine Constitutions are usually light and
vain, sensual and riotous, bold and aspiring. Men of Phlegmatic Constitutions
be idle and slow, cold and careless in things of moment. Men of Melancholic
ones are suspicious, sour, and not easy to be sntreated, jealous, and often
revengeful. And Choleric Constitutions of Body, make men heady, various,
violent, troublesome to themselves and others. Moreover, vicious Affections run
in several Channels, according unto the alterations made in Bodies in Men's
several Ages. The Spring of corrupt Nature is still the same; but the Course is
different. Youth is carnal, presumtuous, easy to be deceived, and refractory
to Reason. Middle Age is of cooler Passions, covetous, ambitious, turned unto
more solemn and less scandalous Follies than those of Youth. Old Age has its
peculiar Vices; it is querelous, impatient, covetous, vainly fearful of
contempt or want. Now according to our Constitutions and Ages, we must make our
enquiry for our Own Sin.

Our Passions be sensitive Cravings for apprehended good, or for the removal of
apprehended evil. Now Sin being the disorder of our desiring Faculty, we may
discover what is our predominant Sin, by considering what Affection is most
violent in us; and of what others it is productive. What is it we do most love,
and when disappointed of it, do most hate, such as cause the disappointment?
etc.

The Moral Causes of special Sins are to be found in the several Callings
wherein Men are engaged. In these, Satan lays his Snares. Secondly, In the
opposite states of Prosperity and Adversity. Both of which have their special
Temptations adherent; long trains of them. Thirdly, In the Society that we
converse with. Company that we choose, discovers us unto others, and may
discover us unto our selves. Fourthly, In the Quality of the Times wherein we
live. There are Days named Evil, in respect of Temptations concomitant, which
will require great circumspection to preserve our innocence. And in these, our
swimming with the Stream, or resisting the Torrent, will discover much of our
hearts. It was Jehosaphat's honor, that he walked in the Commandments of the
Lord, and not according to the doings in Israel.

The Effects of peculiar Sin, by which it is made known, are now to be
considered; 1. The Sin that is frequently and easily committed, and is
difficultly retracted, that Sin is a Man's own peculiar one. Frequent Actions
are from Dispositions strongly bent. And when the power of a Temptation is
quick and speedy, the sinful inclination must needs be strong. Add, that it
must surely be a Darling-Lust that controlls the efficacy of the Principles of
Conscience concerning Good and Evil. 2. That Lust to which others are
subservient, has the supremacy in the Heart. Sins do serve one another.
Covetousness serves Pride; and Pride is his Sin who robs and oppresses for
Money wherewith to support his State and Pomp. 3. It is the darling Corruption
that ingrosses the Thoughts. When the Mind is in continual exercise to compass
Riches, Covetousness is then the reigning Passion. 4. The Sin that you desire
to conceal, and are apt to defend or to extenuate, and are impatient of Reproof
for it, this is your own special Sin. All Sinners dissemble, and paint their
most beloved Sins with least odious Colors. Incontinent men call Lust a humane
Frailty. Many Men of fair Tempers will recoil upon their Reprovers; and
sometimes recriminate, that they are as bad as themselves. 5. The Sin that
enlightened Conscience reflects upon with most anguish and remorse, is usually
the peculiar one. It is commonly that by which God has been most dishonored,
that the Sinner is then most tormented with. 6. The Sin that is your own you
must seek out among the several kinds of Sin. Is it Omission, or Commission?
Spiritual, or Carnal? Personal, or Relative? etc. You must search, even where
you may think there is little reason to expect it.

Q. 2. What is it to preserve ones self from ones own Sin?

A. It implies two things.

1. Abstaining from the practice of that Sin. 2. Mortifying the inward
Affection to that Sin.
He keeps himself from it, who together abhorrs the commission of it, and
watches and prays against the very inclination unto it.

Q. 3. How appears it that a Man's so keeping himself from his own special Sin,
is an undeceiving evidence of Sincerity?

A. It appears, if we consider,

1. God approves it. Sincere Christians only, and accepted ones, can appeal to
God. And this David does; I was upright before him.

2. This keeping ones self from ones own Sin, is equivalent to Perfection and
Integrity; and it is opposite unto Guilt. It Is equivalent unto Perfection,
Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright, the end of that man
is peace. It Is opposite to Guile, John 1.47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in
whom is no guile!

Q. 4. What is hence to be learned?

A. 1. The making this our Rule to judge our selves by.

2. The keeping our selves with all diligence from our own iniquity.

Q. 5. What Motives are unto this?

A. These Six.

M. 1. Habitual indulged Lusts are irreconcilable with the state of Grace.
They render us incapable of God's pardoning Mercy here, and of the heavenly
Glory hereafter. Continued in, they do so.

M. 2. We may by Divine Grace, subdue the strongest Lusts, that from our Nature
and Temper, from Custom, or from Interests carnal, have rule over us. The new
Covenant assures Believers, that sin shall not have dominion over them, because
they are not under the Law but under Grace, Romans 6.14.

M. 3. Our subduing the ruling Lust, will make the Victory over other sins more
easy. For that is the Root whence others do spring and are fed. And besides,
one Victory inspires with courage to atchieve another. The Indians, when they
had killed one Spaniard, took* Heart and resolved to Fight the rest. The Romans
counted that they had killed an Host of their Enemies, in one Mithridates.

M. 4. Our Sins cost our Savior his Sacred Blood, to purchase their Pardon,
and our freedom from their Dominion. This purely Evangelical Argument, has an
admirable Efficacy to inspire Zeal, and make Sin odious. Even the Sin that has
been as near to us as our Bosoms; as pleasant as our corrupt Inclinations, as
familiar and intimate as Custom, 2 Cor. 5.14.

M. 5. The blessed Reward of Vprightness, comprehends all good of Time, and of
Eternity. God is graciously ready to supply all their Wants, allay all their
Sorrows, overcome all their Fears, satisfy all their Desires, when his
Servants are upright. And nothing but Experience, can make the greatness of
their Reward to be understood. Light is sown for the Righteous, and Joy for the
upright in Heart, Psalm.

M. 6. Woeful are the Effects of indulging your peculiar Sins; the Lusts that by
Pleasure or Profit bribe you. Accusing Conscience begins Hell here. Sin's
memory, in the approaches of Death is very ghastly. The power of God's wrath,
is then more in sight. But the prepared Plagues in the next World, do exceed
all the most fearful Apprehensions in this World. There is perfection of
misery, A Life in torments that never Dies, a Death that never ends. Well then,

Q. 6. What are the Means requisite for preserving us from our special Sins?

A. Let it be considered, Medicines be not Sweetmeats. Rules for Recovery and
Preservation of Health will seem harsh, and be distastful unto Minds carnal.
But, if we will keep our selves from our own Iniquity, we must follow them.

R. 1. We must be inquisitive, and get to understand, intimately and distinctly
what our own Sins be. Against undiscerned Enemies we cannot be provided of
Defense; but must fall by them without Resistance.

R. 2. We must use diligent Watchfulness and Circumspection, to prevent and
resist our special Sins. To wit, when we have gained the knowledge of them, and
sense of our danger from them.

R. 3. We must seriously Resolve and solemnly Engage our selves, not to yield
unto our special Sins. This we must do, with Dependence upon the PRESENT and
the PERPETUAL assistance of the Divine Grace. Without which, our Resolutions
cannot be sincere, and will not be effectual. But be broke by the next tempting
Objects; as easily as the strings of a Cobweb be broke by a strong gust of
Wind; or Walls of Glass by the Battery of Cannon.

R. 4. We must rise by speedy and deep Repentance, when we have neglected our
Watch, and fallen into the Sin that we are peculiarly prone unto. This is
necessary to recover God's favor, and to preserve us for the future. Many have
been cut off in early Sins, and lost their Times, their Hopes, and their Souls
for ever. However, by continuance in Sin, the Heart grows both more UNABLE, and
more UNWILLING to resist and mortify it. Fresh Wounds are of easier Cure than
inveterate Ulcers.

R. 5. We must fervently and constantly pray for the Renewing Grace of God. It
is by the Spirit of Holiness that we are able to mortify the deeds of the
Body. And if we intermit Prayer, we must not expect the H. Spirit's aids
thereunto.

R. 6. We must act Faith in our Redeemer. This is the Sovereign and Effectual
Means. Christ is the Fountain of Inherent as well as of Imputed Righteousness.
It is through Christ strengthening we can do all things. It is He gives
Repentance. It is He blesses us in turning us from our iniquities.
Mortification of Sin is attributed to his Death, in respect of meritorious
procurement; and in respect of its being a Representation of it. Our crucifying
the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts is a lively resemblance of his Death.
Which was designed to be operative in us of the death of Sin, and to be
significative of the same. Besides; Christ's Death mortifies Sin by Moral
Influence. As it expresses God's transcendent Love unto us; that draws us from
Sin. And as it no less expresses God's holy severity against Sin, that
affrights and drives us from Sin. Now, Faith in Christ both OBLIGES and
ENCOURAGES us to subdue our Sins. And it has (in the word) a cleansing Virtue,
and a victorious efficacy, attributed unto it. It purifies the heart, and it
overcomes the world.

Concerning the great Duty of Resignation to the disposing Will of God, observe,

Entire Resignation to God's disposing Will is our indispensible Duty under the
sharpest Afflictions.

Q. 1. What is consistent with this Resignation?

A. 1. Earnest Prayer against impending Judgments, is consistent with it.
Christ Resigned to God's will, yet Prayed the Cup might pass. 2. A mournful
sense of Affliction is consistent with it. If we do not at all mourn, we
despise God's Rod.

Q. 2. What does Resignation to God's will, include in it?

A. It includes, 1. Our Mind's assent to the Righteousness and Goodness of what
God does. 2. Our Wills consent and subjection to God's Orders, though against
our own Inclinations. 3. Our Affections composure unto a just temper; and their
restraint from sinful excesses in their Degrees, and in their Continuance.

Q. 3. What are the Arguments for this Resignation?

A. 1. God has supreme right in our Persons, and in All we enjoy. 2. God is
Righteous in all his ways, and will not wrong us. 3. God's Power is
uncontrollable, and it is vain to contend with Him. 4. God's Fatherly
afflictions deserve our Love and Thanks. 5. God's Wisdom orders all in the best
manner for his Glory; which is to be preferred above all, our Life it self: And
for our final Good, which is to be preferred above present Ease.

Q. 4. What Directions are useful for our Resigning to God's Will?

A. 1. Look to Jesus Christ, the grand Exemplar; his Resignation and his
Reward. 2. Look to Saints in all Ages. Jam. 5.10. 3. Look to all Creatures, how
they obey God's Will. Angels above us; and those of rank below us, Ravens and
Lions. 4. Look to the glorious excellency of the Wills that are united unto
God's Will. It Is our highest Perfection. 5. Look to the Felicity that is in
Resignation. It quiets our Hearts, it makes our Election sure, and our
Adoption. 6. Look how short your suffering Time is. Weeping endures but for a
Night. Add hereto, it concerns you,

1. To Believe steadfastly God's Providence and Promises. 2. To make GOD the
supreme Object of your Esteem and Affections. 3. To moderate your Valuations
and Affections to all things below. 4. To forecast possible evils as future,
and as coming on you; and make it your Motto, Never secure. 5. To reflect
seriously and mournfully upon your guilt and deservings from God's Justice. In
the day of Adversity consider, Godly sorrow, lessens Natural. 6. To apply your
Minds to consider your Blessings as well as your Sufferings. 7. To Pray
frequently and fervently. Is any afflicted? let him Pray.

That your Prayers may prevail; Pray 1. With your Eye to God's Mercy, and
Christ's Merit. 2. With your Heart submissive to God's Will and Wisdom. 3. With
your Haste more for Grace, than for Comfort.

FINIS.

