Truth's Vindication, OR, A Gentle Stroke to wipe off the Foul Aspersions,
False Accusations and Misrepresentations, cast upon the People of God, called,
QUAKERS, Both with respect to their Principle, and their way of Proselyting
People over to them.

Prove. 4. 18, 19. The Path of the Just is as the shining Light, that shines
more and more unto the perfect Day: The Way of the Wicked is as Darkness; they
know not at what they stumble.

Isa. 51.7. and 41. 14. Hearken unto me, ye that know Righteousness, the People
in whose Heart is my Law; Fear ye not the Reproach of Men, neither be ye afraid
of their Revilings: Fear not thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel; I will help
thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

Also, An EPISTLE to such of the Friends of Christ, that have lately been
convinced of the TRUTH as it is in JESUS.

Hosea 6. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going
forth is prepared as the Morning; and he will come unto us as the Rain, as the
latter and former Rain unto the Earth.

Job 8. 7. Though thy Beginning was small, yet thy Latter-end shall greatly
increase.

Printed in the Year 1679.

AN EPISTLE TO You Five in particular, viz. A.W. E.T. M.I. B.P. and E.F. unto
whom this is more especially intended to be delivered.
FRIENDS;
NOT in Affectation to be Popular (for that I do not desire) but in Obedience
to Christ Jesus, my Lord and Master have I penned this matter; that so the
Innocence of his Truth and People may more conspicuously appear.

Neither have I fondly desired to get my Name in Print; for it is not Inky
Character can make a Saint: such must be sanctified and cleansed in Body, Soul
and Spirit; through which they come to be prepared, God's Kingdom to inherit.

Wherefore I write unto you my Friends, That you may not content your selves
barely in an outward Separation, whilst not wholely separated from that within
which is the Cause of Transgression; to wit, that Adulterate Spirit of the Man
of Sin, that is got not only into the Pontificial Chair at Rome (whence so many
corrupt Customs, both in Worship and Practice, are come abroad into the World)
but does also sit upon the Throne in the Hearts of many People, even in this
our Native Land: And this Spirit has led Man into many False Ways and Forms
in his fallen Condition, whereby he has strayed from the Right Way of
Restoration; which Way being made known to a Remnant, whose Minds are turned to
Christ's Light within (God's saving Power) these cannot but call to their
Friends and Acquaintance to turn in hither; and therefore have I been made to
send this Friendly Invitation abroad into the World, That People may be invited
to that Feast of Fat Things, which the Lord has prepared for them that turn in
unto him: But more especially does it lie upon me for you Five, to whom I write
this Epistle Dedicatory; to let you know, his Oxen and his Fatlings are ready;
only come away, do not tarry: For I well know, this is the time of the Lord's
Love toward you, because of the sounding of his Bowels, which I have heard
within me; I know they are not restrained from you, because of the constraint
that he has laid upon me, which has been so powerful, that my Heart has been
pained in me, and my Soul has been distressed for you, and often have I been
bowed down in Spirit, yea, till I could hardly stand upon my Feet, until the
Lord (who bowed me down) raised me up, and set before me a Door of Hope,
whereat his Prisoner in you may be brought forth, which is that for which God's
Seed in me has travailed through many Tribulations; and now having delivered
me from that cruel Bondage of Corruption which once I groaned under, this makes
me restless in my Spirit, that others may believe in that inward Power that is
able to rescue from the Eury of their Soul's Oppressor: Yet I write not this by
way of Complaint, as though I thought it a Weariness to serve the Lord, in
answering his Requirings; no, that I cannot think: for I must acknowledge, so
gracious is he in his Condescension, that he has made this my Exercise become
also my Divertion; yea, though I was his Prisoner by Indisposition of Body,
occasioned through the Pressure of my Mind, whilst the Weight of this Matter
lay upon me, yet I wished for no Walks of Pleasure, nor was I weary of my Pain;
the Reward given into my Bosom, in returns of Peace and sweet Security, that
my Soul enjoys amidst the disturbing Fears and Perplexities that are abroad, is
sufficient Recompense for all these light Afflictions.

What the subject Matter hereof is, read and you will find; wherein I have
first endeavored to remove the Stumbling Blocks from before you, and then to
cast up the Way of Truth for you, and that by Scripture Road, as you may read
in those cited Texts, which here have been brought unto my Hands, without the
Help of Humane Concordance.

Read in Charity, what I have written in Humility: knowing you are my Elders in
years, I would address my self unto you in all Christian Manners; but I dare
not Flatter you, nor can I complementally crave Excuses of you: accept it
therefore from me, who can truly say, For some time I have not been my own, the
Lord having made me your Servant in this thing; but now the Truth has (in
measure) set me free, which also made me willing to serve you, as it gave me
Ability; that God might have the Glory, and you the Profit of these my
Spiritual Labors;

Who am Your Faithful Friend Elizabeth Bathurst.

AN INTRODUCTION By way of PREFACE TO THE Ensuing Treatise.
MY former Friends and Acquaintance, for whose sakes this is written; it is to
rectify your Mistakes about, and to inform you in that which some stick not to
call A New Religion: But though the old Enemy of all Righteousness has found
this new opprobrious Term to asperse and undermine the Truth with, blessed be
the Captain of our Salvation, he has defeated him of his Design, and out of
the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings has ordained Praise to his own Name. For,
let me tell you, my Friends, True Religion is of great Antiquity; it is as old
as Abel, who by Faith offered up a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, by which
he obtained Witness, That he was Righteous, God testifying of his Gift; and by
it he being dead yet speaks, as you may read, Hebr. 11. 4. And now I appeal
to you, What Faith was this by which Abel pleased God? Was it not a living
Faith, which God had wrought in him, and not a dead Faith, received by
Tradition, of Man's teaching? yet such was the Nature and kind of it, that he
did not only believe in the true God his Creator, but also in Jesus Christ his
Redeemer, although he was not come in the Flesh then; yet doubtless Abel, as
well as Abraham, saw Christ's Day to come, notwithstanding neither of them had
any Scripture Revelation of him: For Abraham saw Christ's Day afar off, and
rejoiced, many Ages before the Scriptures were recorded; and by the same Faith,
no doubt, Abel looked beyond the Firstlings of his own Flock, to Christ the
Firstborn of God, who was to be made an Offering for Sin, as the Antitype,
which these typified, otherwise his Sacrifice had not obtained Acceptance with
the Lord; for he is the Propitiation for our Sin, and through Faith in his
Blood we come to know Remission; which agrees to that of the Apostle, Romans 3.
25.

Again, I appeal unto you; What Witness was it that Abel obtained of his being
Righteous? or how did God testify of his Gift? since Moses, who writes the
Story in Genesis 4. 4, 5. (to whom the Author to the Hebrews refers) gives us no
farther account, but only this, Chap. 11. Verse. 4.
The Lord had respect to Abel, and to his Offering; but to Cain, and to his
Offering, he had no respect. Now I ask, How was this manifested, or how came
they to know it? how should Abel know that his Offering was accepted (since
Cain was as forward, yea, beforehand with his Brother in offering) had not God
signified it to them by the Manifestation of his Spirit in them, even that same
Spirit by which they came to know it to be their Duty to offer Sacrifice unto
him: But Cain sticking in the Form, and not flying on the Wing of Faith to
Christ, the one Offering, mist the Mark that should have been aimed at by him,
and for this cause God rejected both him and his Offering, as you may read in
the following Verses of this 4th Chapter of Genesis; where the Lord
expostulates the Case with Cain, saying, Why art thou Wrath, and why is thy
Countenance fallen? if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? but if thou
do not well, Sin lies at thy Door. So that it was for Evil-doing Cain lost
the Acceptance of his Offering; which seems clear to me, that God had no
Respect to Abel personally, more then he had to Cain, but as he had an Eye to
the promised Seed to be accepted in, even Christ Jesus, the Eternal Son of God,
in whom alone the Father is well pleased. And it is also as clear to me
(through the Openings of the same Spirit) That by the Spirit of his Son in
their Hearts, he gave Testimony of their Gifts; to Abel, that his was accepted;
and to Cain, that his was rejected: for Cain must needs have a Manifestation of
the Spirit; otherwise how should he know it to be his Duty to offer Sacrifice,
as you may see he did? for we read not of any outward Precept that either of
them had to enjoin it. Now then, if it was a living in-wrought Faith, whereby
Abel obtained Acceptance of his Offering; and if it was by an inward
Manifestation of the Spirit, by which God gave testimony thereof unto him; if
this be granted, I hope the Way of Truth will no longer be Evil spoken of,
which is the same now that it was in the Beginning. And this brings me to that
which I chiefly intend, which is, as I said, to rectify your Mistakes
concerning, and to inform you in, that which (I hope) you will see not to be a
New, but the Old True Religion; which is the Way of this People amongst whom I
now walk, and desire to walk, notwithstanding they are accounted a Sect every
where spoken against: I marvel not that the World hates them, since it hated
him (to wit, Christ Jesus) whom they have believed in, because he rectified
thereof, that the Works of it were Evil, see John 7. 7. And truly, my Friends,
this is the Testimony this People bears this day against the corrupt Ways and
Practices of the World, both among Professors and Profane, telling of them
plainly, That all Unrighteousness is Sin; and for this cause, I know, were
Power given into Men's Hands, they should quickly be rooted out from amongst
them: But though they put no trust in an Arm of Flesh, yet they have a strong
Tower of Defense (even the Name of the Lord) which they run into, and are safe:
This is their Munition of Rocks, whereunto their Adversaries cannot climb up;
and though they do what in them lie to pull them out from thence, yet their Arm
is too short to reach them, their Strength too weak to hurt them their Power of
no force against them, whilst they abide in this safe place, notwithstanding
great is the Wrath of the Enemy, who intends them Mischief; so that what he
cannot do by Power, he will seek to do by Policy; insinuating into the Minds of
People, That though it is the Spirit of Truth which they pretend unto, yet it is
a Spirit of Error that they are led by: which Suggestion of Satan has taken
place in the Hearts of so many, that were not the God of Truth engaged on their
side, to persuade people from this false Opinion concerning them, it would seem
an utter Impossibility: But knowing and being well assured of this, ( viz.)
That the Lord's Strength is made perfect in his Peoples Weakness; I, as one of
the least of the Thousands of Israel, have undertaken in his Name, to go forth
against those who have risen up against them; though I know many are the cruel
Mockings and hard Usings from Profane on the one hand, with evil Surmisings
and severe Censurings from Professors on the other, that has been the Lot of
this People to bear; some of which from the latter of these (to whom I chiefly
write) I hope has not been so much out of Disaffection to the Truth, as
Misapprehension about the Principle of it; as believing, that this People (in
whose behalf I am now constrained to write) preach Damnable Doctrine-the which
I have heard reported of them; some say, ing. They deny the Scriptures; others
saying, They deny the Man Christ Jesus, with all the Benefits that by his
Active and Passive Obedience, as also by his offering up of himself a Sacrifice
to God for us, do thereby accrue to us, together with Iustfiication by Faith
which is in him, and the Imputation of his Righteousness to Man; others
somewhat more moderate, yet have affirmed, That whatever they may own as to the
Death of Christ yet they deny the Resurrection of his Body, and of the Bodies
of Believers; so that they have said, Though they dare not charge them with
Dimnable Doctrine, yet certainly they are of very dangerous Opinions as
concerning Original Sin, and the Institution of the Sacraments, and in Point of
Free will, and Inherent Righteousness, and in holding a Possibility of a Total
Fall from True Grace, and yet they plead Perfection, and reckon themselves
infallible (say they) for all this; and herein they liken them to the Papist.
These are some of the Foul Aspersions, False Accusations and
Misrepresentations, that have been cast upon this People, which I my self have
been an Ear Witness of, and must needs confess, through the Respect I had to
the splendid Professions of those that did help forward (at least) the Report
thereof, I have given too much Credence to some of them; so that though I can
truly say, I have no Guilt to charge my self with as to spreading these false
Reports, yet my keeping too much silent heretofore, when I was convinced in my
Conscience I ought to have spoke, in answer to those whom I might have
contradicted in many of these false Accusations, obliges me now to put forth
this Vindication.

And now, my Friends, if I can demonstrate to you how falsely this People have
been accused, which I doubt not to receive Power from on high to enable me in,
I hope to be believed when I come to speak (according to the Measure of the
Grace of God, which I have received) concerning that Principle of true
Religion, which through this People is promulgated.

Willing I am to give you Satisfaction in Matters whereon so great Concerns are
depending, and that the more, because many of these things are Points wherein I
my self lately doubted; concerning which when I came to a Solution of in my own
Mind, I can truly say, I then was made willing to answer the Lord's Requirings,
in taking up the Daily Cross, which Jesus Christ has said every one must take
up that will be his Disciple; and so I hope may some of you, as the Lord shall
make way for his Truth's taking impression upon your Minds, in this the Day of
your Visitation.

So shall the Desire of her Soul be answered, whose Spirit was exceedingly
pressed to write this Matter.

The CONTENTS.
READER:
IT is some time since I set about this Treatise, which makes me now think,
that the latter part hereof may seem to some to be unseasonable; for as it
swelled beyond my intention, and took up more time in writing then I thought it
would; so also has it occasionally been hindered from the Press since it has
been wrote; in which time those former Discourses, which were the occasion of
the Subject, may possibly be forgotten by those which spoke them; but as they
were afresh brought into my Memory by the Remembrancer, the Holy Ghost, by
which I was pressed in Spirit to give Answer thereunto, and vindicate Truth
therein ( that so I might ease the PRESSURE of my OPPRESSED SPIRIT) I have in
some sort stated, and I hope satisfactorily answered the same: In which, it is
like, I may be thought prolix; but I knew not how to comprize the Matter
shorter; for the truth is, though I at first thought to have filled but one
Sheet of Paper, when I set about it I saw a Field before me, which cost me some
spiritual Travel before I got through. And now, lest any should think the Trace
too long to follow, I have taken pains to prefix and page Contents to every
material Point, that so they may readily turn to that which they are most
desirous to be at.

The Book being divided into Three Parts, the first is in answer to some
Controverted Points, ranked under Ten Heads: The second treats of the PRINCIPLE
OF TRUTH, what it is, from whom it comes, and whereto it leads: The third is a
Confutation of people's False Opinions, concerning the Manner how we have been
convinced of the Principle of TRUE RELIGION.

PART I.
CHAP. 1. Concerning the Scriptures, page 1. Chap. 2. Concerning the Humanity
of Christ, etc. p. 6. Chap. 3. Touching the Resurrection of the Body of Christ,
and of the Saints, p. 15. Chap. 4. Concerning Original Sin, p. 17. Chap. 5.
Concerning the Sacraments, p. 19. Chap. 6. Touching Free will, p. 26. Chap. 7.
Concerning Inherent Righteousness, p. 28. Chap. 8. Concerning a Possibility of
a Total Fall from True Grace, p. 31. Chap. 9. Concerning Perfection, p. 35.
Chap. 10. Concerning Infallibility, p. 38.
PART II. A general Description of TRUTH's PRINCIPLE.
. 1. It is a PRINCIPLE of DIVINE LIGHT and LIFE of Christ Jesus placed in the
Conscience, etc. p.42. A more particular Relation of what the PRINCIPLE of
TRUTH is, and what it is called in SCRIPTURE.. 2. It Is the GRACE of GOD that
brings SALVATION, and has appeared TO ALL MEN, p. 43. It Is the LIGHT of
JESUS, who is that True LIGHT that lights every man that comes into the
WORLD, p. 44. It Is a Measure of the DIVINE SPIRIT; and a Manifestation of it is
given to every man to profit withal, p. 48. An Answer to an Objection, p.
51,52. It Is that DIVINE PRINCIPLE of LIFE, which brings the Clad Tidings of
Salvation near unto ALL. It Is the WORD of RECONCILIATION, p. 53. It Is the Law
written in the HEART, p. 54. It Is the Word of FAITH, ibid. It Is that
Incorruptible SEED by which we are begotten to GOD, and born again by his
Eternal Word, p. 55. It Is that Foundation which GOD has laid in SION, and has
also made become the Head and Corner STONE, p. 59,60.. 3. An Account from whom
this true and inward PRINCIPLE does come. It comes from GOD (through Christ) as
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4 6: p. 62. Touching the FALL of MAN, p. 63. And the
Way of Restoration BY CHRIST the LIGHT, etc. who is the Free Gift of the
Father, for the Salvation of poor Sinners, p. 64. And he has manifested
something of this GIFT unto ALL MEN by the Light of his Spirit WITHIN; for the
Lord of the whole Earth is universal and impartial in his Love to all MANKIND,
p. 66. Concerning the effectual Operation of the Spirit (or Principle of God
WITHIN) from p. 66. to p. 78. The LIGHT of JESUS in the CONSCIENCE proved to be
no Natural Insufficient Thing (as some have sought to render it) being
something OF GOD placed in EVERY MAN to witness against ALL SIN etc. p. 78.
Christ God's Covenant of LIGHT, called by diverse Names in SCRIPTURE, p. 79, 80,
81. A General Invitation to turn to the LIGHT WITHIN, p. 82, 83, 84.
PART III.
A Confutation of Peoples False Opinions concerning the Manner how we have been
Convinced of this Principle of true RELIGION, p. 85, 86. Wherein I have
endeavored to refute the Errors, Ignorance and Mistakes, that many yet lie
under, concerning the Practices of those who are led and guided by the Light of
Christ WITHIN, relating to the Means whereby they CONVINCE and turn People to
the same, p. 87,etc. Whereunto is added, an Epistle to the late CONVINCED of
TRUTH, p. 97.
Truths Vindication, etc.
CHAPTER I. Concerning the SCRIPTURES.
IN the first place, I shall begin with the holy Scriptures which has been
said by some, this People called Quakers do not own.

Answer, That this is a great Slander, their many Writings and Declarations
make manifestly appear, in which their Testimonies are all so consonant, and
agreeable to the Records of Scripture, that I never met with the like amongst
any other: And besides this, I am well assured of it, not only from their own
Witness of themselves, but from the Witness of God in my own Breast, They do
believe all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets; so that those
which do so clamorously charge them, cannot prove the things whereof they so
much accuse them.

But then it has been replied, viz. They own the Scriptures indeed, but it is
in their own Way; they believe them as they do a moral History; just barely
giving credit to them, owning that they are Truth; but they do not believe they
are the Word of God and the Rule of Faith and Life,

As to this, I Answer; They do believe the Scriptures, so far as Scripture
itself requires Faith in it self; that is, that they are able to make wise unto
Salvation through Faith, which is in Christ Jesus being given by Inspiration of
God, according to that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. And they do also
believe, That this same Jesus here spoken of, who is said to be the Messenger
of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. the same, and not another, did Inspire his Prophets
and Apostles in writing of the Scriptures: But still he is the Word as well as
the Wisdom of the Father; and I ask, Where do the Scriptures themselves declare
any other? Where do they say that they are the Word of God? or the Rule of
Faith and Life? Though I have heard it said, that The Prophets Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, etc. often call their Prophecys by the Name of the Word of
the Lord, which say some, is all one if we say the Word of God. Now such I
would advise to take a second view of the Text, and then they may find, that
the Prophets did not call their Prophecies and Writings The Word of the Lord
(for they were the Lord's Words) he being The Word of the Lord, who revealed
their Prophecyes unto them; as for instance, Ezekiel. 29. 1. says the Prophet
there, In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the
month, came the Word of the Lord unto me, saying, etc. So then it was the Word
of the Lord that came and said unto him: the Prophecy was that which he said.
So in Jeremiah (Chap. 7. v. 1, etc. old Translation) it is said, The Words that
came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Stand in the Gate of the Lord's House,
and proclaim there this Word; and say, Hear the Word of the Lord all ye of
Judah. [Mark] The Prophet was to make Proclamation of the Word of the Lord,
that the Men of Judah might hear what he said; as it follows, Thus says the
Lord, Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this
place, etc. And this was he, as I said before, who is the Messenger of the
Covenant, appointed by the Father, to reveal his Secrets unto his Servants, the
Prophets, who came to Jeremiah with this Prophecy: so that it was not what he
said, but he himself, whose Name is called The Word of God, Revelat. 19. 13.
And this is that Word which came unto Abraham in a Vision, Genesis 15. 1. saying,
Fear not, Abraham; I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward: Unto whom
in the very next verse Abraham gives the Titles of Lord and God; which proves
the Word to be Eternal and Divine; but so are not the Scriptures Eternal; for
we know they had their Beginning in time: and though they are Words and
Declarations of divine Things, yet must we distinguish between the Declaration,
and that which is Declared of, so as not to call them both by one Name. Those
written words (for Scripture signifies a Writing) they are Publications in
Testimony of that Creating Word of Power by which the Worlds were framed; see
Heb. 11. 3. yet they do not declare, that the World was made by them; but by
that Eternal Word which was in the beginning, as its recorded, John 1. 1. the
same is that which lives and abides forever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. which Word is
quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged Sword, piercing, even to the
dividing assunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow; and is a
Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart; neither is there any
Creature that is not manifest in his Sight; but all things are naked and opened
unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do, even as it is written, Hebr. 4.11,
13. This is that Word to whom the Scriptures direct us, Luke 1. 79. Psalm 119.
130.
as a Light unto our feet, and a Lanthorn unto our Paths, to guide our feet
into the Way of Peace; the very entrance of which gives Light; yea, it gives
Understanding to the Simple. So that the Scriptures themselves, say not of
themselves, that they are the Word of God, but that they bear witness of him.
And this is he, who said to those great Scripturians (namely, the Jews of old)
who so greatly exalted the Scriptures, but had not the Living Word abiding in
them; Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life; and
they are they which testify of me, says Christ; but ye will not come to me
that ye might have Life, John 5. 38, 39, 40. So here it may be seen, there is
good Reason to distinguish between the Written Words, the Writing or Letter,
and the Living Word, which is a Quickening Spirit.

But now, as to the other part of the Change, which is, That this People (of
whom I am now writing) do not own the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith and
Life.

In their behalf I Answer: They do own the Scriptures to be a Rule, as they
direct unto him (to wit, Christ) who is the Object of our Faith, and Lord of
Light and Life: They do also believe that the Scriptures are profitable, for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that
the Man of God may be thoroughly furnished unto every good Work, as says the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. But yet still it is in Christ Jesus, whom his People
do believe; and he is the Rule by which they live, according to the Example of
the Apostle, who says, The Life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2 20. He must needs be his Peoples Rule; for he
is the Way, the Truth and the Life; no man comes to the Father but by him,
John 14.6. And it is his Spirit that leads into all Truth, Joh. 16. 13. even
that Spirit which searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, as says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 10. which Spirit teaches them of all things, and
brings all things to their Remembrance, according to Christ's Promise, John
4. 26. Therefore the Spirit of Christ, is the Rule of his Peoples Faith, and
the Guide of their Life; yet does not this detract from the Scriptures, nor the
Estemation of this People (called Quakers) concerning them; for I know they do
believe, that whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our
Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have
Hope, as it is recorded, Romans 15. 4. So that it appears, the Scriptures are
owned of them, and are believed by them, and are practiced amongst them, but
they dare not ascribe them that Glory which is due to God, nor exalt them above
his Son Christ Jesus, nor prefer them in his Spirit's stead; neither yet is it
any Derogation from the Scriptures, to exalt Christ and his Spirit more than
they; for Scriptures themselves exalt Christ and the Spirit above themselves:
so that it is not in any slight or disrespect they have to those holy Writings,
wherefore they do not call them the Word, and the Rule of Faith and Life; but,
as they have declared, It Is from that reverend regard they owe and ought to
bear to Christ Jesus, the great and eminent Word of God, to whose Spirit all
Scripture Directions, in Matters of Salvation, refer us, as to an Infallible
Rule and Guide: They direct us thereunto, that we may not live in them, but in
him, who is the Author and Dispenser of them. Thus, though the Scriptures are
granted to be a Righteous Rule, and of Divine Dispensation (for the Prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost, even as the Apostle testified, 2 Pet. 1. 21. and my
Soul praises the Lord, that he has preserved the Records of so many Prophecies
and Testimonies of his primitive Servants, through so many Contingencies, unto
this present Age) yet can I not think, that the God of infinite Wisdom and
Grace, whose Mercy is over all his Works, would leave Mankind in so great a
Concern, whereon their Eternal Salvation is depending, to such a Rule alone,
for Guidance therein, as is subject to concealing Mis-translation,
Mis-interpretation, False Application, as we find the Scriptures have been by
Corrupters of them: Muchless can I believe, that he would suffer the greatest
part of the World to live without them (as they do) were there no other means
appointed for their Salvation: Yea, moreover, I am very sensible, that where
the Scriptures are, many occurrances may fall out in the course of our Lives,
about which the Scripture gives no particular Advice; and yet it is necessary
we should have a Guide near in all our Affairs: But I well know, many Cases
there are, where Scripture is altogether silent in the matter. Admit then here,
that the Creature, in such a straight, not knowing what to do, betake it self
to inquire of the Lord by Prayer; alas! what will that avail, unless it receive
an Answer? which is already granted not to be found in Scripture, neither can
it now he had by the mere Literal Priesthood, nor by their pretended Vrim and
Thummim; and say they (who cry up solely Scripture to be the Rule of Faith and
Life) Neither must we expect Answer by Dream, nor yet by Vision, no, nor by
Revelation, nor Inspiration; for these (say they) are craft many Ages past.
Whom I ask, What way then can the Creature come by Advice? which till they can
resolve me in, I shall still retain my Opinion, viz. That that inward Oracle
(which is a Measure of God's Spirit, whereby we obtain access to him, with
Answer and Direction from him in all our Concerns, about which we inquire of
him) undeniably is of greater Authority, both to beget living Faith, and order
us therein; and a more perfect Rule to guide our Lives, than the outward
Writings of the Scriptures, which in many things leave us without either
Counsel or Instruction. And here I shall leave this Point, which is in answer
to an Accusation, which is, That we deny the Scriptures; a thing often charged
upon, but never proved against the People called Quakers.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Humanity of Christ, etc.
A Second Charge which I have heard brought in against the Quakers, is, That
they deny the Humanity of Christ Jesus, and the Obedience that he yielded in
the days of his Flesh, by his Sufferings, Death, Buriel, Resurrection from the
Dead, together with all the benefits that thereby accrue unto Believers, as
also Justification by Faith, and the imputed Righteousness of Christ. Now that
this has been as falsely charged upon them as the former, I shall undertake to
prove by Scripture: But first let me mind the Reader; this I have observed,
viz. That there are many that have born false Witness against them; yet they do
not seem to accord in their Witness; For first comes out a learned Doctor,
Doctor Owen, Independent.
and he declares publicly (though somewhat ambiguously) that this People deny
that Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, to be God equal with the Father. But when
this was refuted so as not to be believed, then comes out another, John Faldo.
and he would give the World to know, as if they only deny the Son of God to
have assumed Humane (or man's) Nature: Thus their accusers contradict one
another (for both seem to grant we own a Christ; which well they may do, since
they differ in Principles amongst themselves; how ever they agree thus far,
like Herod and Pilate, to unite against Jesus, so have they against his
Followers; but I need not enlarge upon particulars, since rather then they will
want a Host to go out against the Quakers, look but into the Muster, and thou
may see One and Twenty Divines (as they give themselves the Style) enter the
Lift together, of whom I shall say no more here, lest it should be taken for a
Digression from the Answer.

1 st, Therefore to clear Truth from Slander, both on the one hand and the
other; I do in the first place affirm, and that upon certain Grounds, viz. That
all who may be rightly denominated Quakers, (such as Tremble at the Word of
God) they are of the Faith of one Substance, which the ancient Christians so
earnestly contented for, and suffered such hard things in maintaining, to wit,
that Christ the blessed Son of God (as to his Divinity) was of the same Eternal
substance with the Father, as may be read at large in George Bishop's Looking
glass for the Times, page 85, 86.

2 dly, I affirm, they faithfully own the Scriptures. And therefore what John
the Divine saw in his Revelations concerning him, as it is Recorded, chap. 13.8.
That he, (to wit, Christ) was the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World.
And what the Apostle said of him, Phil. 2. 6. Who being in the Form of God,
thought it no Robbery to be equal with God. Likewise John the Evangelist in his
first chapter 1.2, 3. says concerning Christ, In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God; and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning
with God; all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
that was made; for by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that
are in Earth, Visible and Invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions,
Principalities or Powers; all things were created by him and for him, who is
over all God blessed forever, Amen, Col. 1. 16. Romans 9. 5. These together with
the Testimonies Jesus gave of himself, John 8. 38. Verily, verily I say unto
you, before Abraham was I am, John 10. 30. I and my Father are one, John 15. 5.
there he Prays, And now Oh Father glorify thou me with thine own self, and
with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was. In like manner he
speaks of his own Eternity, Proverbs 8. chap. from the 23d to the end, to which
agrees that application given to him, of wonderful Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. These things, I say,
the Quakers believing according as they are written, and having an experience
of in themselves, by the effectual working of the mighty Power of Christ Jesus
in their Hearts, are sufficient proofs to them of his Divine substance; and
also to make them see what is the Fellowship of the Mystery which from the
beginning of the World has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ, as it is written, Ephesians. 3. 9. Wherefore they know the Son to be one,
and equal in Power with the Father.

Now if any shall object that Scripture, where Christ says, My Father is
greater then I.

Answ. That must needs be understood only as he assumed the Nature of Man; not
at all relating to the fullness of the Godhead that dwells Bodily in him, as
it is written, Col. 2. 9. So likewise the Author to the Hebrews describes him,
chap. 1. 2, 3. verses, To be the brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the
express Image or Character of his Substance (for so the Word Person ought to be
rendered) by whom also he made the Worlds. And therefore I believe (and so do
they, in whose behalf I write) that Jesus Christ is very God.

3 dly, I affirm, they do believe that this Jesus, or this God; was manifest in
the Flesh, as says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 16. And John the Evangelist, Chap.
1. 14. The Word was made Flesh and dwelt amongst us (and we beheld his Glory,
the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of Grace and Truth. And
Paul to the Hebrews, chap. 2. 16. speaking of Christ, says, For verily he took
not on him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of Abraham.

4 thly, Therefore in the fourth place I affirm, The Quakers do faithfully own
this Jesus to be the Mediator, according to the Testimony of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the
Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due
time.

5 thly, I affirm they own his obedience also; for I know they do believe that
Christ Jesus in the days of his Flesh was obedient to God, as becomes a Son
unto a Father in all things: For he came not to do his own Will, but the Will
of him that sent him; wherefore we find him Praying to his Father, Nor my Will,
but thine be done. Yea, moreover it is written of him, Hebrews 5.8. Though he
were a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the things which he suffered: For he
was a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with grief; he was wounded for our
Transgressions; he was bruised for our Iniquities; the Chastizments of our
Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed, as says the Prophet
Isaiah, chap. 53. 3, 5. Therefore these do confess to his Sufferings, according
to the Scriptures; for Christ also has once suffered for Sin, the Just for the
Unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to Death in the Flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit; see 1 Pet. 3. 18. Likewise they own his Death, as an
acceptable and most satisfactory Sacrifice to God for the Sins of all, and is
of blessed advantage to all that shall receive Faith in his Blood, which agrees
to Romans 3.25. Ephesians. 5.2. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through
Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that
are past, through the forbearance of God; And he has given himself for us an
offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Also they believe
that as Christ dyed for our Sins, so he was buried likewise, and rose again
according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Again, verse. 20, 21. it is said,
But now is Christ risen from the Dead, and become the first Fruits of them that
Sleep: For since by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the
Dead. So in Acts 17. 31. The Apostle mentions this as the assurance which God
gave to men, of his judging the World at the great Day, by his Son Christ
Jesus, namely, his having raised him from the Dead.

Now 6 thly and Lastly, I affirm, They do believe, that from Christ Jesus these
and such like Benefits extend to true Believers: First, Election in him,,
according as God has chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World, that
we should be holy and without blame before him in Love, as it is recorded in
Ephesians. 1. 4. [Mark] It Is in him we are elected; not in our selves, as though
personally some were chosen, and others past by: but in the Seed Christ, the
Elect of God, the Object of the Father's Love; all who are gathered into him,
are made a chosen Generation, an Elect People by the Lord.

2. Vocation; this also they own to be a Benefit bestowed on them by the
Father, in the Son; for that they who were by nature Children of Wrath as well
as others, have been called of God in Christ, with an High and Holy Calling, to
obtain Mercy from him, even to become Saints, that so they should show forth
the Virtues of him who has called them out of Darkness into his mavelous
Light.

3. Reconciliation to God; as says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. All things
are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given
to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself. So Coll. 1.20,21,22. its said, And having
made Peace through the Blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things unto
himself, by him, I say, whether they be things in Earth or things in Heaven;
and you who were sometimes alienated and Enemies in your Minds by wicked Works,
yet now has he reconciled in the Body of his Flesh through Death, to present
you holy, unblameable, unreprovable in his Sight.

4. Sanctification and Justification; I put both these together, because,
though I do grant they may be distinguished, yet I cannot see how they can be
divided, being so near of kin, that if one languish, the other cannot but greatly
mourn: besides, the Apostle is my President in coupling of them, speaking to
the Corinthiaens in his first Epistle, chap. 6. 11. says, But ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and
by the Spirit of our God. But more of this in another place.

5. Adoption; as it is written, Ephesians. 1. 5. Having predestined us unto the
Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good Pleasure
of his Will: To the like purpose is that in Romans 8. 29. For, whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son,
that he might be the Firstborn among many Brethren: To which accords John 1.
12. To as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of
God, even to as many as believe in his Name.

6. A sixth Benefit is, Forgiveness of, and Redemption from all Sin; as says
the Scripture, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the
Forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace: So Titus 2. 13, 14.
Looking for that blessed Hope, and Glorious Appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works:
And 1 John 3. 8, 5. it is said, For this purpose the Son of God was manifested,
that he might destroy the Works of the Devil: and ye know that he was
manifested to take away our Sin.

7. Victory over Satan; Forasmuch as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and
Blood, he also took part of the same, that through Death he might destroy him
that had the power of Death, that is, the Devil; see Hebr. 7. 14. So that his
strength being broken, and his power destroyed by the Captain of our Salvation,
if we resist him steadfast in the Faith, he will flee from us, as it is written,
James 4. 7.

8. Another Benefit is, Access to God by Faith; as says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.
12. In whom we have Boldness and Access, with Confidence by the Faith of him:
And as we have Access to God by him, so likewise we find Acceptance with God in
and through him.

9. Through him we receive A sure Hope of Eternal Life; as it is recorded, Hebr.
9. 15. And for this Cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of Death for the Redemptions of the Transgressions that were under the
first Testament, they which are called might receive the Promise of the Eternal
Inheritance.

Thus it is confessed, that in Christ Jesus we are Elected, Called, Reconciled to
God, Sanctified, Justified, Adopted; by him we obtain Pardon and Redemption
from all Sin; through Faith in his Name we find Access to God, and Acceptance
with him; in him we are made Victors over Satan, and Heirs of Life Eternal.

Now, Reader, thou may see how falsely the Quakers have been accused. in
laying to their Charge, They deny that Christ which came in the flesh, with the
Obedience he thereon performed by his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection from the
Dead, (...) also the Benefits that thereby are obtained; which things never
were by them denied; for they know, that the Son of God is come, and has given
them an Understanding, that they know him that is true, and they are in him
that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is the true God and eternal
Life, see 1 John 5. 20. But for further satisfaction concerning their Faith
herein if any do desire it) they may see a Book put sorth by George Whitehead,
intitilled, The Divinity of Christ, and Unity of the Three that hear Record in
Heaven, with the blessed End and Effects of Christ's Appearance, Coming in the
Flesh, Suffering and Sacrifice for Sinners, Confessed and Vindicated.

Now concerning Justification by Faith in Jesus Christ, and the Imputation of
his Righteousness to Believe's: Here also it may be seen how grossly this People
have been abused, and how greatly their Principle has been misrepresented: For
Justification by Faith they own (as has publicly been confessed by them)
according to these Scriptures; Romans 3. 2. Gal. 3. 24. Romans 3.26. Ephesians. 2. 8,
9, 10. Tit. 3. 5, 6,7.
By the deeds of the Law shall no Flesh be justified in his sight; wherefore
the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be
justified by Faith: To declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness, that he
might be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus: For by Grace
are ye saved through Faith, and that not of our selves, it is the Gift of God;
not of Works, lest any man should boast: for we are his Wormanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works, not by Works of Righteousness which we have done,
but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior, that being justified by Grace, we should be made Heirs
according to the hope of Eternal Life. But then it must be a living Faith,
according to the definition of the Apostle James in the second Chapter of his
Epistle, Act. 15.9.6,7.
And it must be such a Faith as purifies the Heart, and is held in a pure
Conscience, and is manifest in the Life by Works of love, and gives Victory
over the World For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but Faith, which works by Love, Tim. 3. 5,6,7.
says Paul, Gal. 5. 6. And this is the Victory whereby we overcome the World,
even our Faith, says John, 1 John 5. 4. Therefore, say I, without this real
Faith, it is impossible we should please God, or be justified in his sight: Yet
now because these my Friends have distinguished between Faith and Fancy,
therefore they have been calumniated, and their Principle traduced by many. So
likewise as to the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ, this they own
according to the Scriptures, even as David describes the Blessedness of the
man whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered, saying, Blessed
is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there
is no Guile, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. And Abraham being justified by Faith, it is said,
he received the sign of Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith
which he had yet being Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them
that believe, though they be not Circumcised, that Righteousness might be
imputed to them also, Romans 4. 11. Wherefore this People believe acceptance with
the Father, is only in Christ, and by his Righteousness made ours, or imputed
unto us, by the inward Work and applicatory act of God's Gift of Grace, whereby
he is made unto the Soul, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption,
but because they deny the Righteousness of Christ to be imputed, where it is
not imparted, and distinguish between Imagination and Imputation; between
reckoning or imputing that is real, and reckoning or imputation that is not
real, but a fancy, and dare not own the point in the Latitude of that
Sin-pleasing Principle, to which it is stretched as if men might be
imputatively Holy, though not inwardly Holy, and imputatively Righteous, though
not really Righteous; therefore they are clamoured upon, as if they denied the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, when it is only to those who are not made
Righteous by it, to walk as he walked: For the Scripture does not say, that he
that says he is Righteous by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, but he
that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous, 1 John 3. 7.
What then? shall we Sin? (and yet think to be saved by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace) God
forbid that we should Sin ( in this state of Grace) says the Apostle, Romans 6.
15. Indeed the whole Chapter speaks the same sense ( viz.) that it is not our
Imputation or reckoning of Christ's Righteousness to our selves will justify
us; but he imparting and imputing it to us; and this shall suffice in Answer to
the second general Charge against this People, in every particular of which may
be seen what gross abuses have been cast upon them, whereby the envious and
ill-affected have sought to cover their Principles with their own perversions,
and so to make Truth it self become rejected. But I shall in the next place
speak to those I take to be more moderate, and such whom I have sometime found
my self much swayed by: But since I find it was more by Education and
Tradition, then any certain evidence I could have of the Truth of that
Religion, I find my self obliged to detect those Errors in public, which I
have heard diverse of them cast upon the People called Quakers in private,
charitably judging they speak not so much against them out of ill will, as
ignorance of, and unacquaintance with their blameless Principle; though this is
bad enough for People to speak Evil of things they know not; and for such as
are divided amongst themselves, to join together against others, (as some have
confessed to me, that though they differ in many particulars, yet they all
agree in this, to set their Seal against the Quakers) but who they were, I have
and shall at present conceal, desiring not to expose them, but to inform them,
that so setting before them their Errors and Mistakes, some of them, at least,
may see and Repent them, wherein they have spoken and done amiss.

CHAP. III. Touching the Resurrection of the Body of Christ, and of the Saints.
AS concerning the Resurrection of the Body of our blessed Lord Jesus, and also
the Bodies of Believers; this I have been born down in, that the Quakers do not
own.

In answer to which, though I had something to Reply in their behalf at that
season; yet I must confess the respect I had to my Friend who affirmed the
same, made me a little incline to that Persuasion of them: But now being better
acquainted with their Principle, I must needs add, that this report is an utter
Falsehood; for they do believe as it is recorded in the Scriptures, that Christ
Jesus who descended into the lower parts of the Earth; the same ascended up far
above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, and sits now at the
Right Hand of God in his glorious Body, Ephesians. 4. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 22. Phillip. 3.
21. 1 Cor. 15. 53, 54.
and therefore shall the low estates and humbled Body of Believers be made like
unto his glorious Body, through the working of his mighty Power, whereby he is
able to subdue all things unto himself; and then shall this Corruptible put on
Incorruption, and this Mortallity put on Immortallity, and Death it self shall
be swallowed up of Victory. So here likewise it may be noted, how their
Adversaries have been disappointed; For first it was the design of some, to
have made Saduces of them, by giving out that they deny the Resurrection; as it
was said of them, Acts 23.8. For the Saduces say, There is no Resurrection,
neither Angel nor Spirit. Thus some have sought to render these, as if at
Death, they believed Soul and Body were both to be annihilated: But when this
would not take, then they reported that the Body only was that which the
Quakers held should never rise again.

Here Reader thou may see how they have been slandered both ways; for they
do believe the Resurrection of the Just and of the Unjust, the one to
Salvation, and the other to Condemnation, according to the Judgment of the
great Day, And then shall every Seed have its own Body, as says the
Scriptures, Acts 24. 15. John 5.29. 1 Cor. 15. 38. But because they dare not be
so foolishly inquisitive as to ask, nor so arrogant in their Minds as to
dertermine, with that Bodies they shall rise; therefore do some say, They deny
the Resurrection of the Body of Christ, and of all that are or shall be dead:
But this is most falsely charged upon them; for they do believe the Resurrection
of the Dead; for if the Dead rise not, they are of all men most miserable. What
can be a Balance of an Equal Poix with the Trials, Exercises, Afflictions and
Persecutions, that are their Lot and Portion in this Life, short of an Eternal
Inheritance and a Crown of Glory, that fades not away. Therefore they also
believe, that every man shall be raised in his own order; Christ the First
Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming; yea, they do believe
that the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, and that God gives a Body as it
pleases him, and to every Seed his own Body; there is a Natural Body, and a
Spiritual; there are Bodies Terrestrial, and Bodies Celestial; wherein they
agree with the Testimony of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 23, 43, 44. which I think
is sufficient to give all sober Inquirers full satisfaction herein: For, as to
my own particular, I freely do confess it suffices me, that God will give unto
my Spirit such a Body as it pleases him.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Original Sin.
AS to Original Sin, in which the Quakers are judged to be of so Dangerous an
Opinion, without showing to me what that Opinion was.

I Answer: Though the word Original be not sound in Scripture, yet if any mean
hereby the inward Corruption and Seed of Sin, which Satan has sown in us, and
wherewith we are defiled in our first and fallen Nature; I am sure this will
not be denied by any true Quaker: for they know and believe, that in the first
Adam all are Sinners; but in the second Adam, which is the Lord from Heaven, we
are made Righteous: for as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive, as it is written, 1 Cor. 15. 22. But though it be granted, that by one
Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all
Men, for that All have sinned, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam's Transgression, who is the Figure of him that was to come,
Romans 5. 12. 14. yet this does not prove the Lord to be so partial in his Love
toward his Creatures, as to choose some, but leave the greatest part of
Mankind in the fallen state, without affording them any Benefit by Christ, or a
Measure of his Grace and Spirit; for want of which, and being so past by of
God, (as somehave asserted) they become under a necessity of sinning and; a
necessity of dying: Oh, harsh Doctrine! and so I must confess I often thought
it, whilst I was industromsly striving to work my self into a Belief of it: but
now from a certain experimental Knowledge, and in full assurance of Faith, can
I testify for God, He is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that
seareth God and works Righteousness is accepted of him: For though all have
sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, wherefore he has concluded all
under Sin ('it is) that he might have Mercy upon all, not willing that any should
perish in Sin, but that all might come to Repentance: Moreover than this, the
Scriptures do abundantly speak forth the extent and Benefit of Christ's Death
for all Mankind, upon condition of Faith and Repentance joined with new and
continued Obedience, which are the Gospel Terms, on which he is offered to
them: For Christ Jesus gave himself a Ransom for all; he tasted Death for every
Man; so says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Hebr. 2. 9. So that it is a certain
Truth, all that are or shall be saved, are elected only in Christ Jesus, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. There
is no Prae-exception, or absolute Fore-appointment, as partially designed in
relation to Persons, but upon Man's Disobedience; Wherefore it shall not be
said, The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on
edge; but he that eats the sour Grapes, his Teeth shall be set on edge: for
all Souls are the Lord's; as the Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of the
Son is his; and he has said, The Soul that sins, it shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. 2,
4. Yet has the Lord no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the
Wicked turn from his way and live: Ezekiel 33. 11.
Wherefore he has given the Beloved of his Soul out of his Bosom, to come into
the World to same men from their Sins, that they might be made accepted in him:
Therefore as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation;
even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all men unto
Justification of Life; read Romans 5. 18. which makes it clear to me, the Lord
will not condemn any for Adam's Sin, who have not demerited his Wrath by Actual
Trausgression.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Sacraments.
AS touching the Institution of the Sacraments (so called) by which is meant
Water Baptism and the outward Supper; here also is another great Charge brought
in against the Quakers, unto which I cannot but be very tender in the Answer;
for I must confess, I my self did once think them very chargeable in this
Matter. Now that Baptism, even the Outward and Tipical Baptism was an Ordinance
(that is so say, a Thing ordained by one that has power to Ordain) as John
Baptist had Command from God to Baptize; this I do believe and own: But then
the Lord himself has ordained a higher Baptism, whereby he saves, which
surely is not the outward; no, that is not of Efficacy to obtain or effect such
an End, which is Salvation (as that I think, our Enemies themselves will grant,
and then why are they so angry with us, that we do not own it in their Outward
Form?) But the One Baptism, necessary to Salvation, I do believe, is Inward and
Spiritual, being that of the holy Ghost, foretold by John the Baptist, Mat. 3.
11. I indeed Baptize you with Water, unto Repentance (says he) but he that
comes after me is Mightier then I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear, he
shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with Fire. This is the Baptism which
Christ commanded his Disciples, that they should wait for, (and therefore I
call it an Ordinace, because ordained by Christ) as you may read Acts 1. 45.
And being assembled together with them, he commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise of the Father, which, says he,
ye have heard of me; for John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost not many days hence. The same did Peter Witness,
Acts 11. 15, 16. And as I began to speak ( says he) the holy Ghost fell on
them, as on us in the beginning; then remembered I the word, of the Lord, how he
said, John indeed baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy
Ghost. Now if any shall Oppose these Scriptures to prove outward and Water
Baptism now in force, Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, etc. John 3. 5. Except a man be born of Water, and of the
Spirie he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like Figure
whereunto even Baptism does now save us, not the putting away the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead.

Something I shall write by way of Answer to them, these being the chief Texts
that ever I heard brought to prove the same; As to the first, I say, that must
needs mean the Baptism of which I am now speaking, ( viz.) Spiritual Baptism;
for Christ's bidding of them go, denotes their being empowered from him, to
Baptize in, or rather Into his own and his Father's Name; which is the true
Spiritual Baptism; besides, here is no Water made mention of, whence we may
infer, the Apostles Ministry was to be the Laver in which they were to be
baptized: See here their Mission, Christ bids them go Teach, Baptizing;
Baptizing is in the Present Tence, whilst they were Teaching; and as it was
then, so it is now, the Spiritual and Inward Baptism goes along with the
preaching of the Word of Life. To the second Scripture I Answer, If our
Opponents will have that mean Material Water, may not we then as well conclude,
that John Baptist meant Christ would Baptize them with Material fire? but if we
understand the Power of the holy Ghost to burn up the Stubble (that naturally
grows in us) by the latter, then must we also understand the same Power to
cleanse us from our natural Filth by the former: But I know it will be expected
I should prove this by Scripture, for which see Tit. 3. 5. Not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done (faith the Apostle) but according to his Mercy
he saved us, by the Washing of Regeneration and Renexing of the holy Ghost.
Here is the Washing of Regeneration to parallel being born again of Water, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost, to answer being born again of the Spirit, for
the Washing of Regeneration, or Renewing of the holy Ghost; and being born
again of Water, or being born again of the Spirit, are Terms Synonimous, or
Expressions to the same purpose; all pointing at that One Baptism of the
Spirit, so faithfully believed, and experimentally witnessed by the Quakers,
who are said to deny Baptism to be an Ordinance: But how is it they deny it?
let their Cause be examined, or there can no true Judgment be given whether
they ought to be acquitted or condemned. Infant Baptism, or Sprinkling of
Infants, this they do utterly deny, as a thing by men imposed and, never by God
or Christ instituted; neither is there any Scripture-Precept or President for
it: Indeed how should there, since it was not taken up nor invocated for about
200 Years after Christ dyed; and then it was first brought in by one Fidus a
Roman-Priest in the Year 248. Read Thomas Lawson's Treatise concerning Baptism,
page 53. 55.
which was assented to by Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, and first preached up by
Agustine; then decreed by the Melivitan Council; last of all ratified and
confirmed by Pope Innocent the third, which was not done till the Year 402. Yet
we grant the Baptism of those that were adult or come to Age, and had Faith to
Entitle them unto it; this was the Baptism of John, who was a forerunner of
Jesus Christ; but this was not permanent and continuing, but to pass away, that
Christ's might take place; for he must increase, but I must decrease, says
John, himself, John 3. 30. For John's Baptism was but a Figure of Christ's
Baptism, but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come
Baptizing with Water, says John, Chap. 1. 31. However, where any now have
believed it simply their Duty to be baptized, as thinking it, either for the
Furtherance of the Gospel, or Trial of their Faith, the Quakers are tender of
judging them in that Case; but if they stick in the Shadow, and reject the
higher Ministration, then they are more Reproveable. But there is a third
Scripture I am yet to speak to, and that has reference to Noah's Ark, which was
a Figure (I have heard some of your selves say) of our Ark Christ, The like
figure whereunto (says the Text) even Baptism does now save us (it must be a
baptizing into Christ then) for the Apostle says, It Is not the putting away
the filth of the flesh; so then it is not Water Baptism, for that can but
purify the outward man; that that is External cannot cleanse the Spirit that
is Internal, and give the answer of a good Conscience toward God, as it
follows in the next words; wherefore says Beza a Man (whose Memory ye
pretend to honor) The Baptism which answered to Noah's Ark, was not Material
Water, but the Power of Christ within, which preserves us cleansed, and enables
us to call on God with a good Conscience: But then the last clause of the Verse
ought to be considered, which having Co-herence with the foregoing words,
says, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Lo here is the true Baptism indeed,
the which I am now pleading for; and of which the Apostle speaks, Col. 2. 12.
Buried with him in Baptism; wherein also ye are risen with him through the
Faith of the Operation of God, who has raised him from the dead. And now
Reader, since there is but One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, as says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 5. whether this Baptism be the Sprinkling of Infants, or
outward Washing of grown Persons, or the inward Cleansing by the holy Ghost,
I Will leave the Witness of God in thy own (conscience of judge: and then to
determine whether the Quakers are not greatly wronged in being charged with
denying Baptism.

Now I come to speak concerning the Sacrament (so called) of the Lord's Supper:
In answer to which, in the first place. I must needs say, I find not the Word
Sacrament in all the Scripture, but if by Sacrament, ye mean a Sign, then can
it not be of necessity to continue longer then till the thing signified is
come, and clearly discovered; so that granting it to be a Practice enjoined, it
was to last but its Day and Time, that was till Christ, who i, the Bread of
God, that comes down from Heaven (which Bread is his Flesh, that he gave for
the Life of the World) should come, according to his own Intention; see Ioh. 6.
33, 35. Indeed the whole Chapter speaks of Christ's being the true Bread,
wherewith the Saints are nourished; and that he would come again after his
Departure; see his Promise to his Disciples, John 14. 18. I will not leave you
Comfortless, I will come to you; and that he meant an inward coming, see Verse.
20. of the same Chapter, At that Day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and
ye in Me, and I in You, says Christ. And therefore says the Apostle, I speak
as to Wise men, judge ye what I say, the Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ, etc. for we being many are One Bread,
and One Body; for we all are Partakers of that One Bread, I Cor. 10. 15, 16,
17: And indeed, I do believe that herein is the Communion of Saints (namely) in
eating of the Flesh, and drinking of the Blood of Jesus Christ; not Carnally,
as the Jews thought when they murmered at him, saying, How can this man give us
his Flesh to eat? John 6. 52. But spiritually, wherein conflicts the true
Brotherhood and Fellowship of that Church which is in God, as with one another,
so with the Father and the Son, by the holy Spirit, at the Spiritual Table of
the Lord.

Now if any in proof of the outward Supper, shall produce that saying in
Matthew 26. 26, 27, 28. And as they were eating Jesus took Bread, and blessed
it and brake it, and gave to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my
Body; and he took the Cup and gave Thanks, and gave it to them, and said, Drink
ye all of it, for this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
many, for the Remission of Sins.

I Answer, That that Figuratively pointed to the true Bread, I think is very
clear; so likewise that the Wine there figured out that Spiritual Wine which
was to come from him, will not be hard to make appear; For in the very next
Verse faith Christ, I will not drink of this Fruit of the Vine, until that Day
when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. And that he did not mean
they should stay for this Wine, till they came to Heaven (as some understand by
the Word Kingdom) see what himself says in Matthew 16. 28. Luke 17. 20, 21.
Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here that shall not taste of
Death till they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom. And when he was
demanded of the Pharisees, when the Kingdom of God should come? he answered
them and said; The Kingdom of God comes not with Observation, neither shall
they say, Lo here, or Lo there, for behold the Kingdom of God is within you.
And that there this Wine was drunk by the Disciples; see Acts 2. from the first
Verse to the 18th. When the Holy Ghost fell upon the Apostles, how full of the
new Wine of the Kingdom they were, to the astonishment of Beholders! and
certainly this Wine of the Spirit, or Wine of the Kingdom (which is all one;
for Christ's Kingdom is a Spiritual Kingdom) must come from him; for he is the
true Vine, as he calls himself, John 15 1. So that the Text alleged, does not
at all prove outward and Elementary Bread and Wine to be of use after Christ's
second and spiritual coming; for this he fulfilled before his Death, and the
Holy Ghost was not given till after he was glorified, as was glorified, as you
may read, John 7: 39.

But possibly some may object, It was practiced by the Church of Corinth after
Christ was inwardly come, after the Holy Ghost was given to them, as may be
argued from 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. Where the Apostle repeating Christ's words in
Matthew, adds, This do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

To whom I answer in the behalf of the People whom I have undertaken to speak
for; if any break outward Bread, and drink outward Wine with a sincere
Intention, as believing it their duty that they may the more be put in
remembrance of the Body and Blood of Christ, by the Remembrancer the Spirit of
Truth, which is appointed by the Father to lead the Saints into all Truth, they
judge them not, but rather hope that such will come further out of the Shadow
to the Substance: But to do it merely by Imitation or Tradition, as most do, is
not to offer a Sacrifice to God in Righteousness; however, the outward Supper
cannot be the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, which the Apostle
speaks of in 1 Cor. 10. 15. and so on. This can be but a Sign, to put us in
Remembrance thereof; and therefore, though it was commanded to, and practiced
by the Church of Corinth, yet that does not perpetuate its continuance: For so
was washing another Feet, John 13.5.
abstaining from things strangled and Blood, Acts 15. 28, 29.
anointing the Sick with Oil, laid upon the Saints of old, James 5. 14.
which ye yourselves judge not needful to be practiced now. But if any shall
say. The Apostle relaxt some of these, by saying in I Cor. 10. 25. Whatever is
sold in the Shambles that eat, asking no Questions for Conscience sake. Then it
must be granted, that there is no necessity for the Continuance of the other;
for the same Apostle says, The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. Let no man
therefore judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in respect of a Holy Day, or of the
New Moon, or of the Sabbath Day, says he; wherefore if ye be dead with Christ
Jesus, why, as though living in the World, are ye subject Ordinances? touch
not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with the using, after the
Commandments and Doctrines of Men, Coll. 2. 16, 20, 21, 22. So here is as much
said for the abolishing of this latter (as to any necessity) as can be alleged
for the former; therefore those that can dispense with the one, have small
reason to plead for the other: And yet I testify, the Communion of the Body
and Blood of Christ the Quakers do own, as that which every one must come to
know and witness, or they have no Life in them.

Now I appeal to the Reader, How then can it be said, that they deny the true
Institution of the Lord's Supper? Yet am I loath to leave the thing here, being
willing to hope I write to some, who are Conscientiously scrupulous in this
Matter, who ('it is like) are ready to say, as I my self (in Heart) have often
said, viz. To lay aside this Administration, were at once to cast off and count
useless what so many Martyrs, in the Marian days, so zealously contended for,
yea, resisted unto Blood in striving to maeintain: And having this Opinion, I
confess I was much swayed thereby, as thinking it had been merely for the
outward Administration, that they suffered Martyrdom; but having since more
seriously considered the Matter, I can truly say, I have received this from the
Lord for Answer, viz. It was not to maintain those outward Signs of Bread and
Wine; but to bear Testimony against the Falsehood and Foppery of
Transubstantiation, that the Worthies of those days stood so stoutly against
it, that they counted not their Lives dear unto themselves, that they might
finish the Testimony they had received from the Divine Spirit: which indeed
History is clear in (to them that read with Understanding) For the Question put
to them was not, Why do you break Bread and drink Wine, in your Sacrament,
without Consecration? But, What say you to the Sacrament of the Altar, after
the Bread and Wine is Consecrated? is the Real Presence of Christ there, I or
no? This was the Interrogatory they were to answer; and bravely indeed did
Tindal, Philpot, and others, maintain their Negation to this Quest on; which
those that are acquainted with Martyrology, cannot but have a Knowledge of:
Therefore the laying aside these outward Signs, to be used by way of
Remembrance, when the Spirit it self is their Remembrancer, This is not to put
a slight upon the Sufferings of those Martyrs who then were breaking through a
Cloud of Apostasy and Error, the bright side of which (blessed be our God) has
since more fully appeared.

To conclude this Point: If any shall be offended at what I have written to
vindicate the laying aside of this outward Sign, where the thing signified is
inwardly come; if they will dwell upon the Figure of the Death of Christ
without, and care not to come to know and witness his Resurrection and Life in
themselves, I Will leave them where they are; giving them to understand, I have
not attempted a formal Confutation of Error, but a Vindication of the Truth.

CHAP. VI. Touching Free Will.
ALthough I have heard say, That the Quakers are Free-willers; yet this does
not prove them to be so, no more than Peoples saying so, is proof that they
deny the Scriptures: But since some are so willing to receive Reports against
them, something I shall say as to this Particular in behalf of them, and that
is this; They are not of those that flightly say, Man may be saved if he will:
for they know right well, It Is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but in God that shows Mercy; for we are not able of our selves, as
of our selves, so much as to think a good Thought, but all our sufficiency is
of God, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure: And
therefore say we with the Apostle, Of his own Will beg at he us with the Word
of Truth, that we should be a kind of First Fruits of his Creatures, James 1.
18. But since there is a Willing Faculty placed in Man, and this Will being
corrupted, is naturally froward and averse to any thing spiritually Good;
whereby Man chooses that wherein the Lord delights not, and will not hearken
to his Counsel, nor turn at the Reproofs of Instrustion, Prove. 6. 23.
which are the Way of Life; but obstinately pursues the sinful Desires and
Lust, of the Flesh, to his Soul's Ruin; and so his Destruction is of himself,
and God clear of his Blood, by the free Tenders of his Grace, and strivings of
his Spirit within him: If this be granted, then it will follow, if ever Man be
saved, this stubborn Will most be bowed and subjected, and brought into
Obedience to the Lord Jesus; for it is the Willing and Obedient, to whom the
Promise is made, Ier. 1. 19. So that Man must come to be freely willing to
serve the Lord, and to take up the Cross, and bear the Yoke of his Son Christ
Jesus, not only of Necessity, but of a Ready Mind: And thus now, to have the
Will sanctified, and brought into the pure Obedience of him that sanctifies
it, (which is an Effect of the free Grace of God) here comes the true Freedom
of Will to be known, even to be made free from Sin, being delivered from the
Bondage of Corruption into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God; which
agrees to that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 21. And here, as the Truth makes
free, man comes to be free indeed, and to receive Ability to attend upon the
Lord without Distraction, and to do his Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven,
according to that Prayer which our Blessed Savior taught his Disciples, as we
read in the sixth Chapter of Matthew; After this manner pray ye, (says Christ)
Our Father, which art in Heaven, hollowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, etc. And yet, how many are there that
will plead for this Platform of Prayer, who never expect to receive an Answer?
Can they think, that Christ would bid his Disciples pray for what he never
meant to grant? This were to render him, who is Truth it self, an Impostor; and
to tax the blessed Son of God with Deceit. Oh Horrible!
For say they, The Will of God cannot be done perfectly here: I grant, where
the Kingdom of God is not come, there his Will can never perfectly be done; but
where the Kingdom of God is known and witnessed to be within; that gives Power
and Ability, and makes willing to yield Obedience unto his Requirings of us; so
that here every one, according to their several Measures, may perfectly perform
the Will of their Heavenly Father: Yet is here a vast difference between the
Natural Freedom of Man's Will, which some plead for: and the Gracious Freedom
thereof, maintained by the Quakers; for that is quite another thing to what
has been slanderously reported of them.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Inherent Righteousness.
AS touching Inherent Righteousness, (as a Righteousness of Self is intended) a
thing wherein this People have been falsely as well as foully aspersed it having
been given out concerning them, viz. That hereby they expect to merit Heaven.
Now seeing the Truth struck at with such a Soul-mrudering Weapon as this, makes
me (like Cresus his dumb Son) to speak: What! can their Adversaries wrongfully
reproach them with nothing less then laying waste the very Foundation of the
Christian Faith? which stands in submitting to the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, and not in establishing any Righteousness of our own, as inherent in us
and of our selves. But be it known to the World, though it has been reported
that the Quakers hold this dangerous Tenet; yet the report will not hold true,
when it comes to be examined: For although I have heard others often charge it
upon them; yet I never could find the person that durst say this was their own
Confession, viz: That upon the account of Inherent, or Self-Righteousness, they
expect Salvation; (but if we will take the Confessions of those that are so
forward to make Confessions for others, we may then believe the Quakers are as
bad as they are pleased to render them to us: but we must not take things upon
trust, but hear both parties, if we will be ingenuous) no Reader, they have no
such expectation; far are such thoughts from them? For though they do reckon a
man must be made inwardly Righteous by the power of Christ, that is meet for
the Kingdom of Heaven. I think this amounts to no more then what I have heard
asserted by a Teacher of your own, Namely Loaves, an Independent Preacher.
( viz.) That God freely bestows his Grace upon Men and Women, and afterward
rewards his own Grace in his own Children) which Words plainly imply, the Grace
of God to be free to all, and to be tendered within, which whosoever accepts
thereof to be led by the same, do thereby receive the Spirit of Adoption, and
so come to obtain the reward of Children, which is a part in their Fathers
Kingdom; and this indeed is according to the Quakers Principle; for they know
right-well Gods Grace is Universal, a proser whereof he makes unto all, by
which they might be made a Righteous people, and in it come to enjoy Salvation:
Therefore they believe that inward Righteousness is wrought by Virtue of the
Grace of God, and is a necessary qualification to fit man for Glory, which
makes them choose with the Apostle, rather then talk of the Righteousness of
Faith, to show forth their Faith by their Works; yet do they not expect to be
saved, neither for their Faith alone, nor by their Works, but by Christ who
works true Faith. For it is not Works of Righteousness as done by them, not
only as Inherent in them, by which they expect to be accepted of God and
justified before him, but by and through Christ Jesus, the Author and Worker of
those acts in them and for them, whereby they know that they are in him, and he
in them; and they hold him as their Head, into whom all things are gathered
together in one, even in him. How comes it about then (it may be asked) that
this report has spread so far concerning them? Why truly Reader, if I may give
in my Answer, it must be this, he who was an Enemy to all Righteousness, ever
since the beginning, seeing the Faithful among this People, not only Nominally,
but really Righteous, throughout their Conversation, he has been so enraged
against them, that he has not spared any pains to put on his Instruments to
Reproach and Vilify them: Therefore have they been masked with the most
affrighting Vizards of Self-Righteousness and Self-Sufficiency to bring about
their own Salvation, that if possible, he might fright People from having any
converse amongst them, but notwithstanding the Wrath of the Adversary, their
Innocence will appear with its open Face; for the time is now a hasting,
wherein it will be seen who are but Nominally, and who are really Righteous.
Bear with me my Friends, to whom I dedicate this little Tract: For though I
ranked this point amongst the Scruples of the Moderate, having heard some, whom
I esteem such, lay this Principle to the Quakers charge But now being better
acquainted with them, I find they have wrongfully charged it upon them, and
therefore I can do no less but use some sharpness of Speech to refute the
falseness of this Opinion, that through a mistaken Zeal (I am apt to think)
some have taken up against them: Well may I say Mistaken, for were the Quakers
rightly understood, People would find that they have as low Thoughts of any
Human Righteousness, as those that daily confess all their Righteousness to be
but as filthy Rags.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning a Possibility of a Total Fall from True Grace
THIS Doctrine being held by the Quakers, it has been branded with the
Approbrious Term of Hetrodox; which if so, I know not how the Apostles Doctrine
can be accounted Orthodox; and yet I know the General Opinion of many
Professors is, Once in Grace and ever in Grace (or, Once in Christ and ever in
Christ) But it is not Universality, if they had it, that can give a certainty;
if this would have sufficed our Ancestors needed not to have divided from her
who styled her self the Universal Church: Therefore, as we are not to follow a
multitude to do Wickedly; so neither are we to receive an Opinion for Truth,
because it is so received by many. Here I Will digress no further, but proceed to
show the Apostles Judgments in this matter: Paul speaking of the Jews (whom he
calls the Natural Branches of the true Olive) how that they were broken off;
that the Gentiles (whom he compares to Branches of a wild Olive) they might be
grafted in, says the Apostle, to them: Well, because of Unbelief they were
broken off, and thou standst by Faith; be not High-minded but fear; for if God
spared not the natural Branches, take heed also, lest he spare not thee. Behold
therefore (says he) the goodness and severity of God toward them that felt
severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness,
otherwise thou shall be cut off, Romans 11.20,21,22. And the Author in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, having spoken of Israel of Old, to whom God swear in
his Wrath, That they should not enter into his Rest; he Cautions them, saying,
Take heed, lest there be in any of you an Evil Heart of Unbelief in departing
from the Living God, Heb. 3. 12. And in Chap. 4. he exhorts both them and
himself, saying, Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest, lest any man
fall after the same Example of Unbelief. And in Chap. 6. Verse. 4, 5, 6. he
shows them the danger of falling, for says he, It Is impossible for those who
were once enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the Word of God, and the Powers
of the World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
Repentance; seeing they Crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open Shame. And in Chap. 12. Verse. 15. he wishes them to look
dilligently, lest any fail of (or from) the Grace of God, lest any Root of
Bitterness springing up should trouble them, and thereby many be defiled. Nor
was this his Suspicion concerning others only, but his Supposition of himself;
For I keep under my Body, and bring it into Subjection, says he, lest that by
any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should become a cast away,
1 Cor. 9. 27. And in his Epistle to Timothy he speaks positively, The Time will
come when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts shall
heap unto themselves Theachers, having itching Ears; and they shall turn away
their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables, 2 Timothy 4. 3. It Is
likewise said of Hymeneus and Philetus, that concerning the Truth they have
Erred, 2 Timothy 2. 17. And this I have heard publicly asserted, by one Eminent
in your own Esteem Dr. Annesley.
(viz.) That there could be no Heretics if some did not Apostatize from the
True Faith. Which he inferred from Paul's Advice to Timothy, Chap. 3. Verse. 10,
11. where he bids, A Man that is an Heretic after the first and second
Admonition, Reject; knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sins,
being condemned of himself. And this was the exposition which he gave upon the
Text ( viz.) A Heretic is one that maintains an Error, contrary to the Light
of his own Conscience, pertenatiously persisting in it, notwithstanding
Reproof. And without doubt the Text was truly exposited, may we understand him
to intend the Light of Christ Jesus in the Conscience; (for it is Christ the
true Light, who lights every Man's Conscience, and that is the Light of
Conscience) which if we may believe, he had regard unto; then it will follow
from the foregoing words, First, That it is possible for People to turn from
the true Grace of God, by sinning against the Light, which he has placed in
their Consciences: Secondly, That those are Nicknamed (or Mis-called) who are
called Heretics, for acting according to the Dictates of their enlightened
Consciences (or, which is more clear, to say: For being guided by the Light of
Christ in their Consciences:) Thirdly, It follows, that'tis utterly impossible
to prove a man an Heretic, unless he be guilty of Heresy, and condemned in
himself by the Light of Christ placed in his own Conscience to show him what is
Error, and what is Truth. Thus much the words import; but it may be, some will
refuse to confess to the Import of them, for fear of being counted Quakers
herein: Howbeit, the Spirit speaks expressly, That in the Latter Days some
shall depart from the Faith, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1. And such who have so done, we
know that inward Condemnation does attend them, according as the Apostle Peter
and Jude spoke of some in their Day, as had forsaken the Righteous Way, and
were gone astray, following the Way of Balaam, the Son of Bosor, who loved the
Wages of Unrighteousness: These says Jude, are Wells without Water, Clouds
carried about with a Temptest, to whom the Mist of Darkness is reserved
forever; for when they speak great swelling words of Vanity they alure through
the Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness, those that were Clean escaped
from them who live in Error: For if after they have escaped the common
Polutions of the World, through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the Latter End is worse
with them than the Beginning; for it had been better for them not to have known
the Way of Righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment delivered unto them; but it is happened to them, according to the
true Proverb, The Dog is turned to his Vemit again, and the Sow that was washed
to her wallowing in the Mire, 2 Pet. 2. 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22. And hence, in
Chap. 3. Verse. 17. of this Epistle, the Apostle gives Caution to whom he wrote,
saying, Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these Things, beware lest ye also
being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own stedfastness.
For it is threatened by the Lord, That when the Righteous man turns away from
his Righteousness, and commits Iniquities, and dies in them [Mark, here is
included a Total Fall] for his Iniquity that he has done he shall Dye, Ezekiel.
18. 26. and 33. 13. Wherefore we are exhorted to continue in the Grace of God,
and to keep our selves in the Love of God, because of the danger that there is
of falling from this Grace; for it is those that endure to the End that shall be
saved; these are Christ's own words in Mat. 16. 26. Mark 13. 13. It Is to those
that are faithful unto Death, to whom is promised a Crown of Life. Rev. 2. 10.
Such as are implanted into Christ, and abide in him, they shall inherit the
Kingdom. For if a man abide not in me, says Christ, he is cast forth as a
Branch, and is withered, John 15. 6. And in verse. 10. he tells them, If ye keep
my Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love, even as I have kept my Father's
Commandments and abide in his Love. Thereby signifying, that if we keep not his
Commandments, neither shall we abide in his Love; so then if we abide not in
that which keeps us in the Love of God, we cannot abide in God, for God is
Love, 1 John 4. 16.

See Reader, here is a whole Cloud of Witnesses, bearing Testimony, that'tis
Possible, if there be not a diligent watching, for People to fail of (or rather
fall from) that measure of the true Grace of God, which was once given to them.
Therefore, what the Quakers hold in this Point is no New Doctrine: For if this
could not possibly be, how could any do Despite unto the Spirit of Grace, or
Resist the holy Ghost? Yet do this People believe, A Christian may come to such
a growth, and standing in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus, from which he
cannot fall away, according to that Promise in Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcomes
will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and
I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God,
which is New Jerusalem, which comes down from Heaven, from my God, and will
write upon him my New Name. And they also believe, That such a one may come to
be assured, that he is in such a state, even as the Apostle was, who said, for
I am persuaded, that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities nor
Powers, nor Things present nor Things to come, nor Height nor Depth, nor any
other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 38, 39.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Perfection.
Which Doctrine, though it be firmly founded in Scripture, yet is it rejected
and set at naught, because it is believed by the Quakers; notwithstanding which
they freely confess, that a perfect Principle they plead for, and press the
necessity and benefit of man's believing and conformity to it: Therefore I ask
their Adversaries, Is it any Crime to be Perfect? To which if they shall
answer, (as in effect they have said) This is to be accounted Vile. To such my
Reply is, I hope that the Lord will enable his People to become, and be
contented to be counted more Vile: For to this Abraham was commanded by God
under the Old Testament, as it is written, Genesis 17. 1. The Lord appeared unto
Abraham, saying, I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect.
And to this we are commanded by Christ under the New, whose words are thus
Recorded, Mat. 5. 48. Be ye therefore Perfect, as your Father which is in
Heaven is Perfect. Nor is it only commanded, but also promised; see Romans 6. 14.
For Sin shall not have Dominion over you. And in 22. 23. verses, there we find
it experienced; for the Apostle speaks of such as were made free from Sin, and
become Servants to God, and had their Fruit unto Holiness, and the end
Everlasting Life: For the wages of Sin is Death, but the gift of God is eternal
Life through Jesus Christ our Lord, And in Romans 8. 2. there Paul speaks his own
experience, For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of Sin and Death, says he. And therefore he exhorts the
Corinthians, Having these Promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. And in 1 Cor. 2. 6. It Is said, the Apostle spoke Wisdom among
them that were Perfect; and in 2 Cor. 12. 9. the Apostle wishes their
Perfection: and thus he concludes his Epistle to them in the 11th verse of the
same Chapter, Finally Brethren, farewell, be perfect, etc. And this was it the
Apostle James desired, (viz.) that those to whom he wrote might be perfect and
entire, lacking nothing, James 1. 5. For it was the end of the Apostles
Ministry, that they might present every man Perfect in Christ Jesus, laboring
servently in Prayer for them, that they might stand perfect and complete in all
the will of God: Col. 1. 18.
And in behalf of the Thessalonians, Paul prays, That the very God of Peace
would sanctify them wholly, that their whole Spirit, Soul and Body might be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ Upon which Text I
heard a Preacher of your own thus Paraphrase; The Words, says he, signify a
compleatness in the subject, that nothing be wanting: For to be negatively
blameless, is to be without Crime, to be without Offense to be without Fault;
but to be positively blameless, is to be in some measure Innocent; it is to be
like Adam in his pure Creation; it is to make Christ our Pattern. Now whether
this does not tantamount to Perfection I Will leave the Reader to Judge
1 Thessal. 5. 23. And we find the Apostle Peter making the same Supplication,
even that the God of all Grace would make them perfect, 1 Pet. 5.10. This being
the very end for which God appointed Teachers in his Church, as it is written,
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. He gave some Apostles and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we
all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
Yea, this seems to be the end of Christ's giving himself for his Church, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
Holy and without Blame; see Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Therefore those that deny
Perfection to be attainable by the Lords People, do in effect deny Christ the
one Offering: For by one Offering he has perfected forever them that are
Sanctified, as faith the Apostle, Heb. 10. 14. Wherefore says John, Whosoever is
Born of God does not commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot
Sin because he is born of God, 1 John 3. 9. These and many more Scriptures
which I might have quoted, do abundantly speak forth a Man of God, or a truly
Godly man, to be Perfect or Complete in Christ: Therefore Perfection must needs
be attainable even in this Life; and to show that it is not altogether
unfeasible to be attained, I shall bring in Instances of some which have
attained it: Noah was a Just man and Perfect in his Generation, Genesis 6. 9. Job
was a Perfect and an Upright Man, one that feared God and eschewed Evil, Job 1.
8. Nathaniel was an Israelite indeed, in whom was no Guile, John 1. 47.
Zacherias and Elizabeth were both Righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1. 1, 2. Indeed, this
is the one thing needful, for Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is
nothing, but keeping the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. This is that has
the Blessing, and gives right to partake thereof; for it is written, Blessed are
they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life,
and may enter in through the Gates into the City, Revelat 22. 14. And this is
the Perfection the Quakers plead for, viz. That people may conform unto, and
come to be guided by that perfect Principle of God, placed not only in their
Consciences, but in the Consciences of all men; which as they yield Obedience
to, they will be enabled to keep the Commandments of the Lord, and so come to
witness in themselves the fulfilling of his Determination, which is, To finish
Transgression, and to make an End of Sin, and to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness, as was seen in Daniel's Vision, Chap. 9. Verse. 24.

CHAP. X. Concerning Infallibility.
ONE Charge more I have heard brought in against the Quakers, and that is, They
own Infallibility, and this (say some) there is none own but the Papists and
them; therefore we know not how to distinguish them.

I Answer: It is not a present laid upon me to discover all the Errors of
Popery, therefore I shall say no more, then what is pertinent to my present
Matter: But that the Popists are far from Infallibility (notwithstanding they
pretend highly thereto) their Difference in Doctrines (to which Bellarmine
himself has confessed) with the Disagreement of their Popes (one pulling down
what another had set up) and the Dissension of their Councils (particularly
about the Popes Supremacy, their Priests Marriages, and Worshipping of Images;
wherein one Synod has decreed what another has dissannulled) their own
Writings witness against them; which those that have read any thing of Papal
Story, cannot but have a Knowledge of.
Because the Papists say, Their Church is infallible, (which ye your selves
affirm to be no true Church; so not the Spouse of Christ, but the Mother of
Harlots, and all Abominations of the Earth) and because the Papists say, Their
Councils are Infallible, (whom we know do miserably thwart and contradict one
another) and because they say, The Judgment of the Pope that is Infallible
(though he speak never so much besides the Matter) And now, because the Quakers
say, The Spirit of the Lord, that is infallible (which teaches to deny all
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and is always at Unity with its blessed self,
and is the Christians Oracle for Advice in all Concerns) will there admit of no
distinction between these? Certainly they want Reason as well as Faith, who
cannot judge how these may be distinguished: They place Infallibility in
Persons, we in the Holy Spirit and its Teachings.

But further to clear the Matter, and wipe off this Scandal, of the Quakers
being counted Concealed Papists (I think) George Whitehead and William Penn,
their Declarations before the Parliament, at their Sessions, held in the first
Month, Anno 1678. together with the Test (containing several Articles, showing
the Doctrinal Differences between the Quakers and the Roman Catholics) which
was subscribed to by several Hands of such as are well known in this City, and
then given in to a Committee of Parliament, requiring the same; and the Case
was afterward moved in the House: so that, as I said before, (I think) sure
the Knowledge of this public Discrimination, may very well serve any that are
but willing to be undeceived, both to rectify their Mistakes concerning the
People called Quakers, and to give them satisfaction: For I must confess, it
went far with we, in my own serious Thoughts about them, although then I was
far from them; yet I could not but conclude, there was a Hand of Providence had
wrought wonderfully for them, in giving them an Opportunity of clearing both
themselves and their Principle of that unjust Censure, which had so long lain
upon them.

But to conclude this Point: Though I have heard it said, The Quakers hold
Themselves Infallible; I see now it is not so: they hold not themselves
Infallible, as they are Men; but only as they are guided by the infallible
Spirit, namely, the Spirit of the Lord, a Measure of which he has placed in
all men; and this never failed any, who were led by the same: yet whatever can
be said to evince the Truth of the Quakers Principle, whereby the Innocent may
be vindicated; it is no wonder to have their Sayings wrong reported, and their
Sense quite perverte.

And now my former acquaintance, to whom I present this small Treatise; will
you not yield your selves Mistaken in the Reports you have received? I freely
acknowledge to you, for my part I am willing so to do, and that with Shame
taken to my self herein, my Lot having been cast so near this Land of Goshen,
that it may well be wondered at, why I did not discern my Mistakes long ere this
time: Now though it cannot be so said of you, that the Light has shone so clear
about you, yet know this every one of you, the Light has shined in you, and
that (I am sure) as it is heeded, will make manifest to you, how falsely the
People called Quakers have been accused: They have been looked upon (like the
Apostles in days past) as Setters forth of strange Gods; they have been counted
as unknown, and yet well known; they have been reckoned as Deceivers, and yet
true; for Truth don't use to suffer under its own Name; but when men can fasten
the name of Heresy upon its Principle, then they think they have Pretense
enough to punish its Proselytes; and so it is with these, as it was with the
Christians of old; their Adversaries put Bear-Skins upon them, and then set
Dogs to bait them. There were such, it is known, that were counted the Filth of
the World, and as the Offscouring of all things, who wandered about in
Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the
World was not worthy: And what if I shall say, such there are now? yet are they
Slighted, Contemned, Derided, Reproached, Reviled, Defamed, Slandered,
Traduced, Malign'd, Vilified and set at naught, as if the worst term that could
be given them, were even good enough: One while, they are branded for
Illiterate Nov^ces; another while, counted so profoundly Learned, that they
must needs be Jesuits: though that Order can boast of Antiquity, whilst these
are looked upon as a Novelty; yet are they found in the same ancient Faith with
Righteous Abel in the beginning: But it is no new thing for Truth to be called
an Vpstart, and then prosecuted under the Name of Novillism.

Thus, having shown in several Particulars how grossly people have abused the
Principle of the Quakers, I should nextly come to speak concerning their
Practices, to see if they find any more Favor; but remembering my Promise was,
not only to rectify Peoples Mistakes concerning, but to inform them in the
Principle of True Religion (for the Principle of Truth is but One) I shall
therefore, according to the Manifestation of the Spirit given unto me,
endeavor to signify, What this Principle is, From whom it comes, and Whereto
it leads.

PART II. Concerning the Principle of Truth, What it is, From Whom it comes,
and Whereto it leads.
. I. IT is a Principle of Divine Light and Life, of Christ Jesus, placed in the
Conscience, which opens the Understanding, enlightens the Eye of the Mind,
discovers Sin to the Soul, reproves for it, and makes it appear exceeding
sinful; quickens such as accept and believe in it, though they were dead in
Trespasses and Sins, makes them alive to God, ang brings up into Conformity
to the Image of his Son Christ Jesus, that he may be the Firstborn among many
Brethren.

That this Description accords with Apostolical Doctrine, see Ephesians. 5. 23. All
things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does
make manifest, is Light. Therefore says Christ, John 3. 20, 21. Every one that
does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should
be reproved: But he that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be
made manifest that they are wrought in God. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6. But God, who is
rich in Mercy, for his great Love, wherewith he loved us when we were dead in
Sins, has quickened us together with Christ, etc. Romans 8.29. For whom he did
foreknow, he also did praedestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son,
that he might be the Firstborn among many Brethren.

Thus is general have I briefly described the Christian-Principle; but that I
may make it further intelligible unto you, I feel it upon me to write more
particularly, that so when you shall read it by a familiar Demonstration, you
may the sooner be prevailed upon to yield to its Operation.

. II. In the first place, This Principle, of which I am now writing, it is the
Grace of God that brings Salvation, and has appeared to all men, teaching us,
that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts we should live Soberly, Righteously,
and Godlily in this Present World, as says the Apostle, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Even
that Word of his Grace, which is able to build us. up, and to give us an
Inheritance, Gal. 1.15.
among all those that are Sanctified, Romans 3. 24.
through Faith which is in Christ Jesus; see Acts 2. 8. By which Grace we are
Called, Justified and Saved. Ephesians. 2. 8.
That is, If we believe in the same, if we receive it, and continue therein,
grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the Hope of our Calling, nor
from the Hope of the Gospel, which we have heard, and which was preached to
every Creature which is under Heaven, according as it is written, Col. 1. 23.
But if we turn this Grace into Wantonness, and so receive it in vain; then
indeed it will not save us: However, this Grace of God, in it self is able and
sufficient to save all, to whom it appears, and all that believe in it, and are
led by it are preserved; because it was by this Grace of God, that his Son
Christ Jesus should taste Death for every man: For there is no difference
between the Jew and Greek; but the same Lord over all, is Rich unto all that
call upon him: For the Lord is Gracious and full of Compassion, slow to Anger,
and of great Kindness: The Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over
all his Works, as you may read, Heb. 2. 9. Romans 10. 12. Psalm. 145. 8. 9. All
which are clear proofs, that the Grace of God is both Free and Universal; which
Grace of God is else where called the Light of Jesus, he being that Gift of
Grace, given by God to enlighten the Children of Men, as it is written of him.
Joh. 1. 9. He is that true Light, who lights every man that comes into the
World. And this is he whom the Father promised by the Mouth of his Prophet,
saying, I will give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a Light of the
Gentiles, Isa. 42. 6. The same is again spoken of, Chap. 49. 6. It is a light
thing that thou should be my Servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the Preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a Covenant to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the Ends of the Earth. And the
Prophet Isaiah, speaking to the Church, Chap. 60. 20. says thus, The Lord
shall be thine Everlasting Light. To which the Prophet David brings in his
Experience, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, says he, Psalm. 27. 1. This
is indeed the mighty Savior, he upon whom the Father has laid help, and who
is able to save unto the uttermost, all that come unto God by him, whose
appearance is Light, whereby he Discovers and Reproves Sin in men; see
therefore that none reject him.

For this is he, who has the Key of David, that opens the Understandings of
his People, Rev. 3. 7.
by which they understand the Scciptures when they read them.

This is he, who has discovered himself to be God manifest in the Flesh; and
also does manifest himself in our Mortal Flesh, in which we dwell.

This is he, who when he was on Earth, yielded both Active and Passive
Obedience to his heavenly Father, in Life, Doctrine and Death; which I firmly
do believe, was a Sacrifice acceptable unto God for the Sins of Men; by
believing in whom, and yielding Obedience to him, Pardon and Remission of Sins
comes to be known; and so the Creature finds Acceptance with the Father through
the Son.

This is he, who justifies by Faith in his own Name.

This is he which imputes his own Righteousness to the Children of men (without
whose applicatory act and gift of Grace, in imputing his own Righteousness unto
us all creaturely actings are but in vain.)

This is he that has laid down his Life for us, and took it upon again; for
says he, I have Power so to do, John 10. 18. And by the same Power that raised
his own Body out of the Grave, does and will he raise up the Souls and Bodies
of Believers to glorify his great Name.

For this is he that Acquits his People of all Sin, old as well as new, taking
away and cleansing them from the Sins of their first and fallen Natures, as
well as pardoning (upon Repentance) those Sins which some have at unawares or
through weakness fallen into, after they have received the Knowledge of the
Truth: For he who is called the Light of the World, John 8. 12. John 1. 9. the
same is called the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World, verse.
29. And therefore was his Name called Jesus (a Savior) for it was said he
should save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1. 21.

This is he, who baptizeth his People with the Water of Life and Regeneration,
and seals up his love to their Souls, by giving them his Flesh to eat, which
is the true Bread that comes down from Heaven.

This is he that gives true freedom of will to his People, whereby they can
cheerfully serve him, and keep the Word of his patience, though in much
Affliction; and he has promised to keep such in the hour of Temptation, Rev.
3. 10.

This is the Lord our Righteousness, and he of whom our Righteousness is, Jer.
23. 6. Isa. 54. 17 and 56. 1. 25. 9.
as says the Prophet, which while we abide in him, we have a sure standing: But
if any go out from him, who is a God at hand, and whose Salvation is near to be
reveald in all that wait for him; then it is no wonder if they fail of the
Riches of that Grace which is treasured up in him.

This is he whose Works and Ways are all Perfect, and in him we are made
complete; that is as we are guided by his Spirit, which he gives to lead the
Saints into all Truth, according to his promise, John 16. 13, 14. Howbeit, when
the Spirit of Truth is come, he will lead you into all Truth; for he shall take
of mine and shall show it unto you, says Christ, and this his Spirit by which
his People are led, is an Infallible Spirit: Now if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ (which is Infallible) he is none of his, says the Apostle, Romans 8.
9. And now if any man have and profess to be led by this Spirit of Christ, he
is made a Scoff even by the very Professors of this Age.

Thus I have again touched upon the former Particulars, wherein I undertook to
Vindicate Truth and its Followers, in all which Christ (the Light and Life of
Men) is all in all unto his People: John 1. 4.
For Christianity does not consist in the belief of so many Doctrines, Articles
and Principles (as some suppose) but in conformity unto that one Eternal
Principle, to wit, the Light of Christ manifest in the Conscience, and yet
leads into a heavenly Order, both in Doctrine, Principle and Conversation,
according to the diversity of its Gifts, whereby man comes not to be at liberty
in his own Will, but bound again to God, which is the true signification of the
word Religion: And this Light of the unerring Spirit (by which the Lord leads
his People in the Way Everlasting) it shines within, (mark) It shines in the
Darkness, though the Darkness comprehend it not, as says the Apostle, John 1.
5. It shines in the dark Heart of man, though man in his dark state cannot
discern what it is, yet is this that sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto we do
well to take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until the Day
dawn, and the Day Star arise in our Hearts, according to that, 2 Pet. 1. ^9.
which is as much as if the Apostle had said, This is commendable that you give
diligent heed to the least measure of this Light, or Grace of God, which he
has dispensed to you, till he shall see fit to bestow a greater measure upon
you. For it is still but one thing that I am describing, although rendered by
diverse Names, inasmuch as the sure Word of Prophecy, and the Day Star here
spoken of, differ only in Degrees, not in Nature and Kind; both which
Expressions denote to us, that one gift of Light and Grace through Christ Jesus
freely bestowed on all men, and according to the improvement that they make of
their Measures, so an increase thereof is administered to them: It was by this
Light that Job walked through Darkness, Job 29. 8. And it is by this Light that
we come to see our Darkness; but it is not that we should abide in Darkness, but
walk through it, and come out of it by following the Light of Christ, that in
his Light we may see more Light, and so come to receive the Light of Life, as
it is written, John 8. 12. Then spoke Jesus unto them, saying, I am the Light of
the World, he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the
Light of life. And praised be the Lord, there is a Remnant who have experienced
it, and can say with the Apostle, this thing is true in them (viz.) The
Darkness is past, and the true Light now shines, 1 John 2. 8. Which Light is a
Light of the Spirit of the Lord dwelling in his People; and therefore whatever
the World may think concerning them, it is no presumption in them to own they
are made Possessors of the same: For says the Apostle to the Corinthians, Know
ye not that ye are the Temples of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in
you; For ye are the Temples of the living God; as God has said, I will dwell
in them, and walk in them, 1 Cor. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Now since God himself is
said in Scripture to dwell and walk in his People; why should it be thought
Arrogant for them to say, Christ in them is the hope of their Glory, according
to that of the Apostle, Col. 1. 27. To whom God would make known what is the
Riches of the Glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles, Christ in you the hope
of Glory. And let me tell you, this was the Judgment of Dr. Langly, These
instances I bring in to show how those that speak against the Quakers
Principle, (which is Christ manifest within) are forced many times (by the
Power of the same Principle in themselves) in plain words to confess to the
same.
which I my self heard from him, in a Sermon preached upon that Text, (viz.)
That the great Gospel Treasure is the Lord Jesus Christ, and the glory of that
Treasure is Christ in us. This was his Observation, and this I think is
Confession clear enough to the Truth of our Assertion (viz.) That in being
guided by the Light (which is the Spirit of Christ) within us; hereby a sure
Hope of Eternal Glory is given to us: However we do not conclude Christ in our
selves only, but we say a measure of his Light (in order to show the way of
Life) every man is, or has been enlightened with; Nor yet do we include him in
the fleshly Temples of Men and Women's Hearts, so as to exclude him from being
any where else, but as we know his Presence fills Heaven and Earth, so we
believe, that notwithstanding his appearance in our Hearts, he is continually
at the Right Hand of God, at the Right Hand of the Majesty on High, ever Living
to make Intercession for us, and by his Spirit we feel the Signification
thereof within us.

For this Grace of God, which is the Light of Jesus, it is a measure of the
Divine Spirit; and a Manifestation of it is given to every man to profit
withal; see 1 Cor. 12.7. Yea, this Universal Principle, which I am describing,
it is a Measure of the quickening Spirit, even of that Spirit which raised up
Jesus from the Dead; by the Indwelling of which in us, we come to be renewed in
the Spirit of our Minds, and to have our Mortal Bodies quickened, so as to
capacitate us to serve the Lord with our Spirits, and with our Bodies, which
are his.

Now if any shall think I have raised this Principle too high, let them read
Romans 8. 11. and they will find the Apostle speaking expressly, If the Spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead, shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that
dwells in you. Therefore (as I said before) it is no Arrogance for the People
of God to own, that they have the Spirit of God dwelling in them; for it is not
the Light of Nature, nor the Dictates of a Natural Conscience; but a Spiritual
Divine Principle, by which Men and Women are raised from the Death of Sin, to
serve God in Newness of Life, and Obedience of Conversation.

No Reader, let me tell thee, Nothing Natural will, or can, reach so far,
Nature cannot change Nature; it must be a higher Power, that can cause to put
off concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man, which is Corrupt,
according to Deceitful Lusts, by renewing the Spirit of the Mind, so as to
cause us to put on the New Man, Christ Jesus, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness; and so Old Things are made to pass away;
behold, all things are become New: Lo here is a New Creature, as there is a
putting off the Old Man with his Deeds, there is a passing away of the first
Heavens and the first Earth; and then behold, New Heavens and a New Earth,
wherein dwells Righteousness, as there is a coming to this Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ Jesus (which Law is inward, written in the Heart, and
Engraven on the Inward Parts) there is a setting Free from the Law of Sin and
Death: Col. 2. 14.
And so we come to know a Blotting out of the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, which was against us, and contrary to us, our Lord having taken
them and nailed them to his Cross. And thus, Romans 8. 16.
He that believes (in the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God unto
Salvation) has a Witness in himself, the Spirit it self bears them Witness
that they are the Children of God, according to that in 1 John 5.10. Romans 8.16.
And as they continue in the Faith they come to be sealed with the holy Spirit
of Promise, and to set to their Seals that God is True: For Faithful is he that
has promised, who also will do it; he has promised to redeem us from all
Iniquity, wherefore let us hope in his Word, and not grieve his holy Spirit,
whereby we are sealed unto the Day of our complete Redemption, according to the
Apostle's Advice, Ephesians. 4. 30. O! let us take heed that we do not vex and
quench the Spirit of Christ within us, that so we be not of those (complained
of by Nehemiah) To whom the Lord gave his good Spirit, but they rebelled
against it (And what then?) so he became their Enemy and fought against them.
These were such of whom Job speaks, Chap. 24. 13. saying, They are of those
that rebel against the Light (the Light and Spirit here spoken of, being one in
Being, and not divided, but distinguished only in degrees of Discoveries;) for
this Spirit is a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of Jesus
Christ, which opens and enlighteneth the Eye of the Understanding, and gives
to know what is the Hope of the Calling of Christ Jesus, and what is the Riches
of the Glory of his inheritance in the Saints, according to the Apostle's
Prayer to God for the Ephesians, Chap. 1. 17, 18. And this was it that Christ
promised, when he was about to leave his Disciples (as to his Personal presence
amongst them) at which their Hearts began to be sorrowful, he therefore tells
them, to comfort them, he that dwells with you shall be in you, John 14. 17.
Thereby he meant himself, (who then was present with, but passing from them in
the Flesh) would come again unto them, and abide forever with them, in the
Spirit: For the Lord is that Spirit, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Wherefore
he bids them Examine themselves whether they be in the Faith; Prove your own
selves, says he, know you not your own selves, how that Christ is in you,
Except you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. And hereby know we that we are not in a
Reprobate state, because we witness the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us. For
this Principle of which I write, it is the Unction which we have received from
the holy One, whereby we know all things: that is, this does instruct us in all
things that are necessary to be known by us. For it is that spiritual anointing
that the Apostle John speaks of, which those who have received it (and in whom
it abides) need not that any man teach them, but as the same anointing teaches
them all things, and is Truth and is no Lie, even as it has taught them, they
should abide in him, 1 John 2. 14. that is, in Christ Jesus, from whom this
anointing does come: Now whosoever is taught by this Anointing the same is taught
by God, as it is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God.
Every man therefore that has heard and has learned of the Father comes unto
me, says Christ, John 6.45. For this was the Promise of the Father, even the
new Covenant which he made with the House of Israel, After those Days, says
the Lord, I will put my Laws into their Minds and write them in their Hearts;
and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People: And they shall
not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the
Lord, for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest, Ier. 31. 33,
34. This being the Tennure of the New Covenant, That all the Children of the
Lord shall be taught of the Lord, and in Righteousness shall they be
established, Isa. 54. 13, 14. Which implies, that God will teach them so
effectually by his Free Spirit, that they shall not stand in need of any other
Prophet. But here I must obviate an Objection, before I can proceed.

Possibly some may ask me, Why then do those People that thou art now gone
amongst, keep up their Public Meetings to Preach and to Teach People the Way
of Salvation? What need is there of their Teaching, if every one has a Teacher
in them, able to Instruct them in the Way to the Kingdom?

To whom I Answer: First, Though I did say as much, as that every one has a
Divine Teacher in them, yet I did not say, that every one knows this Teacher in
them: For this has been the Misery of many Ages of the World, People have gone
out after the many Lo here is and Lo there is to find Christ without them, in the
mean time neglecting his Appearance within them, even as was foretold by Christ
himself, when he was on Earth in the days of his Flesh, In the Last Days,
says he, they shall say, Lo here is Christ, and Lo he is there, but go ye not
out after them, nor follow them; behold, I have told you before, Mat. 24. 25.
Luke 17. 28. And now since we upon whom the Ends of the World are come, have
seen it so come to pass, that People are gone from this Gift of God in
themselves, to the many outward Observations of Days, Times, and Superstitious
Customs, thinking to find Christ in them, whilst they shut their Eyes against
his Light, which shines in their Consciences to guide their Feet in the Path
of Peace: Is it not high time for his faithful Watchmen, who see the danger of
such a state, to Cry aloud unto the People that they may take Warning before it
be too late; and therefore do they lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, to sound
a Retreat to the Inhabitants of the Earth, who are without the Spiritual City
of Resuge, that they may return in time, and lay hold of the Horns of the
heavenly Altar, and get into the Habitation or Tower of safety, before the
Enemy of their Souls take the strong hold of their Hearts, and sortifie himself
against them, and keep them without the Gates, till the Avenger of Blood (who
once would have had Mercy on them) pursue and overtake them and so they be
destroyed: Therefore, right-glad are the Hearts of many that ever they heard
this joyful Sound [RETIRE TO THE INWARD GRACE] thereby signifying to them where
Help is to be had, who were seeking Salvation from the Hills and from the
Mountains, yet labored but in vain, but in returning and in Rest they have
found themselves saved, according to the Word of the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah
30. 15.

Secondly, Although I did say, That all the Children of the Lord are taught of
the Lord, yet I did not say, that all are his Children; for it is they, and they
only, who are led by the Spirit of God that are Sons of God. Romans 8. 14.
For though the Lord has given his Spirit; yea, his Son to be a Leader and a
Commander to the People, yet many there are who do not follow his Guidance,
saying in their Hearts (what the jews spoke with their Mouths) We will not
have this Man to reign over us. Now is there not need that some should seek to
convince such of the Evil of their Ways, and the Error of their Doings (who
instead of walking in the Straight and Norrow Way of Righteousness, which leads
to Everlasting Life, are going on in the Broad Way of Sin and Wickedness, which
leads down to the Chambers of Death) that so they may be persuaded to leave off
the Weapons of their Rebellion, wherewith they fight against God, and wound
their own Souls; and submit themselves unto his Ambassador of Peace, the Spirit
of his Son in their Consciences, that true Balm of Giliead, with which they may
be healed.

Thirdly, That I may be rightly understood, let me acquaint my Reader; neither
do I assert, that those who are set out as Travelers in Sions Road, are at
once so perfectly instructed in all the Paths thereof, that they need not to
inquire of those that are gone before, which is the way thither, whose
experiences may be to them of use, for escaping the Snares which the subtle
Fowler lays to catch Souls in, both on the Right hand and on the Left, that
so they may walk right forward with their Faces Sion-ward, until they shall
come to sit down in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Lastly, Nor is it altogether useless; for those that are established in the
Truth, to hear the things thereof declared, notwithstanding they knew the same
before, yet may it be to the stirring up of their pure mind by way of
remembrance, of the dealing, of the Lord with themselves, in days that are
past; and for the comforting and refreshing of their Spirits, to feel how the
Work of the Lord prospers in others of his People, and for the clearing and
making glad their Hearts, to hear how Truth prevails and gets Ground in the
Earth. This therefore is the end of all Declarations amongst us (viz.) that the
ignorant may be Instructed; that Gainsayers may be Convinced, that the Weak
may be Confirmed, and that the Strong may be Consolated; Therefore do our
Ministers labor in the Word and Doctrine, to Convert Sinners to Christ Jesus,
(the Gift of God) and to build up Saints in their most holy Faith, and to
Edify one another in Love.

Thus much in Answer to the Objection; so I return to the point in Hand, which
is further to demonstrate (as the Lord shall enable me) what this Principle is,
that is Preached up amongst us.

It Is that divine Principle of Life which brings the Glad-Tidings of Salvation
near unto all, by which they may be put into a capacity of receiving the Grace
of God in the Gifts thereof, which he has purposed in the appearance of the
Son of his Love, to bestow upon as many as shall believe: This being the
Everlasting Gospel that Paul gloried in; I am not ashamed of the Gospel, (says
he) for it is the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes,
Romans 1. 16. Yea, it is that Word of Reconciliation, which God has committed to
such as himself has called, to make them Ambassadors for his Son Christ Jesus,
by the Ministry of which, they turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive. Forgiveness of Sins, and
Inheritance among them that are Sanctified, through Faith that is in Christ
Jesus; see Acts 26. 18. Thus these profit their Hearers; and so do not only
Pray, but also prevail with Sinners to turn unto the Lord, that he may be a
Father to them, and they his Sons and Daughters.

And this Word that reconcileth, is not afar off; it is not in Heaven, that any
should say, Who shall go up for us, and bring it down to us, that we may hear
it and do it? So then the Indians and Americans shall not perish for want of
the Bible, which we have here in England.
neither is it beyond the Sea, that any should say, Who shall go over the Sea
for us, and fetch it to us thence? but the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
Mouth and in thy Heart, that thou may hear it and do it; as was testified by
Moses, a Man of God, Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 13. and also by Paul, an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. This now is the Word of Faith, which is again
preached by those whom the World in scorn call Quakers: And though such
preaching be accounted foolish by the learned Rabbis of our Age: yet let them
know, it is by the Foolishness of Preaching that God is pleased to save them
that believe, as it is written, 1 Cor. 1.21. So notwithstanding these use not
enticing words which Man's Wisdom teaches, yet do they preach in the Evidence
and Demonstration of the Spirit, and in a way of Power, whereby they are known
to be of God (as were the Apostles, see 1 Cor. 2. 1, 4.) And the Tendency of
their Ministry is to direct people to the Teaching of Christ, the one Prophet,
promised to Israel, Deuteronomy, 18. 18. which Promise the Apostle repeateth Acts 3.
22. saying, And it shall come to pass, that every Soul that will not hear this
Prophet, shall be destroyed from amongst the people, Verse. 23. Thus do they
commend themselves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, by turning
them to the Light of Jesus (the Power of God manifest within) which, as it is
yielded to and obeyed, makes free from Sin; which still is that one thing that
I am writing concerning (viz.) A Principle of Divine Light and Life in Christ
Jesus, according to the Apostle's record, John 1. 4. In him was Life, and the
Life was the Light of Men: And this Light, I say, (however it may be called)
it is the shining of the Son of Righteousness in men's Consciences: It Is not
Conscience, which some have described to be a reflect Act of the mind (whereby
men view their past Actions) the which accuses them for what they have done
ill, and approves of what they have done well: Though this be more then some
there are will allow in this matter; yet is this too short to express its noble
Nature: For this Principle does as well show men the Sin of their future Evil
Purposes and Intentions, as set before them the Iniquity of their former
Actions: Therefore I say, it is not Conscience, for that is but a created
Faculty; But that of God placed in the Conscience, has its being from all
Eternity: For he that shewth unto man his Thoughts, is the same that Formed the
Mountains and Created the Winds, whose Name is the Lord of Hosts, as says the
Prophet Amos, Chap. 4. 13. And this is he who is without beginning of Days, or
end of Life: The Alpha and the Omega; the First and the Last; the beginning of
the Creation of God; the Image of the Invisible God; the first Born of every
Creature; the faithful Witness, and the first begotten of the Dead; and the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth. This is he who is the Resurrection and the
Life, in all that do believe in his Light; as it is Recorded concerning him,
Heb. 7. 3. Rev. 1. 11. Col. 1. 15. Rev. 1. 5. John 11. 25. Therefore whilst ye
have the Light, believe in the Light, (says Christ) that ye may become
Children of the Light, John 12. 36.

And this Light is elsewhere called the Seed, even that Incorruptible Seed, by
which we are begotten to God, and Born again by his Eternal Word, which lives
and abides forever; see 1 Pet. 1. 23. This is the promised Seed; yea, that
Seed of the Woman spoken of, Genesis 3. 15. where the Lord said to the Serpent, I
will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed;
it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel. This is the Seed of
the Kingdom of Heaven; for Heaven's Kingdom is within, (as Christ said, Luke
17. 20.) Wherefore this Seed is sown in the Hearts of the Children of men; as
was set forth by the Parable of the sower, Mat. 13. and the beginning; He spoke
many things to them in Parables; Behold a sower went forth to Sow, and when he
sowed, some Seed fell by the Way-side, etc. some fell among Stoney places, etc.
and some fell among Thorns, Verse 18, 19. Hear ye therefore the Parable of the
Sower, says Christ; When any one hears the Word of the Kingdom, and
understands it not, then comes the wicked One, and catches away that which
was sown in his Heart; This is he that received Seed by the Way-side, etc. And
in the 31, 32. Verses, Christ says, The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Grain
of Mustard Seed, which a man took and sowed in his Field; which indeed is the
least of all Seeds; but when it is grown, it is the greatest among Herbs, etc.
It Is truly so indeed; The Seed (or Grace) of God, is small in its first
appearance (even as the Morning Light) but as it is given heed to, and obeyed,
it will increase in Brightness, till it shine in the Soul; like the Sun in the
Firmament at its Noonday height: But if People will despise the Day of small
things, and will not believe in this low Appearance of the Light of Jesus in
their Hearts; which though it discover to them their Sins, and reproves for
them; yet because its Reproofs are soft and mild, and its Voice small and
still, they out-clamour the sound thereof in their Consciences, whereby they
reject the Son of God (in Spirit: as the Jews did (in Flesh) because he came to
them in so mean a manner, they would not have him to be their Savior: Will it
not be just for Christ to say to these, as he did to them, John 8 24. If ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your Sins; and then whither I go ye
cannot come. For the Lord has said, his Spirit shall not always strive with
man, Genesis 6. 3. He is a gracious and long-suffering God; but though he be
Forbearing, yet he will not always bear, though his Spirit does strive with
some for a long season; yet if they continue to resist the same, the time will
come when it will cease striving with them, and then Woe will be unto them, but
right blessed are they that are prevailed upon by the strivings of the good
Spirit of the Lord (in the Day of their Visitation) to know and mind the things
that concern their everlasting Peace, before they are hid from their Eyes: But
if People will shut their Eyes against the Light, how just is it for the Lord
to withdraw its shinings from them, and to cause Darkness to overtake them.
Wherefore hear ye, and give Ear, be not Proud, for the Lord has spoken; give
Glory to the Lord, before he cause Darkness, and before your Feet stumble upon
the dark Mountains; and while you look for Light he turn it into the shadow of
Death, and make it gross Darkness, according to the advice of the Prophet
Jeremiah, Chap. 13. 15, 16.

For though a measure of this Divine Light, is, or has been in every Man in
order to save them, yet it will not always abide with them (I mean as to its
saving Efficacy) it will continue no longer then during the Day of their
Visitation: Therefore says Christ, Yet a little while is the Light with you;
walk while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you, John 12. 35. Again,
he limitteth a certain Day, saying, in David, to Day, after so long a time, as
it is said, to Day if ye will hear his Voice harden not your Hearts, Heb. 4.7.
True indeed, there is a Day wherein People may know the things that concern
their Souls everlasting Peace: But if they Sin out this Day, afterward those
things will be hid from their Eyes, as Christ said, when he came near the City
Jerusalem, he beheld it, and wept over it, saying, If thou had known at least
in this thy day, the things which belong to thy Peace; but now they are hid
from thine Eyes, Luke 19. 41, 42. Be it known to you (my Friends and
Aquaintance, to whom I write) Man cannot be his own Savior, if he will not be
saved in the day of the Lords Power, he must Perish forever. And this is the
day of the Lords making hare his saving Arm, and revealing his Power, even that
time wherein he lets in Light into the Soul, which not only discovers to man
his Sin, that leads down to the Chambers of Death; but also shows him the way
of Holiness, which leads to everlasting Life: But if men pass this time over
without any regard to the Loving Kindness of the Lord extended to them in this
Matter, it is just with him to turn their Light into Darkness in them; and then,
as Christ said to some of old, If the Light that is in you be Darkness, how
great is that Darkness? Mat. 6.23. (mistake me not) It Is not to be understood
as if the Son of Righteousness (which is the Fountain of Light could in it self
possibly become Darkness, but as to those that have fast closed their Eyes (or
lost the true Sight) lest they should see by its Illumination in their inward
Man; when once their Day is over, they may be as dark as if there were no Sun
in their Horrizon; and so they put Darkness for Light: Hence it is that we see
so many, that have been in some Measure enlightened by this inward Divine
Principle, to see much of the Vanity of their former Practices, and so have for
a time forsaken many of the same; but afterward, having gone out from this
Principle, by which they were in some measure saved from Polution and Sin, they
have again been entangled and ensnared by the Pleasures, Profits, Honors of
this present World, and so the latter End has been worse with them than the
Beginning: and so these having left their Habitation (like Satan, who abode not
in the Truth) envy and accuse the Faithful Servants of the Lord, which keep
their dwelling in him; and like the Spies of old, bring up an Evil Report upon
the good Land, frighting others with the Giant-like Difficulties that lie in
the way to be surmounted; thereby insinuating, as if Israel's God were not able
sufficiently to strengthen them against those spiritual Anakims, great and
tall, that must be incountered with, before the Inheritance comes to be
divided: These are such whom the Apostle Jude, in the 12th and 13th Verses of
his Epistle, calls, Clouds without Water, carried about of Winds; Trees, whose
Fruit withers, twice dead, plucked up by the Roots; raging Waves of the Sea,
foaming out their own Shame; wandering Stars, to whom (at least, they have cause
to fear) the Blackness of Darkness is reserved forever; unless they can
speedily find a place for Repentance, before the Decree bring forth, before the
Day pass as the Chaff, before the fierce Anger of the Lord come upon them,
Zeph. 2.2.
before the Day of the Lord's Anger come upon them; and with this I Will pass
them, being moved to write (not much to those who have forsaken, but) to those
who have not been acquainted with the Truth.

To whom I further say, Although there is a Time wherein the Lord waits to be
gracious, in which time he often expresses his Willingness to save men from
their Sins, and to gather them to himself; as Christ said to Jerusalem, O,
Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
were sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together,
even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, but ye would not, Mat.
23. 37. Again, the Lord complains, All the Day long have I stretched forth my
Hands to a Disobedient and Gainsaying People, Romans 10. 21. And thus the Lord
expresses his Kindness toward all men, in stretching forth his Arm to save
them, even as a man stretches forth his Arms to swim, by sending his Son unto
them to knock at the Door of their Hearts, to see if they will open to him,
that he and his Father may come in, and take up their abode with them; but if
men will not accept of Salvation while the Lord extends his Arm to save them:
If they will not take hold of his strength while they may make Peace with him:
If they refuse to answer his gracious Call, and to entertain his Son whom he
has sent, but keep him out till his Head be wet with the Dew, and his Locks
with Drops of the Night: If People will make their Necks as an Iron. Sinnew,
Acts 7. 51.
and will not yield them to the Yoke of Christ, Luke 7. 30.
being Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, always resisting the
holy Ghost, and doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace; setting at naught all
the Counsel of God; rejecting it (within) against themselves, and will have
none of his Reproof; and continue thus to slight him, till their Time and
Season be over, giving the Lord cause to complain of them, that he has
stretched forth his hand, but no man regarded it: Will it not be just for him
then to Laugh at their Calamity, and Mock when Fear comes upon them? And most
certain it is, that those who despise the Reproofs of Wisdom, and hate the
Knowledge of the Holy, Distress and Anguish will come upon them; but whosoever
hearkneth thereunto shall dwell in a safe Habitation. For Wisdom is a Defense
(Christ) the Wisdom of God is a strong Rock and a sure Foundation; he is that
Foundation which God has laid in Sion, even the Foundation-Stone, that Tried
Stone, the Corner Stone, Elect Precious; who though he be to many a Stone of
Stumbling and Rock of Offense; yet as many as believe in him shall never be
ashamed.

Read hear now what this Principle is, in which the Lord has given a Remnant
to believe.

It Is the Grace of God: It Is the Light of Jesus: It Is a Manifestation of the
Spirit: It Is the Glad Tidings of Salvavation: It Is the Word of Reconciliation:
It Is the Law written in the Heart. It Is the Word of Faith: It Is the Seed of the
Kingdom: It Is that Stone which has been rejected by many a foolish Builder,
but now it is become the Head of Sion's Corner.

These are all significant Expressions, of that excellent Principle, which I
have undertaken to treat on. But if any shall say, They are Expressions of so
different a Nature, that they know not how to reconcile them and make them one
together.

To such I Answer, They might as well confess, they cannot understand how the
Lamb of God can be the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; nor how the Shepherd of
Israel can be the Bishop of his Peoples Souls; there seeming such a difference
in these latter as in any of the former; yet do they all speak of but one
thing, although it be expressed by diverse Names: For it will admit of a manifold
Description; though (as I said before) it is still but one thing, if rightly
understood in its true Notion. And thus I chose to express it, because thus I
have found it ( viz.) A Principle of Divine Light and Life in Christ Jesus,
placed in the Conscience, which discovers both Sin and Duty to us; and not only
so, but it Reproves the one and Enables to perform the other and this I know,
that a measure of the same is placed in the Consciences of all Mankind, by
which they might see the right Way, were but their Minds turned thereunto.
Therefore let none slight or undervalue this Light of Jesus (manifest in their
Consciences) by calling it (as some have done) A Natural, Created, Insufficient
Light, which will lead men down to utter Darkness. Though sometimes again these
very Persons will confess, That the Light of Nature (as they call it) ought to
be followed, as far as it will lead; for say they, though the obeying its
Dictates will never bring men to Heaven; yet the disobeying them will certainly
sink them down to Hell. Hereby rendering the Lord cruel to his Creatures, as if
he required them to follow a Guide that would certainly lead them amiss, or
leave them short of the place of Rest; and then would punish them for being
Misled, or for sitting down when they had no Guide to show them the Way to
walk in; and that from a purpose in himself, to leave the greatest part of
Mankind without any other Guide to direct them in Matters of Salvation; but
that that is Insufficient, that it must be a Miracle if it show them the Way to
Heaven, according to their common Answer, when asked, how those must be saved
who have not the Scriptures amongst them (which these account the only Rule to
Guide men?) Why, we leave them to the Mercy of God (say they) the Lord may in
an extraordinary manner bring some to Heaven, if he have any Elect amongst
them; but whether any of them shall be saved or not, it is hard for us to
determine.

Thus they darken Counsel, by uttering words without Knowledge: They say, The
Grace of God is Free; and yet they make it a Monopoly; so it shall not be Free
to all; nor must all be sharers in it; neither will they allow the Lord himself
to dispense it; nor yet to inspire his Servants to go forth and preach it: But
arrogate to themselves a kind of Sacerdotal Right, to be Dispencers of the
Grace of God, and Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, because of some
outward Qualifications acchieved by them (as External Parts or Humane Learning)
although they never were called of God to the Work of the Ministry, nor never
had the Word of Reconciliation committed to them; yet would they have People
come to enquire of them, the Way to the Kingdom, though they are so
narrow-spirited, as to shut out the greatest number of Mankind, by absolute
Predestination; not sticking to affirm, that God nor Christ never purposed Love
nor Salvation to a great part of Mankind, and that the Coming and Sufferings of
Christ never was intended, nor can be useful to their Justification, but must
and will be effectual for their Condemnation. So being void of Universal Love
themselves, they fondly imagine the Lord to be like themselves: Hence
concluding, there is no Salvation to be had without the explified Knowledge of
Christ's coming in the Flesh, and of the Scriptures; both which we know whole
Kingdoms and Empires in the World are unavoidably ignorant of; and yet few or
none of these will Jeopardize their Lives to preach amongst such;
notwithstandings, this was the Apostle Paul's Practice to preach Christ where
he had not before been named; for said he, if I build upon another Man's
Foundation, I make my Glorying void.

But blessed be the Lord, he has caused many Witnesses to rise up amongst us,
who have given Testimony to the Truth as it is in Jesus, and have taught others
(both in our own Country, and in Nations abroad) to take heed to that sure Word
of Prophecy, nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth, which is the true Grace of
God, that is sufficient for us, not only (as some say) to leave men without
Excuse, and so to aggravate their Condemnation; but as it is received and
obeyed, it will lead out of Sin, into Holiness, and in the end crown with
Salvation.

And thus I am brought to the next thing promised, which was, to show whence
this Principle of Grace proceeds: I have (according to my Measure) shown,
What it is; now I come to show, From whence it comes; to which I say:

. III. It comes from God, (through Christ) as says the Apostle; God that
commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to
give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Corinthians. 4. 6. It Is God's Gift unto us, and therefore well may we
return Thanks unto him for his unspeakable Gifts: God is the Author of it, 1
John 1. 5.
who is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; Psalm. 104. 1.
for he covers himself with Light, as with a Garment; 1 Timothy 6.26.
and dwells in that Light which is inaccessible, which no mortal Eye can
approach unto; Iomes 1. 17.
he is the Father of Lights; and therefore has he given a Measure of his own
Divine Light to all Mankind, to reveal himself unto them; that so they may know
substantially What he is, and not worship him as the Unknown God: and this
knowledge of himself the Father is pleased to dispense to Men, in and through
the Son of his Love, Christ Jesus, our Lord; who is come a Light into the World
as himself testified, John 12. 46. I am come a Light into the World (says
Christ) that whosoever believes in me, should not abide in Darkness. And
therefore I believe, and am well assured, this is the one Faith, whereinto many
thousands by the Lord have been gathered, viz. That the God of all Grace has
sent his Son into the World, a free Gift unto the World; and has given a
Measure of his Light and Spirit, to manifest and reveal him unto all men: Thus
has his universal Love and free Grace appeared. For though God made Man pure
and innocent, yet Satan and disobedient Man has marred that Creation: In the
Beginning God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him,
as we read Genesis 1. 27. But Man soon defaced and stained this glorious Stamp,
and by yielding to the Tempter, went out from his first Nature, and so his
Beauty was turned into Deformity (I mean) that Beauty of his inward Man,
wherein the Image of God stood, in which he had Communion and Fellowship with
his Maker; through Disobedience this was lost, and so man came to be without
God in the World, being alienated from that divine Life, Light, Love, Grace,
Goodness, Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Virtue, Purity, Innocence, wherewith the
Lord invested him at the first in perfect Beauty: but man going out from that
first Divine Nature and Seed, in which he stood before Transgression, here was
his Fall and Degeneration, and so he came by that unexpressible Loss of the
Favor of God and Freedom of Will, that now the Lord being angry with him, he
had no Power to do any thing to appease him; the Garment of Innocence being
lost, their Fig-leaf Aprons could not hide their shameful Nakedness from the
Lord; which he seeing, and taking notice of, compassionately made them Coats of
Skin for their clothing; and then he drove them out of the Garden of Eden: So
here man was put out of the Paradise of God for eating of the forbidden Fruit
of the Tree of Knowledge, and Cherubims placed at the East End of the Garden
with a Flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep the Way of the Tree of
Life, as may be read in the third Chapter of Genesis at large. Thus man being
drove from the Presence of the Lord, Death came over his Soul; though he lived
outwardly, yet did he dye as to that Inward Principle of Divine Life and Virtue
which once he enjoyed, and so the Threatening was fulfilled which the Lord had
said, In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely Dye: Here Man and Woman
having transgressed the Royal Law of God, by breaking of his holy Commandment,
in eating of the Tree whereof he commanded them, saying, Ye shall not eat
thereof, by this they came to be separated from him: So it was Sin that made
the Separation, and it is Sin which makes the Separation: For Man and Woman in
their primitive state (wherein they were created) were good, as the rest of the
Creatures of God; for it is written, God saw every thing which he had made, and
behold it was very good: and God blessed Man and Woman, and they were in Favor
with him, till they became subject to Vanity by reason of that false Hope which
the Serpent suggested to them; they hoped to have been a Gods, to know Good and
Evil; but by going out of God's Counsel, they became corrupted by the Evil one;
and being joined to the Serpentine Seed, they were alienated from God: so that,
had not the Lord, out of his unmeasurable Loving Kindness and Compassion,
opened a Way to restore them, they must have perished in this Deplorable
Condition.

And this Way of Restoration was by Christ, the Light, the Seed, and Savior;
for he, of whom God said unto the Serpent, I will put Enmity between thee and
the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and
thou shall bruise his Heel; He it was who was to be the Savior of the World:
So that now, considering the Sons and Daughters of Adam, as they are found in
the Fall and Degeneration, having all sinned and come short of the Glory of
God; herein (I say) has his universal Love and free Grace appeared, to wit, in
giving of his Son to be a Savior unto them, as says the Apostle John; In this
was manifest the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him, 1 Epist. 4. 9. And
that he was sent to the whole World, see what John the Evangelist faith, Chap.
4. 16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son [ Mark]
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have Everlasting Life:
To which the Apostle testifies, 1 John 2. 2. saying, He is the Propitiation for
our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World.

This was the free Gift of the Father, that the Son of his Bosom should take
Flesh upon him, come into the World, and lay down his Life for poor Sinners;
for he came from God, and went to God again: So that though he laid down his
Life of himself, having Power, and being willing so to suffer, according as
it is written, John 10. 18. Yet himself also said, That his Body was prepared of
his Father, Heb. 10. 15. In which Body he did the will of him that sent him:
Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God, (says he) for a Body have thou prepared me.
Who now that rightly considers this Dispensation of favor, but must needs cry
out, Oh the Height and Depth, and Breadth and Length of the Love of God, and of
Jesus Christ our Savior, who took not on him the Nature of Angels, but took on
him the Seed of Abraham, and was made in every thing like unto us (only without
Sin) that he might restore Fallen Man: Which thing I know will readily be
granted; but it is the extent thereof that some would have limited; affirming,
That Christ dyed for a certain definite number, and not for the whole Lump of
Mankind, one as well as another: Nay, they speak as if none had any benefit by,
no nor so much as the Revelation of Christ (this Gift of God) whom to know is
Eternal Life, but those who have the outward Letter of the Scripture: Yet do I
believe, and so do Thousand more, whom the Lord has called (viz.) That the
Father of Lights, and God of the Spirits of all Flesh, James 1. 17.
has given a measure of his own Divine Light and Spirit unto all the Children
of men, Numb. 16.22.
to manifest and reveal the Appearance of his Son in them Note, That I do not
say Personally (as some suggest concerning us) as if we believe that very Body
of Christ is in us, that was hanged upon the Cross; which were Foolish as well
as False to assert) but Spiritually; as he is the Word of God, the Wisdom of
God, the Power of God; so he dwells in every Christians Heart: And so he dwells
in us, by which Power he completely sanctifies us.
who is that same Savior which shed his Blood for us, that he might wash us
and cleanse us from our Sins; and was offered upon the Cross, not only as a
Propitiatory Sacrifice, to make Reconciliation for the Transgressors; but that
by his once offering up of himself, he might bring in everlasting
Righteousness, and Perfect forever them that are Sanctified; and a measure (I
say) of this his Power (which is Light) God has placed in every persons Heart,
in order to their Sanctification, as they shall be subject to this his
appearance in them.

True indeed, all are not Sanctified and made Perfect by him; although this was
the end of his coming (that he might finish Transgression, and make an end of
Sin) and this was the will of the Father in sending him, to wit, our through
Sanctification) but this is not because all have not a knowledge and
manifestation of his Light (or Spiritual appearance of him) in themselves; but
because all do not believe in, and obey this his Appearance: Now that People
may attain to what Knowledge may be had of God, by the inward manifestation of
the Light of his Son (which is a measure of his Spirit) in their Hearts; this
is clearly proved by the Apostle, Romans 1. 19. That which may be known of God
(says he) is manifest is men; for God has showed it into them. For the Lord
of the whole Earth, who is the Preserver of men, he is impartial in his Love to
all Mankind; not only to them in Christendom (so called) who have the
Scriptures amongst them, but his Love is extended unto all People, in one Land
as well as in another; for his Spirit is not inseparable from the Scriptures
(as some suppose). Yet would I not be thought to undervalue the Scriptures any
whit; for I have very Venerable thoughts of them and a Reverential esteem for
them, as being Holy Writings: But I dare not confine all means for man's
Salvation in them, because the Lord has not confined himself to them, but has
left himself a Witness in every Conscience; which Witness is a spiritual
manifestation of his Son, the Savior of the World: And this the Scriptures
plentifully declare of, which sometimes they call the Word, the Law, the Grace,
the Spirit of God; at other times they call it, the Light of Jesus, the New
Covenant, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, a Rod, a Staff, a Shepherds Crook,
the Word nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth, the Sure Word of Prophecy, the
manifestation of the Spirit; a Shield, a Buckler, a strong Tower, the Armor of
Righteousness: All which are one in Nature, though diversely expressed, according
to its distinct Operations in the Soul, as the Creature stands in need;
sometimes to lighten its Darkness; at other times to lead it in the way of
Holiness: one while it Instructs; another while it Corrects: sometimes it
Counsels; other times it Consolates: and as its Counsel is heeded, and the Soul
guided by it, it preserves and defends in all exigencies and straights: But I
pass over its special use, intending to show that in another place; only here
may be seen the great condescension and matchless love of him, who gives unto
all Life, and Breath, and Being; in that he has sent the Holy Ghost down from
Heaven, with the Revelation of his Son Jesus Christ, in the Hearts of the
Children of men, that whosoever adhereth to the Spirit of his Son within them,
may thereby know him not only as a Savior and Redeemer, but also to be their
Savior and Redeemer; and that not only from the Punishment, but from the Power
and Dominion of Sin, by setting of them free from the Bondage of Corruption,
and bringing them into the glorious Liberty of his own Children: But as for
such who will not believe in this Principle of God, but instead of owning it as
his Power unto Salvation, say it is A Satanical suggestion; and instead of
owning it to be of the Divine Nature of God or Christ, they call it the Dim
Light of created Nature, putting Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter,
counting Darkness Light, and Light Darkness: such may continue in their Bondage
and Vassallage under the Prince and Power of Darkness, in the blindness of
their Minds, hardness of their Hearts, and deadness of their Spirits,
notwithstanding Freedom and Liberty, Life and Immortallity is brought to Light
through the Gospel; which it has pleased the Father should be Preached to
every Creature, by his Son, Sions Deliverer, who is his own Messenger; see Romans
11. 26. Mal. 3. 2.

For this Principle of Light (of which I now write) it is something of the
Nature and Being of God himself, who as he is a Spirit, so he is Light (as you
may read concerning him, John 4. 24. 1 John 1. 5.) and therefore it is by his
Light, with which we are enlightened: It proceeds from him, he being the Ocean
wherein the fullness thereof is contained, it is from him (through his Son Christ
Jesus) that we come to be inlighted by the same: so it is in his Light that we
see Light, even as the Natural Sun causes its Beams to extend to the Ends of
the Earth, so this Eternal Son of Righteousness, (who is the Ocean and Fountain
of Divine, Spiritual Light) causes more or less of the streams thereof to
descend into all immortal Souls upon it.

Thus having showed, the Nature and Quality, Original and Fountain of this
blessed Principle; I come further, to show its Use and Extent, that so I may
not only tell my Reader What it is, and Whence it comes, but according to my
Promise, write something of What it does, and Whereto it leads.

IV. In the first place; It daily Reproves for Sin, even in all men, and
excites to Holiness, during the Time of their Visitation; though it is possible
for men to sin themselves into such a state (by drinking in Iniquity, as the Ox
drinks Water, when through custom in sinning, their Consciences become seared
as with an Hot-Iron) that this Principle of God may cease striving with them,
and so these may not know when they do Evil; yet there is a Time in which this
Principle of God does stand as a faithful Witness against all Unrighteousness
and Ungodliness in the Hearts of Men and Women, and Leads, Draws, Moves and
Enclines their Minds to Righteousness, seeking to Leaven them (as they yield
thereunto) into the Nature of it self; whereby an inward, through and real
Redemption may be wrought in the Hearts of all Men, of what Kindred, Nation or
People soever; notwithstanding any outward Benefit or Privilege they may
Providentially be deprived of, yet is the Lord so Gracious as to dispense such
a measure of his Grace, Power and Spirit unto all the Children of Men, to
convince them of sin, to Reprove them for it, and to lead them out of it, that
as they give up to the Operation thereof in themselves, it will thoroughly
sanctify and make them clean, and so prepare them, and make them meet for his
heavenly Kingdom; yea, though they never had the Scriptures amongst them, nor
never heard Christ outwardly named to them (the Name of Christ being often put
for the Power of Christ within) as in Mark. 16. 17. In My Name shall they cast
out Devils, says Christ of his Disciples. So in Acts 4. 7. The High Priests
and Rulers asked Peter and John By what Power, or by what Name they had made
the Impotent Man whole? For that Name of Christ which heals and saves, is his
Power that makes Free from Sin. Now whosoever knows this Name of Jesus to be
given unto them, and effectually to have wrought in them, they can truly
witness him to be the Arm of God's Salvation: However, we do say, that the
Scriptures, in which we have a Declaration of what Christ has done and
suffered for us, those do much Facilitate Salvation through Faith in Christ
Jesus; and therefore, they ought thankfully to be received by us, and born
Witness to, whenever the Lord shall require us, so as that we may not be
ashamed to own, not afraid to confess him to be our Savior, who they make
mention of, to have been put to Death in the Flesh above Sixteen Hundred Sixty
Years past, by the Hands of Sinners. For we do not believe that this Light,
Grace and Power of God, which is sufficient both to sanctify and save, and
able to give an Inheritance among them that are sanctified through Faith which
is in Christ Jesus (where Christ is not outwardly named) I say, We do not
believe that this is given to any without Christ; but we do believe it to be
the Purchase and Benefit of his Death, who tasted Death for every man. And so
we do freely confess all that is derived to us, to be in and by Christ Jesus,
as Mediator, unto whom we ascribe all, acknowledging him to be our Head, in
whom all Fullness dwells. So that this Light, with which all men are in some
measure enlightened of God, it is no other, but a measure of that Divine Fullness
that dwelt in the Son of his Love when he was hear on Earth, and now dwells
in him, since he is ascended up to Heaven, where he was before, whence he
descends the streams thereof, into the Hearts of all the Children of Men, in
order to bring them out of the Fall in the First Adam, and to redeem them up
unto himself, the Second Adam; that as they have born the Image of the Earthly,
so they may bear the Image of the Heavenly, and be restored unto that Grace and
Favor of God again, which by Transgression they are fallen from.

But First, Let me tell thee, whoever thou art that reads me, This effectual
Operation of the Spirit (or Principle of God within) is not, nor cannot be
known without a being centred down into the same: For this I speak from good
Experience, the Spirit's first work is, to convince of sin (before it effect a
Restoration) and this it does, even in all (though all do not regard it) it
does first show them what is Evil, and then it Reproves them when they do Evil;
which Reproofs if they be despised, cause the fierce Anger of the Lord to be
kindled; and such as despise Wisdoms Reproofs, which are the Way of Life, while
they are so doing, they are treasuring up to themselves Wrath against the Day
of Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God: And as ever they
would come to know Remission of their Sins and enjoy Peace with the Lord, who
is hereby justly encensed against them, they must submit to bear his
Indignation against them, that so they may be redeemed through Judgment, and
brought to unfeigned Repentance; and then, and not till then, shall they know a
blotting out of their Transgressions, according as it is written, Acts 3. 19.
But (I say) before Remission of Sins comes to be known, there must be a
centring down into the Manifestation of the Spirit of God within, which will
bring down every exalted Imagination, and every high Thing, and lay it Low,
even to the Ground; that so every Thought may be brought into subjection to
Jesus Christ: And here comes the Terrors of the Lord to be known, which causes
Fear and Trembling; now does the Soul exceedingly Fear and Quake under the
Sense of the just Wrath of the Almighty, who is of purer Eyes then to behold
Iniquity, and whose Jealousy burns like Fire, and will so do till it have
consumed the Stubble that it meets with in the Heart of the Sinner: For he that
long offered himself as a Guide, is now become a judge in the Conscience of
this Creature; and his just Judgment against all Unrighteousness must be
accomplished. True indeed, the Opperation of the Word of his Power (by which he
judges) is diversely felt and experienced: In some it is as a Hammer, to break
the Rocks is sunder: In others it is as a Fire to melt down the Dross, and
separate it from the Silver: In all it is as a Sword to divide Sin and their
Souls assunder; yea, it divides between the Soul and that sinful Spirit, which
has got into it and defiled it.

Thus the Lord deals with his Creatures, as the matter does require; he
considers their Nature and Temper, and lays no more upon them then he gives
them strength to bare: For he knows our frame, he remembers that we are but
Duft; therefore he does not retain his Anger forever, left our Spirits should
fail before him, and the Souls which he has made us: However, all that have
sinned must know a Time of Sorrow; yea, even such who have not so rebelliously
despised his Counsel, and slighted his Reproofs, and cast his Law behind their
Backs (as some there are which have) yet inasmuch as they have at any time not
hearkened unto his holy Spirit within them, his Judgments will overtake them,
and in Righteousness will he plead with them; and then, I know, former things
will come into their Minds.

This I write, as one having witnessed the Spirit to be given for a
Remembrancer, which was faithfully promised by the Lord Jesus, John 14. 26.
even that Spirit of Truth, which he told his Disciples, it should bring all
things to their Remembrance; and so indeed it does call back things that are
past, and set them in order before us, judging and condemning of us for what we
have done amiss: And now, a Remnant having heard that (in our Hearts) that has
told us all things that ever we did, we know this to be the Voice of Christ;
yea, the spiritual appearance of the Christ of God. For this was he, who saw us
under the Fig Tree (when we had nothing but Leaves to cover us) although we
saw him not, yet did he send and call us to himself, that he might cover us
with his own Spirit, which when we came to be covered with, we then saw who it
was that cast the skirt of his Love over us, and said unto us, when we were
poluted in our Blood, Live: And then was the time of his Love, even when he
stood at the Door of our Hearts and knocked, that he might be entertained by us;
yea, and sometimes in the silence of the Night has he broken in upon us; I
know it in my own particular, when no Creature has been near, this Invisible
Oracle has secretly communed with me, reproving of me, wherein I had done
amiss; and showing me what was right in his sight: And at other times in
Company, thus would the Lord cause his Voice to sound in my Heart [ THE CUSTOMS
OF THE PEOPLE ARE VAIN] by which I was brought off from many of those Vanities
which before I had spent Time in; and that by the Witness of God in my own
Conscience, which testified against the same; although then I did not
understand what it was that did so restrain from sin: but now I know it was the
Lord that girded me, though I knew him not. For I well remember, when I have
been using the common Language of our Country (especially if after the now most
usual strain) this Testimony from God would arise in my Heart against it, viz.
Yet Truth does allow of a Property in Speech, which may be put into a degent
Style; although it admits not of giving flattering Titles to men: Read Elihu,
his acknowledgment, Job 32. 21, 22.
[ I will return unto my People a pure Language] Whereby I was reproved in my
self for using Flattering Speech (though such, as was, and is accounted of by
many to be but Civil Language, or expressions of common Civility to Persons
according to their Quality) in which I had such as Care to keep within the
Bounds of Verity, that I dare assert, I did stere as near the compass of
Truth-speaking, as the Nature of such Speech would couch. But since it has
pleased the Lord by the inshining of his heavenly Light in my Conscience, to
let me see clearly into the Falsehood and Folly of this corrupted courtesy: I
do not only Conscientiously, but Voluntarily decline the using such Flattering
Speech; notwithstanding, I know it is to expose my self to be censured by some,
as a Person Unaccomplished, Unmannerly and Ill Bred.

Praised be his Powerful Name, who has made me willingly Renounce both giving
and receiving that Honor that comes from Man, that so I might partake of that
Honor which proceeds from himself alone: For this is the Honor which all
the Faithful in Heart chiefly esteem; it being the Unbelieving who seek the
Praise of, and Honor from men: Which made Christ say to some of Old, How can
ye believe who receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that
comes from God only? John 5. 44. Yet notwithstanding this, Christ did then
require his Disciples to render Honor to whom Honor, and Fear to whom Fear,
which Requiring of his, all his true Followers (in their Respective places) are
at this Time careful to answer how uncivil soever accounted by the World; yet
have they learnt Gospel-Manners, which is, to give the Right Hand of Fellowship
to whom it does belong; in Honor Preferring one another, each Esteeming other
better then themselves.

And now, I say, it was by this Principle of Divine Eight (which God has
placed in my Heart) by which he pleaded with me in days past, even when I knew
him not; that is, I knew not that it was the immediate Act of his own Power and
Spirit, though I felt such a Force in it, that as I did in the least yield
thereunto (I must confess) I was overcome by it, but still it was as I was
subject and obedient to his Power; for I cannot say, The Lord wrought in an
irresistible manner; although I know and do declare, it was he who did subject
me, and made me willing in the Day of his Power: and thus being prepared by
him, then did he send his Spirit to convince me both of Righteousness and of
Judgment, as well as Sin; yea, to convince me of that Righteousness and
Religious Way of Worship, which I formerly walked in; whereby he let me see it
was but a humane Righteousness, and an invented traditional Worship, set up by
the Will, and performed in the Spirit of Man, and derived to me by outward
Instruction and Education; so that I had a Form which the Power did not attend,
for want of having regard to the Movings and Guidance of God's own Spirit, in
which alone he delights to be worshipped: and therefore is he striving by this
his Spirit in the Hearts of the Children of Men, to bring them out of all Forms
of humane establishing, that they may worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and
serve him in the Gospel of his Son, that so they may be accepted through him:
yet I do acknowledge, that while I saw no farther, and did sincerely serve the
Lord in the Way which I walked in before (hoping it might be right, because
reformed in many things to what some other Ways of Worship are) the Lord was
graciously pleased often to administer some Comfort and refreshment to my Soul,
through the Ministration I then sat under: And in like manner I do believe his
Dealings are with all the Upright-hearted, who are seeking after him in the
diverse Ways of Worfhip; which if they continue seeking him in the Integrity of
their Spirits, I doubt not but he will seek them out (for his Seed's sake) and
in due time bring them to the Mountain of his Holiness, where his dwelling is:
For this was Christ's Promise, John ^0. 16. Other Sheep have I, which are not
of this Fold, them also (says he) will I bring, and there shall be one
Sheepfold and one Shepherd over them: And when Christ comes to fold them upon
his holy Mountain (which Mountain is within) then will they walk in the
Footsteps of the Flocks of his Companions, and know a lying down where he
makes his flocks to rest at noon: but first they must come to know a passing
through Judgment, and their Works must be burnt (and they suffer Loss) because
the Lord of Hosts has said, Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment, and her
Converts with Righteousness, Isa. 1. 27. And Christ said, I lead in the Way of
Righteousness in the midst of the Paths of Judgment, Prove. 8. 28. And the
Spirit of Christ was promised to convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness
and of Judgment, John 16. 8. by which the Spirit and Prince of this World
should be judged, and he cast out of his Throne in the Hearts of the Children
of Men, whereby every one, who comes to experience God's Righteous Judgments
(in themselves) to be brought forth unto Victory; such may also witness an
Overcoming of the Prince and Power of Darkness, through the spiritual Strength
of this Son of Righteousness: howbeit, while these two Spirits are striving
together the Soul cannot but be sensible of an Hour of sorrow; I surely know,
that Day is a Day of Mourning, of Weeping and of Lamentation, when Zion fits
solitary with her Tears upon her Cheeks, clad in Sackcloth, covered with Ashes
(in a spiritual sense) fearing and quaking exceedingly before the Lord, and
trembling in her self, because of his fierce Wrath and just Indignation, that
burns as a Fiery Oven against Sin: Oh! then it is a Time of Heaviness and of
great Sadness with the Soul, sleep departing from the Eyes, and slumber from
the Eyelids, because of Grief in the Night-season; it being truly the Time of
Jacob's Trouble, Ier. 30. 7.
even the time when the Seed of Jacob is traveling to bring forth; and
therefore does that Dragon, the Devil (as in the General, so in the Particular)
seek to destroy this Birth, he is not willing this holy Offspring should be
born, and therefore does he raise Wars without and Fears within, stirring up
the Wicked to revile and smite with the Tongue; and causing cutting Calumnies
and sharp Censures to come from more Sober hands, hereby intending to increase
the Commotions which are within, by threatening the Soul with this, that now it
must expect to be reproached with the Reproaches of men. Thus the Evil One in
this time of sore Conflict, seeks to aggravate the Soul's Grief; and what he
cannot do by storm he will attempt by Terror, secretly striving to make the
Soul impatient under its Exercise, thereby to drive it into Despair. But though
it be a Day of Trial (in which every ones Work must be tried as by Fire) and of
sore Exercise with the Creature, yet is there a secret Hope lies hid under all
this, which is as an Anchor to the Soul, sure and steadfast, founded upon that
Rock which endures forever; and this bears it up above those Floods of
Persecution which the Dragon spues out of his Mouth to drown that heavenly
Birth that the Power of God is bringing forth within; which when it is brought
forth and comes to have the Government in the Soul, it must, shall and will
Reign over Death, Darkness, Sin and Corruption, and all the Powers of Hell and
the Devil.

I would have none think strange of what I have writ concerning this Thing,
though I know it is a Mystery to the Natural Understanding of the wifest of the
Children of Men; and therefore since Paul was called a Babbler, for preaching
such strange Doctrine to the Stoic Philosophers, Acts 17. 8. I can expect no
better from some, but to be counted a Non-sensical Scribler, for writing of the
same; but this I am content to bear, knowing in my self I had no Previous
Intentions to amuse my Reader; but having undertaken to describe (in measure)
the extent of this powerful Principle of God, placed in the Consciences of his
Creatures, following the Foot steps thereof for my Guide in this Matter: Before
I can attain to the End of my Journey, I am necessarily brought hither, and as
I stand here, I see by the Light of this Spiritual Pillar of Fire, that though
the Sea, with the Waves thereof Roar, yet is there a Way for the ransomed of
the Lord to pass over; and this Way is Christ, the Light, the Lamb, the Grace,
the Gift of God, given by the Father to bring out of the Fall (which all
Mankind are in by Nature) that whosoever believes in him, lays hold on him,
and continues to be led by him, should be brought into Fellowship with
himself, and abide therein forever; and this same is he, who leads in the midst
of the Paths of Judgment, and through the many Exercises that I have been
writing of, before he brings to the Banks of Salvation, and puts Songs of
Deliverance into our Mouths, whereby we can sing of the Mercies of the Lord:
And thus having brought out of spiritual AEgypt's Land, and caused to drink
deep of the River of Judgment, he then brings to Shiloh's Brook, and gives to
drink of the Waters of Refreshment: So it is the same Hand that wounded which
heals; and that Arm which broke us does now bind us up; the same Power which
killed, reviveth; and he who once caused grief, now gives Songs in the Night,
Isa. 61. 3.
And appoints to Zion's Mourners, Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of joy for
Mourning, and a Garment of Praises for the Spirit of Heaviness; and who will in
due time bring all his true spiritual Israel out of the Waste Howling
Wilderness, into a Land of Everlasting Rest.

Thus it appears, that the Light of Jesus in the Conscience is no Natural
Insufficient Thing (as some have sought to render it) being something of God
placed in every Man, to witness against all sin, convincing and reproving for
that which is Evil; contrary-wise, prompting, exciting and inclining to that
which is good: so that as many as yield to the Motives of it, it is sufficient,
not only to condemn and to destroy, but also to justify and save; being a
measure of the Living Omnipotent Power of that One Lawgiver, who is able to
save, as well as to destroy: see James 4. 12. which Power is Christ, as says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a
Stumbling Block, and unto the Greeks Foolishness; but unto them that are
Called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God;
who as he was once manifest in the Flesh, so now is he manifest in Spirit, to
be that Covenant of Light, which the Father promised by the Mouth of his holy
Prophet, Isa. 42. 6. And this Light, Power and Arm is (in measure) extended and
reached forth, at one time or other, unto all people, for the gathering unto
him, in whom the Election stands; that so as many as obey his Call, in yielding
themselves to be gathered by this gathering Arm, may make their Election, and
consequently, their Salvation sure in him: For this is he who would have
gathered Jerusalem, Luke 19. 44.
and saved her from that Ruin and Destruction which afterward came upon her,
because she knew not the time of her Visitation: It Is the very same Jesus, and
no other, whom we believe in for our Savior, who by his spiritual Appearance
in the Hearts of the Children of men, gives Light, gives Life, gives Power and
Victory over sin (to as many as follow the Leadings and Guidance of this
Immaculate Lamb) for it is given to the Lamb and his Followers to overcome; and
who so overcomes shall sit down with the Lamb on his Throne, and live and
reign with him for evermore, Rev. 3. 21. 12 11. Acts 7. 3 8. 1 Cor. 10. 4. Rev.
22. 13. Dan. 7. 13, 14. Mich. 5. 2.
Even the same which was with his Church in the Wilderness, being that
Spiritual Rock that followed them, of which they drank by the way, and were
refreshed in him, who is the Rock of Ages, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning
and the End, the First and the Last; the Ancient of Days, whose Dominion, is
an Everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away; and his Kingdom, that which
shall not be destroyed, whose goings forth have been from of Old, from
Everlasting. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16
For he is the blessed, and only Potentate King of Kings, and Lord of Lords;
who only has Immortallity and Eternal Life; to whom be Glory and Honor,
Dominion and Power, henceforth and forever.

Here now ye have a Description, and that in Scripture Dialect, concerning the
Principle of our Faith; something I have writ as to the Nature of it, which,
though at first it causes grief and brings in sorrow upon the Soul, yet does
this sorrow work Repentance, never to be repented of; after which comes
reviving, so that it was truly said, Psalm. 30. 5. Psalm. 126. 5, 6.
Though Weeping may endure for a Night, yet Joy comes in the Morning; for they
that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy; he that goes forth Weeping, bearing
precious Seed, shall doubtless come again Rejoicing, bringing his Sheaves with
him. And such shall surely say, In the Lord have we Righteousness and strength;
for in the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall Glory (in
him) not in Wisdom, Wealth nor Strength, but in this, that they know him to be
the Lord, who exercises Loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the
Earth, as says the Prophets, Isa. 45.24,25. Ier. 9.23,24. Isa. 33. 22.
And this is he whom we acknowledge to be our Judge and Lawgiver; yea, he is
our King, and he will save us; for to this end has he appeared by his Light in
our Hearts, and for this end does he appear in the Hearts of all men, that as
many as bow down to the measure of his Appearance in them, may thereby see and
be enabled to forsake their Ways and Doings, which have not been good, whereby
they may be saved from sin; and by the same saving Power and Spirit in their
Hearts, come to be led into the Way of all Truth, which Way of Truth is Christ,
our Mediator and Intercessor with the Father, through whom man comes to be
accepted of God, as he comes into him, in whom alone the Father is
well-pleased: for it is no other Jesus, concerning whom I write, but the same
that was born of the Virgin, even the Lord's Christ, who has made himself
known unto his Servants by such Peculiar Names, as suited the particular
Circumstances of their Souls, and according to their several Experiences of
him: so they reported concerning him; Isaiah describes him to be as the Shadow
of a great Rock in a weary Land, a Refuge from the Heat, a Covert from Rain and
from Storms, Chap. 4. Verse. 6. and chap. 32. 2 Again, he spoke of his being to
his People, as a place of broad Rivers and Streams, Chap. 33. 21 David calls
him, The Shepherd of Israel, which leads Joseph like a Flock, Psalm. 80. 1. He
also calls him, The Watchman of Israel, who neither slumbereth nor sleeps,
Psalm. 121: 4. Paul speak of his being our High Priest; yea, a Priest forever;
after the Order of Melchizedeck, Heb. 5. 6. And likewise calls him the Minister
of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which God has pitched, Chap. 8. 2.

John the Evangelist calls him The true Light that lights every man that
comes into the World, John 1. 9. The other John (or John the Divine) says,
This is he which was, and is, and is to come, Rev. 1. 8. And now since he is
come to a Remnant, and they have believed in his Light as manifest in them;
they are not ashamed to confess, that in the mind which gives a discovery of
Sin, to be the Power of God, the Appearance of Jesus, and that Light of the
Lamb, which the Nations of them that are saved must and shall walk forever in
(according to Rev. 21. 23, 24) Neither is this any new Doctrine, Opinion or
Principle, other then that which Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, with all the holy Patriarchs of Old were led and guided by, in things
relating both to Faith, Life and Worship: For what else could be a Rule unto
them, in matters of Salvation, but this divine Principle; when as they had no
written Laws nor Ordinances amongst them? which Principle is Christ, the Light
and Leader of his People, in all Ages of the World; who is one in all, never
was divided, though variously described; being the same, who by his Light
shows unto the Wicked, and condemns them for the Vanity of their Thoughts;
who also by the same Spirit comforts and consolates his Peoples Hearts, that so
as many as whose minds are turned to this Light of Jesus, and stayed in it,
though it be but small in its first appearance, yet shall they see a growth and
increase of it.

Thus Reader, have I (according to the Gift communicated to me, from the
Dispensation of the Most-high) described what the Principle of Truth is; which
is perfect in it self, and tends to the Perfecting of those that are gathered
into it.

And now my former Familiars, Neighbors, Acquaintance and Kindred in the
Flesh, and all others to whom this may come, hereby I invite you all to turn in
hither, even into the secret of your own Souls, to that which there reproves
you for your Sins, witnessing for God against all Unrighteousness of men, both
in Thought, Word and Action, striving in their Hearts to turn them from the
Evil of their Ways, and from the Vanity of their Conversations, to walk in the
newness of Life, that so they may be redeemed and restored out of their fallen
state of Degeneration, into the Image of God again, which has been lost
through Transgression.

O turn in, turn in, I say, before it be too late, lest you at last cry with
them spoken of in Jeremiah 8. 20.) The Harvest is past, the Summer is ended,
and we are not saved: Work while it is Day, while the Candle of the Lord
shines in your Tabernacle, be you workers together with God; for the Night
comes wherein no man can Work; and who can tell how soon the Sun of
Righteousness may go down upon you, and the Light thereof obscure it self from
you: Therefore hear Instruction and be wise, while the good Spirit of the Lord
is nigh to teach you; Isa. 55. 6.
seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near, and
refuse not to hearken to his heavenly Oracle in your Consciences (whereby under
this his spiritual Dispensation, he is pleased to speak unto the Children of
men) lest he say by you, as he said by some of Old who regarded not his
Counsel, They shall call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me, Prove. 1.25.28. For that in the Conscience
which checks for Sin, and excites to Holiness, is the Voice of the son of God,
by whom in these last days the Father speaks unto us: Oh be ye persuaded to
hearken diligently unto him: Hear, and your Souls shall live; and I will make
an everlasting Covenant with you, (says the Lord) even the sure Mercies of
David, Isa. 55. 3. And then you will come to know that Faith which Jesus is the
Author of, which stands in the Power of God; even in that Power which inables
to resist Temptations, and overcome Sin, and to get Victory over the World, and
the Spirit of it: so will you witness a dying unto Sin, and a living unto
Righteousness, to the praise of his Grace, who is calling of you out of
Darkness into Light, that you may be Holy in all manner of Conversation.

So now since God's saving Arm is made bare for the gathering many People to
himself before your Eyes; Beware therefore left that come upon you, which is
spoken of in the Prophets, Behold you Despisers, and Wonder and Perish; for I
work a Work in your days, which you shall in no wise believe, though a man
declare it unto you, Read Acts 13. 40, 41.

But Friends, my Hearts desire and Prayer to God for you is, that you might be
saved: And therefore have I (in the tender Bowels of his Love, which he has
shed abroad in my Heart by Jesus Christ) sent this Invitation unto you, that ye
all may make ready, and come to the Supper of the great God, who has spread
his Table and prepared a Banquet for you, whereof whosoever will may eat and
drink abundantly, as long as the time of Visitation is extended unto you: For
this I write in the Openings of Life, and from the motion of the good Spirit of
my God do I declare unto ye ( viz.) That none of ye were absolutely excluded
from Eternity; well knowing that a measure of his Grace has been freely
tendered to every one of you: because his Love extends Universally, and he is
crying, Ho, every one that thirsts come ye to the Waters of Life: And he that
has no Money, come ye buy and eat; yea, come, buy Wine and Milk, without Money
and without Price, Isa. 55. 1. Here is free Grace indeed, free Love indeed: O
do you but yield your selves the Subjects of his Love, and he will set your
Souls at liberty, that Sin shall not have Dominion over you, only obey his
Voice, and he will soon subdue your Enemies for you, and remove that which
lets out of your way, and that you may know when the time of Visitation is
upon you; I Will leave this mark with you, even then when you feel the Son of God
knocking at the Door of your Hearts, that he may come in and Sup with you; then
I say is the time, when the Year of Jubilee is approaching to you, when those
which are in Bondage may beset at liberty: which if you refufe to accept of,
and will not be set free when the Year of Gods release is proclaimed unto you,
how can you expect any other, but that your Spiritual Task-master will obtain
leave to bore your Ears to the Posts of his Doors, and make you his Servants
forever. Therefore bow down to Gods Power in you, that he may come in and set
up his Judgment Seat in every Heart: For For Judgment, says he, am I come into
this World, John 9. 39. That so after you have felt his Righteous Judgments for
every Unrighteous thing, you may find him to be near, which justifies your
Souls: and that you may experience Christ's coming in your selves, with Power
and great Glory, to work Redemption in you, as well as that he has purchased
Redemption for you; wait for him (I exhort you) in the way of his Judgments;
For the Lord is a God of Judgment, and blessed are all they that wait for him,
as says the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 30. 18. So shall you feel your Souls
redeemed out of the Earth, and out of the Earthly Nature, after which you will
witness the Peace of God to be extended toward you, like a River: But if you
rebel against him, you shall dwell in a dry Land, and shall not see when good
comes. Howbeit, when Calamity overtakes you, then shall you know that you had a
Time, you had a Season, you had a Day of Visitation, in which you might have
obtained Mercy; would you have turned unto God, he would have turned unto you,
and put his fear into your Hearts, and blotted out your Transgressions for his
own Name sake, and became a Father to you, and you should have become the Sons
and Daughters of the Almighty. And now once more I invite you all to turn in to
the Principle of God, which daily visits you in your inwards parts, in order to
bring you out of a state of Sin and Misery, and to make you partakers of his
Righteousness and Felicity: Come, taste and see that the Lord is gracious, who
long waits upon you, that he may be gracious unto you, because he delights
in Mercy.

O! come, come away; haste out of Babylon, while the Deliverer is near you; so
will he turn back your Captivity like Rivers in the South, and conduct you to
Canaan, the Land of Everlasting Rest, where Praises shall spring up in your
Souls, to the Glory of his Name, even to all Eternity: and with this I Will leave
you, though much more might be said; yet when all is said that can be, it is the
feeling sense of the inward Operation of this Divine Principle, that alone can
satisfactorily inform ye: which that you may Experience in your selves, and to
be happy, is the hearty Desire of your Souls Friend, who writes this unto you.

Thus, having written my Experience of the QVAKERS Principle, I shall write
something to detect the Erroneous and False Opinion, that is got up in the
Minds of many, concerning the Way and Means by which People come to believe
therein.

PART III. A Confutation of Peoples False Opinions, concerning the Manner how
we have been Convinced of the Principle of True Religion.
MAny and various are the Reports that have been rumored abroad, relating to
the Manner and Practice of this People in gaining upon others to believe in the
Principle of Truth, which they bear witness of: The Principle of Truth I call
it; for so my Soul does witness it; although I am not unsensible, that such who
do despise it, will not stick to scandalize it; and instead of calling it by
its true and proper Name, brand it with the opprobious Terms of Heresy and
Schism, Sullen Separation, and the Effect of a Melancholy Brain; some of whom
not knowing the Way of the Spirit in themselves, and yet seeing the evident
Change which has been wrought upon others, by Virtue of the powerful Operation
of this spiritual PRINCIPLE or POWER of GOD in their Consciences, they have
hereupon confidently affirmed the same to be effected by the Art of Witchcraft
and Diabolical Enchantment; which Affirmation, though false, yet may it truly
be said to have been fixed as a Scarecrow, or Ghostly Apparition, to
affrighten people from so much a looking toward this Religion: But albeit it
has been so intended, yet through the Mercy of our God, there is a Remnant who
have not been so affrighted as to flee from, but have been drawn near to see
and feel, whether there were any Substance in the same; and such have found, to
their satisfaction, That the Substance of Life has lain hid under this dark
Reflection, which through the cloudiness of the Understanding, and Prejudice
that has been in the Minds of people against the Principle of Light, they have
enviously cast upon the Profefsors of it, as the Means whereby they Convert and
Turn People to it; alleging it as matter of Wonder, that any should be so
strangely altered, both in Countenance, Carriage and Communication, and that on
a sudden too, (as some have been observed to be) unless it were by the Power
of Sorcery, or some Satanical Possession: And hence have they mocked at and
derided that Godly Fear and Holy Trembling, that has been made to appear in
some, when the Terrors of the Almighty took hold on them by reason of Sin, as
though this were occasioned through some Frenzy Humor, being the Product of
Natural Weakness and Defect, or else produced by the invincible force of Magic
Art, which the Creature can no ways resist: So that this has been a main
Argument, why people should not adventure themselves so much as to go into a
Quakers Meeting, for fear of the great Danger that some suppose there is, of
being charmed into that Religion; which Fear has so much affrighted the Hearts
of some, that notwithstanding there are good Desires in them after Satisfaction
in Matters of Religion, and they have freely confessed, (even in my hearing)
Thaet this seems to be the Way to attain the same; yet they never were, nor
do they dare to come amongst this people (to wit, the Quakers) for fear of
being forcibly possessed with the belief of their Principle; which if they should
receive, and walk therein, every one knows what will follow thereupon: this
would certainly expose them to the World's Hatred and Scorn, which the Servants
and People of the Lord in all Ages have born: so that, for these to be
accounted Witches is no Wonder, since the Wicked have not spared to fling the
same Reflection upon their Lord and Master; Christ Jesus himself, when he was
on Earth, was sensured to work his Miracles by Magic Art; for when he cast out
a Devil out of one possessed, some said, He did it by Beelzebub, their Prince: And
now, these having received Power from Christ, by their Ministry to effect the
like in another kind, because the Effect thereof has brought some into Fear
and Trembling; therefore they are judged to deal with Familiar Spirits, and to
work by Conjuration: But how unjust this judgment is, and how groundless the
Surmise, I shall not need to answer; let the Reader but search the Scriptures,
and they will give it in on this peoples side, Psalm 2. 10, 11. the Prophet
David instructs Kings and Judges of the Earth, to serve the Lord with Fear, and
Rejoice with Trembling. Philip. 2. 12. the Apostle exhorts them, to work out
their own Salvation with the like frame. Nor was this only their Advice, but
also the Saints Practice: For Moses confesses himself a QVAKER, Hebrews 12.
21. No doubt but Habakkuk's Countenance was altered, when his Lips thus
Quivered; for it is true what David said, Psalm 39.11. When Thou, Lord, with
Rebukes do correct Man for Iniquity, thou make his Beauty to Consume away
like a Moth: If so, why should any think it strange when they see the like
Change?
Habakkuk likewise acknowledges, that at the Voice of God his Belley did
Tremble, and his Lips did Quiver, Hab. 3. 16. Neither was this their Case
alone; for we find the Prophet Ezra meeting with a whole Assembly of them, Ezra
9. 4. says he, Then were asssembled unto me every one that Trembled at the
Words of the God of Israel. And the Prophet Isaiah points at such as the Lord's
Peculiar People, Chap. 66. 5. Hear the Word of the Lord (says he) ye that
Tremble at his Word; your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my
Name sake, said, Let the Lord be Glorified; but he shall appear to your Joy,
and they shall be ashamed. And in the second Verse of the same Chapter, the
Lord expressly promises, But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor,
and of a contrite Spirit, and Trembles at my Word. And in Ier. 5. 21. the Lord
calls by the Prophet, saying, Hear now this, O foolish People, and without
Understanding; which have Eyes and see not, which have Ears and hear not: Fear
ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not Tremble at my Presence? and so he goes
on, expostulating the Matter with them; till at last he threatens to visit
them, and be avenged on their Nation, Verse. ^9. And sure something of this King
Darius was afraid of, when he made a Decree, That all under his Dominion should
Fear and Tremble before the God of Daniel, Dan. 6. 26. Certainly Quakers had a
better esteem with him, then they have with this Generation; the Name being
given them in Derision and Scorn, notwithstanding the Posture is that, in which
the Servants of the Lord, backward from Moses, through the Prophets and
Apostles Days, till this very time have been found. Thus it appears by
Scripture, that Christians were exercised in Fear and Trembling (together with
Humility, Patience and Self denial) and that not from the Procurement of any
Evil Art, but by the Living Sense of the Dealings of the Lord: For proof of
which, see what God himself speaks of his Church by his Prophet Jeremiah,
Chap. 33. 9. And it shall be to me a Name of Joy, a Praise and an Honor before
all the Nations of the Earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto
them; and they shall Fear and Tremble, for all the Goodness, and for all the
Prosperity that I procure unto it.

Thus it is manifest how the matter has been Misrepresented, to wit, that the
Quakers are Inchanters, but this being mostly the charge of the Rash and
Inconsiderate, I shall say no more to take it off, but only add the words of
Christ, Mat. 10 24,25. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant
above his Lord, it is enough that the Disciple be as his Master, and the Servant
as his Lord; if they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much
more shall they call them of his Household?

But there are others, in many things, more Sober and Juditious, who yet have
not been sparing in their Censures: Some of whom have given out, That it is
through Craft and Cunning Collusion, by which these People (the Quakers) gain
over Proselites to their Religion: They are Wise, they are Subtle (say they)
they have reaching Brains; and so they can but Propagate their own Party, they
will be at any Pains.

In Answer to whom, my Reply is, What Crastiness they mean, I must confess, I
cannot tell; but what Craft I have ever found amongst them is no other than
that of which the Apostle writes to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12. 16.
Nevertheless being Crafty (says he) I caught you with Guile: Which holy Craft
and godly Guile has appeared in them, as they have been careful to keep a
Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward all Men; taking the
Apostle's Advice, James 3. 13. Who is a Wise Man, and endewed with Knowledge
amongst you (says he) let him show out of a good Conversation his Works with
Meekness of Wisdom: So likewise have they been careful to observe Christ's
Counsel, Luke 10. 3. who there says, Behold I send you forth as Sheep in the
midst of Wolves, be ye therefore Wise as Serpents, and Harmless as Doves. And
thus sanctifying the Lord God in their Hearts, having a good Conscience whilst
falsely accused, it has pleased the Lord many times to plead their Righteous
Cause, even in their very Adversaries Breasts, whereby he has made their own
words to become their Burden; and that that they have intended to fix upon his
People, by which to render them Guilty of Deceit and Fraud, has returned back
upon their own Heads, whilst Integrity and Innocence has been the others
Armor of Defense, until such time that God has wrought their more Full
Deliverance.

But I must bring the matter a little nearer, that so I may write of that which
relates to my own Particular: This having occasioned some to wonder, viz. That
I should be Decoyed (as they call it) after this Manner! for so some have
bespoke me, by showing a seeming pity toward my Person, whilst they have
manifested Enmity against my Principle; and therefore, that they might not bear
too hard upon me, they have laid the heaviest Load upon those about me; Who
they are that it is supos'd I should either fear or sllatter, I need not name;
for those to whom I write may easily understand.
as if for fear of one, and to please another, I had hereby prudently provided
to serve my Superiors Humor: And so from them, my Friends have born the
greatest blame, whilst I, in part, have been excused, considering the many
Trials, Temptations and Snares, whereunto they reckon I have been exposed;
which Consideration of theirs has procured me some Allowance, from such as are
any whit Tenderhearted, amongst my former Acquaintance; therefore I hope they
will not blame me, if I make use of this Allowance, as well to show them their
Mistakes herein, as to take off the Unjust Aspersions that have been cast upon
my Friends: Wherefore I say, the first Mistake is Gross; for any thing of Force
(which is that that some conclude to be the cause of my coming amongst the
People called Quakers) that I do declare I never felt; nay, I now find it to be
Diametrically opposite to that Foundation Principle, upon which their Religion
is built, which Principle is Christ, the Prince of Peace, who utterly disallows
of all Coersive Compulsion, Force, Constraint or Violence to be used in Matters
of Religion; and teaches such who learn of him in Meekness to Instruct those
that are Ignorant of the Way of Truth, and then patiently to wait till he
inclines their Hearts to walk in it; so that having their Dependence upon, and
Expectation from the Lord alone, they dare not attempt the Propagation of the
Gospel of his dear Son by the strength, and in the skill and time of man,
without being guided, directed and subjected by him, in whom is all their Help
found: This as to the first Mistake.

But the second Mistake amounts to thus much, ( viz.) That what could not be
wrought upon me by Constraint and Force, was othewise attempted to be brought
to pass, to wit, by subtle Insinuations, and fair Promises, by which (it has
been said) this People use to tamper with those whom they Design to make their
Proselites.

In Answer whereunto I shall make this Reply; This mistake is Obvious: For
Promises of outward advantage and Worldly good avails nothing, that can stand
the Soul instead: Therefore it were altogether imprudent, as well as utterly
unlawful to propose any thing of such a kind upon this occasion; neither indeed
was it outward advancement, that I sought after (although this is a reproach I
have been made to bear) the Lord is my Witness herein, who subjected me unto
himself, and made me willing to be at his disposing, and to have my Lot cast by
him The truth is, Corn, nor Wine, nor Oyll did not esteem, nor yet length of
days to enjoy them; for (in my solitudes) the whole World seemed to me as a
very little thing; my Soul desiring nothing but a part in Gods Kingdom, which
made me earnestly entreat him, that he would lead me in the Way Everlasting;
wherefore this was my frequent Supplication unto him (viz.) O! thou
incomprehensible Majesty, who have established thy Throne in the high and holy
Heavens; yet do thou graciously condescend to look down upon the Inhabitants
of the Earth: will thou now be pleased to suffer Dust and Ashes to plead with
thee, and to admit Mortal Flesh to make request unto thee? Then this is it, O
Lord, that I would most earnestly implore of thee, even that thou would cast
up, cast up a Way for me, and remove all Lets and Stumbling Blocks from me, and
mark out a plain Path before me, in which I may walk straight forward toward
thy Heavenly Country, and that amidst the various Forms there are for
Worshipping of thee, my Soul may certainly know how to serve thee aright, and
wherewith to bring an acceptable Sacrifice unto thee. So that this being the
Prayer which the Lord often put into my Heart (as I then took it) to Pray unto
him, when my Soul was seeking the way to his Kingdom, promises of outward
promotion (had they been proposed) could not have given me satisfaction.

And as for that which has been termed, The Quakers subtle Insinuation, I
think it must needs intend their sincere and upright Conversation: For as to my
own particular, I do declare, There was no way by which they did insinuate into
me, but by being found real in what they appeared to be; the Heart-searching
God having then put my Soul upon search to find out a People with whom I might
join as with a Communion of Saints; I looked here and there into many
Assemblies, but alas! still I saw their Conversations so much contradicting
their Professions, that I could heartily join with none of them: And then as to
their Principles, some indeed I did believe, when I heard them declared; but
other some, Gods witness in my Conscience did so testify against, that them I
could not receive. And thus finding no People, with whom I could join in every
thing, I concluded my self to be single in the matter of Religion, which made
me many a time extend my Voice to the Lord in these Words, Oh! my God, upon
whom I have been cast from my Infancy up: How long shall my Faith stand alone
upon the Earth? In Answer whereunto (I must acknowledge) the Lord was
graciously pleased (even at those very times) to signify unto my Spirit, That
he had many Thousands (though I knew them not) who were sincere and upright
before him, unto whom he had regard as to his own Children: But still I over
looked this People of whom I am writing as if it had been altogether unlikely I
should find what I sought for amongst them, although Natural Affect on had laid
a Bond upon me to judge charitably concerning them: howbeit, at length there
was a Way made whereby I was brought to search here also, notwithstanding the
many false Aspersions which my Ears were filled with concerning them; For I
could not tell but little David (the beloved of the Lord) might lie hid amongst
the Stuff, whom God has anointed to Reign in Self-seeking Souls stead;
wherefore I then was willing to look amongst ^is People (to wit, the Quakers)
and to turn up the foul covering which others had cast upon them, under which I
soon saw a glorious one lie hid, the Form of whose Countenance was like the Son
of God: And now having not only sought, but sound the Lord and his People in
the Earth, in their behalf do I here set my Probatim Est (I have proved them)
in the thing which they profess: They profess themselves the Disciples and
Followers of Jesus Christ, from whom they derive their Name Christian; which
Name, though it were given the Disciples in scorn at first in Antioch; Acts 11.
26.
yet did they, and so do these, esteem it as an honorable Epitaph: And
therefore have they labored to answer their Christian calling, with such a
Meek, Patient, Holy, Harmless, Humble, Trembling, Self-denying Conversation, as
may be most conformable to the Pattern of Christ Jesus, the High Priest of
their Profession: So that now, I say, upon my search amongst them, I have found
those who are guided by the Principle of Truth in themselves, by which they
were called) for it is such only whose cause I am Vindicating) very careful to
walk worthy of their High and Holy Calling; like as they have been called by
this inward Principle to be Saints, so by it have they led a Saint-like Life,
that thereby they might reach to the same Principle in the Consciences of
others: And by this their innocent Life, I needs must acknowledge I felt my own
Conscience powerfully reached for some time, before my Judgment was fully
satisfied; But having those words of our Savior imprinted upon my mind ( John
7. 17.) If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Then immediately I consulted not with
Flesh and Blood, but was made willing to give up to the obedience of his will
revealed in my Conscience, and so I came to receive the Faith of that Principle
which the Quakers do profess, and by it am I joined to them, not only in Head
but in Heart; so that this Faith, by which I am united to them, is more then a
mere Natural credential, that stands in the bare assent to the Truth of a
proposition, as propounded by man; for it is founded and grounded upon Christ
Jesus, who was the Author, and I trust will be the Finisher of the same.

But there has arisen another Wonder; and that is, That not my self only, but
also, my Brother and Sister should together, and that so quickly too, become
Converts to the Truth, at this, say some, we cannot but greatly admire.

To which, though it might suffice for answer, to let them know, the Lords
Works are all Works of Wonder, and therefore may very well be admired by
Beholders; yet I must needs say, there is little reason why such should wonder,
that true Conversion should at once pass upon three, who talk so much of
expecting a Nation to be born in a Day; sure if their Faith can conclude the
certainty of the latter; they need not be so incredible concerning the Truth of
the former: No doubt therefore but it was prejudice enough against the Truth,
that caused some to say, It must needs be Hypocrisy which brought us all at
once into the Profession of it. But the Truth is, such neither know how we came
by it, nor can they tell what Progress we have made in it, how far any of us do
witness a real Change; my Soul is made to rejoice herein, and for this I bow my
Knee to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, That he would prosper and
carry on this his own Work more and more in every one of our Hearts; yet dare
we not be found false Witnesses for God, in speaking of things beyond our
measure, or boasting of that which we have not attained; for though it may be
granted, we did feel an inward and effectual Call, much about a time, to come
out of spiritual AEgypt's Land, yet must we travel through the spiritual
Wilderness, before we arrive at the heavenly Canaan: therefore I would have
none Mistake, so as to think, that Conversion is wrought in an instant, for it
is a Gradual Work, carried on by degrees in the Soul, which is not presently
Complete and Perfect; although the very first Motion toward it proceeds from a
Principle which is Perfect in it self; and which will in time Perfect the Soul,
as it follows the Leadings thereof: But if any shall sit down by the way, on
this side the Mountain of true Holiness, notwithstanding they began in the
Spirit, yet if they end in the Flesh, how far soever they have traveled on in
their Journey, still may their Carcasses fall in the Wilderness. Howbeit, I
write this not to Discourage any, but to Provoke to Diligence, as well my self,
as others, that after we have set out toward the Promised Land, and had a
sight of it, none of us may grow weary nor faint in our Minds, and so fall
short of the Everlasting Rest; for it is not a bare Convincement of the Truth in
our Understandings, which may produce a Change in the Judgment, Opinion and
Profession, that will serve our turn, without a Change of the Old Nature,
without there be a Change wrought in the inward, as well as the outward man,
whereby the Heart may be thoroughly sanctified and made clean, else there can be
no real Conversion; yet may we say, since we have felt the beginnings of this
Work in our Hearts, we have been made as Signs and Wonders in the Earth; whilst
we have been Weaning from the Worlds Breasts, we have been made a Mock to the
scoffing Ishmaels of our Age: But be it so, we are not much concerned, having
an Eye to the Hope set before us, we do not only despise the Worlds Flatteries,
but also contemn its Scorns, even as those Worthies of Old, who after they were
Illuminated, endured a great Fight of Afflictions, partly in being made a
Gazing-stock both by Reproaches and Afflictions, and partly by being Companions
with them that were so used; yea, though they had Trials of cruel Mockings, yet
they esteemed the Reproach of Christ greater Riches then the Treasures of
Egypt; For they had an Eye to the Recompense of the Reward, and patiently they
endured this with much more, as seeing him who is Invisible; which you may read
in the Tenth of Hebrews more at large: Wherefore we think it not strange
concerning the fiery Trials that are to try us, as though some strange thing
happened unto us; when the Wicked Reproach us, and speak all manner of Evil
against us falsely for Christ's sake; in this we account our selves happy, yea,
we secretly rejoice that he has accounted us worthy to suffer Shame for his
Name, himself having said to our Comfort, Blessed are ye when Men shall hate
you, and when they shall separate you from their Company, and shall Reproach
you, and cast out your Names as Evil for the Son of man's sake; Rejoice ye in
that day (says he) and leap for Joy, for behold your Reward is great in
Heaven; for in like manner did their Fathers to the Prophets, Luke ^. 22, 23.
So it is no wonder that the World hate us; for we know they have hated all the
Righteous Generations that went before us; they were defamed and made as the
filth of the World, yea; they were accounted the offscouring of all things, by
the Wicked of that Generation, 1 Cor. 4. 13.
and so are their Offspring esteemed with such a sort of People even at this
present time: For the Seed of the Righteous have always been despised in the
Eyes, and reproached in the Mouths of the Proud Ungodly World; howbeit, they
have learned to put their trust in him, who has promised to keep them in a
Pavillion from the Pride of man, Psams 31. 20.
and to hide them from the Strife of Tongues: yet some there are that say,
Psalm 12.4.
Their Tongues are their own, who is Lord over them. And such (I may say) have
sorely railed on me, both in Word and Writing, wherein were Queries, which I
think not worthy to receive an Answer, because they came from a Nameless
Author: Therefore I Will leave them with their remote Questions; winding up all
in this Conclusion, Let none no longer inquire at a distance after the Quakers
and their Principle, as Nathaniel did concerning Christ, John 1. 46. saying,
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? But let them remember the answer
of Philip, who bid him Come and see; so shall they meet with satisfaction in
that inward Principle of divine Light (and the Professors of it) which has
made many, and now has it made me a Spiritual Traveller for Souls Eternal
Welfare.

AN EPISTLE To such of the Friends of Christ As have lately been Convinced of
the Truth as it is in Jesus.
MY Dear Friends and Spiritual Relations, unto whom by Grace I am allied, in
the Love of Truth I send you this Salutation: Often have you been upon my Mind,
long before I found a place to write unto you: For though it was first upon me
to write to my former Friends and Acquaintance, and Natural Relations; yet you
being that new Kindred, spoken of by Christ, Matthew. 12. 50 thus are you nearer
to me by the Union of his inward Grace, than any unconverted thereunto can be.

And now I tenderly admonish you, That as you are convinced of the saving Power
of this Divine Principle (to wit, the Light of Jesus manifest in the
Conscience) see you constantly keep therein. For, Friends, let me tell you,
Here lies our Strength in these Times of Trial; herein is our Safety this Day
of Danger; in this you will be secure and quiet, when peoples Hands shall be upon
their Loins, because of Fear in the Night: yea, though you may be come but to
the Dawning of this Day of God, where you can discern but the glimmering of its
Light appear, which may at present show you Trouble, and minister condemnation
to your Souls for your Evil Deeds, placing Judgment on your Heads, making you
possess the Punishment of your Iniquities that are past; so that instead of
Peace, you may have great Bitterness; yet be persuaded to dwell in the
Judgment; Isa. 26.8. and 41. 1.
wait patiently upon God, who draws near to you in the Way hereof, and I will
assure you, in this Light you shall see more Light, and in it Consolation and
Salvation shall be enjoyed. Wherefore I now write unto you, Little Children (in
the spiritual stature, being my self one of that Number) by way of Exhortation,
To cast away your Idols, and keep yourselves from them; say unto them, Get ye
hence, to the Moles and to the Bats: Isa. 2.20.
Friends, you know what I mean by them; turn in, and I am sure the Light will
let you see them; and the sooner you part with them, the sooner will you find
Forgiveness with the Lord, for the Idolatry which he has beheld in them: And
when your Idols are utterly destroyed, then shall you be joined to the Lord in
a perpetual Covenant, that shall never be broken: And here will your Bow abide
in strength, wherewith you shall shoot at Mystery Babylon, and see her falling
down; yea, though her Archers may shoot sorely at you, yet shall they not be
able to hurt you; for the Lord (the Help of Israel) will be a Shield before
you, and will turn back their Arrows into their own Quiver, so shall they hang
by their Sides, and stick in their Hearts, who privily intended to wound the
Innocent without Cause: Yet it is very likely the Wicked will be pushing at you,
and casting scandalous Calumnies upon you; in which I cannot but tenderly
simpathize with you, having my self lately passed those Pikes of the Enemy
Renowned be the Lord of Hosts) the Captain of my Salvation, which caused me to
march through valiantly, and has also given me the Victory; so that, though I
speak not boastingly, yet I can say, The Revilings of the Ungodly do not at all
dis-spirit me; for now I can take their Reproaches for Christ's sake, and bind
them as an Ornament unto me: To God be all the Glory, who has raised this
Spirit of Courage and Christian-Fortitude in me, and now has called me to call
on others to wait upon him, that they may be thus strengthened with Might in
their inward Man by him. Therefore wait on the Lord, be of good Courage, and he
shall strengthen your Hearts; wait, I say, on the Lord, as said holy David,
Psalm 27. 14. so shall One chase a Thousand, and Two put Ten Thousand to flight
( Friends, read inwardly, so you will understand me) I do not mean that you
should avenge your selves on any with Carnal Weapons of War; No, no: But as you
stand and wait in the Light of the Lord, though you can handle neither Sword
nor Spear, he will make you show comely as Tirzah, and terrible to the Wicked,
even as an Army with Banners: For though the Remnant of the Just (as to outward
Defense) are left this day like a City without Gates or Walls) whom the Wicked
will be PLOTTING against; yet God will laugh at him, for he sees that his Day
is coming; Psalm 37. 12, 13.
and has also given me this Confidence of Hope in him, to wit, That he will
not give his People into the Hands of cruel Lords, nor suffer Men of fierce
Countenance to rule over them: But they shall be as Standers in the Gap, and
Stakes in the Hedge (though some may be but of tender growth) to stop the Enemy
from laying waste our Country, and to stay the Lord's sore and terrible Stroke.

Ah Friends! is it not Pity, that Sin should make an Aceldama of our Nation and
this City? See therefore ye mind your inward Reprover, that ye may be no Cause
in procuring the Nation's Misery: You Children of the Light, arise therefore,
and shine; for your Light is come, which will adorn your Conversation, let it
now appear throughout your whole Behavior, so shall your Words and Actions
glorify your Heavenly Father: thus shall the Wicked see, our Rock has not
sold us; for stronger is he that is in us, than they that are against us: so
though they may outwardly beset us, yet we have a Rock to shelter us, where the
Enemy shall despair forever of coming at us. Wherefore faint not in your Minds,
nor be discouraged in your Spirits, at the Tidings which you hear abroad; but
dwell within your Tent, and serve the Lord with Fear, everyone in your Sphere,
so shall you shine like Stars in their proper Orbs: Yea, though some of us may
be but of small Magnitude, as in the natural Firmament, one Star differs from
another Star in Glory, yet as we abide in the Fear, being clothed with
Humility, so shall we be preserved in our spiritual Station, while we are as
Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth, to have our Conversation honest and as
much as in us lies inoffensive) amongst them that are without, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12.
that whereas they speak against us as Evildoers, they may by the Good Works
which they shall behold in us, glorify God in the Day of their Visitation: so
shall we convince the World of that Principle of Light and Grace, that shines
in their Hearts, which if they turn into it, and obey it, it will teach (and
enable) them, Titus 2. 11, 12.
That denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, they should live Righteously,
Soberly and Godlily in this present World. And by this Grace shall we be to
those about us as Saviors in the Hand of the Lord upon Mount Sion, as others
have been to us when we were in spiritual Babylon: Thus we being as a City set
upon a Hill for people to behold, this shall they confess, Verily God is in us;
when their Hearts shall fail them for very Fear of what Men are about to bring
to pass: But would the Inhabitants of this Island bow to the Scepter of the Son
of God in their Hearts, they should not need to be afraid of any Tripple
Leagues or Conclave Consultations to do them hurt, for yet would God arise, and
break such Assosiations, and take such wicked Wits in their own Crastiness, so
that their Hands should not find their Enterprises; so should ENGLAND become
the Renown of Kingdoms, and a Mart of Nations, maugre the strength of Hellish
Combinations. Therefore let them that read me mark what I say; for the Lord of
Hosts has determined, That the Haughtiness of Man shall be humbled, and the
Loftiness of Man shall be laid low, that himself alone may be exalted in this
Day: And men's Idols he will utterly abolish; yea, he will famish the Gods of
the Earth, that people may worship him in his own holy Place, as say the
Prophets, Isa. 2. 17, 18. Zeph. 2. 11. Again, he says; I am the Lord, that is
my Name; and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my Praise to Graven
Images, Isa. 42. 8. Wherefore such who will not turn from their Idols to serve
the living God, so as to break off their Sins by a real Reformation, he will be
terrible unto them, and will certainly visit them with Ruin and Destruction.

But you who know the Lord, and are turned in to him, do you put your Trust in
him, who is Prince of the Kings of the Earth, unto whom all Power does belong,
Psalm 60. 12.
and through God you shall do valiantly; for he it is that shall tread down all
your Enemies. Friends, I mean chiefly as to the inward; yet am I to exhort you
as to the outward this day, Phil. 1.28.
That you be in nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which will be to them an
evident Token of Perdition, but to you of Salvation from the Almighty; for the
Shields of the Earth are his; therefore trust you in him, Nahum 1. 7.
whose Name is The Lord of Hosts, yea, The Lord Jehovah, in whom is Everlasting
Strength; who is a Strong Hold in the Day of Trouble, and he knows them that
trust in him; so shall Fear be far from you, and as for Terror, it shall not
come near you: You Meek and Harmless Ones, you shall increase your Joy in the
Lord, and shall inherit the Earth, and delight your selves in the abundance of
Peace; Isa. 29. 19. Psalm 37. 11.
for the Righteous God will establish the Just, when Bloody and Deceitful Men
shall not live out half their days: You shall triumph in Christ Jesus, who
will make manifest the Savor of his Wisdom by you in every place; so that
though you may suffer, yet shall you not despair; for in due time the Lord will
be your Deliverer: Wherefore, list up the Eyes of your Minds this day, and look
for the Son of Man's appearing, who has determined to destroy the Man of Sin,
by the Spirit of his Mouth, and by the Brightness of his Coming.

And now it rises in me to write a word to comfort you, your Friends of the
Bridegroom, that mourn for his With drawing, and eat your Bread with Quaking,
Ezekiel 12. 18.
and drink your Water with Trembling, as those who find no Comfort till you do
enjoy him.

Wait without Weariness, and you shall behold his Countenance, and hear his
pleasant Voice, which will revive your Spirits; but still be you mindful when
you hear things unutterable, that you keep low and humble, so shall you be kept
from the Snares of the Devil. And Friends, Let no Outward Things over-set your
Minds, but sit loose in Heart from all that here you have, that nothing may be
preferred like the Favor of the Lord.

And you of Tender Years, who are void of Worldly Cares, be you aware of
Pleasures, Pride and Worldly Honors; for these may be your Snares: I am
sensible many are the Temptations to allure you unto Vanity; but as you eye the
Lord, they shall not overcome you; he will fight your Battles for you, and lift
up a Standard in you against your Souls Enemies; and Satan and his Host shall
fall like Lightning before you: Therefore stand you still, and wait for God's
arising, so shall all his Enemies be scattered before him: And he will surely
rise against our spiritual Adversaries, and bring them down in us, that they
may not insult over us: For the Lord takes notice of the Kindness of our Youth,
and is well pleased to have our first ripe Fruits Holiness unto him; wherefore
he assures us, that as we continue in the well-doing, we shall always inherit
his Blessing. Therefore you Weak and Feeble Ones, put your Trust in him; Isaiah
40.29.
For he gives Power to the Faint; and in them that have no Might, he
increases Strength. This our Spiritual Shepherd has a tender regard to the
hindmost of his Flock; He gathers his Lambs with his Arms, and carries them
in his Bosom, and gently leads those that are young: And thus, as we follow
the Son of God, our Leader, Christ Jesus, our Captain and Commander, so shall
we become as a well-disciplined Army, marching on in Order, every one keeping
our Ranks, and making War in Righteousness with the Prince and Powers of
Darkness; the Weapons of our Warfare not being Carnal, but Spititual, mighty
through God to the pulling down the strong Holds of Sin and Satan, and casting
the Dragon, the Beast and the False Prophet, together with the spiritual
Locust, into the Bottomless Pit, where they shall sink into the Lake of his
Divine Wrath, so as never to rise more to cover the Earth. For, Friends, we are
this day as an Ensign among the People, exposed unto many Spectators, and the
Lord's Presence is amongst us (magnified be his Name) because his Glory rests
upon us: And as we wait on him, he will appear more and more in our Meetings,
and crown our Assemblies, and make our Ancients Honorable, and our Young Men
like Eldaed and Medad, and our Damsels like the Daughters of Philip: Yea,
though we have not all the Gift of Prophesying (vocally) bestowed on us, yet by
our upright Carriage, we shall every one become Preachers of Righteousness
amongst our Neighbors, whereby we shall reach to the Witness, that lies slain
in their Consciences, and shall cause it to arise and stand upon its Feet, and
Prophecy in their Streets; so shall we raise up that in themselves that will
judge them for their Sins: though the Love of God has taught us to be kindly
affectionated toward all, and to be pitiful, notwithstanding we are grieved to
behold the sad and woeful state of the Wicked World; yet can we prane the Lord
in Spirit, that he has turned us from Darkness, unto Light, and from Satan
unto himself; and has made us turn our back upon the Glory of the Earth,
before this Day of Snaking came upon it, when men's Confidence in it shall be
shaken, and their Expectation from it disappointed; then shall those who truly
fear the Lord, be abundantly satisfied.

For Friends, I must acknowledge, it often rises in my Soul as a Return of
Thanks to God, ( viz.) The Remembrance which he gives me of the Time of his
Love, even when my Soul was secretly crying, Where shall I find true Rest? Then
was the Lord pleased to bring me to the Mountain of his Holiness, where a
peaccable Dwelling is, and that just before these Disturbances broke out, in
this part of the World, where my Lot is cast: Oh! praised be his Name. For now
he has taken me into his Family, and makes me to sit down with the Ancients of
his House, at the Table of his Blessing, where he feeds every one with food
convenient for them.

And now, Friends, let me mind my self and you, That we greatly Love and
Esteem, and in Honor do prefer those that were in Truth before us; some of
whom have been made as Trumpets (by the Breath of the Lord) to sound the
Everlasting Gospel in our Ears; and others, on whom that Gift of Utterance has
not been bestowed, yet have they taught us to Fear God, and give Glory to Him,
by the Example which they have set before us: And thus, respecting these as
Elders, so shall our Love regularly extend it self toward all others. I write
this to you Friends, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
only by way of Remembrance, as knowing, none need teach us to love those who
have received like precious Faith with us (much less need we any humane
Teachings, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9.
to Esteem such as held the same ancient Faith before us) For we are taught of
God to Love one another; John 13. 5.
and by this shall all men know, that we are the Disciples of Christ Jesus.
Thus, as they behold our comely Order, whilst we live in Love together, like
Children of one Father, and in the inward Union dwell, so shall they discern
the Splendour of the Truth to shine in and amongst us, even like an Orient
Pearl: And so shall we be bound up together in the Bundle of Love and Life in
Christ Jesus, and shall grow up in him like Willows by the Water courses, and
as tender Plants which God's Right Hand has planted; and our Natural
Capacities shall be enlarged, and our Spiritual Talents augmented, to serve the
Lord with; Faithfulness in our several places, where we shall be as Lights unto
the World whilst our dwelling is here amongst them; and then, having improved
out Talents to the Glory of God, and run well to the End of our Race, when our
Course is finished, we shall lay down our Heads in Peace, and hear that joyful
Sentence pronounced on us, Well done good and faithful Servants, enter ye into
the Joy of your Lord; where we shall receive the End of our Faith, even the
final Salvation of our immortal Souls, which shall eternally live to sing and
set forth Praises and Halelujahs in the highest to him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb Christ Jesus, who has Redeemed us from the Earth, unto
whom the Praise does belong, for the Assistance of his Spirit in this thing.

Given forth by one of the least of the Flock of Christ, whose outward Name it.

ELIZABETH BATHURST.

READER; SOme Errors having escaped the Press (most of them being Scripture
Quotations) I desire when thou art at a loss, that thou turn to this Errata, so
shall thou find what thou look for.

Page 7 line 31 read John 8. 58. p 12 Margin r Romans 3. 20. Acts 15. 9. Margin
dele 6, 7. p 13 Margin r 1 Timothy 1. 5. p 21 l 20 for any r any. l 12 f about r
above. p 24 Margin r John 1^. 14 p 27 l 19 f Ier. r Isa. p 32. l 25 for Timothy
r Titus. p 34 l 7 r Mat. 24 13. p 36 l 6 r James 1.4. Margin r Col. 1. 28. p 36
l 17 r Luke 1.5,6. p 39 l 38 f pervert r perverted. p 42 l 11 r Ephesians. 5. 13 p 43
l 8 f demonstration r denomination. l 18 r Acts 26.18 p 45 l 4 delo on. p 47 l
1 r Job. 27. 3. p 50 l 21 f 14 r 27. p 51 l 18 f 28 r 2^. p 60 l 10 f such a r
as much. p 61 l 2^ f explified r explisit. p 62 l 17 f gifts r gift. p 64 l 26 f
Chap. 4 r 3. p 65 l r f 15. r 5. p 74 l 17 for 28 read 20.


