RICHARD BAXTER'S Catholic Theology: PLAIN, PURE, PEACEABLE: FOR PACIFICATION
Of the DOGMATICAL WORD-WARRIOURS, Who, 1. By contending about things unrevealed
or not understood, 2. And by taking VERBAL differences for REAL, and their
arbitrary Notions for necessary Sacred Truths, deceived and deceiving by
Ambiguous unexplained WORDS, have long been the Shame of the Christian
Religion, a Scandal and hardening to unbelievers, the Incendiaries, Dividers and
Distracters of the Church, the occasion of State Discords and Wars, the
Corrupters of the Christian Faith, and the Subverters of their own Souls, and
their followers, calling them to a blind Zeal, and Wrathful Warfare, against
true Piety, Love and Peace, and teaching them to censure, backbite, slander,
and prate against each other, for things which they never understood. In Three
BOOKS. I. PACIFYING PRINCIPLES, about Gods Decrees, Foreknowledge, Providence,
Operations, Redemption, Grace, Man's Power, Free Will, Justification, Merits,
Certainty of Salvation, Perseverance, etc. II. A PACIFYING PRAXIS or Dialogue,
about the Five Articles, Justification, etc. Proving that men here contend
almost only about Ambiguous words, and unrevealed things. III. PACIFYING
DISPUTATIONS against some Real Errors which hinder Reconciliation, viz. About
Physical Predetermination, Original Sin, the extent of Redemption, Sufficient
Grace, Imputation of Righteousness, etc.
Written chiefly for Posterity, when sad Experience has taught men to hate
Theological Logical Wars, and to love, and seek, and call for Peace. (Ex Bello
Pax.)

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevill Simmons at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXV.

I entreat the WRATHFUL, CONTENTIOUS, ZEALOUS DOGMATISTS conscientiously to
study these Texts of Scripture:
MATTHEW. 28. 19, 20. Go, Teach all Nations, Baptizing them into the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you. Mar. 16. 16. He that believes and is
Baptized shall be saved. Acts 11. 26. The Disciples were called Christians.

1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. I declare to you the Gospel which I preached to you,
which also you have received, and wherein ye stand, by which also ye are saved,
if ye keep in memory what I preached to you, unless ye have believed in vain --
That Christ dyed for our sins, -- and that he was buried, and that he rose
again the third day --

2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the FORM of sound words, which thou have heard of me,
in FAITH and LOVE which is in Christ Jesus.

1 John 4. 15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God.

Romans 10. 9, 10. If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in
thy Heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: For with
the Heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth confession is
made to salvation.

Acts 8. 37. If thou believe with all thy heart thou may (be baptized) And
he said -- I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

Romans 14. 1. 17, 18, 19. Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not to
doubtful disputations -- For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: For he that in these things
serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men: Let us therefore
follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may
edify another. Romans 15. 5, 6, 7. Now the God of patience and consolation grant
you to be like minded one toward another (or, mind the same thing one with
another) according to Christ Jesus; That ye may with one mind and one mouth
glorify God. -- Wherefore Receive ye one another as Christ also received us,
to the glory of God.

1 Timothy 1. 3, 4, 5. Charge some that they teach NO OTHER doctrine, nor give
heed to fables and endless Genealogies, which minister Questions, rather than
godly edifying, which is in faith: Now the End of the Commandment is Charity,
out of a pure heart and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: From
which some having swerved, have turned aside to vain janglings.

1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. If any man teach OTHERWISE, and consent not to wholesome
words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to Godliness, he is PROUD, KNOWING NOTHING, but DOTING about
Questions, and STRIFES of WORDS, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, supposing that gain is godliness, (or thinking that godliness is
advantage;) from such turn away.

2 Timothy 2. 22, 23, 24. Follow righteousness, says, charity, peace, with them
that call on the Lord out of a pure heart: But foolish and unlearned Questions
avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes: and the servant of the Lord must
not strive. V. 15, 16, 17. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman
that needs not be ashamed, RIGHTLY DIVIDING the word of truth: But shun
profane and vain bablings: for they will increase to more ungodliness, and
their word will eat as does a canker.

2 Timothy 2. 14. Charging them before the Lord, that they STRIVE not about WORDS,
to no profit, to the subverting of the hearers.

1 Cor. 8. 2, 3. If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing
as he ought to know: But if any man LOVE GOD, the same is KNOWN OF HIM.

Jam. 3. 1, 13, etc. My Brethren, Be not Many Masters, knowing that we shall
receive the greater condemnation -- Who is a wise man, and endued with
knowledge among you? Let him show out of a good conversation his WORKS with
meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter zeal (or envying) and strife in your
hearts, Glory not, and Lie not against the truth. This WISDOM descends not
from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish: For where envying and strife is,
there is confusion and every evil work: But the wisdom from above is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy: And the fruit of
Righteousness is sown in Peace of them that make Peace.

Acts 15. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us But not to
Church-Tyrants, Dogmatists or superstitious ones.
to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things --

Phil. 3. 15, 16, 17. Let us as many as be perfect be thus minded: and if in
any thing ye be otherwise (or diversely, or contrarily) minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk
by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my
joy that ye be like minded, having the same Love, being of one accord, of one
mind: Let nothing be done through strife, or vain glory; but in lowliness of
mind, let each esteem other better than themselves: Look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of others: Let this mind be in
you, which was also in Christ Jesus -- Who -- made himself of no reputation.

1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ that ye speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions
among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment: For it has been declared to me of you brethren -- that
there are contentions among you -- that every one of you says, I am of Paul,
and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: Is Christ divided? Was Paul
crucified for you? or were you baptized into the name of Paul? I thank God,
that I baptized none of you, etc.

1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. I could not speak to you as unto spiritual, but as unto
carnal, as to babes in Christ -- For whereas there is among you envying, and
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as men? See Ephesians. 4. 1, etc.
after.

John 17. 20, 21, 22, 23. I pray -- for them which shall believe on me -- that
they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in Thee, that they also
may be One in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me. And the
glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one, even as we
are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and
that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou
have loved me.

Matthew. 5. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
children of God.

Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with
all men.

2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. I fear lest when I come I shall not find you such as I
would -- lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings,
whisperings, swellings, tumults -- Lest God will humble me among you, and I
shall bewail many, etc.

Gal. 5. 19, 20. The works of the flesh are manifest -- hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings --

1 Cor. 14. 33. God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all
Churches of the Saints.

Acts 20. 30. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to
draw away disciples after them.

Phil. 1. 15, 16. Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some
also of good will: The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely --

Romans 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you brethren, Mark them which cause divisions
and offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them:
For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies:
and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple.

Luke 9. 55. Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of --

The Angelical Gospel of the Ends of Christ's Incarnation, Luke 2. 19. GLORY TO
GOD IN THE HIGHEST: ON EARTH PEACE, GOOD WILL TO MEN (or WELL-PLEASEDNESS IN
MEN.)

John 20. 26. Peace be unto you. Grace, Mercy and Peace, with all that are in
Christ -- and Love -- Gal. 6. 16. Ephesians. 6. 23. 1 Pet. 1. 2. and 5. 14. 2 Pet. 1.
2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.

2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally, brethren, farewell: be perfect, be of good comfort, be
of one mind: Live in Peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

Amen.
1. Assert. THe BAPTISMAL COVENANT expounded in the ancient CREED is the sum
and Symbol of Christianity, by which Believers were to be distinguished from
unbelievers, and the outward Profession of it was men's Title to
Church Communion, and the Heart-consent was their Title-condition of Pardon and
Salvation; And to these ends it was made by Christ himself. Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
Mark 16. 16.

2. All that were baptized did profess to Believe in God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, and devoted themselves to him, with profession of Repentance for
former sins, and renouncing the Lusts of the Flesh, the World and the Devil,
professing to begin a new and holy life, in hope of everlasting glory.

3. This form of Baptismal Covenanting and Profession begun with Christianity
(and called our Christening, or making us Christians) has been propagated and
delivered down to us to this day, by a full and certain tradition and testimony
and less alterations than the holy Scriptures.

4. The Apostles were never such formalists and friends to ignorance and
hypocrisy, as to encourage the baptized to take up with the saying [I believe
in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost] without teaching them to understand what
they said. Therefore undoubtedly they expounded those three Articles: And that
exposition could be no other in sense than the Creed is. And when Paul recites
the Articles of Christ, 1 Cor. 15. and mentions the Form of sound words, we
may be sure that they all gave the people one unchanged exposition as to the
sense: Christianity was one unchanged thing.

5. Though I am not of their mind, that think the twelve Apostles each one made
an Article of the Creed, or that they formed and tied men to just the very same
syllables, and every word that is now in the Creed; yet that they still kept to
the same sense, and words so expressing it, as by their variation might not
endanger the corrupting of the faith by a new sense, is certain from the nature
of the case, and from the Agreement of all the ancient Creeds, which were ever
professed at baptism, from their days; that cited by me (Append. to the
Reformed Pastor) out of Irenaeus, two out of Tertullian, that of Marcellus in
Epiphanius, that expounded by Cyril, that in Ruffinus, the Nicene, and all
mentioned by Usher and Vossius agreeing thus far in sense; And no one was
baptized without the Creed professed.

6. As Christ himself was the Author of the Baptismal Creed and Covenant, so
the Apostles were the Authors of that Exposition which they then used and
taught the Church to use: And they did that by the Holy Ghost as much as their
inditing of the Scripture.

7. Therefore the Church had a Summary and Symbol of Christianity (as I said
before) about twelve years before any Book of the New Testament was written,
and about sixty six years before the whole was written: And this of Gods own
making: which was ever agreed on, when many Books of the New Testament were not
yet agreed on.

8. Therefore men were then to prove the truth of the Christian Religion, by
its proper Evidences and Miracles, long before they were to prove that every
word (or any Book) of the New Testament was the infallible perfect Word of God.

9. Therefore we must still follow the same Method, and take Christ's Miracles
to be primarily the proof of the Christian Religion, long before the New
Testament Books were written.

10. Therefore if a man should be tempted to doubt of the certainty of this or
that Book, words or reading, it follows not that he must therefore doubt of
the Christian Faith.

11. A thousand Texts of Scripture may be not known and understood, by one that
is Justified: but all the Baptismal Articles and Covenant must be understood
competently by all that will be saved.

12. Those Church-Tyrants, Dogmatists or superstitious ones, who deny the
sufficiency of this Test and Symbol (made by Christ and his Spirit) to its
proper use, (to be the Symbol of such as in Love and Communion we are to take
for Christians) do subvert the sum of Christ's Gospel and Law, and do worse
than they that add to, or alter the lesser parts of the Word of God.

13. Therefore our further Additional Confessions must be only to other
subordinate ends; As 1. To satisfy other Churches that doubt of our right
understanding the faith: 2. To be an enumeration of Verities which Preachers
shall not have leave to preach against (though they subscribe them not.)

14. Object. Heretics may profess the Baptismal Creed. Answ. 1. And Heretics
may profess any words that you can impose on them, taking them in their own
sense. All the Councils are not large enough to keep out subscribing Heretics.
We must not make new Symbols, Rules and Laws as often as Knaves will falsely
profess, or break the old ones: there being none that may not be falsely
professed and violated. 2. Many subscribe to the whole Scriptures, that yet are
Heretics. 3. Church Governors are for this, to cast out those or punish them,
who preach, teach and live contrary to the certain and sufficient Rule which
they profess. Judicatures are not to make new Laws, but to punish men for
breaking Laws. A heart-Heretick-only is no Heretic in foro Ecclesiae. He that
teaches Heresy must be proved so to do, and judged upon proof: which may be
done without new additional Symbols, Rules or Laws of faith. So that all this
contradicts not the sufficiency of the Baptismal Creed as the Symbol of
Christian Love, Communion and Concord. I thought meet to add this more fully to
what I said in the Epistle, to convince men of the true terms of Union, and of
the heinous sin of all the sorts of Adding and Corrupting overdoers, that
divide us.

THE PREFACE, AGAINST CLERGY MEN'S Contentions, AND Church-distracting
Controversies.
THAT the Churches of Christ are dolefully tempted and distracted by Divisions,
no man will deny that knows them: That the Clergy is not only greatly
culpable herein, but the chief cause, cannot be hid. But which part of the
Clergy it is, and what be their dividing Errors and Crimes, and how they
should be cured, is indeed easy for the truly faithful and impartial
Spectators to perceive, but exceeding hard (as experience tells us) to make the
Guilty thoroughly know, and harder to do much effectually for the cure. For the
error and sin which is the true cause, is its own defense, and repelleth and
frustrateth the Remedies. And so each party lays it from themselves, on
others, and hate all that accuse them, while they are the sharpest (and perhaps
most unjust) accusers of the rest.

I shall here freely tell the Reader the History of my own Conceptions of these
matters, and then my present thoughts of the Causes of all these Calamities,
and the Cure.

I. I was born and bred of Parents piously affected, but of no such knowledge
or acquaintance as might engage them in any Controversies, or disaffect them to
the present Government of the Church, or cause them to scruple Conformity to
its Doctrine, Worship or Discipline: In this way I was bred my self, but taught
by my Parents and God himself, to make conscience of sin, and to fear God, and
to discern between the Godly and the notoriously wicked: For which my Parents
and I were commonly derided as Puritans, the Spirit of the Vulgar being
commonly then fired with hatred and scorn of serious godliness, and using that
name as their instrument of reproach, which was first forged against the
Nonconformists only; And the Clergy where I lived, being mostly only Readers
of the Liturgy, and some others that rather countenanced than reproved this
course, I soon confined my Reverence to a very few among them that were Learned
and Godly (but Conformists) and for going out of my Parish to hear them, my
reproach increased: About eighteen or nineteen years of age I fell acquainted
with some persons, half Conformists and half Non-conformists, who for fear of
severities against private Meetings, met with great secrecy only to repeat the
public Sermons, and Pray, and by Pious Conference edify each other. Their
Spirits and Practice was so savoury to me, that it kindled in me a distaste of
the Prelates as Persecutors, who troubled and ruined such persons, while
ignorant Drunkards and Worldlings were tolerated in so many Churches, yea, and
countenanced for crying down such persons, and crying up Bishops, Liturgy and
Conformity: Before I was aware, my affections began to solicit my
understanding, to judge of the Things and Causes by the Persons (where the
difference was very great). But yet my first Teachers kept my judgment for
Conformity as Lawful, though not Desirable had we Liberty, till I was ordained.
But soon after a new acquaintance provoked me to a deeper study of the whole
Controversy than I had undertaken before; which left me persuaded, that the
use of Liturgy and Ceremonies was lawful in that case of necessity, except the
Baptismal use of the Cross, and the subscription to all things, etc. But in
1640. the Oath called [Et Caetera] being offered the Ministry, forced me to a
yet more searching Study of the case of our Diocesane Prelacie (which else I
had never been like to have gainsaid.) At a meeting of Ministers to debate the
case, it fell to Mr. Christopher Cartwrights lot and mine to be the Disputers;
and the issue of all (that and my studies) was, that I settled in the
approbation of the Episcopacy asserted by Ignatius, yea, and Cyprian, but such
a dissent from the English frame, as I have given account of in my Disputations
of Church Government.

My genius was inquisitive, and earnestly desirous to know the truth: my helps
for Piety were greater than my helps for Learning, of which I had not much
besides Books: sickness helped my seriousness, keeping me still in expectation
of death. All my reverenced acquaintance (save one) cried down Arminianism as
the Pelagian Heresy, and the Enemy of Grace: I quickly plunged my self into
the study of Dr. Twisse, and Amesius, and Camero, and Pemble, and others on
that subject: By which my mind was settled in prejudice against Arminianism,
without a clear understanding of the case: whereupon I felt presently in my
mind, a judgment of those that were for Arminianism; as bad or dangerous
adversaries to the Church; and specially of the then ruling Bishops: which yet
I think I had not-entertained, had I not taken them withal for the great
Persecutors of Godly able Ministers, and serious Christians, not only for
Ceremonies, but for holy practices of life.

Being under these apprehensions, when the Wars began, though the Cause it self
lay in Civil Controversies, between King and Parliament, yet the thoughts that
the Church and Godliness it self was deeply in danger by Persecution and
Arminianism, did much more to bias me to the Parliaments side, than the Civil
interest (which at the heart I little regarded): At last (after two years abode
in a quiet Garrison) upon the Invitation of some Orthodox Commanders in
Fairfax's Army, and by the Mission of an Assembly of Divines, I went (after
Naseby Fight) into that Army as the professed Antagonist of the Sectaries and
Innovators, who we all then (too late) saw designed those changes in the Church
and State which they after made. I there met with some Arminians, and more
Antinomians: These printed and preached as the Doctrine of Free Grace, that all
men must presently believe that they are Elect and Justified, and that Christ
Repented and Believed for them (as Saltmarsh writes). I had a little before
engaged my self as a Disputer against Universal Redemption, against two ancient
Ministers in Coventry (Mr. Cradock and Mr. Diamond) that were for it. But these
new notions called me to new thoughts: which clearly showed me the difference
between Christ's part and Man's, the Covenant of Innocence with its required
Righteousness, and the Covenant of Grace with its required and imputed
righteousness: I had never read one Socinian, nor much of any Arminians; but I
laid by prejudice, and I went to the Scripture, where its whole current, but
especially Matthew. 25. did quickly satisfy me in the Doctrine of Justification:
and I remembered two or three things in Dr. Twisse (whom I most esteemed) which
inclined me to moderation in the five Articles: 1. That he every where
professes, that Christ so far dyed for all, as to purchase them Justification
and Salvation conditionally to be given them, if they believe. 2. That he
reduces all the Decrees to two, de fine and de mediis, as the healing way. 3.
That he professes, that Arminius and we and all the Schoolmen are agreed, that
there is no necessity consequentis laid on us by God in Predestination, but
only necessity consequentiae or Logical (but in Election I shall here suspend.)
4. That the Ratio Reatus in our Original Sin, is first founded in our Natural
propagation from Adam, and but secondarily from the positive Covenant of God.
5. That Faith is but Causa dispositiva Justificationis, and so is Repentance.
These and such things more I easilier received from him, than I could have done
from another: But his Doctrine of Permission and Predetermination, and Causa
Mali, quickly frightened me from assent. And though Camero's moderation and
great clearness took much with me, I soon perceived that his Resolving the
cause of sin into necessitating objects and temptations, laid it as much on God
(in another way) as the Predeterminants do. And I found all godly men's Prayers
and Sermons run quite in another strain, when they chose not the Controversy
as pre-engaged.

In this case I wrote my first Book called Aphorisms of Justification and the
Covenants, etc. And being young, and unexercised in writing, and my thoughts
yet undigested, I put into it many uncautelous words (as young Writers use to
do,) though I think the main doctrine of it sound. I intended it only against
the Antinomians; But it sounded as new and strange to many. Upon whose dissent
or doubtings, I printed my desire of my friends Animadversions, and my
suspension of the Book, as not owned by me, nor any more to be printed, till
further considered and corrected: Hereupon I had the great benefit of
Animadversions from many, whom I accounted the most judicious and worthy
persons that I had heard of: First my friend Mr. John Warren began: next came
Mr. G. Lawson's, (the most judicious Divine that ever I was acquainted with, in
my judgment, (yet living), and from whom I learned more than from any man):
next came Mr. Christopher Cartwright's (then of York; the Author of the
Rabbinical Comment. on Genesis chap. 1, 2, 3. and of the Defense of King Charles
against the Marquess of Worcester). Answers and Rejoinders to these took me up
much time: next came a most judicious and friendly MS. from Dr. John Wallis;
and another from Mr. Tombs; and somewhat I extorted from Mr. Burges: the
answers to which two last are published. To all these Learned men I owe very
great thanks: and I never more owned or published my Aphorisms (but the
Cambridge Printer stole an Impression without my knowledge). And though most of
these differed as much from one another (at least) as from me; yet the great
Learning of their various Writings, and the long Study which I was thereby
engaged in, in answering and rejoyning to the most, was a greater advantage to
me, to receive accurate and digested conceptions on these subjects, than
private Students can expect.

My mind being thus many years immerst in studies of this nature, and I having
also long wearied my self in searching what Fathers and Schoolmen have said of
such things before us, and my Genius abhorring Confusion and Equivocals, I came
by many years longer study to perceive, that most of the Doctrinal
Controversies among Protestants (that I say not in the Christian World) are far
more about equivocal words, than matter; and it wounded my soul to perceive
what work both Tyrannical, and unskilful Disputing Clergymen had made these
thirteen hundred years in the world! And experience since the year 1643. till
this year 1675. has loudly called to me to Repent of my own prejudices,
sidings and censurings of causes and persons not understood, and of all the
miscarriages of my Ministry and life, which have been thereby caused; and to
make it my chief work to call men that are within my hearing to more peaceable
thoughts, affections and practices: And my endeavors have not been in vain, in
that the Ministers of the Country where I lived, were very many of such a
peaceable temper (though since cast out), (and a great number more through the
Land by Gods Grace (rather than any endeavors of mine) are so minded.) But the
Sons of the Coal were exasperated the more against me, and accounted him to be
against every man, that called all men to Love and Peace, and was for no man as
in a contrary way.

And now looking daily in this posture, when God calls me hence, (summoned by
an incurable Disease to hasten all that ever I will do in this World,) being
incapable of prevailing with the present Church disturbers, I do apply my self
to posterity, leaving them the sad warning of their Ancestors distractions, as
a Pillar of Salt, and acquainting them what I have found to be the cause of our
Calamities, and therein they will find the Cure themselves.

II. I Have often taken the boldness (constrainedly) to say, that I doubt not but
the Contentions of the Clergy have done far more hurt to the Christian World,
than the most bloody Wars of Princes. And I must reduce the Causes to these
three Heads:

I. The Abuse of POWER, II. Of WISDOM, III. Of GOODNESS; or of the Names of
these: the three great Principles of Humanity.

That is, I. By Clergy TYRANNY, II. By OPINIONISTS or Dogmatists, III. By
SUPERSTITION and HYPOCRISY, or PRACTICAL BLIND ZEAL.

But among all these sorts, selfish PRIDE, IGNORANCE and UNCHARITABLENESS or
want of LOVE are the great effectual Causes. And departing from CHRISTIAN
SIMPLICITY, in Doctrine, Worship, Church Government, and Conversation, is the
grand instrumental means of most of our Schisms, Distractions and Calamities.

I. Only by Pride comes Contention, Prove. 13. 10. The Church-TYRANT is Proud
of his Superiority and Wealth: The OPINIONIST is Proud of his supposed
Knowledge and Theological Wisdom; on which account the Gnostics troubled the
Church of old. The HYPOCRITE and the (honester) ignorant Zealot, is Proud of
his supposed Holiness or Goodness: And for an eminency and precedence and
praise in each of these, they all conspire (while they disagree among
themselves) to trouble the Church of Christ: In a word, Selfishness, Ignorance
and want of Love, are the Causes of men's personal ruin and damnation, and the
same are the Causes of the Churches divisions, and all the miseries of the
World.

II. And that IGNORANCE is a Common cause even in the Gnostick Dogmatists that
cry down Ignorance, Error and Heresy, needs no other proof, than the diversity
of Opinions which such contend for: Every side pretend, that it is
ORTHODOXNESS, FAITH or the Great Truths of God, which they defend; And in one
Country or with one Party, one thing is Orthodoxness and the Truth, and
another thing in another Country or Party, and another thing with a third,
etc. And did they all but know what is Truth and the Will of God indeed, they
would cease their Contentions; and all the Sects would meet in Unity.

III. And did men but LOVE their neighbors as themselves, and were as easily
persuaded to think well of, and deal gently with their neighbors as
themselves, and as hardly drawn to condemn, hate, hurt or injure them, I need
not tell you how easily, quickly and universally we should be healed.

But before I speak of the Instrumental Means, I will fullier open the three
forementioned Causes.

I. Religious Clergie-TYRANNY has so notoriously, so long, and so greatly made
havoc both of Piety, and Peace, that he that is not an utter stranger to
Church History cannot be ignorant of it. I need not tell any Learned man, how
many even moderate Papists, much more Protestants have thought, that
Constantine and other Emperors that over-exalted the Clergy, poured out
Poison into the Church: making great preferments a bait to invite all the worst
of men, to be seekers and invaders of Church Offices and Power, and to corrupt
those that otherwise would have been useful men: especially when (Christians
having first made them their Arbitrators, in obedience to St. Paul's counsel)
they were made the Legal Judges of the Causes of all contentious Christians,
and so set up Secular Magistratical Courts. I need not tell them what work
almost every General Council (as those of one Empire were called) did make!
what work even the first at Nice had made, had not Constantine burnt their
Bills of accusation against each other, and personally lamented their
divisions, and driven them on to peace! what work was made in that at
Chalcedon, and that at Ephesus, and so of others! what a horrid scandal the
case of John and Dioscorus was, and the murder of Flavianus, and many others!
nor yet how the controversies against the Nestorians, Eutychians, and
Monothelites were managed! I need not tell them, how soon Victor began at Rome,
nor what Socrates and others say of Cyril and Theophilus at Alexandria; nor yet
how Nazianzene was used at Constantinople; nor how copiously and vehemently he
accuses the Bishops, and wishes that there were no such inequalities among
them, as gave them advantage to do hurt; nor what he says against their
Councils: nor yet of the quarrels of Basil and Anthymius, nor of Basils sharp
complaints of the Roman and other Western Prelates: I need not tell them of the
Usage of Chrysostom, even by such men as Theophilus, Epiphanius and their
partakers; nor of the dividing of the Constantinopolitan Christians thereupon;
nor how the violent Prelates made Separatists and Non-conformists of
Chrysostoms adherents, by the name of Joannites; and how unlikely that Schism
was to have been healed, had not wiser Bishops succeeded, who restored Concord
by honoring Chrysostoms Name and Bones, and dealing kindly with his followers:
I need not tell them of the sad work made at Ariminum and Syrmium, and often at
Rome, Constantinople and every great Episcopal Seat: nor of the bloodshed
between Competitors, at the Election of Damasus; nor of the separation of St.
Martin from the Synod of Bishops led by Ithacius and Idacius; nor of the
difference of him and Ambrose from the rest about the complyances with Maximus.
The World knows of the doleful Rupture that has continued between the Roman
and the Greek Church about a thousand years; And of the many Schisms at Rome by
various Anti-Popes, even at once above forty years together; And of the reason
of the calling of the Councils of Constance and Basil to end them; And how the
King of Rome keeps up his Kingdom to this day; what work he has made with
Frederick, the Henry's, and other German Emperors; what divisions this caused
among the Clergy; what blood he caused to be shed for Jerusalem, and how many
thousands of the Waldenses have at diverse times been slaughtered; what work the
Inquisition has made in Spain and Belgia and elsewhere; and the flames of
Persecution in England, and almost in all Christian Lands; what work the Holy
League did make in France, and the English Bishops in many a War with their
Kings; besides the case of Becket and such others; By whose instigation two
hundred thousand Protestants were lately murdered in Ireland, and many again in
Piedmont; I say to tell such things as these to those that are acquainted with
Church History, is vain. And I would those that yet think cruelty the best way
to set up themselves (or Religion, if that must bear the name) and to repress
their adversaries (or Schisms,) would but (among many others) read the Epistle
of great Thuanus before his Works to Henry King of France.

But is it only the old Bishops, Greeks and Papists, that have made such havoc
in the Churches? Even those that pretended to moderation did by the German
Interim make many hundred Churches desolate. And the ten years imprisonment of
Caspar Peucer (vid. Histor. Carcer.) and the silencing of many and many
faithful Ministers, and the banishment of many, does show with what Spirit,
many of the Lutherans carried on their work. And doubtless, had the Calvinists
in Belgia been as wise and peaceable as the English Delegates were at the Synod
of Dort, and been as far from Tyranny as they should have been, matters had
never come so often to Blood or Tumult among them as they have done, nor Grotius
and the Arminians had so much to say against them. I will not meddle with the
matters of this Island in our times, seeing they sufficiently speak themselves.

But how comes this Clergy Tyranny to be so common, so long and so powerful
in the World, to make Parties, and draw Princes into Wars?

1. It must be remembered, that true Godliness is not common in the World: Too
many take up Christianity, as in the Eastern parts the posterity of the old
famous Christians are now Mahometans.

2. The Gospel and true Spirit of Christianity is contrary to the minds and
worldly interests of carnal, ambitious, covetous, voluptuous men. So that they
profess a Religion which their own hearts abhor as to its serious practice.

3. Every unrenewed man has such a worldly fleshly nature, and is voluptuous,
proud and covetous: And none of them love to be reproved or crossed in their
way.

4. Church Honors, Dignities and great Revenues, and Clergie-ease in an idle
life, are a great bait or temptation to a carnal mind: And the worse men are,
the more they will desire and seek Church preferments, and make all the friends
they can to get them; And the more self-denying men will not do so, (but
perhaps avoid them.)

5. The diligent seekers are liker to obtain and find, than the neglecters and
avoiders: And so the Churches to be usually in the power of the worser sort of
men, and Religion to be under the Government of its enemies.

6. Men in power, and the Major Vote, have great advantage to execute their own
wills, and to put Laws on others, and bring them under what Characters they
please; and so to affix the names of Heretics or Schismatics on them, if they
fulfill not all their wills: yea, to silence them, and suppress their Writings,
and make them to be little understood in the World, yea, or by their neighbors
round about them.

7. The Vulgar (as they are for the Conqueror in the Wars, so) usually are for
the upper and stronger side in peace, that have Power to hurt them, and have
the Major Vote; And also easily believe them, and think men that suffer, are
like to be guilty of what they are accused.

8. Godliness being against a worldly mind and interest, and the Rabble usually
for it, hence arises a Conspiracy of carnal Clergymen, and the Rabble,
against those that are most seriously Godly, as if they were their enemies, and
a surly, proud, intractable sort of people. As Sulpitius Severus describes
Ithacius and his followers, (and even Mr. Hooker out of him Eccl. Pol. Praefat.)

9. Such men in Power never want flatterers at their ears, to praise all that
they do, and to exasperate them by slandering and reviling sufferers.

10. The long possession (since the days of Constantine) of Great Places and
Power by the Clergy, within the Roman Empire (now the Greek and Latin
Churches,) does seem to justify men's Usurpations and Tyranny, and make all
dissenters seem singular and Schismatical, (which was and is the Papal strength
against the Reformed.)

11. Too many of the Secular Rulers of the World, have much of the same Spirit;
And find also their interests so twisted in show with the Papal Clergies, that
they dare not cross them.

12. The faults of those that suffer by them (in doctrine and imprudent
carriages) use to give them great advantage, and make all their odious
characters and names of them believed and received, (as the case of the
Waldenses and of the Lutherans and Calvinists in Germany too fully prove.)

II. The second Rank of Church-disturbers are DOGMATISTS or men that profess
exceeding zeal for ORTHODOX Opinions, or Theological Knowledge. And thus three
instances tell us of the Cause of our Calamities,

1. That of Gnostick and Heretical persons, who account every new Conceit of
theirs, to be worthy the propagating, even at the rate of Theological Wars and
Church Confusions; and cry out [But the Truth, and sell it not], when it is
some error of their own, or some unprofitable or unnecessary notion.

2. The case of the Romanists (to say nothing of all the old contentious
Bishops and Councils, and the controversies about Persona and Hypostasis; and
about many words and forms of speech). What do the Roman Councils for many
hundred years last, but on pretense of preserving the faith uncorrupted,
multiply divisions and new Articles of faith (quoad nos)? And while they cry
down most of Christ's Church as Heretical or greatly erroneous, they have run
themselves into the grossest errors almost that humane nature is capable of,
(even to the making it necessary to salvation, to deny our own and all the
sound men's senses in the World in the case of Transubstantiation).

3. The case of the Schoolmen, and such other Disputing Militant Theologues:
who have spun out the Doctrine of Christianity into so many Spiders Webs; and
filled the World with so many Volumes of Controversies, as are so many Engines
of contention, hatred and division: And I would our Protestant Churches,
Lutherans and Calvinists, had not too great a number of such men, as are far
short of the Schoolmens subtilty, but much exceed them in the enviousness of
their zeal, and the bitterness and revilings of their disputes, more openly
serving the Prince of hatred against the Cause of Love and Peace. O how many
famous Disputers, in Schools, Pulpit and Press, do little know what Spirit they
are of, and what reward they must expect of Christ, for making odious his
Servants, destroying Love, and dividing his Kingdom? How many such have their
renown as little to their true comfort, as Alexanders and Caesar's for their
bloody Wars?

But how comes this Dogmatical Zeal so to prevail? Consider,

1. Nature it self is Delighted in Knowing much: Else Satan had not made it
Eves temptation. Without Grace, even Theological Speculations may be very
pleasing to men's minds. Morality and Holiness is principally seated in the Will.

2. Satan has here a far fairer bait, than worldly Wealth and Pleasures and
Honors, to tempt men, and steal away their hearts, from that Love and Practice
which is Holiness indeed. All men are bound to Love Gods Word, and his Truth
must be precious to us all: and now it is easy for the hypocritical Dogmatist
to take up here, and make himself a Religion of Zeal for those opinions, which
he entitleth God to. And O that I could speak this loud enough to awaken the
Learned World of Disputers, to so much jealousy of their own hearts, as is
necessary to their own safety, as well as to the Churches peace! This thing
called Orthodoxness, Truth and Right-believing (precious in it self, if it be
what it is called,) is made by Satan an ordinary means to deceive Learned men,
and keep them from a holy and heavenly mind and life, when grosser cheats would
be less effectual: Theology is valued by many as the Mathematics are, as a
pleasant sort of knowledge; and by others as the Jews were zealous of their
Law, by a formal sort of Religiousness; one sort being zealous for their
Opinions, and another for their Ceremonies from the like principle of formality.

3. Yet Nature that would know much, is dull and slothful, and loath to be at
that great and long study and labor necessary to obtain it.

4. And it is but few that are born with a quick natural capacity.

5. And it is not the most that have the happiness of very wise, experienced
and thoroughly Learned Teachers: but most are instructed by half witted men. And
young persons know not how to choose the best for themselves, nor their Parents
neither ordinarily.

6. Ease and Interest, or the Veneration of certain persons, makes men fall in
with those Opinions that are in best esteem in the places where they live, and
among the persons whom they most value.

7. Reason is man's noble faculty, and therefore that which man is aptest to be
Proud of: And though few have much knowledge and wisdom, almost all would be
thought to have it, and are too proud to endure to be accounted ignorant or
erroneous.

8. The Dignity of the Pastoral Office, and Academical Degrees, makes men
think that the Honor of knowledge is their due, and necessary to their work.
And therefore they will expect and claim it that deserve it not: and it shall
be taken for Pride and Singularity for any man to convince them of ignorance or
error.

9. Many of them are godly men and excellent Preachers, and cried up
(deservedly) by good people: And therefore they take the reputation of more
knowledge than they have, to be their due; and the people are ready to join
with them in reproaching all that differ from them.

10. Great knowledge being rare, the half-knowing men are still the major part
by far (alas how far!) And so if Synods be called, or most Voices heard, these
will still pass for the Orthodox men, and a more judicious man will scarce be
heard among them.

11. Learning is of many ages got into certain forms of words; and he that has
got some organical arbitrary Notions, passes for a Learned man; or he that can
speak many Languages: while true real wisdom (which consists 1. In knowing
the Greatest Things, and 2. In fitting words to things) is much neglected:
whereby as hypocrites deceive themselves and others with forms of piety, so do
Scholars with forms and notions instead of knowledge.

12. These humane formalities of wisdom have prevailed to bring the Scripture,
and the best part of wisdom, into disesteem, as a dull and low kind of
knowledge; as if Logical, Physical and Metaphysical trifling, were a higher
matter.

13. No man is sufficiently apprehensive of the greatness of the Curse in the
confusion of Tongues: whereby as we can preach but to few Nations in the World,
so we cannot intelligibly converse with one another. All words (being arbitrary
signs) are Ambiguous; And few Disputers have the jealousy and skill which is
necessary to discuss equivocations, and to agree of the meaning of all their
terms before they use them in disputing: And so taking Verbal differences for
Material, does keep up most of the wretched Academical and Theological Wars of
the World.

14. And nothing here undoeth all the World in point of wisdom, so much as
overhasty judging or prefidence: It is natural to almost all to fasten
presently upon the first appearances, and to be confident before they have half
tried: In cases where seven and seven years serious study is necessary to a
through digested knowledge, every Novice will presently conclude as if he were
sure. And then as every one is apt to be confident, so to be tenacious; every
error leading on more, and the reputation of the person being concerned in it,
mutability being a shame: And so it becomes a very difficult thing to unlearn
the errors once learned; as white Paper is easier written on than that which is
written on before.

15. And then no man knows his own error (else it were no error), nor knows
what another man's perceptions are, nor what any other man knows more than he.

16. And lastly, the odious names of dissenters (the common usage) does quickly
affright even beginners from thinking well of their Opinions, (yea, or of their
persons and piety usually). And by all these means almost all are of the
opinion of the Country where they live, or of those that they most reverence,
or which are most for their interest; and boldly condemn the rest not
understood.

III. And the pretense of HOLINESS or a blind practical Zeal, and Superstitious
Religion, both in Hypocrites and many honest ignorant people, has not a little
hand in the distractions of Christ's Church.

It was the appearance of more Spirituality and Strictness which drew
Tertullian to the Montanists, and which promoted a great part of the Heresies
which have torn the Churches. This bore up the Cause of the Priscillianists,
and of those that Bernard and Cluniacensis so much inveigh against, (I suppose
Manichees with some better persons mixed:) This kept up the Donatists; but above
all the Novatians long in great reputation: This was the strength of the
Anabaptists in Germany and the Low Countries, as their adversaries confess.
Says G. Wicelius Meth. Concord. c. 12. p. 42. [Retinctores hac una part
duntaxat sapiunt, tenentes doctrinam Ecclesiae Catholicae] speaking of the
necessity of a holy life: This is the strength of the Quakers among us now, and
of almost all the separating and Censorious Sects: And were not so excellent a
thing as Godliness the Motive, abundance of good people durst never have done
the great evils which we have seen done in this age, to the great shame of our
profession, and the sad calamities of Church and State. (And if I my self have
formerly in my unexperienced youth, promoted any dividing or unwarrantable
ways, it was upon this and the former mistake; which I beg daily of God to
discover to me to the full, and beg the pardon of the miscarriages which I
know, and which yet I know not of.)

And if you Consider these things following, you will not wonder that mistaken
Godliness should cause divisions:

1. Holiness and Gods Love or well-pleasedness with man, is the best thing in
this world, or that man is capable of. And therefore is most Desirable, and
most Honorable.

2. Therefore all good men prefer it before all other things; And are justly
more averse to any thing that is against it, than to any worldly loss or
suffering.

3. Yea it is Gods Interest more than their own: And all good men are against
all that displeases God, so far as it is known.

4. We all know but in part, and as in a glass and darkly: Even the most of
Teachers take abundance of things for True and Good that are False and Evil,
and for False and Bad which are True and Good; Much more are Godly vulgar
people ignorant, and consequently err in many things. Even they that cry out
against the vulgar Ignorance, and insufficient Teachers, know far less than
they are Ignorant of themselves.

5. He that mistakingly thinks any thing is Good or Bad, Duty or Sin, which is
not so, will be zealous in pursuit of his mistake, if he be serious for God: A
good principle will hasten him on in a wrong way, whatever it cost him.

6. Ignorance and timerousness cause superstition, which is a conceit that God
is pleased by overdoing in external things, and observances and laws of their
own making, and so they that make part of their own Religion superstitiously
(as most good people do in some things through ignorance,) will censure all
others as Good or Bad, by the measure of their own mistakes.

7. He that thus mistakingly thinks that men sin when they do not, will have a
proportionable dislike of them, and aversation from them: And will be ready to
speak as he thinks of them, and so will be guilty of calumny, and calling Evil
Good, and Good Evil.

8. The World will abound still with real evil and scandals; And all parties
will be faulty: And usually the greater part of the Clergy in the Christian
World will be guilty of so much Ignorance, pride, contentiousness, worldliness
and sensuality, as will greatly grieve and offend good people. And this will
occasion alienation and separations even with Godly persons: The sacrifice of
the Lord was abhorred through the sins of Eli's sons: The case of the Clergy
at this day in the Greek Church in Moscovie, Armenia, Syria, Abassia, etc. yea
among too many of the German Churches, is very lamentable, by Ignorance and
scandal: And the corruption of the Roman Clergy was it that facilitated the
revolt from the Papacy, at Luther's reformation. He that reads Cornel. Mus,
Ferus, Espencaeus, Erasmus, Alvan Pelagius, Clemangis and such others
describing their own Clergy, and Jos. Acosta of them in India, etc. will see
much of the Cause of the Divisions in the World: And all the old Writers that
write against the Waldenses, do make us understand that the ignorance and
wickedness of the Clergy then, was it that drove them from the Roman Church.
Says Wicelius Meth. Concord. c. 11. p. 39. Quum tales ad nullum honestius
vitae institutum idonei sunt, mirum sit si bonos sacerdotes praestabunt: sic
itaque procedente tempore regetur Ecclesia ab asinis, and praedicabunt
imperitissimi misero populo, quod nunquam didicerunt ipsi. Adolescentes optimi
quique abhorrent propterea ab instituto illo, quod nolint suam libertatem sibi
eripi, etc. I have often said, what caused St. Martin to separate during life
from the Synodical Bishops about him: And what Gildas says of such, that no
excellent Christian will call them Ministers: And it is very observable not only
as Dr. James in the Margin of Wicelius has cited, that there are many Canons
against wicked Priests celebrating and Massing, but Wicelius himself says (p.
17.) Non admittantur sacra concubinariorum, quos Deus pejus odit, atque
manifestarios incestus: Meminerimus in Decretis Pontificum pie caveri, Ne quis
Missam ejus Presbyteri audiat quem scit indubitanter concubinam habere, aut
subintroductam mulierem. (And yet there are now men pretending to piety among
Protestants, that speak of, and use those Godly persons more hatefully who
refuse to hear such wicked Priests, than they do those Priests themselves.)
Light and Darkness have no Communion: And the Church will always have bad
Ministers and Members: And many good people through Ignorance will think that
they should go further from them than they ought: And will not distinguish
between that private familiarity which is in their own power, and that public
Church Communion which the Church Pastors are the guides and judges of. And so
the honesty and the ignorance of these good men, meeting with the vulgar
wickedness, will be as the congress of fire and water, and will occasion
ruptures and parties in the Churches.

9. The carnal Clergy will usually hate and persecute Godly zealous Preachers:
(As even the case of Ph. Nerius and Baronius at Rome shows, which had almost
made disturbance:) And then sufferings will be a stronger temptation to hard
thoughts and too much alienation than most are able well to overcome.

10. And the Godly people will adhere to their Godly suffering Teachers, and
run further in bitterness against the carnal and persecuting party, than their
suffering Leaders do desire.

11. Yet interest and temptations will prevail with too many of the sufferers
to connive at the bitterness and alienation of the people, (if not to
countenance it,) which they do not justify: And so the rupture will grow still
greater.

12. And all men have some Pride: And Godliness being the best thing may become
the object of Pride as well as Knowledge and Power. And so many will affect to
have their Piety Conspicuous, and therefore to be singular or of some small
party that is eminent; and so by separation to stand at a more conspicuous
distance from the vulgar sort of Christians, than Christ would have them: And
so many a good man has more of Pride in his profession and separation than he
is aware of.

13. And because Gods word, and his last judgment, and Heaven and Hell, do
make so great a difference between the Godly and ungodly, it occasioneth many
to think that they must difference men by their own censures and separations
farther than indeed they ought.

14. And it greatly promoteth Schisms that good people are unacquainted with
Church History, and know not how just such Opinions and Schisms as their own
have in former ages risen, and how they have miscarryed and dyed, and what have
been their fruits.

15. And few men have that humble sense as they ought, of their own Ignorance
and badness, which would keep their suspicions and Censures more at home, and
make them more compassionate to others.

16. And few love their Neighbors as themselves, nor consider while they hate
men's sin, what is lovely in their Natures and Capacities of grace.

17. And the Piety of almost all Sects of Christians on Earth is already
corrupted with so many humane superstitious additions, that few can escape the
temptation of Censuring accordingly.

18. And the Church will always have many hypocrites, who quiet their
Consciences by adhering to the strictest Ministers and Churches, instead of a
mortified, holy and heavenly heart and conversation.

19. And lastly, Persecution and hatred from others, and the due Love of Godly
persons, tempts too many Ministers to overrun their own judgments, and
follow the more censorious sort of persons further than they ought (at least by
connivence,) and to be ruled by those whom they should rule. And thus Divisions
are occasioned even by Piety it self.

II. But yet were the Principles of Division never so many and pernicious,
Interest might have led more of the world to Quietness and Concord, had not
Satan, the great enemy of Love and Peace, seduced them to that Instrumental
Means and way, which will never consist with Concord. It is that which Christ
and his Apostles have done very much to prevent, but the Devil (even with all
the sorts forementioned) has much prevailed against their precepts.

The Grand case of the Christian World is, WHAT IS THE TRUE CENTER and RULE OF
CONCORD? Could they find out this, it would hold men of various tempers to it.

I. Christ first laid down the Description and Measure of Christianity, in the
Baptismal Covenant; and ordained that all should be accounted Christians in
foro Ecclesiae who by Baptism were solemnly devoted to him, in a professed
Belief and Covenant, Dedication and Vow to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost:
These he would have called Christians or his Disciples, and this is their
Christening, and so ever called in the Church. 2. And next he made it his new
(that is Last) and Great Command, that All his Disciples should Love each
other, and live in eminent Unity and Peace: which he accordingly wrought them
to by the first pouring out of his Spirit, Act. 2. and 3. and 4.

II. The Apostles founding the Church in this Baptismal Vow or Covenant, and
mutual Love, exhorted accordingly all the Baptized to Love each other, and to
Receive even the weak in faith, but not to doubtful disputations, Romans 14. and
15. Often vehemently charging them to be of one mind and live in Love and peace,
and to beware of them as not serving Christ but their own bellies, who were for
Divisions, 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11. Romans 16. 17. And though they came with pretenses
of ORDER, WISDOM or PIETY, such Good words, and fair speeches were noted to be
engines to deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 17.

And whereas the objection seemed unanswerable, How can they so agree, who are
of several judgments about Good and Evil? Paul often warns them to hold fast
the form of sound words, and summeth up (as 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4.) the
Articles of their faith, and charge them that so far as they had attained,
they should walk by the same rule, and mind the same things, and if in any
thing they were otherwise minded, stay till God revealed the matter to them,
Phil. 3. He often charge them to be of one mind and judgment (thus far) and to
live in Love and Peace, and to do nothing by strife and vain glory, but in
honor to prefer others to themselves; and not to strive about words that
profit not, nor about unnecessary Questions, seeing such disputings and
strivings gender to ungodliness, and fret like a Canker, and pervert the
hearers minds: Yea he directs the Pastors to edify souls, rather by a
Teaching than a disputing way, and to convince gainsayers, by meek instructing
opposers, to see if thus God will give them repentance to the acknowledgement
of the truth: for the Minister or servant of the Lord must not strive; Love is
their work to be effected in others, and Love must be their Principle, and Love
must be their mode and means, even Loving others as themselves: Often are they
called by Christ and his Apostles from masterly opinions, aspirings and
endeavors, and to be as little Children; and the servants of all, and as
stewards of Gods mysteries and helpers, not Lords of the Churches faith, and
not to domineer over the flock of Christ, but to oversee them not by constraint
but voluntarily: And what cannot be done by Light and Love, is not to be done
by them at all: The Magistrate and not they, must use the Sword; but not to
make men believers (for he cannot.)

And though Vossius and others have rendered Reasons enough to persuade us that
the story of the twelve Apostles making each one an Article of the Creed, is
not credible, nor that they shaped it in every word to the present form, yet it
is to me a certainty, that the Apostles made and used the Creed for sense and
substance as the very summary and test of Christianity, long before any Book of
the New Testament was written (about twelve years, and almost sixty six before
the whole.) For 1. It is certain that all Christians were Baptized: 2. It is
certain that they then professed to Believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and to Covenant accordingly, renouncing the flesh, the world and the
Devil. 3. It is certain that the Apostles and Pastors labored to make men
understand what they did, and would not delude them by taking the bare saying
of these three words. 4. And it is certain that the Pastors altered not the
Christian faith, but taught the same for substance to all that were baptized.
5. And it is certain that should men have taken much liberty to use new words
or forms at Baptism, in opening the faith, it might easily have corrupted the
faith and introduced a new doctrine. 6. And it is certain by Church History
that (though some variety of little words was used, yet) this same Creed for
substance (except the two or three clauses mentioned by Usher and Vossius) was
commonly used at Baptism from the days of the Apostles. 7. And we find yet
that this Creed is nothing else but the explication of the three Baptismal
Articles; of which see Sandford and Parker (two Learned Non-conformists) in
their very Learned Treat. de Descensu Christi at large. 8. And it is certain
that if the Apostles did take this course so many years before they wrote any
of the New Testament, they did this (as well as that) by the Holy Ghost: and so
that the Holy Ghost seconding Christ's own Baptismal Law, or Instituted test,
did make the Creed to be the summary of the Christian Belief, twelve years
before we had any Book of the New Testament, and about sixty six as is said
before we had them all. And then it will appear what is Gods appointed test of
Christianity, Communion and special Love.

All which considered, though I think it is the truth which I long ago wrote
against a Treatise of a Learned man (Mr. Ashwell) in the Append. to the second
Edition of my Reformed Pastor, yet I publish my Repentance that ever I wrote
it, as fearing lest it occasioned the turning of men's minds from this great
truth which he and I agreed in, and which I find few consider as it deserves.

But the Gnostics began the corrupting game, and by pretenses of higher
knowledge, spoiled men by vain Philosophy, which engaged the Apostles to cry
them down, and to warn all Christians to take heed of being so spoiled, and to
vilify arbitrary Philosophical notions, tricks and vain janglings, as likely
to draw them from the simplicity of Christianity.

And the certain truth is, that he knows neither the Interest nor the
Ignorance and weakness of man, nor the nature of Knowledge, who does not know,
that the frailty and employments of mankind are such as that there never will
be an universal Concord in very MANY, or UNCERTAIN, UNNECESSARY things; And O
that I could write it on all men's hearts, or doors at least, that The Christian
world will never have Concord, but in a FEW, CERTAIN, NECESSARY things.

Therefore Paul said to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. I am jealous of you
with Godly jealousy: For I have espoused you to one husband, etc. But I fear
lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve though his subtilty, so your
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in (or toward) Christ.

O mark these words all ye contentious Church -TYRANTS, DOGMATISTS and
SUPERSTITIOUS ones. Read and study them well.

God laid down the terms of the Churches Concord in seven Unities. 1. One Body
or Church Catholic; 2. One Spirit or Holy Ghost, as the soul of that Church;
3. One Hope, or Heavenly felicity hoped for; 4. One Lord of the Church, our
Head and Savior; 5. One Faith, or Creed, or Symbol of our belief, and Belief
thereof; 6. One Baptismal Covenant; 7. And one God and Father of us all, who is
above all, through all and in us all. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. And it is the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace, that on these terms we are charged to keep,
v. 2, 3. with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in love.

But now comes the Serpent (note 1. The author,) and by subtilty (2. Note the
means,) even as he beguiled Eve (3. Note the precedent) which was by promising
her more knowledge and exaltation to be as God; and he corrupts men's minds,
(4. Mark the effect) though it is knowledge and advancement of mind that he
promises and pretends: Even by drawing them (as to higher POWER, KNOWLEDGE
or HOLINESS) from the Christian simplicity, (5. Mark what the Corruption of
Religion is.)

And what is this Christian SIMPLICITY which they forsake, and how are they
thus Corrupted from it?

I. The Church -TYRANT departs from the SIMPLICITY of Church Government
first, and will not hear Christ's vehement charge, Luke 22. With you it shall
not be so: He cannot understand such Texts because he would not. Hence how
unlike is the Secular-Papal and Patriarchal state to the Ministry appointed and
described by Christ! To reduce them to that, they think is to be enemies to the
Church; And do they not then take Christ for their Capital enemy? because they
are enemies to humility, mortification and the Cross, Phil. ^. 18. (To cross
bearing not to cross making.) The Papists think that Greg, the seventh that
took down Princes was the most glorious instrument of the Churches exaltation:
And by turning all to corporeal Glory, they lose hearts, and destroy the souls
whom they profess to save.

And having first corrupted GOVERNMENT from the Primitive simplicity, and made
Princes their Lictors (as Grotius speaks in that excellent Epistle newly
translated by Mr. Barksdale,) they next corrupt DOCTRINE, and WORSHIP
consequently. For TYRANTS must have their Wills in every thing: and numerous
and needless Laws and Canons must be made to show their power and fulfill their
wills, that they may be Lawgivers and a Rule to all the World. And when they
have made a seeming Necessity of doing things unnecessary, then to plead the
Necessity which they have made, is the sum of all their arguments.

And they that are against strict and precise adhering to the Scriptures, or
observance of Gods own commands, are yet so strict for obedience to their proud
imperious wills, that they persuade themselves and others, that without it
there can be no order, no unity, no peace, but rebellion and confusion: And so
they cry up Obedience, Obedience, that their Idol wills may be bowed to by all
without control; And when they are mere Usurpers, and use no Power given them
by God, they yet get the advantage of making all odious that obey them not in
the least and greatest matters, by the names of schism, unruliness or such
like. O say the Papal Usurpers, [The Church must be obeyed, or there will be no
order: Disobedience in small matters is no small sin] when they have set up an
Idol power against Christ; as if to disobey him, whose Laws they make void by
their Traditions and Usurpations, were a lesser fault. And when they have
departed as far from the Christian simplicity, in Doctrine, Government and
Worship, as their voluminous Councils and Decretals, and Missals differ from
the ancient simple Christianity, and have made as many snares and engines to
divide and tear the Church of Christ as there are noxious (that I say not
Needless) Laws, Canons, and Decrees imposed as necessary to peace and concord,
then no men's mouths are more opened against schism, when they have unavoidably
caused it, yea are the greatest schismatics; And no men call so loud for Unity
and Concord, as they that have first made it a thing impossible.

Let none think that I am speaking against any true Church Government, or
faithful Pastors: But I appeal to the Consciences of these Papal Tyrants; 1.
Whether it would not be far easier for Christians to Agree, in A FEW, PLAIN and
NECESSARY things, of Christ's own Institution, than in a multitude of humane
decrees and articles, composed in words more liable to Controversy? Will not
more subscribe to the Creed, than to all the Councils? 2. Have they not room
enough to show their Power, and work enough to do, in seeing to the execution
of Christ's own Universal Laws, and preserving mere Order and Decency in
undetermined circumstances, that all may be done to edification? 3. Does not
every needless Oath and Subscription by which they would tie men faster to
themselves in controvertible cases, plainly tend to undermine themselves, and
keep up still a conscientious party against them? For while men have nothing to
do but live quietly under a Government, they will be glad of peace: But when
they are put to Subscribe, Declare, Covenant and Swear that all this is good or
lawful, or that they will never be against it, it sets men unavoidably on the
deepest studies of the case, and so all the people are set on trying and
judging of that, which else they would never have meddled with: For what honest
man will say, swear or promise he knows not what? Even as some crafty Rebels
would undermine Princes, by drawing them to put the controverted parts of their
Prerogative into the Subjects Oaths, that so they may make all the people
Students and Judges of the cause, and unavoidably make factions and dissenters,
that else would have lived quietly if they might: so do the Papal Clergy ruin
themselves by such over-doing impositions.

I remember Lampridius tells us that Alexander Severus (that great enemy of
injustice) was so severe, that he would have made a Law to regulate men's
Apparel: But Ulpian changed his mind by telling him, that Many Laws cause
Divisions, and make occasions of disobedience.

They cry out, There will be no order if Ministers and people be left to their
own discretion in such and such circumstantials; But do they dream of Perfect
Concord on earth? and that men of such various Interests, tempers, educations,
converse and degrees of knowledge should not differ in a word, or gesture? Our
English Rulers make no Laws, what Gesture shall be used in singing Psalms, or
in Hearing Sermons, and there is no division or great disorder in them: But if
on pretense of nearer Concord, they should tie all to one Gesture, this or
that, we should presently find it an engine of division. And O how many such
Engines have the Papal Clergy made and used long! and to what purpose? To
silence faithful Ministers, to torment faithful Christians in the Inquisitions,
to brand the best men with the names of Heretics and Schismatics, to gratify
all profaneness and malignity, to quench brotherly love, and to tear the Church
into pieces; And no experience will make them wiser.

II. And the DOGMATISTS also have done their part, by departing from the
Simplicity of the Christian Doctrine, to set the Christian world together by
the ears. Of which Hilary has written sharply against the Making of new
Creeds, not sparing to tell them that even the Nicene Fathers, led others the
way: And Hierome wonders that they that were for the word hypostasis questioned
his Faith, as if he that had been Baptized had been without a Faith or Creed
which all at Baptism do profess. But this will not serve turn to these
Corrupters. Councils, Doctors and Schoolmen have been led by the temptation of
more subtle-knowledge, to be Wise and Orthodox overmuch, till the Churches
Faith is as large as all the Decrees of General Councils de side at the least,
and the Churches Laws a great deal larger! And what abundance of dubious
Confessions, Declarations or Decrees are now to be subscribed or believed and
justified, before a man can have his Baptismal birthright, even the Love, peace
and Church Communion bequeathed to him as a Christian by Christ!

And now controversal writings fill our Libraries by Cart-loads: And a Use of
Confutation is a great part of most Sermons among the Papists, Lutherans and
many others; And men are bred up in the Universities to a Militant striving
kind of life, that their work may be to make Plain Christians seem unlearned
dolts, and dissenters seem odious or suspected men, and themselves to be the
wise and Orthodox persons, and triumphant over all the erroneous, that were it
not for these Contenders would destroy the And so Ministers are armed against
Ministers, Churches against Churches, Christians against Christians, yea
Princes against Princes, and Countries against Countries, by wrangling
contentious Clergy men. And (O what an injury is ^t!) Young Students are
almost necessitated to waste much of their lives (which should be spent in
preparing them to promote faith, holiness and Love) in reading over multitudes
of these wrangling writers, to know which of them is in the right: And most
readers catch the disease hereby themselves; And those few that at great cost
and labor come to the bottom of the differences do perceive, that the Proud
Opiniators have striven partly about unrevealed or unnecessary things, but
chiefly about mere ambiguous words and arbitrary humane notions; and multitudes
condemn and revile each other, while they mean the same things, and do not know
it. One writes a Learned Book against such a party, and another confuteth such
an Adversary (especially about Predestination, Redemption, Free Will, Humane
Power, Grace, Merit, Justification, Pardon, Imputation, etc.) and then many
read and applaud all as excelently done; (Alas, for the low estate of the
Clergy that while!) when a truly discerning man perceives that it is but a
striving about unexplained words, for the most part: And thus being Over-wise
in pretenses of Zeal for Truth, and under-wise in understanding it, and
departing from Christian simplicity of doctrine, and even deriding the
Christian Creed, has made even some honest men become dividing Engineers, and
their Articles, and Controversies the Churches calamity.

III. And what Practical misguided zeal about worship has done, almost all
Sects, Novatians, Anabaptists, in Germany and here, and the various sort of
Churches that refuse Communion with one another, and that condemn, or cast out
dissenters from them, and preach and talk and backbite their brethren into the
odium or distaste of their seduced auditors; the bitter invectives in Pulpit,
talk and press of the several Pastors and people against each other (and worse
than words where they have power:) all these speak so loud, as may spare me the
labor of any further discovery; and calls us all to make it the matter of our
lamentation.

And what shall I say in the conclusion, now I am near to my departure from
this contentious world? but sound a Retreat to all these unhappy militants,
that will not let Holiness prosper by the necessary advantage of Peace. Cease
your Proud contendings, O vainglorious Militant Clergy! Learn of the Prince
of peace and the holy Angels that preached him, to give Glory to God in the
highest, who gives Peace on Earth, and well-pleasedness. in (or toward) men.
Did Christ or his Apostles make such work for Christians as you do? The great
Shepherd of the flock will take your pretenses of ORDER, ORTHODOXNESS (or
Truth) and PIETY, for no excuse, for your corrupting ORDER, FAITH and PRACTICE
by your TYRANNY, SELF-CONCEITEDNESS and blind ZEAL and SUPERSTITION; and for
using his name against himself, to the destroying of that Love, and Concord and
Unity which he has bequeathed to his Church; and for serving his enemy, and
dividing his people, and hardening Infidels and ungodly ones by these scandals.
Return to the primitive simplicity, that we may return to unity, Love and
peace. Dream not of them upon your own corrupting terms. And read and read over
again and again Jam. 3. which does describe you, condemn you, and instruct you.

If you say, Physicion heal thy self: Who has wrote more of Controversies? I
answer, peruse what I have written, and you will see, it is of Controversies,
but against Controversies, tending to End and reconcile. If any thing be
otherwise (except necessary defense of certain necessary faith or duty) I
retract it, and condemn it: Let it be as not written. I have meddled much with
Controversies in this Book: but it is to end them. The God of Peace give Wisdom
and peaceable principles, minds and hearts to his servants, that (though I
shall not live to see it) true Love and Piety may revive in the Christian
world, by the endeavors of a healing Ministry, and the shaming, restraint and
reformation of the CONTENTIOUS CLERGY, whether TYRANNICAL, DOGMATICAL, or
SUPERSTITIOUS.

Amen.
Jan. 25. 167^.
Of DIVISIONS and CONTENTIONS among Christians, Consider
I. The EFFICIENT, I. PERSONS: 1. The Devils. 2. Men: 1. A Contentious Clergy.
2. Unwise and wicked Rulers instigated by them. 3. The deceived people that
follow them.

II. QUALITIES, viz. I. Remotely: 1. Selfishness in Carnal hypocrites, who
prefer worldly interest. 2. Slothfulness in Students, in seeking truth. 3.
Hastiness in Judging, before digested conceptions and proof.
II. Nearly: Want of 1. Humility and self-acquaintance: Pride. 2. Knowledge:
Ignorance and Error. 3. Love to others: Envy, Malice and Bitterness.

III. Instruments, or Engines, 1. In General: Corrupt departing from Christian
Simplicity. 2. Particularly, 1. From Simplicity of Doctrine, by DOGMATISTS
Words and Notions: 2. From Simplicity of Practice, by SUPERSTITIOUS additions.
3. From Simplicity of Discipline by CHURCH-TYRANNY.


II. CONSTITUTIVE Causes, viz. DISCORD, [1. In JUDGMENT of things necessary,
ALIENATION, [2. In WILL and AFFECTION, viz. 1. Privative; by denying due
Communion. 2. Positive, 1. By Contention. 2. Malice. 3. Hurtfulness to each
other.

DIVISION, [3. In Necessary PRACTICE,
III. The EFFECTS, viz. I. On THINGS, viz. on Church* 1. Doctrine and
Preaching, and Writing, turning it into vain and hurtful wrangling. 2. Worship,
Prayer, Sacraments, corrupting them by faction, partiality and wrath. 3.
Discipline, corrupting it into Secular or factious Tyranny, or a dead Image.
II. On PERSONS, viz. I. Particular, 1. Themselves, 2. Their followers: 1. The
Guilt and Deceit of false-Religious zeal. 2. The Death of true Holiness and
Heavenly Conversation. 3. The Death of Love, and Life of Wrath and injuries.
3. Rulers, viz. 1. Corrupting them by factious clamours against their
Subjects. 2. Tempting them unto persecuting Laws and Executions. 3. Engaging
them in bloody Wars abroad.
4. The Innocent, viz. Injuries to 1. Private persons, 1. By censures,
slanders, backbitings, making them hated. 2. Denying them due Love, Communion
and help. 3. Persecution, silencing, and other mischiefs.
2. Princes, 1. Weakening and grieving them by the Subjects discords. 2.
Dishonouring them by defaming Excommunications. 3. Urging them to be the
Clergies Lictors or Executioners.

5. Enemies and Strangers, scandalizing and hardening them in Infidelity and sin.
II. Societies, I. Churches: 1. Corrupting them in Doctrine, Worship and Order.
2. Weakening them by discord and division. 3. Shaming them before the World. 4.
Making them less fit for Gods Love and Communion.
II. Kingdoms: Weakening them, dishonouring them, and drawing them into the
Guilt of Feuds, Wars and Persecutions.


IV. The REMEDIES. I. Persons, 1. Christ the Prince of Peace, and the Churches
Head and Center. 2. Wise Princes, who understand the Interest of 1. Christ, 2.
Their people, 3. Themselves. 3. Able, Wise, Holy and Peaceable Pastors. 4. The
Mature, Experienced, Mellow, Peaceable sort of the people.
II. Qualities, 1. Diligent Study under wise Teachers. 2. Sincere Holiness: A
dying life: -- 1. Humility. 2. Knowledge. 3. Love, to others as our selves.
3. Deliberate Judging upon trial.
III. Means, 1. Returning to Christian Simplicity 1. In Doctrine: The ancient
Creed, etc. 2. In Worship. 3. In Discipline.
2. Magistrates forcing the Clergy to keep the peace, and forbear strife. 3.
Subjects obedience in all lawful things required by Authority.

V. HEALTH or Cure. 1. Rulers, Pastors and people of one MIND, 2. One HEART in
Love, 3. One MOUTH and practice, in things Necessary, in Communion and mutual
help: And mutual loving forbearance in Infirmities and things unnecessary;
edified in Love.
VI. The EFFECTS hereof. I. GLORY to God, 1. In the Hallowing of his Name, and
Honor of Religion. 2. In the increase of his Kingdom, and Conversion of the
World. 3. In the Doing of his Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven.
II. Peace on Earth. 1. Increase of Holiness, Heavenliness and Love. 2. Mutual
Delight herein: The Joy of Health and Concord. 3. The Churches Strength and
Glory.
III. Gods WELLPLEASEDNESS in MEN: His Church will be meet for his Love,
Delight and Communion, and be liker to Heaven, and enjoy its foretastes.



An Appendix to this Premonition.
SInce the Printing of this, the World has seen a specimen of such contention,
as I lament, in a contest between a young insulting Assailant, and a jocular
contemptuous Defendant; in my judgment both running into extremes; whether
verbal or real, their own explications must further tell us: The extremes of
the former are reprehended by many: By the later, (a person of great wit and
piety,) I perceive that some men have such conceptions of the Covenants of God,
as will give occasion to some Readers to think, that by mis-describing them, I
have erred and misled men, through this and many other Writings. And men that
are not able to conquer the obscuring and tempting notions of their Authors,
are still calling for Answers to every inconsiderable objection, or
contradicting word that is suggested to them; and little things puzzle and stop
such Readers (though otherwise pious and worthy persons) who have not by long
and accurate studies methodized and digested the matter that is disputed of:
Not therefore to offend any man by opposition, or to defend other men's
extremes; but to prevent the frustration of some of these Writings, and the
scandal or trouble of my Reader, I must take notice;

I. That some think that [the Covenant of Grace must be considered, 1. in its
Constitution; and 2. in its Execution: The Constitution of the Covenant is
God's firm and unchangeable purpose of saving his Elect, to the praise of his
glorious Grace.] For the word signifies a disposition, appointment, or
ordering of matters, whether there be a restipulation or no; (the English word,
Covenant, seduceth our understandings): The fixed purpose and determinate
counsel of God, in Scripture, is called a Covenant, Jer. 33. 20. II. The
execution of this fixed Constitution is God's wise and gracious managing of all
things for the accomplishment of that glorious design which he had in the
prospect of his eternal counsel, which he steadily and regularly pursues
through all the vicissitudes that his mutable creatures are obnoxious to, etc.
page 718, 719. 1. On God's part; whatever grace and mercy was in his eternal
purpose, that is given out to us by Christ, etc. III. 1. Christ cannot be the
foundation of the Covenant, because Christ himself is promised in the Covenant
as the great comprehensive blessing, Isa. 49. 8, 9. 2. Free Grace is given as
the true reason of the Covenant, Heb. 8. 8. IV. The Constitution of the
Covenant in God's purpose and counsel, has no condition at all: nor is that
the Condition of the Covenant required of us on our part, which God promises
to work in us on his part; nor that which God in Covenant bestows; nor that
which presupposes other Covenant mercies antecedent, etc. V. A promise of
pardon and life on condition of believing and obeying, is no Covenant of Grace
at all, and neither better nor worse than a threatening of condemnation, etc.
It Is no more a Covenant of Grace than a Covenant of Wrath. -- It Is no great
matter where it is founded. p. 584, 586. VI. God has not dispensed with one
jot or title of the moral Law, but, Do this and live, is as strictly exacted as
ever: so that unless a Surety be admitted, and the righteousness of another
owned, the case of all the sons of Adam is deplorable and desperate. To deny
the righteousness wherein the believing sinner may stand before this righteous
and holy God, is to affirm the eternal damnation of all the World. VII. The
Covenant mentioned justifies not, but declares our Justification, which is
the immediate proper effect of Christ's righteousness. VIII. Never any man in
his wits affirmed that the righteousness of Christ is the formal cause of our
Justification: Give us but leave to call it the material cause, or the
meritorious cause immediately and properly of Justification, etc.

Some will think that they are great and heinous errors, which either these
words, or some of mine that seem contrary, import: But I must crave leave here
to follow my usual method, in separating the Controversies de re and de nomine;
and then I think that even these strange words prove not him and me at so great
a distance as they seem to intimate. For I grant him as follows de re.

1. That God has such a decree of Election or eternal purpose as he
describes, and calls the Constitution of the Covenant. 2. That God does
wisely and graciously execute this Decree. 3. That all Grace and Mercy is given
by Christ: (And therefore so far as Mercy is common, Christ is the common cause
of it.) 4. That Christ himself is a blessing or gift decreed, and also freely
given by God, even from his love to the World, Joh. 3. 16. 5. That God's
electing Act, or Decree, as in him, has no condition: nor his purpose to give
Christ as a Savior to mankind. 6. On our part no condition is required, either
that God may elect us, or that the first promise of a Savior be made, or that
Christ come into the World, or that he fulfill all righteousness, or that he
obey, or die, or rise, or be glorified, or come to judgment, or raise the dead,
or that he enact it as his Law of Grace, that [he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned.] 7. Nor is
any condition on our part necessary (absolutely, necessitate medii) that the
Gospel, or the first Grace, yea the first special Grace be given us. 8. That
Christ by his suffering and merits has procured to his elect, not only pardon
and life if they believe and obey him, but Grace to cause them effectually and
infallibly to believe, repent, obey, and persevere. 9. That no man can or will
believe and repent, but by his Grace. 10. That to give men a promise of pardon
and life if they will believe, repent, and obey the Gospel, is not the whole of
Christ's Grace to any: but wherever he gives this, he gives also much
means, and gracious help, by which men may do better than they do, and so be
more prepared for his further Grace. 11. That if God only gave men a promise of
pardon if they believe, and gave them no Grace to enable or help them to
believe, it would be no saving Covenant. 12. God did not repeal his Law of
Innocence, (or as he had rather call it, of Perfection); nor did properly
dispense with, or relax the preceptive part of it: Nor is it absolutely ceased,
as to a capable subject: And therefore Christ was bound to perfection. 13. God
would not have his Law to be without the honor of the perfect performance of
man's Mediator, though it be violated by us all. 14. No man is saved or
justified but by the proper merit of Christ's perfect obedience; yea, and his
habitual holiness and satisfactory sufferings, advanced in dignity by his
divine perfection. 15. This merit, as related to us, supposes that Christ, as
a Sponsor, was the second Adam, the Root of the justified, the reconciling
Mediator, who obeyed perfectly with that intent, that by his obedience we might
be justified; and who suffered for our sins, in our room and stead; and so was
in tantum our Vicarius poenae, as some phrase it, or substitute; and was made a
curse for us, that we might be healed by his stripes; as he was obedient, that
his righteousness might be the reason as a meritorious cause of our
Justification: which supposes the relation of an undertaking Redeemer, in our
nature doing this, and in our stead so far forth, as that therefore perfect
obedience should not be necessary to be performed by our selves: And
righteousness therefore is imputed to us, that is, we are truly reputed
righteous, because we, as believing members of Christ, have right to impunity
and life, as merited by his righteousness, and freely given to all penitent
believers. And Christ's own righteousness may be said so far to be imputed to
us, as to be reckoned or reputed the meritorious cause of our right or
justification, as aforesaid.

Thus far we are agreed de re: And then de nomine I willingly leave men to
their way of speech. 1. If he will call God's Decree, his Covenant in
Constitution. 2. If he will call the execution of his Decree, his Covenant in
execution. 3. If he will call nothing else the Covenant of Grace, or at least
nothing of narrower extent, but what comprehends God's eternal Decrees, and
the promise and gift of a Redeemer, (and so of the rest,) I cannot help it; his
language is his own. But I shall tell you further my thoughts de re and de
nomine.

1. De re: 1. God's eternal decrees, purposes, or election, give no one right
to Christ, Pardon or Life; and so justify no man.

2. The execution of God's Decrees, yea, of Election, has many Acts besides
Justification.

3. It must therefore be some transient Act done in time, and ad extra, by
which God justifies men.

4. There are diverse such acts concurring in several sorts of causality, or
respect.

5. Christ's meritorious righteousness and satisfaction are the sole, proper,
immediate causemeritorious of all the Grace or Mercy procured and given by him,
there being no other meritorious cause of the same kind either more immediate,
or at all coordinate, and copartner with him.

6. As Christ gives us Holiness qualitative and active by the real operation
of his Spirit, (though he merited it immediately himself;) so does he give us
right to impunity, to the further Grace of the Spirit, and to Glory, by the
instrumentality of his Covenant, as by a Testament, Deed of Gift, or Law of
Grace. Which by signifying God's donative will, does not first declare us
justified, or to have the foresaid right to Christ and Life, but does first
give us instrumentally that right; and so immediately justify us. (And God's
will gives us not right as secret, or of it self, but by such instrumental
signification.)

7. God has signified his will to us, partly by absolute gifts and promises,
and partly by conditional: that such there are, he that denies, must deny much
of the Scripture. Christ was absolutely given to fallen mankind for a Redeemer;
and so was the Conditional Law, or Covenant of Grace; and many other mercies
But he has made and recorded a conditional Gift of Christ, as in special
Union, (to be our Head,) and of Pardon and Salvation.

8. It is Christ's stated Constitution, that [he that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved, and be that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16.
16. That if thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy
heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: for with the
heart man believes (Christ's resurrection) unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto Salvation, Rom, 10. That except you repent you
shall all perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. That men must repent, and be baptized, for the
remission of sins, Acts 2. 38. And repent and be converted, that their sins may
be blotted out, Acts 3. 19. So, Rev. 22. 14. Matt. 6. 14, 15. Ezekiel. 33. 14, 16.
1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of the
Life that now is, and of that which is to come.] Call these Laws, or Covenants,
or what you will, we are agreed that all this is the word of God.

9. These terms of life and death are the rule of our practices, and our
expectations, by which we must live, and by which we shall be judged: and
therefore we may truly say that they are Christ's Law. And they are God's
signified determination of the conditions of life and death, and his donation
of our right to Christ, Pardon and Life, is contained herein; and therefore
this may truly be called Christ's Testament and Covenant, in several respects.

10. Though all duties be prescribed by God's Law, and so each Precept is a
material part; yet formally or specifically the Laws to which these material
parts belong, must be distinguished by the distinct conditions of life and
death.

11. God has made more Promises, Donations and Covenants, than one or two;
which must not be confounded: 1. His Law and Covenant made to and with man in
innocence is one. 2. And his Law and Covenant made to and with Christ, as
Mediator, is another. 3. And his absolute promise of a Savior to the World,
with the conditional promise or Law of Grace conjunct, was the first edition of
another. And the Gospel, as after the incarnation promulgate, was a more
perfect edition of it: (to pass by Abraham's Covenant of Peculiarity, and the
Mosaical Law, as such.)

12. Though Christ be promised in one of these, and be God's antecedent gift,
he may nevertheless be the Author of another, (and so far the foundation,) as
well as the meritorious cause.

13. That may be of free Grace which is merited by Christ; yea, and that which
is annexed to the Evangelical worthiness of a believer.

14. That may be a condition required of us, to be done by the help of Grace,
which yet is the effect of that Grace, and given us by God.

15. It is a true Covenant between God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
man, which is solemnly entered into in Baptism: And this is a Covenant of Grace,
even that proceeds purely from Grace; and of Grace, as given by God, and by
us accepted. He that will confound these various Covenants, Promises, and Laws,
on pretense of their unity, (though there is doubtless a wonderful unity of all
the parts both of God's moral (signal) means, and his physical works) shall
confound much of Theology.

16. The Law made to Adam never said [either thou or another for thee shall
obey;] but it bound man to perfect, perpetual, personal obedience.

17. Therefore that Law, as it obliged us, is not fulfilled by the obedience of
Christ, but only as far as it obliged him; nor can any man be justified by it,
as a fulfiller of it, by himself, or by another: nor did Christ fulfill it in
any other man's person, though in his stead, so far as is aforesaid.

18. The Law does not command any man since Adam, perfect, personal obedience,
as the means or condition of life; nor promise any life on such a condition as
is now naturally impossible: but though it be not repealed by God, is so far
ceased, by the cessation of the subjects capacity to be so obliged.

19. The Laws obligation of us to punishment is dispensed with, and dissolved
by a pardon purchased by our Mediator.

20. Christ's righteousness is nevertheless the meritorious cause of our
righteousness or justification, though he justify us by the instrumentality of
his donative Covenant, as giving us right to our Union, and Justification and
Life; and though our Faith and Repentance be the condition of our Title.

21. We accept two Concessions as containing that truth, which shows that we
do not much differ de re, could we more happily order our organical
conceptions: 1. That Christ's righteousness is not the formal cause of our
Justification: 2. p. 596. [Seeing the satisfaction was not made IN THE PERSON
of the offender, but his substitute; it was necessary that THE BENEFIT of
ANOTHER satisfaction should be communicated in such a way as might best please
that God whose Grace was the only motive to his acceptance of a substitute: It
is the undoubted privilege of the Giver, to dispose of his own gifts in his
own way: And it was absolutely and indispensibly necessary that the sinner
should be duly qualified to receive such transcendent favors, purchased at so
dear a rate, and fitted to return the glory to a Redeemer; which an unhumbled,
unbelieving, unconverted and unsanctified sinner could not possibly be.] He
that writes this, cannot sure much differ from me hereabouts.

But he is charitably uncharitable, when he says, [Never any man in his wits
affirmed it so, (that the righteousness of Christ is the formal cause of our
Justification.) It Is too charitable to hide that which cannot be hid, of so
great a number; whom it seems he never read (for all his Commission from all
the Systematical Divines of Germany, etc. p. 696.) And it is too uncharitable to
judge so many excellent men out of their wits. The truth is, so many speak so,
that I have been doubtful I should be smartly censured for saying otherwise.]

Forma qua justificamur est misericordia Patris and perfecta Justitia filii,
says Ant. Fayus in his Accurate Theses, Th. 60. p. 280. (And by misericordia
Patris being the form, you may see how he understood Imputation.)

The number that thus speak, are too great here to be recited: so that even the
most judicious Davenant, lest he should go out of the road, was fain to make
this the Theses to be proved by him; Imputatam Christi obedientiam esse causam
formalem justificationis nostrae, probatur; Cap. 28. p. 362. etc. de Instit.
habit. But let none turn this to our reproach, nor take all these for mad; for
it is but an unapt name, and by him and many others soundly meant: for the
greater part of these Divines say but that Imputatio Justitiae Christi and
Remissio peccatorum are the form, not of Justification, as in us, but as it is
Actus Justificantis, (as Altingius, Maresius, Sharpius, Bucanus, Spanhemius,
Nigrinus, Sohnius, Beumler, and many others: And Paraeus, Joh. Crocius de
Justif. and many more expressly deny Christ's righteousness to be the formal
cause: And I believe that all they that assert it, mean as the rest, though
they speak incautelously and unaptly.

And what they mean by [Imputation,] let Davenant speak, ib. c. 27. p. 359.
[Imputantur quando illorum intuitus and respectus valent nobis ad aliquem
effectum, aeque ac si a nobis, aut in nobis essent, -- siquis indignus aut
ignavus ob paternam virtutem and merita erga rempublicam, in gratiam regis
admittatur, -- gratum and nobilitatum dicamus per and propter Imputationem
virtutis paternae.] This is Bradshaw's sense, but yet the similitude falls
short.

So Altingius states the Question; Loc. Com. part. 2. p. 679. [An justificatio
consistaet in Imputatione Justitiae Christi, hoc est in Imputationae Justitiae
per Christum acquisitae?] And what Protestant will deny this?

And Maresius (with him) says, [Cum Paulo justitiae Imputatio and peccatorum
remissio idem sint, prout nullum est discrimen inter satisfactionem Christi and
illius meritum, non est necesse subtilius inter haec duo scrupulose
distinguere, cum remissio sit peccatorum tum commissionis, tum omissionis and
per illam jus plenum ad vitam aeternam habeamus.] (But this needs somewhat
more I think,) Loc. 11. p. 284.

And the description of the effect shows what the Imputation is, which
Maresius truly thus describes, Exeg. Art. 23. p. 326, 327. Transit reatu
(peccatum orig.) ut non amplius imputetur; adhaeret quidem ei inseparabiliter
Reatus potentialis sive in actu primo; ut sonat intrinsecum meritum poenae; sed
ablatus est Actualis, sive quoad actum secundum, ut sonat jus and voluntatem
Dei de paena illa adhuc exigenda: N. B.

Thysius in synopsi Leidens. Disp. 33. p. 413. says, [Mirum hic videri non
debet Christi justitiam; non meritoriae solum and materialis, imo and Formalis
causae rationem habere, cum id fiat diversi mode, nempe qua illa est, propter
quod, in quo, seu ex quo, and per quod justificamur.] So he takes Christ's
righteousness to be all three, (the meritorious, material, and formal cause of
our Justification.)

De nomine, I add as to our Author: 1. I hope few will follow him, in calling
the Decrees of God, the Covenant, and confounding Election and the Covenant in
Constitution. For my part, I will not.

2. Constitution signifies, 1. actum Constituentis; 2. more usually passively,
statum seu rem constitutam: God's Eternal Purpose is not properly the Covenant
in Constitution in either sense.

3. God's Eternal Decree is nothing but his Essence (for there is nothing in
God but God, and nothing but God eternal) denominated, as related to its
connoted object, (which from eternity was nothing.) And the Covenant in
Constitution is not God, nor shall be by me so called.

4. Nor will I call the whole execution of God's Election by Christ, the
Covenant in Execution; nor any part of it but that which Scripture so calls.

5. I grant him that (...) is usually taken for a divine disposition and
constitution: but that is not merely in God's Decree, but (as Grotius has at
large opened,) (Praef. ad Annot. in Evang.) as it is God's signal revealed
determination of the terms of life and death; or as it is a Law and a Covenant
on God's part imposed on us, before we consent. And Jer. 33. 20. does not call
God's mere Decree, his Covenant; (but his created course and law of nature.)

6. He that will but try the Texts which his Concordance refers him to, and
cannot find a multitude of places where the word [Covenant] is taken for
somewhat else than God's Decrees, and their general Execution, even for a Law
with its premiant and penal sanction, and for a free donation or promise, which
yet has its proper conditions, as the moralis dispositio recipientium; and
that cannot find diverse such Covenants made, by God, with Christ and us, that
are really distinct, and not to be confounded, must not expect that I here
trouble other Readers with such a task as his conviction.

7. I fully agree, that Christ's righteousnrss is fitly called, both the
meritorious and material cause of our Righteousness or passive Justification:
(Though I lately read one contending that it cannot be both.) For we mean but
that it is that Matter or Thing which meriteth it.

The First Part: OF THE Nature, Relations, Knowledge AND DECREES OF GOD; AND OF
FREE WILL AND PROVIDENCE, As the Objects thereof. Such selected Verities as are
needful to reconcile the common Differences about Predestination, Providence,
Grace and Free Will, between the Synodists and Arminians, Calvinists and
Lutherans, Dominicans and Jesuits, etc. By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevill Simmons at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXV.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. 1. WHAT Knowledge of God is here to be expected, Page 1. Sect. 2. Of
man's Soul as the Glass or Image in which God must be seen, p. 3. Sect. 3. The
several inadequate Conceptions which together make up the most exact and
orderly Knowledge of God, p. 4. Sect. 4. The Relations and Denominations of
Gods Active Power, Knowledge and Will, as to the Creatures, p. 6. Sect. 5. Of
Futurity, and the pretended Eternal Causes of it, and Gods Knowledge of it, p.
8. Sect. 6. Of the Co-existence of the Creature with God in Eternity, and of
Gods Knowledge of them as existent, p. 13. Sect. 7. Of the presumptions and
uncertainties of many Scholastic Disputes about Gods Knowledge, which should
moderate our censures of Dissenters in such matters, and check our sinful
curiosity, p. 15. Sect. 8. More of Gods knowing things future, and of
Permission of sin, p. 24. Sect. 9. Of Predetermination, Universal Causation,
Humane Power, and the Nature of Liberty of Will: Distinguished in a Table, p.
27. Sect. 10. Of Natural and Moral Power and Impotency: Their difference, p.
36. Sect. 11. More of the same; and Whether God bind man to Impossibilities? p.
39. Sect. 12. Of Scientia Media, p. 42. Sect. 13. Of the Will and Decrees of
God in general. Their simplicity and diversity, supposed priority and
posteriority. Of Negations, of Nolitions and Volitions of Negatives, etc. p.
45. Sect. 14. Several distinctions of Gods Will explained, 1. Positive acts,
and non-agency. 2. Positive and Negative as to the object. 3. Positive and
Oppositive, Volitions and Nolitions. 4. Immanent and Transient. 5. Efficiently
Transient and Objectively Transient. 6. Natural and Free. 7. Efficient and
Permissive. 8. Beneplaciti and signi de eventu and de debito, Decretive and
Legislative. Where the true nature of Laws is opened. 10. Absolute and
Conditional. 11. Effectual and uneffectual. 12. Antecedent and Consequent, p.
49. Sect. 15. Whether Gods Decrees must be said to be diversified and proved,
according to the order of Intention, or Execution. Whether God do intendere
finem? and what is his End. The Order and Objects opened, p. 57. Sect. 16. What
Election and Reprobation are? The order of the Decrees called Reprobation, and
of the Objects: Of Negations of Decree, p. 66. An Additional Explication of
Divine Nolitions, p. 76. Sect. 17. Whether God Will, Decree or Cause Sin. Five
Acts of God in and about Sin. What Sin is. Many ways God can cause the same
thing that the sinner causes, and so fulfill his Decrees, without Willing or
Causing the Sin. Objections answered. God freely (not idly or impotently)
restrains his own possible operations, sometimes that he do not such or such
an act at all, and sometime that he do but so much toward it, and no more.
Whether God be ever Causa partialis? p. 84. Sect. 18. A Confutation of Dr.
Twisses Digress. 5. li. 2. sect. 1. Vindic. Gratiae, where he asserteth that
God Wills the existence of Sin, and that sins are a medium sua natura sum
and unice conducibile to the Glorification of his Mercy and Justice, p. 92.
Sect. 19. The same Doctrine in Rutherford de Providentia confuted, Whether
things be good, because God wills them, or willed by him because good?
resolved. Whether there were eternal rations boni and mali. Dr. Field
vindicated, p. 106. Sect. 20. The old Doctrine of Augustine, Prosper and
Fulgentius, thought by some Jesuits too rigid, but indeed Conciliatory, (for
absolute Election to Faith, and so to Salvation, and for no reprobating Decree,
but only of Punishment for Sin foreseen, but not decreed.) Prosper ad Cap.
Gall. Sentent. translated, p. 115. Sect. 21. The sum of Prospers Answer to
Vincent. 16. Object. p. 118. Sect. 22. Fulgentius words to the same sense, p.
121. Sect. 23. The healing Doctrine and Concessions of many called Calvinists,
of the Synod of Dort, Pet. Molinaeus, etc. p. 124. Sect. 24. And of Petr. a
Sancto Joseph, Suarez, Ruiz, etc. on the other side, especially Bellarmines at
large, and others, p. 127.
ERRATA.
PART 1. page 10. l. 38. in marg. for Reason Being r. Relation being: p. 24. l.
25. r. those Causes: l. 26. r. first Case: p. 27. l. 2. r. Of predetermination.

Reader, Pain and Greater business forbad me to gather the Errata: some are
gathered by a Friend out of the first Book; many more I must leave to your
ingenuity: I see in the Premonition p. 4. l. 22. for [Mr. W. [Mr. D.] l. 47.
for [Armatus] [Annatus]. Also Dial. 11. p. 231. l. 30. r. [refuse]: Dial. 13.
p. 291. l. 13. for [not] r. [done].

Catholic Theology: The First BOOK. PACIFYING PRINCIPLES Collected from the
common Notices of Nature, the certain Oracles of GOD in the Holy Scriptures,
and the common Consent of Christians. For the RECONCILING OF THE
CHURCH-DIVIDING and DESTROYING CONTROVERSIES, especially about PREDESTINATION,
PROVIDENCE, GRACE and FREE WILL, REDEMPTION, JUSTIFICATION, FAITH, MERIT,
WORKS, CERTAINTY OF SALVATION, PERSEVERANCE, and many others. In Three Parts.
I. Of Gods Nature, Knowledge, Decrees (and Providence about Sin, with Man's
Free Will, as the Objects of the former.) II. Of Gods GOVERNMENT and MORAL
Works. III. Of Gods Operations on Man's Soul.
By RICHARD BAXTER, An earnest Desirer of the UNITY, LOVE and PEACE of
Christians; For endeavoring of which, he expects with resolved Patience,
still to undergo the Censures, Slanders and Cruelties, of IGNORANCE, PRIDE and
MALICE from all that are possessed by the Wisdom and Zeal, which are from
beneath, Earthly, Sensual and Devilish, the Causes of Confusion, and every evil
work, James 3. 14, 15, 16.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevill Simmons at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXV.

The First Part: OF THE NATURE, KNOWLEDGE, WILL AND DECREES of GOD, As far as
is needful to the intended CONCILIATION and CONCORD.
SECT. I. Of our Knowledge of God, as here attainable.
THough it be about the Knowledge, Will and Decrees of God, that our
Controversies are agitated, yet because the consequent Verities are scarce ever
well understood, without the understanding of the Antecedents, out of which the
Consequents arise, and without the just order, place and respect which the
later have unto the former, and unless things be understood in their true
Method; I will therefore expose my self to the obloquy of those, who will call
it Over-doing, so far as to premise somewhat of the Deity it self; But not what
is necessary to the full explication of the Divine Attributes (as we are
capable) as must be in a Method of Theology (which I have attempted
elsewhere); but only so much as lies under our Controverted Subject: And when
I have done that, I shall leave the rest.

These. 1. To Know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, is Life
Eternal. John 17. 3. Bradward. l. 1. c. 11. p. 198. The first necessary
incomplex Principle is God, and the first complex simply is of God, Deus est,
etc. But yet it is not to us the primum cognitum.


2. To Exodus 20.
know GOD is to know his Being, Nature, and Relations: For though those
Relations that are to Man be not essential to his Divine Nature, yet are they
essentially contained in the signification of the name [GOD] as he is the
object of our Faith, and Religion. For to be OUR GOD does speak his Relations
to us, as well as his Nature; As the name KING and FATHER does among men.

3. We neither have, nor can have here in flesh any one proper formal
Conception of the Divine Nature, that is formally suited to the truth in the
object: But only Metaphorical or Analogical Conceptions; borrowed from things
better known.

4. Yet nothing beyond sense (at least) is so certainly known as GOD, so far as
we can reach, though nothing be less perfectly or more defectively known, or
less comprehended. Even as we know nothing Visible more certainly than the Sun,
and yet comprehend nothing Visible less.

5. It is not true which many great Metaphysicians assert, that the Quiddity of
God is totally unknown to us: For then it could not be life eternal to know
him; nor would a mere Negative knowledge cause in us a sufficient Positive
Love, or Joy or Trust, etc. But to know that we cannot know him, would but
infer that we cannot Love him: For we Love not an unknown Good.

6. Nor is it true that Pet. Hurtado de Mendoza (in fine Disput.) and some
others say, that the Notions of Life and Intellect are all that we have of the
Quiddity of God, and that the Divine Will is not a Quidditative notion.

7. God is here seen in the Glass of his Works, with the Revelation of his Word
and Spirit. And from these works we must borrow our conceptions. The doubt is,
How Imperfect works can notify the perfect God: And the Schoolmen manage it as
an insuperable difficulty, Whether God could have made the World, or any thing
better than it is? If you will pardon me for making that easy, which they make
ineffable, I answer, Goodness is Primitive (that is, God) or Derivative, which
only is in Creatures: This last is formally Good, as it is Related as Conform
to Gods Will, the Prime Good, as its Rule: To be a Deo Volitum is the formal
notion of Created Good. And so the world is perfect, and can be no better,
because it is as God wills it: And yet God can make particular creatures
better to themselves, and to one another; He can make any man more wise, more
holy, etc. But bonum sibi is no further properly bonum, than it is Volitum a
Deo: Therefore God can make the world far otherwise than it is; and yet then it
would be no Better. For still it would be but as God willed it to be: So that
the matter and private Goodness might alter; but the true form of Goodness
would be still just the same as now.


8. Therefore though the Thing intended when we speak of God, be transcendently
and only in Him, and not in the Creature, yet the first use of the words is to
signify something in the Creature. And therefore the Creature is the famosius
analogatum, though Nothing to God.

9. In the use of these notions we must still profess that we apply them to God
no farther than to signify his perfections: And all words must be as little as
may be used of him in strict disputes, which imply imperfection, when better
may be had; But the highest are to be preferred.

10. And we must still profess, that we take none of these words to be formal
proper univocal terms, lest the concealed Metaphor or impropriety occasion
false conceptions of God, and unworthy of Him; and also tempt men to run them
further by false inferences.

11. Gods Nature is most simple, undivided: And so must an adequate conception
of Him be: But Man can have no such conception of Him; but must know what he
can know of this One GOD by many partial inadequate conceptions.

12. Yet must we be very careful that these inadequate analogical Conceptions
be Orderly, and not as (I will not say how commonly) it is done by some, a
confused heap: For the Mind that so conceives of Him, greatly injureth it self
and Him, and the Tongue and Pen that so describes Him, dishonors Him: And
though the Ignorant, for whom Catechisms are written, cannot lay together a
full Scheme of the Divine Attributes in just method; yet those few which they
can understand and remember, they would as well and better understand and
remember in the true method, were they taught it, than in an heap. For Method
is a great help to understanding and memory. We would not give a Prince his
Titles so confusedly; nor draw his Picture monstrously, with the arms where the
seet should be, and the seet where the arms, or the back before, and the face
behind, unless we exposed him purposely to scorn. Every man knows the
difference between a Clock or Watch in order, and the same in confused parcels
on a heap; and between an Army and a Rout, etc. Shall Order be the beauty of
the World and every Creature in it; and shall we deny it only to the God of
Order? I crave the pardon of Divines for entreating them to amend this in their
Doctrine, but especially in their Catechisms, yea, in their Understandings
first.

SECT. II. Of man's Soul as the Glass in which we must see God.
13. THe principal Glass in which we must see God, in his Nature; among all his
Creatures here, is the Soul of man; which is said to be made after the Image of
God; And which being our selves, we can best perceive.

14. The Soul of Man bears Gods Image in three parts of it, or respects: 1.
In its Nature it is the Image of the Divine Nature: 2. In its Rectitude it is
the Image of the Divine Holiness and perfection: 3. In our Dominion over the
inferior Creatures, and eminently, in Superiors over Subjects, it has the
Image of his Majesty and Supereminence.

15. I We have no one adequate Conception of the Nature of our own souls; but
must think of them by partial inadequate Conceptions. And that by many (not
feigned or forced, but) real and necessary Trinaries in Unity.

16. And first the Three Inadequate Conceptions of its Being are the Generical,
the Differencial, and the Proper-inseparable Accidental, viz. that it is, 1.
Substantialitas Generica, is loco materia: Aegid. Romans says Quodl. 1. q. 9. p.
18. Non est materia in Angelis: been tamen est aliquid loco materia: quia non
sunt Actus purus, sed habent aliquam potentialitatem admixtam: Unde in li. de
Causis scribitur, quod Intelligentia habtant suam (...), i. e. suum materiale.
Et hoc forte volunt illi qui in Angelis Materiam ponunt; Cum ipsi dicant
materiam illam non esse ejusdem rationis cum materia corporalium: Solum ergo in
verbis videntur discordare a nobis: Quia and nos ibi aliquod materiale ponimus.
(N. B.)
(...), Vita, Proprietatibus suis praedita. The first notion is substantia
abstracte a forma concepta: The second is the Conceptus formatis: The third its
Accidents, not acquired, but natural. By LIFE I understand not Relatively only,
that it is the Life of the body or Compositum; But essentially as in its nature
it is Life it self, or a Living substance formally, as well as the Living
Principle in the man. The word [Spirit] as commonly used by us, comprehends
all this; but what a Spirit is, we know but by these partial Conceptions.

17. To pass by the Three Vital Faculties, Vegetative, Sensitive and
Intellective, (because I describe it but as the Speculum Deitatis). 2. This One
Formal Principle, LIFE, as it is man's soul, must be it self known by us by
these Three inadequate Conceptions, as making up the Form of the soul, 1. Vital
Activity (or Power), 2. An Intellect, 3. A Will. See Aureolus in 2. d. 9. that
in separated substances (Angels) there is a Motive power beside the Intellect
and Will; with whom Suarez and many others do agree.


18. 3. And the EXISTENCE of these Formal Principles cannot justly be
understood by us, but in these three gradual inadequate or partial Conceptions,
1. As in Potentia-activa seu Virtute: 2. As in Actu immanente: 3. As in Action
transeunte: (Not as it is in Passo, but as it is Status vel Modus Agentis.)

19. II. The Moral or Holy Image of God on the soul, is the Holy Perfection or
Qualification of these Faculties, as they are In Virtute by Holy Dispositions;
As in Actu immanente, by Holy Intrinsic Acts and Habits; And as to Action ad
extra, by a Holy Rectitude: And this Image consists in the souls Holy
Vivacity or Activity, and its Wisdom and Goodness, or its Holy Liveliness,
Light and Love.

20. III. The Image of Gods Majesty or Supereminence consists in 1. The
Sub-propriety which we have in Inferior Creatures; 2. The Sub-government; 3.
That we are under God Their End (and Benefactors).

SECT. III. The several inadequate Conceptions which in order make up our
Knowledge of God.
21. BY the Knowledge of our own Acts we know our Powers and the Nature of our
own souls (though imperfectly); And by the Knowledge of our souls, we know the
nature of other Intellectual Spirits; And by the Knowledge of our selves and
them, and the Scripture expressions of his Attributes, we know so much of God
as we can here know. And accordingly must speak of Him, or be silent: For we
have no higher notions, than such as are thus Analogical; expressing that which
is in God in an unconceivable eminency and transcendency, by words which first
signify that which is formally in the soul (as is said).

22. And so we must conceive of God by all these following inadequate
Conceptions, confessing the impropriety, but having no better. I. The Essence
of God, who in Scripture is called in two words [An Infinite Spirit] is
necessarily conceived of by these Three Conceptions: 1. (...), 2. Vita, 3.
Perfectio. The two first being the substantial Conceptus of a Spirit, and the
third that which answers to all perfective degrees, properties and accidents
in Creatures, and comprehends a multitude of Perfective Attributes: which I
express in the Abstract, being loath much to use Concretes or Adjectives of God.
Of these as the first answers to Matter in Materials, and to the Genus and
substantia abstracte sumpta in Spirits, so does the second to the Form and
Difference; when yet in God there is no Composition, or Matter.

23. II. And the Formal Conceptus [VITA] must it self be conceived of in this
Threefold inadequate Conception; 1. It is a great dispute with the Schoolmen,
Whether Gods Power be any thing but his Intellect and Will: that is, a
necessary distinct conceptus inadaequatus of God? (For he is one simple
essence.) Durand. 1. d. 38. q. 1. justly affirms it: Vasqu. in 1. Tho. q. 23.
d. 102. c. 2. says, Haec sententia no^null is recentioribus mirum in modum
probatur: yet he is against it; (though Suarez be for it). But it is partly by
misconceiving of the Potentia Vital is in man, as if it were only Executive ad
extra, or in the inferior faculties; and partly on such frivolous reasons as
tend also to a denial of his Intellection and Volition. Methinks, they that
acknowledge Gods Understanding and Will to be analogically so called (man's
being the first which the word signifies though Gods infinitely more
excellent) should on the same reason grant, that Vita and Potentia activa are
terms as applicable to God: For which denomination many reasons and cogent may
be given: And I am sure the language of the Scripture and our Creed will
warrant this conception.
Potentia-Actus, 2. Intellectus, 3. Voluntas. I call the first Potentia-Actus,
to avoid Concretes, and to signify, that as God has no Potentia Passiva, so
his Potentia-Activa is not an idle cessant Power, but in perpetual perfect Act;
and that Act is a most Powerful-Act: so that neither Potentia alone, nor Actus
alone, but both together, are our best Conception of this first Principle in
the Deity. And I take it for granted, that even in Man's soul, the
Potentia-Vitalis Activa, the Intellect and Will, are not as Thomas thought
Accidents, but the formal essence of the soul, as the Scotists and Nominals
better say; And I have largely elsewhere proved, and therefore stand not here
upon it.

24. III. And the Existence of this Divine Essence, must be known by us in this
Gradual Threefold Conception: 1. As in Virtute (vel Potentia) 2. In Actu
Immanente, 3. In Action Transeunte: Of the first I shall say no more, but what
is said before. By the second I mean Gods own most perfect Essence as Active in
it self, without extrinsick effect or object. By the third, I mean not the
Creature or the Divine Action ut recipitur in passo, or the effect: But the
Divine Essence it self in the state of Agency ad extra; which the Schools
conclude to be Eternal, though the effect be but in Time. Yet if any will call
this a free, and not a necessary state of the Divine Essence, I contend not.

25. IV. The Essential Immanent Acts of God are Three: 1. SIBI VIVERE, or to be
Essential Active Life in Himself, 2. SE INTELLIGERE, to know Himself; 3. SE
AMARE, or to be Amor sui.

26. V. The Trinity of Divine Subsistences or Persons also must be here
acknowledged; 1. The FATHER; 2. The WORD or SON; 3. The HOLY SPIRIT: Of which
the Schoolmen have said so much, (if not far too much) as that I may turn the
Reader to them.

27. I have elsewhere showed that many of them, and other Divines, do take the
Three last named Immanent Acts in God, to be the same with the Three Persons or
Subsistences; Even the Three Divine Principles (Potentia-Actus, Intellectus and
Volunt as) as in Act thus Immanently; But of these great Mysteries elsewhere.
All that I say here is, that seeing the Trinity of Divine Principles (or formal
Essentialities) and the Threefold Act, are so certainly evident to Natural
Reason it self, that no understanding person can deny them, we have no Reason
to think the Trinity of Eternal Subsistences incredible, and a thing that the
Christian faith is to be suspected for, but the quite contrary; though they are
mysteries above our reach, (as all of God is, as to a full or formal
apprehension).

28. Though God have no Real Accidents, we are fain to conceive of Him with
some Analogy to Accidents: where, 1. The Universal Conception is PERFECTION,
which comprehends all. 2. The Divine Principles considered in PERFECTION
denominate God, 1. Potentissimus, 2. Sapientissimus, 3. Optimus.

29. The Attributes of the Divine Persons are, 1. Distinguishing; viz. 1.
GENERANS, Patris: 2. GENITUS, Filii: 3. PROCEDENS, Spiritus Sancti. 2. Common
to all, such as (...), etc.

30. The particular Attributes, analogical as to Creatures, Comparate, Relative
and Negative, are very many: But yet in Order to be conceived of, and not
confusedly; which elsewhere I offer to the Readers view.

31. VI. Gods Causal Relations to his Creatures, are in General those named by
S. Paul, Romans 11. 36. OF HIM and THROUGH HIM and TO HIM are all things. And he
is, 1. The first EFFICIENT, 2. The supreme DIRIGENT, 3. The Ultimate FINAL
Cause of all things.

32. Gods EFFICIENCY is terminated, 1. On the Things in their Being, 2. In
their Action and Operation. 1. And in the first respect he is the Cause, 1. Of
their Existing Essence, 2. Of their Order, 3. Of their Goodness or Perfection:
And so he is, 1. The CREATOR, and Conserver, 2. The ORDINATOR, 3. The
BENEFACTOR of all the world.

And in the second respect, (as to Action) he is, 1. The Actor or Motor of all
things (by his Active Power) 2. The Governor of all (according to their several
Natures) (by his wisdom) 3. The Perfecter of all things in their attingency or
fruition of their proper End, (by his Goodness.)

33. VII. As to MAN in special God is now Fundamentally Related to him as his
CREATOR, his REDEEMER and his REGENERATER or SANCTIFIER; eminently ascribed
distinctly to the FATHER, SON and HOLYSPIRIT: From whence flows, NATURA,
MEDELA, SALUS, or NATURE, REDEEMING GRACE, and RENEWING GRACE (HOLINESS and
GLORY) (that is, LOVE begun here and perfected in Heaven.)

34. VIII. From CREATION there resulteth a Threefold Moral Right and Relation
of God to Man: 1. He is our Absolute OWNER or LORD to dispose of us, and Act us
by his Power. 2. He is our Supreme RECTOR, Morally to Rule us as Intellectual
free-agents, eminently by his Wisdom. 3. He is our LOVER and Ultimate END; as
he is Goodness and Love it self; To Love Him and be Loved by him perfectly for
ever, being Amantissimus and Amabilissimus in his Goodness.

35. He that leaves out any one of these Relations of God to man, (to be Our
Owner, Ruler and Lover and End) leaves out that which is Essential to Our God,
as the word is Relatively used in the Precepts and Promises of the Holy
Scripture.

SECT. IV. Of Gods Relations to the Creature and denominations (thereupon) in
his Power, Knowledge and Will.
36. THe Three Divine Essential Principles, Related to the Creature, ad extra
are denominated, 1. His Omnipotence, 2. His Omniscience or Knowledge of them,
3. His Volition and Love of them. He who is Potentissimus, perfectly Powerful
in Act, in Himself, is denominated Omnipotent, because he can do all things ad
extra which belong to That Gods Power is Infinite, quia est ipsa Infinita
Essentia, is past doubt: But whether it may be called Infinite, as respecting
outward objects, is disputed: And some prove the affirmative, by asserting
Infinite Objects: But Gregor. Ar. n. 1. d. 43. q. 2. has reasons too subtle
to be here recited: One of them Vasq. uses in 1. Tho. q. 25. d. 103. c. 2. and
disp. 104. Vid. opiniones Gabriel. Scoti and Thomae de ratione nominis
Omnipotentia Divinae.
Power: 2. And he who is Intellectus se Intelligens ad intra, is denominated
Omniscient or Knowing all Creatures, from the exterior objects: 3. And he who
is Voluntas se Volens, or Amor se Amans ad intra, is also denominated willing
of exterior things.

37. But (by the way) how the Creature is called exterior to God who is
Essentially every where and in all, and how God is not a Part of Universal
Being, and how God and the Creature are no more than God alone, is elsewhere
somewhat explained, but transcendeth man's Understanding to comprehend.

38. Gods Transient Acts are of two sorts: 1. Effectively Transient (as
Creation, Regeneration, etc.) which do cause somewhat without. 2. Objectively
only Transient; which cause nothing, but suppose the Object.

39. It is a dreadful thing to be over-bold, rash and presumptuous, in speaking
and asserting any thing without clear proof, of Gods Knowledge and Will;
especially to reduce them to all the Modes and Methods of a man, even as to the
order of his Acts: seeing we are forced to confess, that even Intellection and
Volition are spoken of God with exceeding great impropriety, D'Orb^llis 1. d.
40. inquit [^icet in Deo non sit proprie Habitus, est tamen ibl aliquid
intellectum a nobis per modum habitus, siquidem scientia in nobis est Habitus
ad cognoscendum, sicut Virtus est habitus ad operandum. Cognitio Divina cum
semper maneat, congrue signatur per modum habitus.]
and man's Acts which are the prius significatum, are further below Gods, than a
Worm is below a Man. Therefore were it not that the presumption of the Schools
and Polemical writers, has made that Necessary as Defensive, which else would
not be so, I should scarce dare to say this little following:

40. I. The Power of God is denominated Relatively Omni-potency in three
instants to Three several Objects: 1. In the first instant, as to All things
which belong to Power: And so God can do all things, which are hence called
Possible. 2. In the second instant, to All things meet or Congruous to the
Divine Intellect to be willed and done: And so we say, that God can do All that
is meet to be done, and nothing that is unmeet. 3. In the third instant (of
reason) as to All things which he wills to do: And so we say, that God can do
whatsoever he will do. And so Possibility has various senses.

41. II. Gods Intellect is Relatively denominated Omniscient, in respect ^eid.
Romans quodl. 3. q. 3. says, That Gods speculative knowledge is before his
Velle; but his Practical determined ad o^^s is after as we must conceive of it.
to three sorts of Objects also in three instants: 1. In the first instant he
knows all Possibles, in his own Omnipotence: For to know things to be
Possible, is but to know what He can do.

2. In the second Instant he Knows all things, as Congruous, eligible and
Volenda, fit to be Willed: And this out of the perfection of his own wisdom:
which is but to be perfectly Wise, and to know what perfect Wisdom should offer
as eligible to the Will.

3. In the third instant he knows All things willed by him as such (as
Volita): which is but to know his own Will, and so that they will be.

42. In all these instances we suppose the Things themselves not to have yet
any Being: But speak of God as related to Imaginary beings, according to the
common speech of men.

43. These therefore are not properly Transient Acts of God; because it is but
Himself that is the object indeed, viz. His own Power, Wisdom and Will, though
it be de creaturis in that which is called his Idea's.

44. It is usual with Divines to ascribe Idea's to the Divine Intellect, after
the manner of men, against which I quarrel not, but am my self afraid of
presumption.

45. From what is said, you may see, that the Common School distinction of all
Gods Knowledge, into scientia simplicis Intelligentiae, and purae Visionis, is
not accurate, and the terms are too arbitrary and dark to notify the thing
intended; and that the scientia media added does not mend the matter: And that
a fitter distinction is plain and obvious.

46. III. Also the Will of God as Related to things not yet existent, has in
several instants a threesold object, (as we may conceive of God after the
manner of men.)

1. The Possibility of things, which God is said to Will, in Willing his own
Power as respecting them.

2. The Congruity, Goodness and Eligibility of things, as in his own Knowledge;
which is but to Will the perfection of his own Understanding.

3. The Future existence of things Good and Eligible, to be produced in their
fittest season.

47. They that say God can do no more than he does, must mean only in the
second and third instants or sense; or speak very presumptuously, if not
blasphemously.

48. That God does not all that he Can do, is no note of imperfection in his
Wisdom or Will, but is from the perfection of both.

49. Nor does it hence follow that he has either a Vain or an Unactive Power.
For his Power is his perfection, and therefore not Vain: And it is ever
essentially Active in himself, as he is the Living God: And was neither Vain
nor Unactive when there was yet no Creature.

50. Gods Power does not therefore Create or operate ad extra merely as Power;
For then it should do so ad ultimum posse, and from Eternity: But as it
Voluntarily puts forth the effect.

51. Gods Knowledge merely as Knowledge, or as the Knowledge of Congruities,
Future things, yea, or things Existent, is not Efficient, nor yet as it
concurreth with his Will ut finis (or his Will of Complacency;) But only as it
concurreth with his Efficient Will.

52. Gods Knowledge and Will effect nothing ad extra, but by and with his
Active Power, as efficient.

53. Therefore Bradwardine and many other Schoolmen, do not congruously say,
that Gods mere Volition without any Effective Power is all his Causing Influx:
Unless they thrust two Conceptions into one word, and mean a powerful active
Volition. For, 1. By the same reason that we must ascribe to God Intellection
and Volition, we must also ascribe Active Power; These being three principles
in his Image. 2. And in Man Mere Willing effects not. 3. And they that say God
wills ut eveniat peccatum ipso non efficiente, sed permittente, suppose that
he wills something which he effects not. But against them in this Suarez
and others have said enough.

54. Though Gods Nature have no Real Accidents, but simple essential
perfection, yet Relations, or Relative Accidents are not to be denied of him.
For indeed (as Ockam has copiously proved) That Relations have no entity extra
intellectum prae^er absolutum, Ockam in many disputes in his Quod lib. shows.
Relations have no real Entity, or are nothing besides the Absoluta and the Act
of Reason about them. Relation is but comparabilitas.
Relation is but rerum Comparabilitas, which Reason uses by actual comparing
conceptions of them.

55. Though the Thomists say, that man only is Related to God, An Relationes
reales sint in Deo ad Creaturas, e. g. Creator, Dominus, etc. Affirmatur ab
Ockam and Gabr. 1. d. 30. q. 5. Durand. q. 3. Marsil. 1. q. 32. a. 1. Greg. Ar.
1. d. 28. q. 3. a. 1. Pet. Hurtad. Negatur a Thomistis: sed est Lis de nomine
ut notat Vasquez in 1 Tho. q. 13. a. 7. Nullum quippe fundamentum de novo est
ex part Dei, sed creaturae: Ideo Thomistae ^ocant Relatione^ rationis.
relatione rationis, and not God to man, yet Pet. Hurtado de Mendoza and others
strongly assert, that God himself has not only Relationes rationis and
Transcendental, but predicamental Relations also; as Creator, Dominus, Rector,
etc. which the Scriptures constantly ascribe to him; And which indeed are no
way notes of Imperfection. For if it be no Imperfection in God to Create,
Redeem, Sanctify, Rule, etc. it can be none to be related to us as a Creator,
Redeemer, Sanctifier, Ruler, etc. For it is nothing more.

56. As Gods Immanent Acts are his Essence, but not simply as Essence; but as
Essence in the distinct Acts of self-living, self-knowing, self-loving, related
to Himself: so his Actions ad extra are his Essence as Related to the Creature,
but not simply as Essence, but as Essence-Acting.

57. Gods Will as merely Ordinant or Dirigent effects only Order and
Direction, but not the Substances ordered.

58. His Will qua Finis is not Efficient. Bonavent. in 1. d. 45. q. 2. Resol.
Deus non dicitur Omni-volens, sicut Omnipotens and Omnisciens, cum Voluntas
abstrahat and a ratione actualitatis, and a ratione causae. See his plain
explication of it. Vide Alliac. in princip. 1. At e contra Bradward. l. 1. c.
10. cor. page 197. But not accurately enough; though it seems but lis de nomine.


59. His Will qua Finis is his Will as Pleased by being Fulfilled.

60. All that is Good is Pleasing to God, and so is the final fulfilling of his
Will.

61. God wills efficiently all that is Good, which comes to pass; For all
Good that is ever done, is done by him, though not by him only.

62. But he wills the various production of things, as they are variously
produced; some solely by Himself, and some by Creatures and means; some
necessarily by necessitated agents, and some freely by free agents.

63. As Gods Efficient Will causes the thing willed (whether substance,
accidents, rule, order, etc.) so his Final Will or Complacence supposes the
Pleasing thing in Being: That is, If it be the Thing it self, that he is
Pleased in, it is supposed Existent; If the thing as Past, it is supposed Past,
or that it was existent; If the thing as future, or fore-known, or fore-willed,
it is not the thing it self that is in that instant properly said to Please
him, but his own Knowledge and Will concerning it: Though we use to call this,
The Thing in esse Cognito aut Volito.

SECT. V. Of Futurity and its pretended Causes.
64. THe Possibility and Futurity of things, are not accidental notions, or
relations of the things themselves; but are termini diminuentes, Of Futurity,
see Bonaventures distinction of futur. quoad successionem temporis, and quoad
ordinem temporalis ad aeternum secundum consecutionem with the application, in
1. did. 38. dub. 2.

Vid. Blank de Concord. lib. and decret. 1. n. 54. that futurity is nothing but
respectus rationis, and needs no cause, but that of the thing future.


as to the Things, and are spoken of Nothing. To say that a Thing May be, or
Will be, which now is not, is to say that now it is nothing.

65. Nothing is no Effect; and therefore has no Cause: Therefore things
Possible and Future as such, have no Cause.

66. Therefore Possibility and Futurity as they are taken for any attribute or
accident or mode of Creatures, as objects, are mistaken; Though they may be
Conceptions in the mind of Creatures, concerning that which is not.

67. Therefore also God is no Cause of any Eternal Possibility or futurity.

68. Therefore the Possibility and futurity of things (conceived as an effect)
has no Eternal Cause: For there is nothing Eternal but God.

69. Though man Imagine Things which are not, and then think that they Can be,
and Will be, because that Is, which Can or Will Cause them, and thence frame
notions and names of Nothing, and call it Possible and Future; we must be very
fearful and not unreverent and rash, in ascribing such a dance or lusus of
notions to God, unless as used with great impropriety after the manner of weak
man.

70. God knows his own Power, Knowledge and Will; And so knows what he can
do, what he knows to be eligible, and what he will do. And if any will call
this knowledge of God, by the name of the Possibility or Futurity of the thing
known, or will denominate, Nothing, (as an Imaginary something) as Possible and
Future, relatively from Gods Power, Will or Knowledge, Let them remember, 1.
That Nothing has no relation. 2. That properly they should but give the
denomination to that which is, that is, to Gods Power, Will and Knowledge, and
say God Can, e. g. make a World, or Will do it; and not to that which is not:
And when they say that e. g. the world is eternally possible or future, they
can justly mean no more, but that God can and will make it. 3. And that this is
but lis de nomine, and not a real difference (whether futurition be thus from
Eternity).

71. And especially let them remember that nothing in God is Caused: There are
no effects in God: Therefore as there is nothing from Eternity but God, and
therefore possibility and futurition must needs be names of God himself, or
some Divine perfection or conception (which is himself) if they be said to be
eternal; so such Possibility and futurity can have no eternal cause. For God
has no Cause, nor any thing in God.

72. If the Futurity of sin must have an eternal Cause, then God causes
Pennot. l. 3. c. 14. cites many Fathers saying, that things are not future
because fore-known, but fore-known because future: And Augustine, Greg. M.
Boethius, Ans^lm, Lomb. and Aquin. saying the contrary. And he cites the four
ways of the Schoolmens reconciling them, and concludes that in regard of the
Creatures being, the first is true; and in regard of free acts, the second. I
think that in regard of sin neither is true. Unless [Because] signify only
rationem denominationis objectivam; And even if so it is dubious, whether they
be not simultaneous as Relations are.
the futurity of all sin: But that is not so. For none is the Cause that sin
will be, but he that (mediately or immediately) causes the being of it when it
is.

73. Imagine (per possibile vel impossible) that a thousand years hence a free
created agent (that can do otherwise) will cause such an act; It may be
denominated Future without the taking in of any antecedent cause into the
notion. It is called Future because it will be, and not because there is at
present existent any cause from whence it will be mediately or immediately.

74. Though Futurity be Nothing, yet this Proposition is something, [This or
that Will be.] And to know the futurity of a thing, is most properly to know
the truth of that proposition [It will be.]

75. God knows not by Propositions (for that is the imperfect mode of man)
But he knows Propositions when they are existent, as humane instruments or
conceptions: And therefore he knows the truth of all true propositions of
futurity.

76. What man knows by Propositions, God knows otherwise by a more
transcendent perfect, but incomprehensible way; Therefore God knows that
every thing will be, which will be.

77. There were ^o Propositions from Eternity: (For man that uses them, was
not: And God uses them not, though he know them as used by man): Therefore
this proposition [Hoc futurum est] was not* from Eternity; Because non entis
non sunt affectiones.

78. But if there had been such Propositions from Eternity, as, [The world will
be made, Christ will be incarnate, etc.] they would have been true: And so the
eternal Futurity of things, as commonly disputed of, can be nothing but the
Eternal Verity of a Proposition de futuritione, which was no proposition
(because then there was none); only in time man's brain Imagines or feigneth
that then there might have been Creatures, who might have used propositions de
futuritione rerum, which if they had, they would have been true.

79. All Verity is either, 1. Rei, 2. Conceptus, 3. Expressionis; And 1. Ubi
non est Res, ibi non est Veritas Rei: The thing which was not from Eternity,
was not a True Thing from Eternity. 2. The Divine knowledge that such and such
things will be, was True from Eternity, by an incomprehensible way above
propositions. 3. If there had been any Propositions Mental or Verbal de rerum
futuritione, they would have been true. And this is all that can truly be said
of the Eternity of futurition.

80. Only this being added, that so far as Gods will was the first Cause
determining of any thing that will be, so far he was eternally the Cause of the
truth of this proposition, Hoc erit, when such a proposition shall be.

81. But where Gods Will is not the first cause of the Thing which will be,
there it is not his causing the truth of the proposition that is the cause that
it will be; (Though his Knowledge be a medium from whence it may Logically be
inferred that it will be.)

82. Moreover, whatever is from eternity, must be Res, or modus rei, or
Relatio. But from Eternity, there is no Res futura, no modus rei futurae, no
Relatio rei futurae. I know that the Judicious Greg. Arim. 1. d. 28. q. 3. page
122, etc. asserteth these four things: 1. That aliquid potest reserri realiter
ad non ens: 2. Non ens potest realiter referri ad ens: 3. Quod Deus
aeternaliter referebatur ad Creaturam quae non erat: 4. Quod Deus realiter
reserlur ad creaturam ex tempore. And his reasons are very considerable for
three of them: But as to the second which concerns our case he fails. For
1. his first reason, that relations are ever mutual or convertible, I deny his
proof as vain, as to the reality of the relation. 2. And that res non existens
is causa I deny: Fuit causa, non est. 2. And remember that he instanceth only
in things as caused or foreknown: Sin therefore can be called future but as
fore-known. 3. Remember that his Master Ockam has often (in Quodl.) proved that
Relations are Nothing, besides the quid absolution, and Reason Being nothing
but Comparabilitas, all is but to say, that God fore-knew what would be, and
therefore had there been such a proposition from Eternity as [This will be] it
had been true.

Vid. Aquin. 1. p. d. 38. q. 1. a. 1. Bonav. ib. a. 1. q. 1. and 2. Durand. 1.
d. 38. q. 1. Scot. ib. q. 1. Cajet. Bannes, Rip. Zumel. Nazar. Molin. Vasqu.
Arrub. etc. 1. p. q. 14. a. 8. Greg. Valent. 1. p. d. 1. q. 14. punc. 5. s. 3.
Alvar. de Auxil. disp. 16. Snarez de A^xil. l. 1. c. 13. Ledesm. de A^xil. dis.
2. Ruiz de scient. d. 15, 16, 33, 36, etc.


For non entis non est Modus, vel Relatio. If you add that it is Denominatio
extrin eca, I answer it must be then God himself only, as denominated Knowing,
or Willing that This or that shall be, (which is not properly the futurity of
the thing). For otherwise it must be a denomination of Nothing.

83. Obj. The Object is before the Act of Knowledge. Therefore a thing is
future before God knows it to be future.

Answ. 1. To be future is a word whose sound deceives men, as if it signified
some being; which is not so. 2. God cannot know that a thing will be, unless it
will be; But this signifies no more but that he cannot know this proposition
to be true [This or that will be] unless it be true: But 1. there were from
eternity no propositions. 2. And the proposition is not true before it is a
proposition. 3. And therefore not before it is conceived in the mind, whence it
has its first being. 4. But if you might suppose God to have eternal
propositions, their Being is considerable before their Verity; and the Verity
has its Cause. But that cause is nothing but what is in God himself, which is
either his Decree of what he will Cause, or his foreknowledge of what will be
caused by a sinning Creature: And neither of them as a cause of the truth of
the proposition, causes that the Thing will be: nor yet is any other existent
Cause supposed; but only that God knowing that he will make the free agent,
knows also that this agent will freely sin: In all which the futurity is
Nothing, nor is any existent cause of it necessary: But only the truth of the
proposition would result from the Infinite perfection of Gods knowledge.

84. Obj. The futurity of things is True whether God or man know it or think of
it or not. Answ. 1. Futurity being Nothing is neither true nor false. According
to Greg. and the Nominals sense of Relations before cited, two Nothings may
eternally be Related to each other, One as a future Cause, and another as a
future effect: And if there were now no Being, but hereafter (per impossible)
a Being would arise of it self, it is future though there be none to know it.
But this futurity has no Cause: And it is no more, but that this Proposition,
Hoc erit, would be True if there were any to conceive it.
2. But all that you can truly mean is but this, that whether it be thought on
or not, this is a true proposition, Hoc vel illud futurum est. Which is true
when there are propositions, extrinsecal, which no man thinks of. But 1. God
has no propositions; 2. Much less extrinsecal from Eternity. But if he had
any, they would be nothing but the acts of his own knowledge. 3. And they have
no Cause. 4. If they had been uttered by words, they needed no Cause but his
perfect knowledge.

85. Obj. Futurity is the Object of Gods knowledge; and the object is a To the
Question, An praescientia Dei sit Causata a rebus? Bonavent. answers (in 1.
did. 38. q. 1. a. 1.) Praescita Causa sunt praescientiae Divinae, non essendi,
sed aut Inserendi, aut Dicendi -- Secundum rationem essendi Praescientia potest
esse Causa aliquorum praescitorum, licet non omnino: sed nullo modo e converso.
Secundum rationem Inferendi sunt mutuo causae, quia mutuo antecedunt and
consequuntur: and antecedens est causa consequentis. Secundum rationem Dicendi,
futurum est causa praescientiae, and non e converso: Nam praescientia, dicitur
scientia ante rem: constat ergo quod importat ordinem ad posterius: and si
scitum esset semper praesens, esset scientia, sed non praescientia.

Bonavent. 1. did. 38. dub. 3. says, Gods knowledge called Approbation
connoteth and effectum and bonita^em: but when it is called simplex Notitia, it
connoteth only the event, but in it self is one. Thus denominations by
Connotation and relation may be many ways diversified, both of Knowledge and
Will.


cause of the act. God knows things to be future, because they are future; as
he knows existents, because they exist.

Answ. Still I say, 1. Futurity is Nothing; and Nothing has no Cause. 2.
Nothing is eternally in God but God: and God has no Cause nor is an Effect. 3.
At least that which is Nothing cannot be the Cause of God. 4. It is not true
that God foreknoweth things, because they will be; but only that he
fore-knoweth that they will be.

86. Gods mere foreknowledge, nor his mere Will without efficient Power or
Action, causes not the thing future, and therefore is not the Cause that It
will be. But where Knowledge and Will with Active Power cooperate, they are
true Causes of the thing. And nothing is a proper Cause that It will be, but
what will Cause its being.

87. By all this it is evinced that God Causes not the futurity of sin; And
that there needs no Decree of God to make Sin pass e numero possibilium in
numerum futurorum; And consequently that the Learned and pious Dr. Twisse his
Achillean argument, which is the strength of his Book de Scientia Media is but
delusory: As the excellent Strangius also has fully manifested. And his
admired Bradwardine is as weak in his attempts on the same subject, and proves
God the Cause of all futurition by no better reasons than he proves, that
without him there would be no impossibles; yea that non posset esse
impossible: When it were impossible any thing should be, were there no God;
and yet that impossibility is nothing and needs no cause. It Is strange how
some Learned men confound Things and Nothings, and the Notions and Names of
Nothings with the Nothings named. So Bradwardine l. 1. c. 18. p. 221. will tell
us how God knows complex objects, and distinguishes those that are
antecedent to Gods Intellection from those that are consequent: The former sort
are such as these [God is God, is eternal, omnipotent, etc.] These he says are
the Causes that God knows them, being before his knowledge of them: The other
about Creatures are after it and caused by it. Yet does the good man thus
humbly Preface [Non proprie and distinct sed similitudinarie balbutiendo vix
tenus possum vel scio, ignarus homuncio, excelsa scientiae Dei mirabilis
resonare.] But see how the world is troubled with this profane Hervtus in his
Quodlib. puts the question, Whether it be not a Mortal sin in a Divine to omit
things necessary, and to treat of curiosities? But he was too guilty himself to
answer it as plainly as he ought.
presumption, and how justly Paul cautioned us against seduction by vain
Philosophy: and what danger the Church is in of losing Faith, Religion and
Charity, and peace in a game at words. What is this Complexe object [Deus est]?
Is it any thing or nothing? If nothing, it is not before Gods knowledge and the
Cause of it. If any thing, Is it God or a Creature? A Creature is not before
God, nor a cause of his knowledge, which is God himself. If it be God is it his
Essence as such, or his Essential properties, or the Persons? None of these:
For Gods essence is the prime Incomplexe Being, and not a Complexe proposition,
[Dens est]: His Properties, primary, are Omnipotent-vital-power, Intellect and
Will; But these also are the same Incomplexe essence, and not propositions: And
his Intellect as an object of it self is not before his Intellect as an Actual
Knowledge of himself, nor the cause of it: All the sense he can make of it is,
that this proposition [Deus est, and est Aeternus, etc.] if it had had an
eternal being, would in order of nature have been conceivable to us before this
[Deus scit se esse] or before his knowledge it self: or that if man had been
the Knower, it had been first a true proposition that He is, before he knows
that he is. But God knows not himself by propositions. Words (in mente vel
ore) are but artificial organs for blind creatures to know by. And does God
need such to know himself? Does he know by Thinking and by Artificial means, as
we do? Has he Entia rationis in his Intellect, as man? (as Propositions are).
And had he an Intellect and these Entia rationis or propositions in his
Intellect (Deus est, etc.) before he knew them? yea, and his self-knowledge
(which in Act is his pure, eternal, necessary Essence) caused by these? All
that you can say is, that poor creatures know by Propositions, and phantasms,
and diverse thoughts; and that God knows man, and therefore knows all our
propositions and thoughts as ours: but not that he had the like eternally in
himself, and knows them in himself; and that Himself as a proposition, is the
Cause of himself (or self-intellection) as in Act. He can know that you see by
Spectacles, and yet not eternally use Spectacles himself as the Cause of his
sight.

But Bradwardine says, that God knows illa vera complexa quae voluntatem
divinam praecedunt, per solam suam essentiam, sicut alia vera incomplexa; Illa
vero quae voluntatem ejus sequuntur, non scit Deus per illa complexa neque per
aliquid aliud a voluntate ejus semota, sed per suam voluntatem, vel per suam
substantiam cum voluntate, etc. More presumption still! He says God knows
complexa sed non complexe; And who knows what sense those words have? What
means he by complexa but Notions, that is, names and propositions, as
distinct from the Things? And what is it to know propositions complexe, but to
know them as they are? And what is it to know them incomplexe, unless it be to
know quid physicum a proposition is, or to know that it is no proposition, that
is, to err? If God know a Complexum or a proposition, that Proposition is in
being: And where was it in being before God knew it? If in God (or no where) 1.
God then is a proposition; 2. And God is before he knows himself; 3. And a
proposition being in intellectu an act of knowledge, it is to say, that [God
knows that he is, before he knows that he is: and his knowing that he is,
causes him to know that he is].

If it be said, that by complexa he means not organical notions, words nor
propositions, but the Verity of Gods Being, Eternity, etc. I answer; To know
things, is said to be [to know some Truth] because by knowing the thing, we can
make this proposition [This is] or [This truly is.] But Gods knowledge of
Things is not as ours, but by pure perfect intuition, and so makes not
propositions in himself by knowing things: But if it be the Truth of this
proposition [Deus est] that you mean, it supposes that proposition to exist
(for, quod non est, non verum est); and so to exist in God; which is denied:
And it is that proposition that Bradwardine speaks of.

But if by Truth, you mean nothing but Gods Essence; that is not a Complex
object, which he speaks of: And he says not, that God knows suam
essentiam, and creata vel futura, but that he knows per suam essentiam quod
Deus est, and est Omnipotens, Aeternus, etc. and per suam essentiam cum
voluntate quod mundus futurus est. So that it is a proposition that he calls
complexum incomplexe cognitum by contradiction; when he cannot prove that Gods
Intellect made propositions in it self, and that antecedently to themselves,
and the Causes of themselves.

And all this which men talk in the dark about God is nonsense, to trouble
themselves and the world with, on false suppositions that Gods knowledge is
such as ours, or that we can have formal conceptions and descriptions of it:
when we should tremble to read men thus profanely take Gods Name in vain, and
pry into unrevealed things.

I have purposely been the larger on this instance, to warn the Reader to take
heed of the common cheat of Scholastic Word-mongers, who would obtrude on us
humane entia rationis, or Thoughts, as real Divine entities, and would persuade
us that every nothing which they make a name for, is therefore something, yea,
some of them God himself.

What I have said of Divine Intellection, I say of his Volitions, of which cap.
20, 21. Bradwardine says, that Voluta priora, viz. Deum esse, omnipotentem
esse, bonum, cognoscentem, etc. sunt Causa. But, 1. It is too bold to say, that
Gods Will is an Effect. 2. If it were so, it must be his Essence, Omnipotency
and Intellect that is the Cause of his Will, and not a Complex verity, as [Deus
est, omnipotens, bonus est, etc.] For Gods Will is not caused by Propositions.
3. If you say that his Volition as terminated objectively on his Essence,
Goodness, etc. is his Will in act (se Velle; which some call the third Person)
yet here would be no Cause and Effect, but our distinct partial conceptions of
that incomprehensible simplicity, which has no real diversity or priority.

SECT. VI. Of Gods Knowledge, and the Co-existence of the Creature.
88. AUgustine well and truly says, that foreknowledge in God, is the same
with the Knowledge of things present: Past, present and future, through his
Infiniteness and Eternity, being alike to him, even all as present.

89. But this depends upon the Indivisibility of Eternity: in which all the
things of time are included, and co-exist.

90. Thus says Augustine li. 2. ad Simplic. q. 2. Quid est praescientia nisi
scientia futurorum? Quid autem futurum est Deo qui omnia supergreditur tempora?
Si enim in scientia res ipsas habet, non sunt ei futurae, sed praesentes: ac
per hoc non jam praescientia sed tantum scientia dici potest -- Si autem sicut
in ordine temporalium creaturarum, ita and apud Deum, nondum sunt quae futura
sunt, sed ea praevenit sciendo, bis ergo ea sentit; uno quidem modo secundum
futurorum praescientiam, altero vero modo secundum praesentium scientiam:
Aliquid ergo temporaliter accedit scientiae Dei. quod absurdissimum atque
falsissimum est.

Thus with Augustine Nothing is future to God, lest the after-knowledge of
things as present, seem an addition to the first. And if this be true, then
futurity had no eternal Cause.

91. See more ibid. in August. to the same purpose. And li. 15. de Trinit. cap.
7. Et in Psalm. 101. And Gregor. Moral. li. 20. cap. 23. that Prescience is not
properly in God, nor any thing future to him. So Anselm. opusc. de Concord.
cap. 1. See also Arriba Council. li. 3. c. 11, 12, 13, 14. and Boethius and
Aquinas there cited. And a cap. 16. ad cap. 26. the whole Controversy handled
of the co-existence of all things with God in eternity. Vid. Bonav. 1. d. 36.
ar. 1. and plurimos Scholast. in 1. d. 8. viz. Tho. q. 2. Cajet. Zumel. Bannez.
Nazar. Gonzal. Arrubal. q. 14. hac lin. Vasquez. Fasol. and Alvarez. de Auxil.
l. 2. disp. 8. and 9. Navarret. Cent. 52. Suar. l. 1. de Scient. c. 7. and 8.
Ruiz. de Scient. disp. 28. Albert. To. 3. Princip. 4. Corol. 2. q. 2. Valent.
1. p. disp. 2. q. 14. punct. 5. sect. 1. Alarcon. 1. p. tract. 2. d. 2. c. 8.
Tanner. 1. p. d. 2. q. 8. dub. 6. Gillius l. 2. de Essent. Dei, tract. 10. c.
15, etc. Arriba in Council. per plura cap. cum multis aliis. Lychet. in 1. p. d.
39. q. 1. Tuiss. de Scient. Med. Bradward. l. 3. c. 51. p. 828. and corol. p.
830.


92. But because Scotus, Durand. Gabriel. Greg. Molina and many others digest
not this notion, I shall open it to you in a moderate and undeniable sense, how
things may be said to co-exist with God in eternity.

When temporary Creatures are the subjects of Relation to God, then God is
denominated by extrinsecal denomination as the terminus of that Relation: But
when God or Eternity is the subject of Relation to Creatures, then temporary
creatures are denominated as the termini of the Divine relation. And so
Eternity (being as Divines conclude indivisible and tota simul quia sine
partibus) being one and the same, communicates somewhat of its Name to the
multifarious fluid creature, as its terminus: And as the Mutations of creatures
in existence and operation thus communicate various denominations to the
actions (knowledge and will) of God; so Gods Unity and Constancy gives various
denominatinos to the creatures. Card. Sarnan. Council. Th. and Scoti, p. 22.
inquit, Deus per suam aeternitatem sine aliqua successione sui est omnibus
praesens: sed non sine successione rerum. Ideoque omnia quae sunt, suerunt and
erunt, coexistunt in aeternitate, and habent etiam esse cognitum in mente
divina. Et ideo been dicunt and Thomas and Scotus.
And so, because things when they exist, do co-exist with eternity, and
eternity has no prius and posterius, and the Prepositions [ab] and [ad] and
[ante] and [post] have there no true signification, therefore it may be said,
that as Indivisible Eternity co-existeth with the creature, so the creature
co-existeth with and in indivisible eternity, and so with All eternity, and not
with a part.

93. Hence you may see how both sayings may be true; both that Eternity (or God
and his Knowledge) ever co-existeth with creatures, and also that it does de
novo begin to co-exist; viz. As God is extrinsecally denominated from the real
mutation of the creature related to him; or as the creature is denominated
extrinsecally as related to the indivisible God and Eternity: even as God and
the creature are variously considered toward each other, as the Relate, or as
the Terminus.

94. To clear it by a low similitude; When a Rock in the Sea is the Relatum,
and the Sea the Terminus, it may be said, [This Rock is the constant Companton
of the Sea]: And also thence, that [The Sea is the constant companton of the
Rock] the title of Constancy being thus mutually used, but in a various ^ense.
So when the Sea is the Relatum, and the Rock is the Terminus, it may be said,
that [The rolling Waves pass by the Rock as its unconstant companions] And
consequently, that [The Rock is an unconstant Companion of the Waves.] So you
may say, that [the Eternal God or Eternity does indivisibly co-exist with the
temporary creature, or with time;] and thence that [the temporary creature or
Time does co-exist with indivisible eternity.] And yet that [the transient
creature does transitorily co-exist with God] and so that [God does but
temporarily co-exist with the transitory creature]; as the reason of the
denomination is variously fetched in.

95. In like manner quoad locum it may be said, that [the finite creature does
limitedly co-exist with God] and so, that [God as the Terminus of the creatures
existence, does limitedly co-exist with the creature]. But also that [the
Infinite God does immensely co-exist with the finite creature] and [the finite
creature does co-exist with Immensity.]

96. This supposes (with Pet. Hurtad. and other Nominals,) that God is Related
to the creature, and that Scotus his answer to Aquinas resting on the contrary
supposition, that only the creature is Related, is therefore vain.

Aegid. Roman. Quodl. 3. q. 3. page 135. Totus decursus rerum est Deo praesens:
Ideo circa hoc non fallitur; sive sit necessarium sive contingens: cum
infallibilitas divinae cognitionis non det rebus necessitarem, n^c tollat a
contingentibus contingentiam: Futura s^nt praesentia praescientiae Divinae, etc.

For this co-existence, see Ricard. in 1. d. 38. q. 3. and d. 39. q. 1. a. 1.
Capreol. 1. d. 36. q. 1. a. 2. and d. 38. q. 1. a. 2. Ferrar. cont. Gent. 1. c.
66. Caje^. 1. q. 14. a. 13. On the contrary, see Alens. 1. ^. q. 23. in 4. a.
3. Bonavent. 1. d. 39. a. 2. q. 3. Scot. ib. q. 1. Dur. q. 3. n. 12. Greg. q.
2. a. 2. Gabr. 1. d. 38. q. 1. a. 2. Mar^il. in Thom. Vas^u. in 1. The. q. 14.
a. 3. d. 64. r. 3. 4.


But note 1. That as the denominations of a universal may be better distributed
and restrained by its relation to particulars, than particulars can be
denominated like the universal; so it is here unfitter to give the attribute of
God relatively to the creature, than to speak of God as Relatively limited to
the creature. And therefore it is more unfit to say that the creature
co-existeth [eternally and immensely] with God, than that God co-existeth
[temporarily and limitedly] with the creature in relation. 2. That the most
proper expression is to fetch the attribute from the Nature of the subject,
rather than borrowedly from the correlate: And so it is fittest to say, that
[The Eternal and Immense God does co-exist Eternally and Immensely with the
Transitory, finite creature]; And that [the creature does Transitorily and
finitely co-exist with the Eternal Immense God].

97. As Time is no Real being, but the Duration of Beings, which is nothing but
their Existence not ceasing; so Eternity is nothing really distinct from God
himself; but it is Gods existence considered as having no measure of duration,
no beginning, no middle, no parts of duration and no End.

98. Eternity therefore is a Notion which may be called Indivisible and
Divisible in several respects. It is Indivisible properly and in it self
considered; for it is nothing but God himself as existing sine mensura tempor
is perfectly and indivisibly: But it may be called Divisible Intellectually (by
humane, partial or inadequate conception; not by partition), as it is compared
to transitory time; and because as man's narrow head must know one God suo modo
by many inadequate conceptions, or not at all, so must he know Eternity suo
modo, by conceptions drawn from partible Time.

99. By this much the great Objections of the Scotists may be satisfied by a
Conciliation: They say, 1. That which existeth not, does not co-exist; nor God
with it. 2. That Eternity indeed includes all Time successively as present in
it; but not future Time. To the first I answer, 1. That it is granted that Time
has successions, and only the present Instant is: And that which Is not,
co-existeth not with Eternity: But yet seeing Eternity is Indivisible, it is
not part of it that co-existeth with one of our Instants and part with another;
but All indivisibly with each instant. 2. And when it is said, That the
Creature existed not ab aeterno, if you intellectually divide Eternity into
past and present and future, like Time, it is true: But speaking properly, it is
fallacious: For [Ab] aeterno implies a division of Eternity, and a preterition
of one part, which is commonly supposed false. But if the denomination be
sercht from Eternity, seeing it is Indivisible, you cannot say that to day it
co-existeth with this day, and not with to morrow, for if ever it co-existeth,
it always co-existeth: For, ab and ad, and ante and post, and fuit and erit,
are words of falsehood spoken properly of Eternity (according to the commonest
doctrine.)

100. And to the second the same answer serves; Denominating Time in it self,
you may say that some is future, that is, Is not, but Will be, and so that it
is not In Eternity till it come. But setching the Name from Indivisible
Eternity, Future there is a word of false importance: There is no Futurity in
Eternity. And it Indivisibly includes all successions of our Time.

101. Yet we lay no stress on any of this as necessary to reconcile our
Controversies: And we readily acknowledge and maintain, that by Extrinsick
denomination from its Relation to our successive Instants, Eternity and God
himself may have new and various denominations (of which more anon).

SECT. VII. Of School Curiosities and Uncertainties about Gods Knowledge.
102. ABout Gods Knowledge Scholastical presumption has gone so far, as that I
should rather with trembling fly from their questions, than seek to solve them,
if the opposition of their curiosity and the defense of truth, were not by them
made necessary to others, and consequently some consideration of the thing.

103. Some presume to tell us, that God knows Creatures only in his own
Essence, and not in themselves, which must needs be false, if the Creatures
Aureolus in Capr^ol. 1. did. 35.
are in themselves Intelligible: Because Gods perfection imports the
knowledge of all that is intelligible.

104. Others tell us on the contrary, that God knows the Creatures Vid. Rad.
li. 1. Cont. 29. ar. 1. p. 452.

Vid. Tanner. 1. p. d. 2. q. 8. dub. 3. Valent. p. 1. d. 1. q. 14. p. 3. S^ar.
de attrib. l. 3. c. 2. and 3. Rad. ib. p. 453, 454. Pet. Aquil. 1. dis. 35.
Lombard. 1. d. 36. Henr. 1. d. 5. Aegid. 1. q. 3. Greg. Arim. 1. q. 1. Gabr. 1.
q. 3. a. 3. Ruiz. 1. d. 10. Aluiz. tr. 1. d. 5. and 6. Alarcon. 1. p. di^p. 2.
c. 3. etc. Granad. 1. p. contr. 2. tr. 3, 4.


only in themselves, and not in his own Essence: But doubtless so far as they
may be said to be in his Essence, (which is at least Virtually) they are there
intelligible.

105. Scotus with his followers hold that Gods Intellect has two Objects, one
Primary, immediate, and motive, by virtue of which all other things are known;
and this is Gods Essence. The other secondary, mediate, and not motive, but
terminative, and such is the Creature; known only in Gods Essence, as per aliud
prius cognitum in quo continetur, and non per propriam speciem. But here they
are at the greatest loss.

106. For to the Question, How the Creature is in God, their necessary
Ignorance bewrays it self by their divisions. It is agreed that all things
were eternally in God as in the first cause virtually and eminently. But say
some, The same numerical perfections are in God, as in the Creatures, viz.
Infinitely in God, and finitely in the Creatures: But this makes God and the
Creature to be One, and deifieth Creatures.

107. This they are put to, for the solving of that great difficulty, Whether
God and the Universe conjunct contain more Entity or perfection intensively or
extensively than God alone, and the Worlds Being add any Entity besides Deity?

108. They that are for the Negative, judge it blasphemy to say, that God alone
is Less than God and the World; For he seems not to be of Infinite Entity to
whom any thing can be added. The question is not Whether the World add any
Divine Being to God, but any Being at all be so superadded, as that God is made
a Part of the Universe. And I confess that Pars, and toto minor, are words that
I dare not apply to God.

109. On the other side, says Rada, Though Intensively nothing is added ^bi
supr. p. 454, 455. So ^radwardin^ is hard put to answer his Seminator ^borum,
li. 1. c. 7. p. 184. that says, The number of things to God is sinite: and to
sinite some what may be added: Ergo to Gods knowledge somewhat may be added
(which drove ^asquez to as^rt Infinite intelligibles.) But plainly Gods
knowledge is Infinite in knowing himself: But not as terminated on finite
creatures.
to God, yet Extensively we must say, that entity and perfection in the
Creature is so added, as that God and the Creature are More than God alone;
because else we must say, either that God and the World are one, or else that
the World is Nothing, or has no Being: which is false.

110. Who dare venture on either of these dangerous consequences; either that
God is but a Part of Entity and Less than All, and so not Infinite; or that the
World is God or Nothing? If we should say, that the Entity of the Creature
being but Analogical Entity, is no Addition to Gods being, Ens non dicitur
Univoce de Deo and Creaturis; as the Sco^ists deny the antecedent, so it hardly
satisfies the mind: Because even this Analogical Entity is real positive
Entity, and not nothing: And therefore though it add not Deity, it seems to
add Entity; and both sorts to be more than One alone.

111. And if we should say, that the World is an Accident of God, (as The wi^ty
Dr. Fairsax in his Book of the Bulk of the World, says It is aliquid Dei; and
so do all men that confess a God: and P^t. Hurtado and many others prove that
it is no dishonor to God to have Real Relations, which we call Accidents, as is
asore noted.
a man's hair is of a man, supposing it were voluntarily Caused by him); And
that it is no imperfection in God to have Accidents, as long as his Essence is
no Accident, nor Compounded; And so that the World is no part of God, Essential
or Integral; but being an Accident it is no Addition of Entity to God; Because
as the word [Man] or [Peter] includes not only his Parts, but his hair as an
Accident, so the word [God] may include the World as an Accident: This would be
judged novel, bold, presumptuous, and is not fully satisfactory, had it no ill
consequents.

112. The only way therefore is to confess our Ignorance, and that it must
needs be that the mind which cannot comprehend Gods Immense Eternal Essence,
must be unable to solve such questions as imply such a comprehension: And it
were well if men's experience of their utter incapacity to understand some such
Cases, would warn them more cautelously to meddle with others.

113. The Scotists doctrine is laid down by Rada in these Conclusions; 1. Deus
cognoscit alia a se. 2. Cognoscit omnia perfectissime. 3. Non cognoscit alia a
se per repraesentationem and motionem quam ipsa de se faciunt. 4. Creatura non
est objectum primarium and immediatum Divinae cognitionis. 5. Sed tale est
Divina essentia. 6. Distinctam tamen aliorum Vasquez in ^. Thom. q^ 19. disp.
80. Praescientia est ipsa substantia Dei, quae alias Cognitio est creaturarum
possibilium, addito respectn solum rationis ad res futuras; quarum dicitur
scientia: Ita ut s^res futurae non essent, Deo quidem deisset, praescientia,
sed non scientia: and si res futurae non essent, non esset in Deo libera
Voluntas, quae significatur cum illo respectu libero: esset tamen Voluntas
Complacentiae, ipsa viz. essentia divina cum respectu rationis necessario ad
res possibiles. Ita and Ferrariens. c. 75.
habet Cognitionem. 7. Deus cognoscit creaturas in su^ essentia. 8. Cognoscit
res in se ipsis and propriis earum naturis, si fiat determinatio cognitionis ex
part rei cognitae. In all this it seems to me to be overbold presumption to
conclude, 1. That God knows not the Creature immediately: And the reason he
gives is as bold, quia tunc vilesceret Divinus intellectus. None of this can
be proved, though I presume not to assert the contrary. Yet it seems to us
that the Creature is Quid intelligibile in se immediate, and that it is the
perfection of God to know all that is intelligible, and not a vilifving of him.
As it is no vilifying of his Power to make every thing as it is. The Creature
no doubt is not the Primary intelligible object: But whether it be not
Immediately Intelligible in se is the doubt.

2. And it seems to me a presumption to say, that else the Creature would
move the Divine Intellect, and that God as the object moves his own Intellect
as agent; For Moving signifies Causing, and there is in God (say all Divines)
no Effects, and therefore no Causing of them; and so no such moving.

114. It is also an agitated Controversy with them, Whether it be Gods Essence
as such which the Creatures are Represented and known in, or in his Knowledge
it self as such? They that are for the former say, that the Creature is
represented in the Divine Essence before it is known (as in a glass) because
the object is presupposed to the act: says Cajetan, the Cajet. 1. p. q. 14.
art. 5.
Ruder ignorant sort thus imagine. The second opinion is thus delivered by
Rada, Res non continentur in Divina Essentia ut prior est cognitione Rad. li.
1. contr. 29. art. 2. page 460.
actu and formaliter; nec ibi repraesentantur actu and distinct. 2. Creaturae
in Divina Essentia non prius habent esse repraesentatum actu and formaliter,
quam intelliguntur. 3. Creatura (formaliter loquendo secundum Scot. in 2. d. 1.
q. 1. lit. H.
quod aliquid dicitur formaliter intelligibile) non prius habet intelligibile
quam intelligatur; sed per intellectionem habet primum esse actuale and
formale, and proprium expressum and repraesentatum. And their similitude is,
that as man's mind does not presuppose second notions (Genus, species, etc.) but
make them, so does God the Creature as intelligible intelligendo.

115. This leads them to another doubt, Whether the Creatures have from
Eternity an esse reale distinct from Gods Essence? Where Henry. says that
they have a true esse reale essentiae, at non existentiae, because Henr.
(refor. Scoto. in 1. d. 36.) quodlib. 8. q. 91 and q. 4. 1 and ^.

Scot. 1. d. 36.

Vid. Th. Waldens. de antiq. fid. l. 1. c. 8. cont. Wicles.


omne possibile est ens reale; and est in genere, etc. Thus do men play with
the notions of their own brains. Scotus confuteth this by seven arguments,
which is easily done.

116. But their next doubt is greater, Whether the Creatures have from eternity
an esse intelligibile and cognitum distinct from Gods essence? What the esse
Cognitum is, whether it be ens reale or rationis or quid medium? Scotus is the
Author of this notion of esse cognitum as an esse formale and proprium quod
creatura habet distinctum ab esse suae Causa; in quo in Divino intellectu
creaturae ipsae per intellectionem producuntur; e. g. Lapid^m in esse cognito
producit, sicut intellectus noster secundas intentitiones facit, and ita rebus
ipsis esse cognitum tribuit: nam sicut lapis visus per visionem habet esse
visum, ita lapis cognitus per cognitionem esse cognitum habet -- sed ut primum
ejus esse, per quod esse formale habent -- Imo esse rerum Possibile in esse
cognito fundatur. Who can read such Scot. 1. d. 43. l. D. and d. 36. l. M. Rada
l. 1. Cont. 29. art. 3. p. 466.
presumptuous assertions of the unknown mode of Divine Intellection without
dread? And what a dance and show is here made of mere words, while a Creature
that is no Creature, is said to have an esse which is no esse (of them) and so
confessed? For (though Cajetan and others mistook him,) Scotus confesses that
this esse congnitum non est ens reale, nec medium Vid. Rad. ib.
inter ens reale and rationis, sed est ens rationis purum, and omnino nihil,
contra ens reale distinctum, ita, quod nullatenus aliquid realit at is habet.
And is not here then a presumptuous play with words? Scotus thus explaineth it.
If Caesar were annihilated, and the statue of him remained, Scot. 1. d. 36. q.
uniclit. G.
Caesar would have an Esse repraesentatum in the statue, which is neither an
esse essentiae vel existentiae total or partial. And says Rada, Ex his
manifest colligitur esse cognitum Creaturae in Deo secundum Scotum esse Rad.
ubi sup. page 467.
omnino nihil, prout nihil opponitur enti reali sive essentiae sive
existentiae, -- and non magis esse nihil Chimaeram quam hominem in esse
cognito, quia utrique inest negatio totius entis. And indeed the esse
repraesentatum Caesaris is nothing but the modus statuae, which per modum signi
is apt to bring the shape of Caesar to the beholders imagination. And 1. Can
they prove any such Modifications of God? 2. And if they can, should they so
abuse words as to call that modus Intellectus Divini, an esse primum formale
creaturae distinct from God? The sum of the Scotists opinion is thus expressed
by Rada Esse cognitum creaturae est Ib. p. 468,
ens Rationis, solum habens esse in intellectu Divino objective, sicut secundae
intentiones in intellectu creato -- sed res in esse cognito non est objectum
motivum sed terminativum secundarium. 1. As if God had any objectum motivum! 2.
Or as if we poor mortals knew that God has entia Rationis! Though we confess
that we may so speak of him after the manner of men; if we confess the great
impropriety of the speech.

117. From hence arises another Controversy, Whether to Gods understanding
the Creatures, there be necessarily pre-required in him distinct relations to
the objects? which I will not trouble you with their agitation of.

118. But the great Controversy is of the Divine Idea's; especially Whether
the Creature as in Esse cognito be a Divine Idea? Aquinas denies it, Aq. 1. p.
q. 15. art. 1.
and says that an Idea is the Divine Essence as imitable by the Creature.
Scotus, Gabr. Ockam, Gerson, etc. affirm it. Aquinas his opinion Scot. 1. d.
35. q. unica. and 36. Gabr. 1. d. 35. q. 5. Gerson l. vit. spir. animae. Lect.
2. Corol. 12.

See in Pennot. l. 3. c. 9. p. 114. etc. the four different opinions about.
Idea's, and the doubtfulness of them.


is thus opened by Cajetan, Rada and others, 1. Idea non significat solum
fundamentum imitabilitatis. 2. Nec tantum respectum imitabilitatis. 3. Sed
utrumque. 4. Essentia Divina cognita ut imitabilis a Creatura per modum
exemplaris est Idea. 5. In Deo est idearum multitudo. 6. Multitudo i would arum in
Deo non est multitudo rerum reipsa inter se, and ab essentia distinctarum. 7.
Nec multitudo rationum formalium, sive rerum formaliter distinctarum. 8. Sed
est multitudo rationum intellectarum. 9. Non distinguuntur ratione per actum
intellectus creati. Idearum multitudo est multitudo rationum a Deo
intellectarum.

119. The Scotists think Augustine of their mind, and give us their sense in
these conclusions, of Rada, 1. Ideas, hoc est, rations in mente Divina August.
Quaest. l. 83. q. 46. Scot. 1. d. 35. q. unica. Rada l. 1. cont. ^29. art. 5.
p. 497, 498, etc.
collocatas tam Graeci quam Latini tradiderunt. 2. Idea non est Divina essentia
secundum se and absolute sumpta. 3. Non est quid aggregatum ex essentia and
respectu imitabilitatis. 4. Non includit in sua ratione respectum rationis nec
tanquam aliquid sibi essentiale, nec tanquam modum intrinsecum. 5. Idea in
mente Divina est ipsamet creatura cognita. And Scotus his definition is, Idea
est ratio aeterna and incommutabilis in mente Divina, secundum quam aliquid est
formabile extra tanquam sccundum propriam rationem ejus. Vid. Durand. in 1. d.
36. q. 2, 3. De Ideis vid. ^tiam Bonav. 1. d. 36. q. 1. Richad. m. 1. d. 35. q.
4. Aquil. Scotel. in. 1. d. 36. q. 1. (who seems dubious of his Masters
doctrine.) page 240. and q. 2. Vide diversitatem opinionum de qu. Quorum sunt
Ideae.


120. By this you see how widely they are disagreed what an Idea is in God: And
yet they conclude (as Rada ib. p. 480.) neminem nisi his intellectis sapientem
esse: Nam quamvis Deus Opt. Max. ex cognitione suae essentiae sit Infinite
sapiens, ac proinde ex cognitione Idearum non efficiatur sapientior intensive,
attamen si Ideas, quarum ratio incommutabilis est, ignoraret, non esset
Omniscius. Et Art. 3. p. 470. he says, [Deus esse nequit sine Ideis.] We all
grant that without the Knowledge of all things Intelligible, God cannot be, nor
be Omniscient. But the name of Idea's is fetched from man's mode of Intellection,
which is ever conjunct with somewhat of Imagination or sense; which also
seems included in our notion of Ideas, which therefore are usually called
Images or Species. And as we are most certain that Intellection in God both in
the form and mode does so Infinitely transcend and differ from humane
Intellection, as that it is not the same thing; so we are very unfit in this
woeful darkness to talk so peremptorily of things unknown, and to conclude that
God has not a more perfect knowledge of things, than by Idea's, or any thing
fitly so called. The world therefore should not be troubled with such
presumptions.

121. The next doubt among them is of Future Contingents, Whether and how they
are known of God. That they are known of him is past doubt: But how is the
great difficulty. Aquinas his mind is thus expressed by Rada, Concl. 1. Futura
Contingentia prout sunt in suis causis indeterminatis, Rad. ibid. art. 3. p.
494.
solum conjecturali cognitione cognosci possunt. 2. Futura contingentiae in
seipsis possunt certa and infallibili cognitione cognosci. 3. Deus non
cognoscit praecise futurum contingens, prout est in suis causis indeterminatis.
4. Deus cognoscit futura contingentia ut praesentia in sua reali and actuali
existentia, quae eis convenit extra suas causas. 5. Deus certa and infallibili
cognitione praescit futura contingentia.

122. The mind of Scotus he thus expresses, after many notes and distinctions.
1. Deus cognoscit omnia futura contingentia quoad omnes Id. ib. ad. page 504.
conditiones existentiae eorum, sic, quod quaecunque eis in tempore
contingenter insunt, perfect ab aeterno attingit. 2. Deus non cognoscit certo
and determinate futura contingentia per hoc quod sunt sibi in aeternitate
praesentia. (Should I here recite you the reasons by which he and other
Scotists and Dr. Twisse do propugn this assertion, and those by which Cajetan
and many Thomists do oppugn it, I should tire you. It shall suffice to say that
both sides talk in the dark of that which is utterly above man's reach). 3.
Certitudo Divinae essentiae respectu omnium quantum ad omnes conditiones
existentiae, non habetur per ideas. (This also is on both sides tediously
disputed in the dark). 4. Qui nosset causas naturales futurorum, etiam eorum
quae necessarias causas habent, ut Solis, Lunaeque defectiones, non proinde
infallibilem eorum notitiam assequeretur, nisi determinationem divinae
voluntatis circa hujusmodi eventus cognosceret. (That Is true, because they are
all but dependent second Causes). 5. Deus cognoscit futura contingentia certo
and infallibiliter; quia Divina essentia ut ratio cognoscendi repraesentat
divino intellectui rem determinate futuram ex determinatione divinae
voluntatis. And this is Scotus his way, which Dr. Twisse propugneth.

123. Here Scotus supposes things to lie in this order in the Divine Scot.
Quodlib. q. 14. Liter. S. and T.
Intellect, [1. The Divine Essence moves the Divine intellect to know it self,
and all that is formally in it. 2. To the simple Intellection of all that is
Intelligible, as abstracting from existence, or any order to it. 3. To the
knowledge of all necessary copulations, which are known by connection of terms,
and this naturally and necessarily before the wills determination: because they
are not True because God wills it, but antecedently formally of themselves.
But not so to the Knowledge of contingent copulations, etc.] How easy were it
to open much uncertainty and figment in these bold assertions? Vid. Rad. ib. p.
497, 496. Vid. Ruiz de Vol. Dei disp. 16. sect. 5. p. 173. Citing abundance of
Schoolmen as holding etiam nunc posse Deum efficere ut non voluerit aut
praedestinaverit nec praescierit; and some saying yet more, nunc esse possibile
per potentiam absolutam, ut non fuerit facta revelatio de futuris Dei operibus.
Is not this profane boldness with the most holy God?


124. And here a great deal of dispute there is about the Liberty of Gods will,
and the nature of contingency. Some Thomists, (whom our Westminster Assembly
follow, but it should not have been put into a Confession of faith) say that
nothing is to be called Contingent in respect of God. But the Scotists
contrarily say that there could be no contingency if it were not first from
Gods free will: and that he freely and contingently made all the world: All
Actions being either naturally necessary or contingent; And if God had made all
of natural necessity, they had been eternal.

125. And here they say that Gods will has first a Liberty of contradiction,
(to will or not will.) 2. And a Liberty to diverse objects, (which I call of
competition or comparison) yea and to will contrary objects by the same act. 3.
But not a Liberty to contrary Acts (Velle and nolle) because that would be
mutability.

126. And here many maxims are used by them as sufficient to answer all
objectors, which yet are ambiguous or uncertain themselves. 1. One is, that God
receives not the certainty of his Knowledge from the Creatures: And therefore
if their present co-existence in eternity were proved, it would no whit clear
the doubts, or help the Thomists, who are here at a loss for a sufficient
answer. My business is to side with neither, but to deterr the Reader from the
presumption of both parties; and to that end, to open the uncertainty of what
they say. And so it is enough to answer, that As the Creature in being is no
addition to Gods being or perfection, so to Know the Creature is not any
addition to Gods Knowledge or perfection; but only the terminative acting of
his perfect Knowledge ad extra. And that their word [Receiveth] has a false
supposition. For God Receives no Knowledge (though man's knowledge be partly
Receiving); but the Infinite Light of his Intellect is emitted knowingly to the
Creature. So that Gods knowledge may be terminated on Creatures, and thence
denominated This or That knowledge without Reception.

127. Another maxim is that of Augustine, Non aliter facta quam fienda novit,
and no new mode of Knowledge is to be imagined in God: which both sides make
use of. To which I say, that nothing can be called Gods Knowledge, but either
his Essential Intellection, or the termination of it on the Creature. The first
is never changed: But the second, say the Nominals, is but an extrinsick
denomination of it from the various terminating objects: And whether you will
call them terminations, or Relations, or denominations, they may be New and
various (of which more anon) without any change or variety in God: even as the
Sun is not changed by the various Receptions or terminations of its influx here
below.

128. See the marginal citation, sect. 16. out of Pet. Alliac. Came. who gives
three reasons against Scotus his making Gods Volition to be the reason of his
knowing future contingents, 1. Because it falsely supposes priority and
posteriority in God. 2. Because it makes Gods intellect in primo instanti to
be neutral de futuritione, and so in that instant daretur medium in
contradictione. 3. Because it falsely supposes one Act of God to be a medium
and ratio of another. Therefore he concludes, 1. That the case is
unsearchable. 2. But most probably Intellectualis and aeternus Dei oculus est
quaedam Intuitio quae immediate super quamlibet rem actualiter vel
potentialiter existentem simul fertur: Ideo tam circa futura quam praesentia
vel praeterita omnium contin^entium veritatum certum habet judicium: and divina
intuitio est talt immensum judicium.
Another maxim is, that God knows things even Intuitively eternally in
himself (his Will) when they exist not. Answ. As Abstractive and Intuitive are
words signifying the diverse modes of Gods knowing things, they are but
presumptuous figments, for ought I see; It being past man's reach to know the
mode of Divine intellection, more than above the reach of a bird or beast to
know the mode of ours. But as we may more easily and safely distinguish and
denominate Gods Knowledge from the objects, so we may well say, 1. That he
knows not that Creature to exist in nunc temporis which does not so exist. 2.
And that esse Volitum is not esse existens. And therefore to know the former is
not formally to know the latter.

129. Yea it is here disputed Whether there be indeed any contingency Read the
dispute of Pet. Alliac. Camerac. m. 1. q. 11. ar. 3. R. S. and Gregory's and
Okams and his own opinion, about the possibility of Gods not knowing what he
knows, and that it is in the power of the Creature to make God not to have
known them, and much more such like. I confess I tremble to read (not the
falsehood but) the boldness and presumption of such disputes, as fearing they
are profane.
or not (which the Doctrine of Hobs and the Dominican Predeterminants must
needs exclude, which make all events to be necessitated by God). The Reasons
against it are, 1. Whatever God fore-knoweth must necessarily be: but he
fore-knoweth all that will be: ergo -- 2. All things future are from eternity
determined in Gods will to one part of the contradiction: ergo necessario
erunt. 3. All the acts of the Creatures will is to be done, by the physical
efficient necessitating insuperable predetermination of God the first cause:
ergo, there is no place in such necessity for contingency (which is a posse
tendere ad esse vel non esse.)

130. Many and different answers are given to these, and those of the Thomists
and Dominicans are mostly shuffling and vain: But plainly and briefly, 1. Gods
foreknowledge, 2. And his mere will, when they are not joined efficiently with
power, or a will de efficiendo, do no whit at all Cause or necessitate the
effect or event, or ponere aliquid in objecto. It is only a Logical necessitas
consequentiae in ordine probandi that arises Vid. D'Orbellis in 1. d. 38. dub.
1. Bonaventur. and (says Dr. Twiss) all the Schoolmen say the same.
from them, which consists with contingency, and not a physical necessity in
ordine essendi as from a Cause, called consequentis, or effecti. And, 2. Gods
Knowledge and Will rather prove contingency; For he does not only know and will
hoc futurum, but hoc contingenter futurum: Therefore it will be. 3. And the
last argument from necessitating predetermination I shall elsewhere confute,
and show their contradiction who say that God does predetermine the thing
contingently to come to pass.

131. But it cannot be denied but that Gods will is from Eternity determined
about every contingent event: And therefore that Necessitate existentiae the
determination of it is eternally necessary: And therefore that which we call
Its Liberty is but the perfect manner of its determination, as Bradwardine
confesses.

132. But what is all this stir about? The great business of all is to show how
God fore-knoweth sin. For says Rada, It Is easy (from Gods Ibid. ar. 3. p. 503.
Volition) to show how he knows things that are not sin: but how knows he
sin from eternity, seeing this was never in esse volito? And Vid. 1. d. 36. q.
1. a. 2. Bonav. ib. q. 1. a. 3. Durand. ib. q. 1. Cujet. Bannez, Zumel. Rip^,
Gonzal. M^lin. Vusqutz, Arrub. Fasol. Aluiz 1. p. q. 14. a. 10. Tanner. 1. p.
disp. 2. q. 8. dub. 8. Granad. 1. p. Cont. 2. d. 5.
here the way of the Scotists proves utterly insufficient. Dr. Twisse and
Rutherford and some Dominicans say, that God fore-knoweth it, because he
Decreed to Cause all the Entity of the Act with all its circumstances from
which the form of sin is but a resulting relation. But this subverteth
Religion. Rada ibid. and Twiss often say, he Decrees to permit it, (and that it
shall come to pass ipso permittente, says Twiss:) Qu^ permissio (says Rada)
non accipitur in communi, sed pro eo quod est permittere Ibid. art. 3. p. 503.
de facto deficere and in peccatum ruere subtrahendo efficacia auxilia quibus
positis non foret peccatum. Quare haec est bona consequentia quantum ad
illationem prcaise; Deus permittit aliquem peccare hic and nunc de facto: ergo,
peccat: ergo, valet consequentia, Deus voluit ab aeterno permittere ut Petrus
peccaret de facto tali and tali occasion oblata: ergo peccabit: Dixi quantum
ad Illationem praecise. Quia quantum ad Causalitatem non est bona illa
consequentia Vid. Ruiz de scient. d. 17. Gr. Valent. p. 1. disp. 1. q. 14.
punct. 7. Alarcon. 1. p. tr. 2. disp. 3 and 4.
. But to pass by their supposition of Gods knowing consequences by
argumentation, I shall confute all this anon.

133. And here the Thomists and Scotists have another skuffle, on the Vid.
Aquin. 1. p. q. 14. art. 13. ad secundam. Scot. ^^ 1. d. 39. q. 4. Rad. li. 1.
Co^t. 30. art. 5. page 310, 311, etc. See Lychet. Confutation of Cajetan and
Ockam at large in 1. p. d. 39. q. 1. fol. 254. ad 268.

Leg. Pennot. li. 3. c. 11 and 12. p. 118, 119, etc.


question, Whether this knowledge of future contingents and the conditions of
existency in God, be Necessary in him, or free and contingent? The Thomists
thus conclude, 1. Si futurum contingens secundum se, and suam propriam naturam
consideretur, necessitas nullatenus ei convenire potest, sed sola contingentia.
2. Si futurum contingens consideretur secundum quod subest Divinae scientiae,
est necessarium absolute. 3. Haec propositio, Deus scivit Antichristum futurum,
est simpliciter and absolute necessaria: sed ho^ consequens, [Ergo Antichristus
erit] non est absolute necessarium sed contingens, si secundum se consideretur:
At ut divinae scientiae subest, est absolute necessarium. 4. Scientia Dei
respectu futurorum contingentium prou^ jam ad ipsa est terminata, est
simpliciter necessaria. And they prove the affirmative thus, 1. Gods knowledge
is Immutable: therefore necessary. 2. To know future Contingents is Perfection:
therefore necessary in God. 3. This Can be in God: therefore it necessarily is
in him.

134. The Scotists thus express their sense, (after much explication), 1.
Futuro contingenti secundum suam propriam naturam consider ato null^ necessitas
conveire potest. 2. Futura contingentia, etiam ut subsunt Divinae scientiae,
non sunt necessaria. 3. Futurum contingens, etiam at subest Divinae scientiae,
est q^oad esse simpliciter contingens, and secundum quid necessarium. 4.
Propositio haec [Deus scivit Petrum futurum] sive sit de praesenti, vel de
praeterito, non est simpliciter necessaria, sed ex suppositione. 5. Praefata
propositio and omnia futura contingentia, sunt necessaria necessitate
immutabilitatis. 6. Scientia Dei respectu omnium creaturarum quoad esse
existentiae earum est contingens, and ex suppositione necessaria. I recite the
words of Rada only, that I may not weary the Reader by referring him to peruse
too many Authors, and because no man better discusseth the differences. See
also his answers to the Thomists arguments, page 514. He that would peruse
more, may see them named in Ripalda lib. 1. d. 38. Alex. Alens. 1. p. q. 23.
memb. 3. ar. 4. Thom. cont. Gent. c. 66. Francis. Mayro. 1. p. d. 38 and 39.
Lychet. 1. d. 39. q. 1.
and 37. and may read Aquin. 1. p. d. 38. q. 1. ar. 5. Aureol. 1. d. 38. ar. 1.
Ockam and Gabri. ib. q. unic. ar. 2 and 3. Greg. ib. q. 2. Durand. ib. q. 3.
Fab. d. 54. Cajet. Naz. Bannez, Zumel, Gonzal. Arrub. Molin. Vasq. Fasol. m. 1.
p. q. 14. ar. 3. Tanner. 1. p. d. 2. q. 8. dub. 3. Valent. 1. p. d. 1. a. 14.
p. 3. Suarez li. 3. de Attribut. c. 2. Ruiz d. 10. Bonavent. 1. d. 39. Aquil.
Scotell. in 1. d. 39. q. 2. And on the same a multitude of other known
Scotists, etc.

135. Should I proceed to open to you all or half the questions about which the
Schoolmens acutest wits do but dream, concerning the Knowledge and Decrees of
God, I should weary my self and the Reader to little purpose; If you would see
what the Thomists say of these, Ripalda will direct you where to find them. And
the Scotists and Nominals being fewer are soon found.
such as, An scientia actualis aliorum sit de Essentia Dei? An Essentia Dei sit
Motivum adaequatum ejus scientiae? An Deus cognoscat creaturas ex seipso, aut
ex alio per discursum? An and quomodo scientia Dei possit dividi in plures? An
and quomodo Deus cognoscat Mala? An and quomodo Deus cognoscat negationes and
privationes? An Deus cognoscat Entia rationis? An habeat in se Entia Rationis?
De scientia Media. An scientia Visionis sit causa futurorum? An futur a causa
scientiae? An scientia simplicis intelligentiae sit causa futurorum and
practica? An Deus cognoscat futura compenendo and dividendo? An Deus cognoscat
praesentia eadem indivisibili cognitione, qua ipsa praenovit futura? An Deus
noverit Infinita scientia simplicis intelligentiae? An eadem cognitione se and
creaturas cognoscat? An existente objecto pro solo imperio Voluntatis Divinae
possit non esse in Deo aliquis actus scientiae divino intellectui possibilis?
etc. with a multitude of lesser questions which arise in the handling of these;
And with as many more about Predestination, Gods Decrees or Volitions,
Predetermination, etc. I think rather your patience is put to it sufficiently
already.

136. If you say that by reciting these difficulties, I do but confound men's
understandings, rather than elucidate the things in hand, I answer, If Nic.
D'Orbellis in 1. d. 41. a. 2. Posset dari una responsio generalis ad
quaestiones consimiles; quod debilitas nostri intellectus non sufficit ad
indagandum abyssum judiciorum Divinorum. Nec mirum: cum ad plenum non valeamus
cognoscere modicae herbae seu minimi vermiculi proprietatem.

The very same has Bradwardine, though a presumptuous Schoolman.

See also Vasquez in 1. Thom. q. 19. disp. etc. c. 2. page 503, 504. where he
fully and freely confesses that our understandings are utterly stalled about
Gods Liberty of Will as related to things future. Nodus hic mea quidem
sententia insolubilis est; vix enim vitare possumus circulum in reddenda
ratione: Certissima ratione investigare possumus quid in hac re non sit: Quid
vero sit, verbo explicari difficillimum, aut pro hoc statu impossible est. Qui
autem videt Deum, de ejus Voluntate Libera quatenus principium liberum est
futurorum, long aliter sentiet, and unico verbo exprimet sine hisce
relationibus rationis. See the rest there to the same purpose. And this is the
confession of them all: of which more after.


you are lost in them, I have my end, which is to make you sensible how unmeet
it is, that the Peace of the Church, and the Concord and Communion of Brethren
should at all be laid on such multitudes of difficult and unsearchable things
which are many vain, and others past man's understanding. Shall we call one
another by the names of Sects, and reproach our brethren, as for the truth of
God, and as if it were for his Glory, till all these Controversies are cleared
to us all? I who profess them to be beyond my reach, and profess my Ignorance
of very many of them, am yet censured by my Brethren as too Scholastically
curious for so much as naming them, or meddling with them; yea, and for deciding
cases which may and must be decided: And of all our present Ministers, I am
confident there is not one of fifty (if of a hundred) that has either
thoroughly studied them, or ever will do. Now if the Church must have Love and
Concord, how will it be had? Of those few (one of a hundred that study them
thoroughly) six men it is like are of three opinions. And what shall the ninety
nine do that never so studied them? Either they must know what they never
studied, and be in the Right where they understand not what they say: Or else
they must unite by an Implicit faith. And in whom shall that be? If the Church,
what Church is it? Are not many Churches of many minds? If of the Papal Church,
it has more wit than to decide such Controversies; so that their Doctors are
almost Sectaries by divisions to this day.

137. And if any will dream that the Controversies between the Calvinists and
Lutherans (or Arminians) and the Dominicans and Jesuits can be resolved for
either side without meddling with these questions, he is a person too ignorant
to be fit to speak confidently in the Cause. Let him but try a dispute with any
able adversary, and he shall be carried to these whether he will or not.

138. But if it be one that is so confident on either part, as to think that
his side or opinions are so great and clear, as that the contrary are unfit for
our toleration, and communion, I must be so free with him as to say, that he
bewrays so great Ignorance and Pride, as make his own fitness for communion
much more questionable. For is it not most odious Ignorance, for a man not to
know his own Ignorance of so many mysteries which no mortals know? And is it
not loathsome Pride, for men to be so confident of these false conceits and
arrogate to themselves a knowledge which man's earthly state is incapable of?

139. And it fills me with shame to find, that (though some stir has been
lately made against the Jansenists) yet all these Sects (Dominicans, Jesuits,
Scotists, Nominals, etc.) can live in communion notwithstanding their
differences, when yet the Protestants have prosecuted the same differences with
all that bitterness, which you may find in the Germans Historians and Divines,
(such as Schlusselburgius, Calovius, and many more) and in the sad History of
the Low Countries, and in Heylin's Life of Archbishop Laud, and which you may
still hear in all parties, in their ignorant censures of one another, by the
names of Calvinists and Arminians. And yet the Church of Rome is justly
condemned by us for its uncharitable Cruelty against Dissenters, when thus we
thereby condemn our selves.

SECT. VIII. More of Gods Foreknowledge, and of Permission of Sin.
140. BUt to leave this Wilderness, and speak more of things certain, or such
as belong to us in our measure to know: It is certainly unknown to mortals,
formally, what knowledge is in God (as is aforesaid), and much more in what
Manner he knows either Futures or Contingents, or any Creatures, ex part
scientis.

141. If any particular manner therefore offer it self to your minds, as that
which probably seems to be the right, it may afford you reason therefore to
suspect that it is not the right: Because it is certain that the Manner is past
our reach. And what man can comprehend is infinitely below God.

142. If the Case of Aarons Sons, the Bethshemites, Uzzah, Uzziah, and others
that presumed too boldly to meddle with holy Rituals and Ceremonies was so
dreadful; what is theirs that profanely toss Gods own Name, and pretend to know
that of himself, which they know not, and turn his secrets profanely into
matter of Contention against the Churches of Christ?

143. Either Futurity as such, is Intelligible in it self to God, or else the
things future are Intelligible as in Eternity; or else futurity is intelligible
only in its Causes: We can think of no other way (but God has more than we can
think of.) If it be Intelligible in it self, or as things are In Eternity, the
Controversy is mostly ended: The perfection of Gods understanding then is
proof enough that he knows all that is intelligible. But if it be only in the
Causes, it is either as those Cases necessarily will Cause, or else as freely
and contingently. The first Cause reaches Pennottus propugn. l. 3. c. 11. n.
1. notes, that even the reconciling of the certainty of Divine pre-science
with contingency, was quite past the power of man's understanding in this life,
in the opinion of these subtle Schoolmen, Gabriel 1. d. 38. q. 1. a. 2. Ock^m
ibid. q. 1. Marsil. 1. q. 40. How much more difficult will it be to reconcile
Gods D^crees, and most of all his premotion if pre-determining with contingency?

Plainly and honestly says Bonaventure, in few words, in 1. d. 37. q. 2.
Divina Cognitio quia a re non Causatur, nec dependet, ideo potest esse certa de
re contingenti.


not our Controversy: For sin has no necessitating Cause, but free. The
second is the same difficulty with that in question, viz. How God knows that
a free undetermined Cause (man's Will) will this or that way determine it self?
Nothing is knowable to us as certain from an uncertain cause; which has no
antecedent reason to prove its future self-determination to this more than to
that.

144. If we go to the Jesuits Scientia Media (as it deserves not that name,
so) it is insufficient to this use. For all those circumstances in which God
sore-knoweth that the will shall determine it self, are such as necessitate the
will so to do, or not: If they say the first, they give away their own cause,
and the cause of Religion (speaking of sinful Volitions). If the latter, the
case is still as difficult (and the same) as if they had never mentioned those
circumstances or conditional knowledge: viz. How God knows that a will still
free and not necessitated will choose sin rather than duty? For from
non-necessitating circumstances it follows not.

145. If we go the way of Scotus, and say that he fore-knoweth it in the
determination of his own will de rerum futuritione, either that will is
supposed to be a Causing efficient will; or not? If it be, it reaches not the
case of sin, seeing Gods will does cause no sin. But if not, then still the
difficulty is the same as before, How God that wills the Event, but causes
it not, does know that his Will shall be done? For it is not from the Cause to
the Effect. To say that his own Immutability proves it, is no proof: For if
his Immutability Cause not, the Effect arises not from it: And to say that his
Omnipotency or Absoluteness infers it, is no proof, unless his Omnipotency
Cause it. And to say that it follows Logically Necessitate Consequentiae,
though not Causally necessitate effecti vel consequentis, that what God wills
to be, shall be, is most certain: And so is it from his foreknowledge (which
medium yet the Scotists say is here insufficient.) But that is because it is
here supposed that what God so knows or wills to be future, he wills to
be future by the causation of some Cause: for he wills not any thing to be
without a Cause. Besides that still sin is not willed by him to be future at
all. See in Alliaco after cited the notable reasons by which the Nominals
confute Scotus in this opinion (which yet Dr. Twisse Praef. ad l. de scient.
Med. says did first invite him to School Divinity.)


146. And here I am to confute the foresaid reason of Rada (recited These. 130.)
God, says he, fore-knoweth sin, in that he knows that he decrees to permit
it. And Dr. Twiss often says, that all confess, that Permission certainly
infers the event of the thing permitted. I answer; This also Annatus de
Scient. Media cont. Twiss. grants him cap. 5.. 1. But not as ex ratione
permissionis, but by hypothetical Connotation, Because we use the word
Permission about that which aliunde will be if permitted. So that it is a
Compound notion, when thus used.
There is not so much as any great appearance of the Truth of the consequence
unless limited. To Permit is nothing but non-impedire, not to hinder. And if a
thing will come to pass because it is not hindered, then the world would have
been made without God, and man saved without God, if he would not hinder it.
Try if your work will be done merely by your not hindering it.

147. Indeed the word Permission is often used as a complicate notion, signifying
both the permission and the event permitted: But that is nothing to the nature
of proper permission it self.

148. A man may be hindered, 1. Morally; and that 1. By Commands, 2. By
Threats, 3. By Promise and persuasion; 4. By Gifts; 5. By terrifying stripes on
himself or others. In all these respects God permits not sin, but hinders
it by them all.

149. 2. Or a man may be hindered Physically. And that 1. By to^al restraint
and disabling, 2. Or by lesser impediments which make not the act impossible,
but difficult. God does not always thus hinder sin, and therefore thus he
permits it. He does not disable the sinner, e. g. to lie: And he does not
always render it difficult to him. But it follows not necessarily, that this
will be done, because it is possible; no nor because it is easy or not
difficult to be done.

150. Rui^. de praedet. Tr. 2. di^p. 12.. 1, 2. p. 172. so defines Permission
as I confess so it is positively decreed: viz. (Increatam permissionem Deus non
praed^finit) Creata permissio simul complec^itur qu^rundam rerum productionem
and aliarum rerum negationem, quibus positis peccatum permittitur. And if by
permission they will mean quid positivum, it must have a positive Will and
Cause; but what is that to the Negative, or mere non impedire? (Thus still all
our wranglings shall be but about ambiguo^s words.) His reason. 2. is,
Permission of sin is good: 1. Negatio Volitionis essicacis qua Deus impediret
peccatum. (And he said that permissio increata is not decreed.) 2. Negatio
motivorum, etc. 3. Prod^ctio and Constitutio circumstantlarum. 4. Generalis
concursus. Ans. 1. Nothing is not Good: mere Negations are Nothing. 2. Moral
Negations or Logical (that is, Denial and restraints) are something, and have a
Cause. 3. Production and Concursus are something and have a Cause; but so is
not a me^r non-impedition, which is proper permission.
But the Case differs as to permitting of a propense agent, and an
indifferent agent, and a contrarily disposed agent. To permit a stone to
ascend, will not make it ascend. To permit the Air to move, will not make it
move. But to permit a stone in the Air to fall, I think with Durandus, is
enough to make it fall, supposing the continuation of the Nature of it and all
circumstances. And so is it in permitting some sinners to sin.

151. But yet here we must distinguish, 1. Between a necessary and a free
agent, 2. Between Adams sinning and ours; 3. And between the sin of a man
strongly inclined or but weakly, or that has many disswasions or but few. 1.
Though a bad man be under a moral necessity of sinning in the general, that is,
of not living innocently, yet he is not under a necessity of committing every
sin that he commits: nor is it a valid consequence, He is a bad man: Ergo he
will do this, and that, and the other Sin: Because a free agent often acts
contrary to his habits. 2. And some Sinners have so great impediments in
sinning, that they stand long in aequilibrio before the act. 3. And Adam had no
more propensity to his first sin, than to the contrary: So that bare permission
will not infer the Certainty of all sin, atleast; and therefore will not here
serve turn.

152. But says Rada, it is not common permission, but also a withdrawing of
effectual helps against sin. Answ. 1. God did not so by Adam at first. 2. But
are sufficient or necessary helps also withdrawn, as well as effectual? If so,
then Adam was as much necessitated to sin by God, as he was to dye by Gods
withdrawing his Vital influx or sustentation, and it would have been as
naturally Impossible for him not to sin, as to live without God. But if not so,
then while Necessary Grace, called sufficient, is continued, the withdrawing of
any other infers not a necessity of sinning. But indeed it is an unproved
and improbable fiction, that God withdrew from Adam any Grace which he had
given him, till Adam cast it away.

It is therefore no good Illation, Deus permittit aliquem peccare: ergo peccat:
unless by permitting you mean withholding necessary help; which is more than
proper permission.

153. And it must be remembered that God is far from a total permission or
non-impedition of sin: He always hinders it so far as to forbid it, to
threaten damnation to affright men from it, to promise salvation and all
felicity to draw men from it: He tells men of the vanity of all which would
allure them to it; And his daily mercies, and corrections should withhold men
from it. Only by doing no more, nor effectually changing or restraining
sinners, but leaving them to their own choice under all these moral restraining
means, he permits sin.

154. But it is also confessed, that when by great sin these means themselves
are forfeited, some of them are oft-times withdrawn or not given: And so some
are without that Teaching, those mercies or those corrections which others
have: But yet they are still under a Law of Grace.

155. And it is still supposed that God as the first Cause of Nature, upholdeth
man in the Nature which he gave him; and concurreth with it as the first Mover
and Universal Cause: And therefore that man's Inclination to Felicity, Truth and
Goodness which is Natural, does continue. Otherwise it is confessed, that
Permission would infer sin materially, but no sin formally, if by permission
be meant Gods withdrawing Reason, Freewill, or executive power.

156. But I easily confess, that if the Dominicans predetermining Premotion Or
Bradwardines Effective Volition as necessary and productive of all that comes
to pass.
in sinful actions could be proved, that would certainly infer the event of
sin; And if God decreed so to pre-determine the will, sin may be fore known in
that decree. And if Scotus or the rest had been of that mind, they had never
omitted that easy solution of the Case, How God fore-knoweth sin? But this I
have elsewhere confuted, and shall add a little here.

157. But first (having disproved all these presumptions of Gods way of
fore-knowing future sin) I shall in a word tell you the answer which may and
must satisfy us; which is, [That Gods Understanding is Infinite, and therefore
extends by its own perfection unto all things intelligible; But How his
understanding reaches them, what Idea's he has of them, how they are
Intelligible to him, with such like, are sinful presumptuous questions of blind
men, who know not their own ignorance. And no manner of understanding is
properly Divine, which mortals can comprehend.]

SECT. IX. Of Predestination and Free Will (of which see more Sect. 20. against
Mr. Rutherford.)
158. THough Pre-determination belong to Gods Execution, and be after his
Volitions in order, yet because I am now only to speak of it, as a pretended
medium of his knowledge of sin, and as quid decretum, I shall touch it here. It
is confessed that there is no substance which God is not the Maker of (besides
himself); Nor any Action of which he is not the first Cause.

159. God may well be called the perfect first Cause of humane Actions, in that
he gives man all his Natural faculties, and a Power to Act or not act at this
time, or to choose this or that, and as the Fountain of Nature and Life and
Motion, does afford his Influx necessary to this free agency. So that when ever
any Act is done, as an Act in genere, God is the first Cause of it: For it is
done by the Power which he gives and continues, and by his Vital Influx; And
there is no Power used to produce it which is not given by God.

160. An Act as such, has no Morality in it, but is quid natural; And so it
is from God as he is fons naturae. But the Morality of an Act is formally the
Relative Rectitude or obliquity of it, referred to Gods Governing Will or Law,
and to his amiable Goodness or Will as it is man's End. And Materially it is
(not the Act as such, but) the Act as exercised on an unmeet object rather than
on a meet one, or to an undue End rather than a due End, or else the Omission
of the Act as to the due End and Object, which is the sin, and the fundamentum
of the sinfulness; and so e contra.

161. This Comparative mode of exercise adds no proper Physical Entity at all
to the General nature of the Act as such. In Omissions (of Loving, Trusting,
Fearing, Serving God) there is no Natural Act, but a privation of it. In
committed sins, to Love this Object rather than that, has no more Natural
Entity than to Love that rather than this; and no more than is in the general
nature of Love as such. A modus Entis is not Ens: But this Comparative choice,
is but the Modus Modi entis: For an Action is but Modus Entis, and this is but
a modus actionis.

162. It is therefore an invalid argument which is the All of the Dominicans,
that Man should be a Causa prima, and so be God, if he could determine his own
will without Gods pre-determining pre-motion; and there should be some being in
the world which God is not the Cause of: For this morality and modality is no
proper being above the Act as such.

163. If any will litigate de nomine entis, let them call it Being or nobeing
as they please; but it is such as God can make a Creature able to do. And he
that dare say that God Almighty who made all the World, is not Able to make a
Creature that can determine his own will to this object rather than to that,
under Divine Universal Influx, without Divine pre-determining pre-motion, on
pretense that his wit does find a contradiction in it, is bolder against God,
than I shall be. And if God can do it, we have no reason to doubt whether it be
done.

164. Men seem not in denying this, to consider the signification of the word
It is a contradiction therefore of Dr. Twisse who often says, that God denied to
Adam no grace ad posse, but he denied him grace necessary ad agere: For he has
not the Power who has not that which is necessary to the act.

Vid. Rad. li. 1. Cont. 29. art. 1. page 457.


[POWER] when they confess that God gives man the Power to choose or refuse,
and yet say that it is Impossible for him to Act by it, without the said
pre-motion. If so, It was only a Power to Choose when predetermined to it. He
that has a proper Power to Choose, is Able to Choose, and Can Choose, by that
Power.

165. God therefore is truly the first Cause of the Act by Giving the Power,
and doing all that belongs to the fons naturae to the exercise. And he is the
first Cause of our Liberty in making us free-agents; and he is the first Cause
of the Moral Goodness of our actions, by all that he does by his Laws,
Providence and Grace to make them good. But he is no way the first Cause of
them as evil.

166. When we say that God causes the Act of sin as Causa universalis,
Bellarmin's Universal Cause, seems the same wi^^ what Durandus means. And
Pennottus denying Durandus's opinion, says, l. 4. c. 16. p. 212. Non quod
evidenter sequatur ex hac opinione dari duo prima rerum principia: Multi enim
Philosophi, ut Plato, Aristot. ^gnoverunt unum primum principium omnium, and
tamen non agnoverunt istud primum principium ess^ causam immediatam omnium
esse^luum Causarum sec^ndarum.
the sense of this word must needs be opened by this distinction. A Cause is
called Universal, 1. In praedicando, Logically; And so Artifex is causa
universalis rei artificialis, and Statuarius est Causa particularis, and
Polycletus est causa singularis hujus statuae. 2. In causande, as to the
effect. And so that is an Universal Cause, whose causality extends to many
effects. And this is twofold: 1. When it is the cause of somewhat common to
all those effects, but not of all that is proper to each, unless its causality
be otherwise (as by the dispositio recipientis) determined. And so the Sun is
causa universalis of the sweetness of the Rose, and the stink of the Dunghill,
etc. And so God is the Causa universalis ut fons naturae, by his common
sustaining and moving Influx, of all sinful actions, 2. When it is the Cause of
those actions, not only as to that which is common to them all, but as to that
which is proper to each by which they differ from one another, and that of it
self, and not as determined by the dispositio recipientis, or by any other
cause. And so God is the Universal Cause of all that is merely physical in all
beings and actions; As in Generation, etc. which is properly to say that he is
at once, both Cause universalis, particularis and singularis. And how far he is
thus also the Cause of all the moral Good of all Actions I must open to you
more distinctly in the third part. But of the sinful morality of Actions he is
not such a Cause; but only a mere Universal as aforesaid.

167. They that denying our self-determining power, do make Volition, and
free-Volition to signify the same, and Cogency to be nothing but to make men
willing and unwilling both at once in the same act, do seem rather to jest,
than seriously dispute. And to define Free Will, to be only Lubentia vel
Volitio secundum rationem, is no other. For Velle juxta rationem, is no more
than Velle; the Will being the Rational Appetite distinct from the sensitive.
And if Velle and Libere Velle be all one, why do we blind the World with words,
and do not plainly put the case whether man has any will, and not whether his
Will be free? And if to take away its Liberty or constrain it, be nothing else
but to make the same numerical act which is a Volition simultaneously to be no
Volition, or not the Volition of another thing, the question whether the will
may be constrained is ridiculous. If the will be not forced as long as it
wills, or wills juxta rationem, then to question whether it can will by
constraint, is to question whether it can at once will and not will; Of this
see Ie Blanks excellent Theses de lib. arbitrio absolut.

The definition of Alvar^^ of Free Will is [lib. arbitrium est facultas
voluntatis and rationis ad utrumlibet agendum vel non agendum and agendum unum
vel alterum] which Rivet rests in, and fitteth the doctrine of necessitation;
but I think expresses not Liberty strictly taken: It may be ad utrumlibet if
Satan had a power to move it as I move my pen.

Bellarmine's is [lib. arb. est libera potestas ex his quae ad finem aliquem
conducunt unum prae alio eligendi, aut unum and idem respuendi vel acceptandi
pro arbitrio nostro ad magnam Dei gloridm concessa] which Paraeus dissenteth
not from. But all defining is vain, ^ill the ambiguous word [Freedom] be
distinguished, and the sense accordingly variously stated.


yet is this description only of Liberty and constraint too common with some.

168. But if this were so, then 1. The suspension of the will might be
nevertheless by force or restraint: which is a non velle; And so when they say
Voluntatem ab ipso Deo non cogi posse, because when it acts it acts
willingly, (that is, when it wills, it wills) the consequence holds not,
because it may be forced from all action: (unless they mean that it cannot
nolle and non agere at once). 2. And if this were so, then either they mean
that God cannot naturally necessitate the will to act, or that such a natural
necessitation consists with its Liberty. If the first, they destroy their
doctrine of Predetermination: For what is that but Gods Physical irresistible
efficacious premotion, determining the will to act? And what is natural
necessitation if this be not? If the latter, then they contradict their own
definition of Liberty, which they often give us, that it is Liberty from natural
necessity (which Twiss calls Libertas naturae distinct from Libertas
conditionis, vel civilis.) And what more natural necessity than that which
refulteth from that premotion of God as the first cause of all action, without
which no agent natural or free can act, and which none can resist?

169. Their opinion of Liberty also leaves no difference between brutish
appetite or spontaneity, and free will, save only that this does follow reason:
which indeed is a difference of Guides, but not of Liberty.

170. And according to this opinion, if God gave Satan power to move any man's
will to sin by as true a physical motion and as unresistible as I move my pen,
it were no constraint, nor loss of natural Liberty, because it is moved to be
Willing.

171. And if they lay all on the Acts congruity to the Habit or Inclination,
then if Satan could infuse unresistibly into the Will, an Inclination to hate
God or to any sin, and then physically determine it according to that
inclination, it were no force, or loss of natural liberty.

172. But I think he that by irresistible efficiency makes a man's will wicked
both in its Inclination and Acts, does incomparably more against him and his
liberty, than he that could force his tongue or hand against his will, or he
that only tempted and persuaded him.

173. The grand Reasons why we cannot receive the Dominicans doctrine of
predetermining premotion, are elsewhere given; I now name but these three, 1.
Because (whatever vain talk is used to blind men) it makes God the
sole-total-first-necessitating cause of all the sin that is committed in the
world, or can be. 2. It unavoidably destroys the Christian faith: For if God
be really the said determining Cause of all lies and other sins in the world,
then his Veracity which is the formal object of faith, is gone: And no mortal
man can tell whether Prophets and Apostles are predetermined to speak true or
false, nor when God moves them to the one or the other: For to Call their
motion by the name of Inspiration, will satisfy no man, that Gods Inspiration
can do any more (at least to interest himself in the act) than his necessary
physical premoving determination. 3. Because it feigneth God to damn most of
the world for not-conquering God, who insuperably predetermined them to the
forbidden act; that is, for not being Gods, or greater than God: And that he
sent Christ to die only for those sins which he thus pre-moved us to
irresistibly, and it was as impossible to forbear, as to touch the Moon.

174. In the issue of all these Controversies, the sharpest contenders seem
agreed, whether they will or no: Arminius grants that all events of sin or
damnation are from eternity necessary necessitate consequentiae, Bonavent. in
1. d. 38. q. 1. Resol. Praescientia Dei rebus praescitis necessitatem non
imponit cum ^o modo res cognoscat quo futurae sunt -- Duplex est necessitas:
Absoluta quae opponitur Contingentiae, dicitur necessitas consequentis:
Respectiva dicitur necessitas consequentiae: and haec non opponitur
contingentiaeut si ambulat, movetur -- In praescito non est necessitas
absoluta, sed solum consequentiae.

Nicol. D'Orbellis 1. d. 38. dub. 1. Duplex est necessitas, Consequentiae and
consequentis: Been sequitur necessitate consequentiae, Deus novit me cras
sessurum, ergo sedebo: consequens tamen est contingens -- ut homo currit, ergo
movetur.

Nos concedimus Liberum arbitrium in ^o quod agit, liberum esse ab omni
necessitate, ut proprie non possit necessario agere quoad exercitium sui actus;
quamvis respectu Divinae ordinationis certo and infallibiliter agat. Ames.
Bellarm. Enervat. To. 4. l. 4. c. 1. He means it of a caused physical
necessity, no doubt.


which is (as is said) but a Logical necessity in ordine probandi: that is, It
is a good consequence, [This God fore-knoweth, ergo it will come to pass:] And
it is only the necessitas consequentis which he denies; (which Rob. Baronius
Metaph. calls necessitas causata, and I had rather call necessitas effecti)
which is in ordine productionis. And Dr. Twiss does sharply reprehend him for
feigning that he or any others do assert any more than necessitas
consequentiae: And brings in the testimony of many Schoolmen professing
concordantly that there is no more than this, which also foreknowledge it self
will infer; It Is worth the reciting: Vindic. Great. Li. 2. p. 1. Digres. 5.
[Quid quod ab eruditis eadem statuitur necessitas ab utraque profluens, tam a
praescientia Dei quam ab ipsius Voluntate. Nam licet Arminius voluerit
necessitatem a Dei voluntate profectam esse necessitatem Consequentis, a
praescientia vero promanantem duntaxat Consequentiae; aliter tamen visum est
magnis Theologis. Sic enim Durandus [Non been dicunt illi qui dicunt quod omnia
de necessitate eveniant per comparationem ad Voluntatem divinam; quia omnia
respectu Voluntatis Divinae eveniunt libere; and ideo absolute loquendo possunt
non evenire.] Expressius Bonaventura [Dei voluntatem absolutam necesse est
impleri; conditionalem vero minime: sed advertendum quod est necessitas
consequentiae, sicut praedictum est de praescientia: Ipsa enim non habet
necessitatem consequentis sed consequentiae; Quia necessario infertur and
sequitur, Deus praescivit hoc; Ergo hoc erit: Sed tamen non necessario
praescit: quia in actu praesciendi frequenter notatur effectus contingens. Sic
intelligendum est quod Voluntas Dei absoluta connotat eventum rei, and ideo est
ibi necessitas consequentiae: sed non consequentis; quia non mutat eventum rei
-- unde sicut praescientia quia necessario infert effectum, non potest falli:
sic voluntas absoluta quia necessario infert (that is, in arguing) non potest
impediri.] Annatu^ de scient. Med. cont. Twiss de Liberate cap. 6. seems not
to understand him, as to this Necessity consequentiae, which is not at all
Causal of the event, but of the Conclusion in arguing; Leaving it out, from
whence the event is.


Ita Trigosius in sum. Theol. Bonav. [Effectus contingentes and liberi si
comparentur ad scientiam, providentiam, and Voluntatem Dei dicuntur necessarii
secundum quid, sive ex suppositione, quae necessitas vocatur conditionalis and
consequentiae, non tamen absoluta and consequentis. -- Quoniam istae
consequentiae sunt optimae [Deus praescivit hoc futurum, Ergo erit: Deus vult
aliquid fieri; Ergo fiet eo modo quo voluerit, and quando voluerit; Quia non
stat dari antecedens verum and consequens falsum.]

Istis ad amussim congruentia sunt Aquinatis illa [Quamvis Voluntas Dei sit
immutabilis and invincibilis, non tamen sequitur quod etiam effectus sit
necessarius necessitate absoluta -- sed solum conditionata, sicut and de
praescientia dictum est.] But the word [effectus] here is more than the rest
say.

And more fully ibid. sect. 18. page (Vol. min.) 230. [Quid quod Scholastici,
nominatim vero Aquinas and Durandus (nec quenquam novi aliter sentientem, N.
B.) non aliam agnoscunt necessitatem rerum, ratione Voluntatis Dei, quam quae
dici potest necessitas consequentiae.]

And yet plainer ibid. sect. 18. page 332. c. 2. [At ea necessitas quam juxta
nostram sententiam oriri putat Arminius ex Decreto Dei, revera non tam ex
Decreto Dei fluit, (quod monuit Perkinsius, and vere,) quam ex suppositione
decreti divini, in Argumentatione scilicet: quoties scilicet posito decreto Dei
de re aliqua futura, legitime infertur necesse esse ut suo tempore futura sit.
At hujusmodi necessitas nihilo minus evincitur ex suppositione actus liberi
cujuscunque quam ex suppositione decreti Divini: etenim posito quod existat
actus liber, necesse est ut existat.]

175. We are all agreed then what Necessity it is that foreknowledge, decree,
and providence infer as to the acts of sin: viz. of Logical consequence. Let
them now but make it good that their Physical efficient predetermining
premotion causes no other, and I will contradict it no more.

176. But whereas they constantly say that God predetermineth man's will to the
mode as well as to the act, that it be done freely as well as that it be done;
if Willingness and freedom were all one, I would grant it, on their grounds.
But if an Immediate-Physical-predetermining -efficient premotion, and an
invincible causation of Habit and Act by the first Cause, bring no other
necessity but of Logical sequel, and be no real cause of the thing it self, I
confess I understand not what they mean, nor know what Liberty is, if the will
have not a Power to act without such a Predetermination.

177. The same I say of Camero's and others way of predetermining by Vid.
Bellar. de lib. arbitr. l. 3. c. 8. prop. 6. Pennot. propug. li. 1. c. 23. p.
46, 47, etc. Scot. 2. d. 25. Henric. quodlib. 1. q. 16. Bannes 1. p. q. 83. a
1. dub. 2. Cont. 2. Suar. Met. q. 19. sect. 6. Vasquez 1. p. d. 67. n. 14.
a chain of necessitating Causes, viz. that God by the object necessitateth the
act of the Intellect in specie. 2. And that the Intellect necessitateth the
will. For all comes to one, if all sinful Volitions be necessitated. Nor will
it satisfy any man well that Camero does resolve all man's sin into the Devils
temptation as a necessitating cause, till he know into what to resolve the
Devils sin: And he may turn Manichee in time that can believe that God gave the
Devil power to necessitate innocent man to sin, and bring all sin and misery on
the world; much more he that says, that God did all this himself.

178. As there is Libera Voluntas, and Liberum arbitrium, or Libertas
Voluntatis, and Libertas hominis, so there is a coaction or constraint of the
Co-action in sensu composito is a contradiction and impossible: but not in
sensu diviso; to be forcibly or by unresistible power made willing of unwilling.

Yet in a large sense I confess that Voluntarium qua tale est liberum.


Will and of the Man. I should take my Will to be constrained, if by an
unresistible power it were suddenly made impious in act and habit, or either.
But the man is not said to be constrained, so long as he has his Will.

179. The unhappy descriptions of free will, which I mentioned, Jansenius has
To. 3. li. 6. de Great. Salvat. cap. 5. and 6. And Annatus de Incoacta Liberate
confuteth them at large: As [Implicat contradictionem ut Voluntas seu Volitio
non sit libera, sicut implicat ut Volendo non velimus. Latet Contradictio in
eorum dictis qui dicunt Voluntatem, id est, Volitionem esse posse quae non sit
libera. Apud Augustinum esse liberam, and esse aliquam hominis and Angeli
Voluntatem seu Volitionem pro iisdem prorsus usurpantur. Voluntas seu Volitio,
and libera Voluntas idem est, sicut and Velle and libere Velle: and Impossible
est ut Velle non sit liberum -- ] Lege etiam Annatum and Petavium Cont.
Vincent. Lerinens.; and Pennoti propugnacul. haec before tractans.

180. The Liberty of the will consists not in such an Indifferency as Leg.
Guil. Camerar. Scot. Disp. Philos. Moral. qu. 4. for Gibie^fs sense of Liberty
as not involving defectibility.
leaves it in aequilibrio equally inclined to this or that (As Macedo against
Tho. White confesses with others;) For then all Habits or Inclinations to this
rather than that, destroyed Liberty: But in an Indetermination with a Power of
self-determining: which power is called Indifferent, because it is a Power to
this or that, and not because it is equally inclined, no nor equally a Power to
either. For there may be inequality.

181. When Dr. Twiss. de Scient. Med. l. 2. c. 3. p. 265.

Annat. de Scient. Med. Disp. 1. c. 6.. 5. p. 135.


Twisse with Bradwardine Vid. Bradward. l. 3. c. 10, 11. and passim.
about the definition of freewill, (which positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis
potest agere vel non agere) limiteth [omnibus] to second causes, Annatus
plays upon his oversight, as if he said that [Agere posset voluntas sine
requisitis ex part causae primae.] But no doubt Dr. Twisse meant the
limitation as to the non-agere only: and that with the explication [non quasi
motio Divina sit inter ejusmodi prae-requisita quae voluntatem creatam
indifferentem relinquat.] Though indeed we cannot imagine that the causae
secundae should operate and ponere omnia ad agendum requisita sine prima. And
we may well say indeed that Voluntas potest non agere, if the second cause only
do its part, when non potest omnino agere. This therefore should be better
opened.

182. If by [omnibus requisitis] be meant only [mere necessariis sine quibus
agere non potest Voluntas] this takes not away the Moral (much less the
Natural) Power ad agendum vel non-agendum, nor necessarily determines it. But
there may be such an effectual or That August. Anselm^, I ^mbard, Aquin.
Scotus, held some Liberty con^stent with necessity, see their words cited by
Pennottus li. 1. c. 15. p. 32. And so does Alph. a Castr. advers. Here Is. in ^b.
Liberl. for which see Rada ^^^ 1. most accur^tely.
potent operation on the will, as shall Certainly and Constantly determine it,
by causing to determine it self: and antecedently take away its Moral power ad
contrarium, though not its Natural. Of the difference between the Natural and
Moral power, I shall somewhat insist, and elsewhere more at large.

183. The Natural Liberty of the Will must be distinguished from its Moral
Liberty (from evil dispositions) and its Political Liberty (from restraining
Laws.)

184. The Natural Liberty seems to Quid sit Libertas, vide Ockam Quodl. 1. q.
16. and Soncin. Meta. l. 9. q. 17. and Scot. 1. d. 39. lit. F. and Waldens.
Doct. sid. antiq. li. 1. c. 25. and Medin. 1. 2. q. 6. art. 2. Bannes 1. p. q.
83. art. 1. dub. 2. concl. 2. prob. 4. and many desinit. cited by Pennottus l.
1. c. 33. p. 63. Vid. Pennol. l. 1. c. 3. five senses of Liberty: But it is no
perfect distribution. And whereas cap. 14. he makes only Election as distinct
from Volition (in four respects) to be the formal act of the Will as free, it
is true as freedom is taken in the narrowest sense, as above cited: But there
is a freedom also of all Volitions: And there is One common Notion of Liberty
which is a genus to both. And he confesieth that the will ad finem is free
quoad exercitium actus.
consist in these three things; 1. That the Will as a finite dependent
Creature, be a Power given and upheld by God of self-determining or morally
specifying its own acts, without any necessitating Pre-determiner (Divine or
humane.) Where note that all Divine Predetermination takes not away that
Liberty: But not to be able to determine it self without Divine Physical
Efficient Predetermination, is inconsistent with its Natural Power and Liberty.
2. Liberty contains the Wills Empire over the inseriour faculties
(respectively with variety, Despotical or Political.) 3. To be from under the
power of any creature, as to necessitation.

185. As the Posse Velle hoc vel illud, velle aut non velle (in quibusdam) sine
divina vel alia extrinsica praedeterminatione, is the Wills Natural Liberty, so
not to be pre-determined to sin, (in act or habit) by God or creatures, is the
Wills Political Freedom, or Libertas Condition is, as Dr. Twisse calls it:
which God himself has given it, and never takes away from it.

186. And to be Habitually and Actually Holy, is the Wills Ethical Liberty;
which all men have lost so far as they are corrupted by sin: and all men have
recovered, so far as they are sanctified by Grace. This is the Free Will which
Grace restores to us.

187. Habits do not determine the Will infallibly per modum nature, or
necessitate its act. Because a man often acts contrary to habits.

188. There are some things which Natural Inclination infallibly causes the
Will to determine it self to, without the loss of its primary natural Liberty.

189. For all Liberty lies not in such an Indifferency as Morally may fall
either way: But a certain Natural Liberty is consistent with a constant
certainty of self-determination ex Inclinatione Naturali, as 1. To a simple
Aug. de Not. and Great. cap. 46. Perquam absurdu^n est ut ideo dicamus non
pertinere ad Voluntatem nostram quod beati esse volumus, quia id omnino nolle
non p^ssumus: -- nec dicere aud^mns ideo Deum non Voluntatem, sed necessitatem
^aoere justitiae, quia non potest V^lle pectar^. He that would fully see the
sense of August in, Prospen and Fulgentius de ^ibert. with least labor, let
him read all their own words in Paul. Iren. his ^ias Patru^.
Volition of our own felicity; 2. As to a simple Volition Boni sensibilu qua
talis. 3. As to a Volition medii unici, noti, ubi nihil repugnat.

190. And yet here, I mean but quoad specificationem actus: For quoad
exercitium it may be omitted. 2. I confine it to simple Volition, which may
consist with The common doctrine that Election or comparate Volition is only de
Mediis, is false: No one thing is necessarily our end. God is refused by the
wicked: Felicity may be refused if put in competition with pub-lick good or
Gods will. He is a Beast that would not choose to be annihilated, rather than
the World or Kingdoms should be annihilated. But the simple Volition here is
neces^ary.
Comparate Nolition of the same thing.

191. Some Habits are so strong, that (with the Concurrence of convenient
objects and circumstances,) the Will does never act against them; and though
they do not absolutely necessitate, nor take away the Natural power ad
contrarium, yet do they constantly procure that power to determine it self well
or ill according to them, as resembling a Natural In^lination in some degree.

192. That which is commonly called Liberty is not the greatest excellency of
the will or felicity of man; An indifferent and undetermined state, is a middle
state between that of Brutes and Angels, and is fitted to a Viators condition.
But so far as Grace and Holy Habits fix the will to a constant certain
self-determination to Good, so far is it set in such a Liberty of excellency as
Gibieuf describes, above our state of loose indifferency.

193. Because Order is necessary to a clear and full understanding, and all our
controversies are indeed resolved into this of Free Will, I will here delineate
it, as I understand it.

I. FREE WILL as to the Quid nominis is ambiguous as to the Object, and is

I. Libertas proprie dicta: Quae semper est Libertas ab aliquo Malo, viz. I. A
malo Effecto viz. 1. A Peccato 1. Actuali 2. Habituali. 2. A Miseria 1.
Privativa 2. Positiva.
II. A Mali Efficiente I. Physice. I. Supra nos: (Deus Optimus Malum peccati
non efficit.) II. Intra nos: Ab inclinatione Naturali determinante ad malum.
III. Extra nos, viz. a 1. Personis. 1. Angel^s 1. Bonis, qui nec volunt nec
possunt. 2. Malis: qui non possunt.
2. Hominibus: qui non possunt.
2. Rebus: Objectis, etc. quae non necessitant.

II. Moraliter. I. Supra nos: (Deus peccatum non Causat moraliter.) II. Intra
nos 1. Ab ipsius Voluntatis 1. Prava Inclinatione. 2. Malis Habitibus. 3.
Actibus, (ad pejus ducentibus.)
2. Ab ignorantia and errore Intellectus. 3. Ab inferiorum facultatum (sensus,
phantasiae, etc.) tentatione.
III. Extra nos, viz. ab 1. Angelis 1. Bonis: Qui neminem ad malum alliciunt.
2. Malis: 1. Quoad tentationum species: 2. Gradus.
2. Hominibus, viz. 1. Ne Tyrannide 1. Bona vetent, 2. Mala praecipiant. 2. Ne
falsa doctrina Intellectum corrumpant. 3. Ne practice nos tentent 1. Illecebris
2. Nocumentis.
3. A Rebus 1. Terrorem incutientibus, etc. 2. Allicientibus.


III. A Causa Mali Deficiente, viz. 1. Deficientia Physica: 2. Deficientia
Morali
distinguenda, ut ante de Causa efficiente videre est.


II. Libertas Improprie dicta: cum illud dicitur Libertas 1. Quod Majus quid
est, ut Dominatio. 2. Quod Minus: utpote Boni nihil continens:
viz. I. Ad supra, viz. Libertas 1. A Dei Gubernatione, per Leges and judicium.
2. A Dei Attractione and Determinatione Gratiosa and finali. 3. A Dei Dominio
and dispositione arbitraria.
II. Ad Intra, Libertas 1. A Voluntatis Inclinatione naturali ad Bonum
natural. 2. A Voluntatis Habitu Confirmato, and Perfectione, Inclinante ad
bonum spirituale, Deum scilicet, sanctitatem, coelestia. 3. Ab Intellectus
Lumine, specificante actum per Boni intuitum.
III. Ad Extra, viz. 1. Libertas ab Angelorum Gubernatione and Auxiliis. 2. Ab
Hominum 1. Instructione per doctrinam. 2. Regimine necessario per Leges. 3.
Auxiliis amicis (in spiritualibus, etc.)
3. A Bonitatis Objectivae determinante attractione.



I mention all these Objective Distinctions, as about the Common use and abuse
of the Name of LIBERTY or Free Will, that you may be able to examine men's words
that shall mention it.

194. II. As to the thing it self: passing by our, 1. Moral Liberty from Sin.
2. Our Political Liberty from restraints of Rulers. 3. I shall speak only of
the Natural Liberty in hand: And there show I. Quid sit, viz. I. Essentialiter.
1. Voluntatem esse sub Deo principium propriae determinationis, and actuum
suorum Dominam, potentem se praedeterminare sine necessitante
praedeterminatione, Divina vel extrinseca. 2. Imperare caeteris facultatibus
(sed diverse.) 3. Absolute, direct and proprie, nulli subjici praeter Deum,
viz. I. Ab extra. 1. Non Angelis vel Daemonibus. 2. Non Hominibus,
imperantibus, suadentibus, etc. 3. Non Objectis, (sicut est appetitus brutorum.)
II. Ab intra. 1. Non sensibus vel phantasiae, dum objecta praesentant. 2. Non
Passionibus; (tametsi molestiam ei facessant.) 3. Non Intellectui: Qui dirigit;
non imperat.

II. Consequenter. I. In voluntate: Hinc nihil potest 1. Imprimere ei malas
Inclinationes, nec auferre bonas. 2. Efficere malos Habitus, aut auferre bonos
(necessario.) 3. Determinare eam ad Actus malos necessario.
II. In Persona: Et ita Personae Liberum Arbitrium est, Me 1. Bonum vel Malum
morale posse agere, si velim. 2. Posse Mereri si velim, and malum non commereri
posse invitum. 3. Posse foelicem esse si velim, and non Infoelicem nisi
Voluntario peccantem.


II. Qualis sit: Estque Libertas Voluntatis, I. Conjuncta cum necessitate
conven^^ ente naturali, 1. In Volitione simplici seu Amore propriae
foelicitatis, 2. In Volitione simplici seu Amore Boni sensibilis, 3. In
Volitione Medii unici foelicitatis, omnimode boni,
Quoad Actus specificationem. II. Separata a necessitate naturali, viz. 1. In
Subjectione and Amore erga Causam primam (Creatorem.) 2. In Volitione simplici
Dei ut Finis, and Boni spiritualis. 3. In Electione Finis ubi plures
praesentantur. 4. In Electione Mediorum ubi diversa offeruntur. 5. In Actu
Intendendi finem electum, quoad Exercitium. 6. In Usu Mediorum, and
facultatibus subditis imperandis.

III. Quotuplex sit Libertas Voluntatis; Estque 1. Libertas Contradictionis,
vel Exercitii, viz. Velle aut Non-velle; Nolie a^t Non-nolle. 2.
Contrarietatis, seu specificationis quoad Actum, viz. Velle aut Nolle. 3.
Competitionis, Comparationis, vel Contrarietatis, vel specificationis, quoad
Objecta: viz. Velle aut Hoc aut Illud; Nolle Hoc vel Illud.



195. If any man will dispute about Free Will named and not defined or Vid.
D'Orbellis n. 2. d. 25. d^^. 2. d^ distinct. lib^^ a^bit^ii.
distinguished, nor tell us in what sense he takes it; or if Divines will
tediously and fiercely dispute An sit, before they Agree or prove, Quid sit,
they are fitter to be pitied, than to be read or heard.

SECT. X. Of Natural and Moral Power as foreseen.
196. ANd having here anticipated the Doctrine of Free Will, I will (as fittest
for the Readers use) connex the Difference of the Natural and Moral Power of
the Will or Man, as it comes under Prescience and Decree. If you will put the
question, Whether homo lapsus sine auxilio gratiae po ^it resistere gravi
tentationi? Vel An possit essica^iter diligere Deum sine gratiae speciali
auxilio, etc. The Schoolmen will ordinarily say, No, as well as Protestants.
Vid. Careres Sum. Theol. 22. cap. 1. p. 11, 12, etc.


Power is called Natural in all these respects: 1. Because it is in our Natures
and we have it from our birth. 2. Because it is essential to the soul. 3.
Because it operateth per modum merae naturae, quantum in se, and not freely.
Man's soul has three Powers called Faculties, The Vital-Active, The
Intellective, and The Volitive Power: Of which the two first are natural in all
these three respects, in themselves considered: But the Will is natural only in
the two first respects; And so are the other two so far as they are imperate by
the Will, being, as imperate, participatively Free.

197. Power is called Moral, 1. Because it is it self Morally Good or Evil, as
a Disposition of the soul. 2. Because it is a Power to Moral Actions. 3.
Because it is not called A POWER in the strict physical sense, but Morally,
that is, Reputatively, called Quasi Potentia.

198. Two things are called a Moral Power: 1. The Natural Powers themselves,
not simply as Natural, but as thus Morally qualified. 2. The Moral disposition
of the Natural powers. Natura humana, e^usque potentiae Naturales, quamv^s mere
naturales sint, sibi innatam proserunt potentiam receptivam gratiae, immo ^tiam
potentiam activam ^x se aptam ut simul cum divino auxilio vitalit^r producat
supernatural^m actum fidei, charitatis, etc. Ruiz.


199. Morality is first seated in the Will, and from it our Power is first
called Moral: But yet it is secondarily in the other two faculties.

200. As to Dr. Twisse his saying, that Potentia non fundatur in Potentia,
(Moralis scilicet in Naturali, and as others say, Accidens non fundatur in
accidente:) I answer 1. Potentia univoce sic dicta non fundatur in potentia:
But this is not such. 2. It is false that accidens non fundatur in accidente,
as the instance of Relation proves: The term [Accident] is indeed so
ambiguous, as proves that the distribution of all things first into Substance
and Accidents is not genuine and congruous, but inept. If you will call Calor,
Lumen, or Motus Accidents, and call Gradus also an Accident, and then say, that
Caloris, Luminis, Motus, non dantur diversi gradus, because Accidentis non est
accidens, you are not to be believed. And if you will say that Ordo is an
Accident, and that Qualitatum, Actionum, etc. non datur or do, it is false. 3.
But the worst of the error is, that the Natural Powers are called Accidents,
which is a falsehood of very ill tendency in many respects: They are the very
formal Essence of the soul. And surely the soul may have its Good or Evil
Dispositions.

201. There is in the very Essence of the Natural Power or faculty, besides the
Vis vel Virt^s agendi, a certain Natural Inclination to some things, which is
Inseparable from it, from which the Schoolmen say even of the Will that it is
quaedam Natura, and pondus animae. So the soul is Inclined or propense (and not
only Able) to Activity as such, to Intellection as such, to Volition as such;
and objectively to Truth as such, and to Natural Good and felicity as such. And
there is an Inclination of the soul, which is not essential and inseparable,
but is much under the power of the Will, and may be got and lost.

202. This adventitious Disposition, is found in the soul in various Degrees:
1. When it is in such a Degree only, as that immediately and properly without
any other power added, the will may be said to be Able to Act thus or thus,
then it is called a Moral Power: But when it is in such a degree, as that we
are Disposed to Act promptly and easily, it is called a Habit.

203. He therefore that is so far disposed to any Good act, and whose
Indisposition, or disposition to the contrary, is but such, as that in his
present state, without any more help than Yet the Jesuits themselves (as Ruiz
ubi sup.) are not so much for the necessity of predisposition, but that they
confess that Grace often takes occasion of things natural, or indifferent, yea,
of heinous sins themselves. And that the beginning of Justification
(Sanctification) is not from the strength or endeavors of nature, but from
Grace he largely proves in the whole disp. 17, 18. as Vasquez and Suarez and
other Jesuits also do.
he has, he can move his own will to the said act, and the difficulty is not
so great, but that such Power sometime does overcome it, is said to have a
Moral Power. But he that wants not Natural force or power, but only a right
Disposition of his Will, and so far wants it, as that none in his case do
ever change their own acts to good, without more help and power than he has,
is said to be Morally unable or impotent: and not only to want the Habit.

204. Whether the Natural Powers be properly called A Power to Believe, Repent,
Love God, etc. without the Moral Power or right disposition? though it be a
question of some use among the Contenders about these matters, yet it is
chiefly de nomine, and therefore of the less moment. This is to be granted of
all de re, Of this see Mr. Truman's Treatise of Natural and Moral Impotency,
and Mr. William Fenners notable though popular Tractate of Wilful Impenitency.
that Unbelievers want not that Natural Power or faculty, which can Believe and
Repent if duly suscitated and disposed: But through an Ill Disposition and
contrary course of action, and want of due excitation, that Power will not Act,
without Gods special Grace. Which [Will not] signifies, 1. The Undisposedness,
2. The Non-agency: And in strictest speech, the former is best expressed by
[The Will is undisposed and averse to Believe, etc.] and the latter by [The
Will does not consent.] But the first may be expressed by [It cannot] because
it will not come to pass: Though it is no such [Cannot] as is distinct from
[Will not] but the very same. And as [Power] is distinct fom [Will] and a man
is said to be Able to do that which [he can do if he will], so no doubt but he
that Will Believe and Repent, can do it, so far as he is Willing. And this is
it that Augustine so much pleads for, when he would have us distinguish
[Cannot] and [Will not], and when he says, that Posse Credere est Omnium;
Credere autem fidelium.

205. To the fuller opening of this, note the following Conclusions.

No man does that which he cannot do, at that instant.

206. Humane (and all created) Power is dependent, and is not properly a Power
to do any thing, but on supposition of Gods Emanant support and concurse, as he
is the first Cause of Nature.

207. Humane Power is finite, and is not a Power ad omnia, but ad haec: which
therefore are called Possible to us.

208. Power being a Relative word, it may be said to be nullified ad hoc by an
alteration of the Object only: As if you double the weight, that man may be
Unable to bear it, who Could bear it when it was less: when the object is
changed, and not the power indeed.

209. Power supposes the due object and its due proposal or state. We have no
Power to see invisibles, to understand things not intelligible, to will things
not apprehended to be good, and not so revealed, etc.

210. The three Conjunct Powers of the soul suppose each other, though they are
not formally the same: We have no Power to Will objects not understood, nor to
understand, will or execute without Vital-activity; nor to understand most
things without the Wills determination ad exercitium.

211. The due qualification also of the Inferior faculties (the Senses, and
Fantasy, and Organs) is supposed to the being of true Power. We never had
Power to see without eyes, no more than without Light. This Power of the
Inferior faculties some call Potentia secunda, as to the acts of the Superior.

212. It is no true Power ad hoc, which is put to overcome a Greater opposing
Power. We never had Power to overcome God, or to act against his pre-moving
pre-determination (as Bradwardine truly says.)

213. A man may be Able mediately to do that which he is not Able Immediately
to do: I mean he that can write with a Pen, or move things with an Engine, and
so act but as a partial, though Principal Cause, may not be Able to write
without a Pen, nor to do the same alone as a Total Cause.

214. And a man may have Power to do that Mediately and Hypothetically
hereafter, which he Cannot do Immediately, that is, at the present time. He can
learn to write, and after can write, who cannot write till he has learnt. Thus
Infants have a remote Power of speaking, and Infidels of believing.

215. No man Does all that he is truly and properly Able to do.

216. No man does all that he is Disposed and Habited to. Sudden objects often
carry us againt strong Habits.

217. A man ordinarily Wills and Acts according to the predominant Habits
of his soul, if he have objects and means.

218. A man always wills that which he is soley disposed to will, or most
disposed to will, at that moment; and which he apprehends sub omnimoda
ratione boni: Much more if he were perfectly Habited to it, in his Vitality,
Intellect and Will.

219. No man acts without the Essential fundamental Inclination to Good and
to Natural felicity: But a man may by sudden instigation and occasions will
that which before he had no particular disposition to: A Power may be without a
Habit.

220. No Good man's Habits here are perfect in goodness.

221. No Bad man here is at the worst; nor destitute of all Moral Power to all
things commanded him of God.

222. A bare Moral Power which comes not up to be an Inclination or Habit,
determines not the Will of it self.

223. Habits tend to the Wills determination per modum naturae, ut appetitus;
But they are not sufficient to it, or necessary determiners de eventu.

224. Weak Habits are often born down: Strong ones rarely, yet sometimes.

225. An unholy soul is much more Impotent as to the great Internal Acts of
Loving God, delighting in him, etc. than to any mere external Act which the
Natural Power extends to: And so are the regenerate in that measure as they
are unrenewed.

226. But we are more able to Love or Will aright, than to Work and Do aright;
because here both must concur, which requires more Power than one alone. E.
g. to Rule the Thoughts aright requires more Power than to be Willing to rule
them.

227. Yet in that measure that a man is Willing to do Good, he is Morally able,
(and more than able) Because Morality being first seated in the will, it is no
farther Morally Good or Bad, than it is Positively or Privatively Voluntary. He
that is sincerely Willing, is sincerely Abole, and he that is Perfectly
Willing, is perfectly able (and more.)

228. Every man's Natural faculties may be called Moral Powers as to the
Obligation, as being obliged by God to Moral Good.

229. And because Obligation presupposes some true Power to obey, mediately or
immediately, present or former when the Law was made, therefore man's Natural
faculties, though undisposed, are thus far called a moral power to the
commanded act.

SECT. XI. Whether God bind Men to Impossibilities.
230. THis leads us to the question, Whether God bind men to Quaudo praeceptum
supernaturale obligat, non potest vitari peccatum contra illud absque auxilio
gratiae. Pet. a S. Joseph. These. Univers. Theol. de auxiliis p. 83.

Alliac. Camerac. 1. q. 14. R. says, 1. We cannot be bound to a simple
impossibility: 2. We may be bound to Will an Impossibility (as that his sin
past had not been, though he doubt of this.) 4. He may be bound to that which
is not in his power, to do of himself: So every one is bound habere gratiam;
and quilibet viator fidem infusam: and tamen non est in creaturae potestate
activa.


things Impossible. Where we must needs distinguish 1. Of disability Antecedent
to the Law, and Consequent. 2. Mediate and Immediate. 3. Between Impossibles as
such, and as Things Hated or Nilled. 4. Between Primary and Secondary Moral
acts. And so I answer,

231. 1. No Law of God (or just men) binds to things Naturally Impossible
before the Law was made and broken, by an Immediate obligation.

232. A just Law may antecedently bind us mediately to that which is
immediately impossible. So he that cannot Read, may be bound to Read mediately;
that is, first to Learn, and then to Read. And Paul requires men to work with
their hands, that they may have to give to him that needs, (and then to
give;) which yet before they have got it, is impossible.

233. The obligation of a Law cease, when the thing commanded becomes
Impossible without the subjects fault.

234. Every sin is Voluntarium-prohibitum: And so far as Impossible things may
be Voluntaria-prohibita (which is all the doubt) so far they may be sins.

235. Gods Law is Antecedent to our practice, and mediately ex part sui
binds us at once to all that we must do to the End of our Lives. As if a
Master in the Morning command his servant his work till night. Therefore as if
that servant purposely break his Spade or other Tools that he may not work, he
is not therefore so disobliged as to be guiltless; even so when man by sin
disableth himself to his commanded duty, the Law is not changed, but is still
the same, nor is he thereby excused.

236. Here the Primary sin is that which contracted the Impotency: The
Secondary sin is the Impotency it self, thus wilfully contracted and seated in
the will. The third rank is the not doing of all that was first commanded, and
the doing of all that was forbidden.

237. But if it be not only a Moral Vicious Impotency that is contracted (such
as the habitual unwillingness in question) but a Physical Impotency (as if a
man drunk himself stark mad, or blind, etc.) this is a sin (and the consequent
acts and omissions) not simply in it self considered, but secundum quid, and
participatively, as it partaketh of the first sin, which is described it self
to be [a Voluntary forbidden act disabling us to future duty, and That a
necessity contracted by our own fault (as by drunkenness) excuses not from
guilt, see August. l. de Nature. and Great. c. 67. and Aquin. n. 4. d. 50. q. 2.
a. 1.
virtually containing a sinful life to the end.]

238. But if it be this Physical Impossibility that is contracted, then though
the Law change not, yet the Subjects capacity being changed, strictly and
properly God is not said after to Oblige him by that Law, because he is not
Receptive and Capable of such new obligations; And yet he is not disobliged as
to his benefit. For no man gets a right to any benefit by his fault. What
then? Why, the Precept to that man is past into a Virtual Judiciary Sentence,
condemning him as disobedient; even as it is with those in Hell.

239. Therefore since the fall, the Law of Innocence in it self is the same,
which once said [Thou shall continue perfectly Innocent;] but it does not
properly oblige us as a Law to that Innocence or perfection which we were born
without, because we are become incapable subjects: Much less is that Innocence
now the Condition of any Promise or Covenant of God; as if he still said [Be
personally and perpetually Innocent, and thou shall live; and that thou may
live.] But the Law being still the same, we that are incapable of the duty, are
not incapable of the guilt and condemnation: Vid. Bellarmin. de Great. and lib.
a^b. li. 5. per totum, etc. 30. de did. necessitates.
And therefore the Law and Covenant are now become a Virtual Sentence of
Condemnation for not obeying personally, perfectly and perpetually to the
death. For he that has once made Innocence Naturally Impossible to him, is
Virtually in the case of one that has persevered to the death in sin

240. But if the contracted Impossibility be not Physical but Moral, the case
is quite different. For then the thing is a threefold sin in it self as
aforesaid; 1. The disabling sin. 2. The vicious Disability or Malignity of the
Will. 3. And the after sin thereby committed, and omission of duty.

More of Physical and Moral Impotency.

241. 1. No righteous Law forbids Physical Impotency as such, nor commands
men Physical Impossibilities, as is said; But Gods Laws primarily forbid the
malignity of the Will, which is its Moral Impotency. Bradwa^dine plainly says
li. 3. c. 9. p. 675. that [Nullus actus noster est simpliciter in nostra
potestate (we grant not absolutely and independently) sed tantum sec^ndum quid,
respectu Ca^sarum secundarum. Nihil est in nostra potestate nisi subactiva,
subexec^tiva and subservien^e necessari^, necessitate naturalit^r praecedente,
respectu ^oluntatis divinae. Quod ideo in nostra dicitur potestate, quia cum
volumus iliud facimus voluntary and non in^iti. So that by him no creature was
ever able to do more or less than it does, except you call him able to do it,
that can do it when God makes him do it: but that is not to be able before, or
when he is not caused to do it.


242. 2. Rulers use not to make Punishments for Physical Impotency; But for the
Wills Malignity God does.

243. 3. Rulers use not to propound Rewards for Physical Impossibilities; But
for the fruits of Moral Sanctity or Habits, and for themselves, God does.

244. 4. No just Judge condemns men for Physical Impotency; But for Moral God
and man do.

245. 5. No Good man hates another for Physical Impotency; But for Moral
malignity God and man do.

246. 6. An enlightened Conscience accuses and tormenteth no man for mere
Physical Impotency and Impossibilities: But for the Wills Malignity Conscience
will torment men. So that it is evident that one sort of Impotency makes an
act no sin (in its degree) and the other makes it a greater sin. For Nature
and common notices teach men to judge that the More Willingness, the more
culpability. But he that has Actual and Habitual Wilfulness, and is as some
Adulterers, drunkards, revengeful persons, proud, covetous, etc. who are so bad
that they say, I cannot choose, are the worst of all the sorts of sinners, by
such disability.

247. It is most probable that God overcomes Moral Impotency, and gives Moral
Power, by Moral Means, and Operations: For though God can give it by a proper
Creation without Moral Means, and we cannot say that he never does so, nor how
often he does or does not; yet it is most probable that his special Grace, does
by his Trine Influx of Power, Wisdom and Goodness, Life, Light and Love,
suscitate the natural faculties of the soul to the first special Act, and by it
cause a holy Habit, which he radicateth by degrees; And this is Metaphorically
a Creation.

248. This is certain, that since the sall we have the same essential
faculties; that Original sin is not as Illyricus so long and obstinately
maintained (though an excellently good and Learned man) a Substance, though it
be the Pravity of a substance: And that sin changed not the humane species; Nor
does Grace change our species. It is certain that the Acts of these same
natural faculties are commanded to all men, even the unregenerate, under the
names of Faith and Repentance; And so these are their duties. And it is
certain, that a Course of Moral means (preaching, reading, meditating,
conference, threatenings, promises, mercies, afflictions) are appointed and used
to the procuring the said faculties to perform these commanded acts: It is
certain that these Means have an Aptitude to their end: And that God works by
his own means: And appoints not man to use them in vain; And that in working
Grace, God preserves and reformeth Nature, and works on Man as Man: and
according to the Nature of his means.

249. And I think none dare deny, but that God is Able by his Spirits powerful
operation, without any Antecedent new Habit or disposition, to set home these
same means so effectually on the Natural powers of the soul, as shall excite
them to the first Acts of Faith and Repentance: And by them imprint a Habit, as
is said, and shall be said again in Part 3. And if he Can do so, and Can do
otherwise, which then is likest to be his ordinary way, I leave to the
observers of Scripture and Experience.

450. This is the Common sense of Divines, who place Vocation, exciting the
first act of Faith and Repentance, before Union with Christ, and before
Sanctification, which gives the habit, till Mr. Pemble Vind. Great. taught
otherwise, whom Bishop G. Downame confuted in the Appendix to his Treatise of
Perseverance.

251. As to the question, How this Grace is called Infused, and not Natural? I
answer, It is called Infused and Supernatural, because, 1. It is not wrought by
any Natural-moral means only, but by Supernatural-moral means, viz. Revelation,
in and by the Gospel of Christ. 2. And this supernatural Revelation cannot work
it, without the special extraordinary operation and impression by the Holy
Ghost, above the common concurse of God with all his Creatures, as he is fons
naturae. This the Schools have Metaphorically called Infusion.

252. But it may be called Natural, 1. In that man's Natural faculties receive
Gods Influx, 2. And perform the act: 3. And are perfected by it as the Natural
body is by Health.

253. And what the difference is ex part Dei agentis (and ex part effectus)
between Gods Natural and Gracious operations, I shall after open in the third
Part.

254. The Schoolmen, especially the Scotists and Ockam, and many Franciscans,
Benedictines, and other Friars, (yea, such Oratorians as Gibieuf) have fled so
high in making Grace supernatural, (feigning a state of pure Naturals that had
none) and talk so phanatically of the Deification of the soul, as I think has
ensnared some Sectaries among us to imitate them, seigning that the first
Covenant is Moral as a Law, and the second Covenant is the very in-being of a
Divine Nature, which they (though obscurely) seem to describe as somewhat above
all Habits and Inclinations, put into our own nature, like another form or
soul: Which over-doing tends to tempt men to Infidelity, by doubting whether
man's Nature was made by the Creator to enjoy God in Heaven or not, when it must
be made another thing to attain it.

SECT. XII. Of Scientia Media.
255. AFter this Digression about our Will and Powers as the objects of Gods
Knowledge and Decrees, I return to the Doctrine de Scientia Media. And that God
knows from Eternity the truth of all conditional propositions that are true,
is past all doubt, If we may suppose that God had eternal propositions. No
doubt but he knows now that such propositions are true [If such Causes be
put, they will or will not produce this or that as the effect.]

256. But if it be an Imperfection to have mental propositions to know by, and
God knows not by them, but only knows them as the instruments and way of
humane knowledge, (For no doubt but he knows all that is ours,) Then it must
be said that he had from eternity, but the foreknowledge of the Creatures
conditional propositions. And who can well determine this?

257. And this will lead the arrogant disputers to other enquiries no less
difficult, Whether it be only or primarily the Proposition it self as ens
rationis humanae or as the Thought of man's mind which God knows, or the res
ab homine cognita, that is, futurition it self? And if the former, How God
knows them to be True? If the latter, How he knows futurition?

258. And here inextricable difficulties will still arise before them, Whether
to have the notion of futurity, be not a part of the Creatures imperfection?
Whether God know not all things as present? Whether [Nothing] be properly
Intelligible in it self? Whether it be not only Propositions de nihilo that are
known, and not the ipsum nihil, (such as futurition is?) Whether to ascribe
such knowledge of [Nothing] and such notions or propositions to God, be to
ascribe perfection or Imperfection to him?

259. If we may or must say that God from eternity fore-knew our Propositions
of future contingents, which are Conditional, yet we must not say or think that
his knowledge quoad actum is conditional, so as that the Creatures * Nic.
D'Orbellis says, Communiter distinguitur triplex cognitio Dei, viz.
approbationis, visionis and intelligentiae. Cognitio approbationis est tantum
Bonorum: Cognitio Visionis est little quae sunt, fuerunt, vel crunt: Cognitio
intelligentiae seu simplicis notitiae, est omnium quae possunt esse. Hujusmodi
autem cognitiones non differunt secundum se; sed secundum distinctionem
connotatorum. Et Bonavent. 1. d. 38. dub. 3. Dicendum quod in nobis notitia
simplex and notitia beneplaciti dicunt diversas cognitiones; and diversos modos
cognoscendi -- A Deo autem una tantum cognitio est. Sed illa una facit Deus,
quod homines multis. Et ^^^o illa una dupliciter significat --
state is the condition of Gods Knowledge in it self: But only that the object
is a conditional proposition, speaking the Condition of the event fore-known:
From which Gods Act is denominated conditional only denominatione extrinseca,
not as an Act, but as This act.

260. We deny not but God may be said as truly to know the truth of
hypothetical as of absolute propositions; If one be the object of his
Knowledge, the other is: Which proves the hypothetical proposition to be less
perfect than an absolute, but not Gods knowledge of it to be less perfect.

261. Nor does Gods foreknowledge that Adam will sin in such circumstances,
make his understanding depend on the Creature, but only to be terminated on the
Creature as an object: And so it does in all Acts where the Creature is the
object: This objection therefore belongs also to the dispute, Whether God
know any thing but himself? or out of himself?

262. The seigning God to have in himself so many acts of knowledge, really
distinct, and to lie in such an order, is intolerable, seeing God is most
simple. But by extrinsecal denomination, his Knowledge may by us, through our
weakness and necessity, be distinguished according to its respect to diversity
of objects, by inadequate conceptions: But on that pretense to feign many
needless distributions, is profane,

263. They that think it a good confutation of scientia mediae that Non decreta
non sunt futura; therefore no futurition can be known but as Decreed, do err
much in the antecedent, (For it is false that sin is Decreed) and are either
erroneous or uncertain in the conclusion, (For God fore-knoweth sin so far as
it is intelligible.)

264. The sense of the question de Scientiae Media, is not de conditionatis
Vide Pet. a Sanct. Jos. Disp. 4. Sect. 1. p. 465. de Scient. Med.
necessari^s, as [If the Sun set, it will be night] Nor yet of such
conditionals as are merely disparate, and have no kind of dependence or
connection, as [If Peter dye quickly, John will live long:] But of such
conditionals, as have some reason of the Connection, and yet leave the will in
an undetermined power to act or not. But we know no difference between these ex
part Dei Scientis, but only denominatione extrinseca ex part objecti.

265. Much less dare we conclude with them that Gods knowledge See all this
modestly and judiciously handled by Fr. Zumel Disput. in Tho. p. 1. especially
his Conclus. 6. p. 127. And Ockam 1. d. 38. q. 1. Et. Greg. Arim. ib. q. 2. a.
2. Et Gabr. Biel ib. qu. 1. a. 1. Et Ant. Cordub. quaest. q. 55. dub. 10.
of Conditionals is in God before his will to concur, or that they exist; For
we are not acquainted with such priorities and posteriorities in God, except by
such denomination.

266. Methinks it is but sumbling to say with Pet. a S. Joseph Suav. Concord.
Disp. 4. p. 484. A nemine dubitari quin ad cognitionem futurorum sub
condition, necessarium sit aliquo modo decretum divinum; cum n^hil possit esse
futurum sive absolute sive sub condition, nisi Deus ut prima Causa dut
absolute, aut sub condition velit ad ista concurrere. At See the short answer
in Pet. a S. Joseph. Suav. Concord. p. 576.
the first look this seems to be spoken of the cause of futurition, or of the
knowledge of it: And if not, the Decree seems mentioned to no purpose: For
futurum tantum sub condition, is not as such futurum; For the condition
suspendeth the futurition: A conditional proposition de futuro is as true of
that which will never come to pass as of that which will. And if they mean that
God Decrees e. g. that Judas shall sin if he be so and so tempted, it will lay
the cause of Judas sin more on God in their own apprehension, than their Cause
or the Truth will bear. For if God Decree that unnecessary Causes shall
certainly effect the thing (sin) let them take heed of the consequence.

267. I could never see how the Doctrine de scientia media does at all Pennot.
l. 4. c. 23. says, 1. Scientiam Mediam maxima cum probabilitate defendi posse.
2. Hunc modum reconciliationis (decretorum cum Liberate) principaliter and
immediate non inniti Scientiae mediae, sed solum remote: quia principaliter
illa non ponitur in Deo ad conciliandam arb. libertatem cum Div. decretis: sed
ut Deus provide and sapientissime omnes actus, maxim liberos disponere possit;
and dirigere ad opt. fines.
serve their turn: seeing they use it to show how God knows that
Determinately, which he foreseeth but in Conditionibus sine quibus non, or in
unnecessary and not determining causes. And their own answer signifies nothing
more to the purpose, but that God can know future contingents by the Infinite
perfection of his understanding, which is most true. But that he knows them
ever the more for the supposition of circumstances, they never prove. Therefore
the doctrine of Gods knowledge of such Conditional propositions, and
contingents as so circumstantiated, seems True materially, (that They are the
Objects of Gods knowledge;) but false efficiently as if they were any Causes of
his knowledge, (which has no Cause;) but only extrinsecal denominaters of it
in that act: And it seems useless and needless to their purpose.

268. For I confess I think that we need no more, and are capable of no more to
satisfy us, how God knows any thing Intelligible, than to say, By his
Infinite perfection. Man knows by Reception ab extra, but so does not God.
And if the Quest. How does God know this, suppose extrinsick efficiency or
reception, it is blasphemous! And I confess I hear men dispute How God knows?
with horror as I hear men curse and swear and blaspheme: knowing how incapable
such Moles as we Mortals are of understanding the intrinsic manner of Gods
knowledge; And I detest the very question, and am but persuading others to
detest it thus understood.

269. Much more do I think it arrogant presumption in those that dispute pro
scientia media to say that God Can no otherwise know future contingents. As
Annatus de scient. med. p. 85. contr. Ab omiibus con^^s^^^ est, nullam
veritatem fugere intellectum Di^inum: ac proinde propositiones de fu^^ris
contingentibus, etc. Blank. de Concord. lib. cum Decretis. 1. These. 49, 50, 51
--
Twiss. D. 1. c. Seclusa Scientia Medi^ non remanere in Deo praescientiam
absolutam futurorum contingentium. Et cap. 6. Seclusa Scientia Media non posse
praedefiniri a Deo liberas creatae voluntatis actiones. O Man! O Worm! Who art
thou that in cases so unsearchable dare assert a non posse upon the Almighty
God thus in the dark!

270. And it is no less arrogant in the adversaries of Scientia Media, such as
some of our own, and the Scotists who dare say that God Rada ^^i ^^pr. (who was
one of the Congregation where it was disputed before P. Clem. 8. and was
against it; as Pet. a S. Josiph and others tell us.)
cannot know future contingents, but in the predefinition and decrees of his
own will. As if we had seen into all his Powers and Acts, who dwells in the
unaccessible light. Whereas we know little of the smallest of his works.

271. And as audaciously do the Dominicans plead that God cannot otherwise know
our future free acts, but by decreeing by immediate identificate premotion to
predetermine them as the total first efficient cause. Nothing can be more
certain than that we know not How God knows, who scarce know How we know our
selves.

272. He that has read but one half what is said upon this subject by Zumel,
Ripa. Gonzal. Fasol. Arrub. Aluiz, Alarcon, Alvarez, Tanner, Ruiz, Greg.
Valent. Suar. Molin. Cantarel. Navar. Curiel. Cabrera, Mascaren. Verdu,
Fonseca, Mendoz. Lessius, Diotalev. Moncaeus, Theophil. in Theolog. Nature.
Aegidius Conink, Pennottus, Petr. a S. Joseph, Annatus, Twisse, etc. yea or but
any two Contenders, and is not convinced that they talk presumptuously of
things which are unknown above their reach, Non d^sunt ex nostris qui scientiam
mediam aliquate^us agnos^unt, inquit Strangius l. 3. c. 13. p. 675. naming even
Gomarrus, Walaeus, and Lud. ^^ocius, as also Jacob. Martinius and other
Lutherans: and are we further from Arminius than Gomarrus was?
does not think reverently enough of God, nor knowingly and humbly enough of
man: And he that does but weigh the difficulties which Durandus his third
opinion casts in the way, and does but try to solve well all Lud. a Dola's
Questions, Part 1. cap. 9. p. 96, 97, etc. and to answer well all his arguments
against the usefulness of Scientia Media, Part 2. and against the truth of
immediate physical Predetermination, Part. 3. and against Identificate Concurse
(as to evil actions) Part 4. may soon find that much of these matters are so
far above us as to be nothing to us, and unfit to be thought necessary to our
Peace and Concord.

273. The old doctrine of Gods Prevision, and this de Scientia Media, in all
that is within our reach come all to one: And they err that hold it to run
pari passu, equally about Good and Evil. God fore-knoweth not evil Acts because
he wills them, or the futurity of them, nor because he decrees to
predetermine the will to the act in specie which is sin: But he wills to
effect that which is Good, and may so far know it.

SECT. XIII. Of Gods Will and Decrees in General.
274. GOds Decrees de futuris and his Will de praesentibus are in themselves
the same, save as to the extrinsick denomination from the diverse state of the
connoted objects.

275. Gods Decrees are not his works in themselves considered, but only That
Gods Decrees are not to be taken for a thing past and ceased, but as a thing
still doing, Pennot. li. 4. c. 24. thinks is the best notion to reconcile
them with liberty. But ab extrinseco and Connotative they must be denominated
past; though without change in God. Of this Dr. Twisse has animadverted.
when with his executive power, they operate ad extra: and then his knowledge
and will are his working, being productive of the effects.

276. As in point of simplicity Gods Acts are all One and yet many, that is,
One ex part agentis as his Acts are but his Essence; and yet many ex part
effecti and objecti, and inde denominatione extrinseca; so also as to their
Eternity Gods Acts are all Eternal as they are his Essence, ex part agentis;
and yet some of them new and temporary, some past, some present, some future,
ex part effectus, and objecti, and inde denominatione extrinseca.

277. Yet I confess that it passes my understanding to conceive how it is,
that the same Act is Eternal ex part agentis, and yet but temporary ex part
patientis and effecti: that God should from eternity do all that ever he does
ex part sui to create the world, to redeem, sanctify, justify, etc. and yet
that nothing should be done by it till lately. Which drew Ludov. a Dola (de
modo conjunct. Concurs. par. 1. c. 2. p. 20.) to say, [Probatur Actionem Dei
externam seu Concursum in actu secundo esse actum ab ipso Deo distinctum ex
natura rei, ante opus intellectus. Quia Deus non solum poterat nihil agere ad
extra, sed de facto per aeternitatem nullum producebat effectum, and de novo
incepit operari in principio temporis. Igitur actio Dei est omnino distincta ab
ipso Deo: Neque dici potest actionem quidem Dei fuisse ab aeterno, sed effectum
non fuisse nisi in tempore; Quia tametsi Virtus, and Potentia agendi, and
Principium operationis, esse possit antequam Causa actu agat; tamen Actio esse
non potest quin Causa vere agat and producat. Ac impossible est Causam vere
Agere and producere, quin effectus aliquis ab ea producatur and agatur. Nullus
autem effectus producebatur a Deo ab aeterno: ergo non habebat Actionem ab
aeterno (loquimur de productione ad extra and transeunte.) Sane non potest
Actio esse sine termino and effectu suo. Sed Actio essentialiter est sui
termini productio aut conservatio, and ne con^ipi quidem potest sine illo:
Estque prorsus inintelligibile dari productionem aut conservationem alicujus
rei, and non dari actualiter ipsam rem; Estque Omnis actio intime conjuncta cum
effectu, qui per ipsam formaliter producitur, aut conservatur; nec sejungi ab
illa potest.] And so Aureolus.

278. In this also we we must confess that the matter quite transcendeth our
capacity: And as this is rash in a Dola, to affirm so confidently a thing above
him, so we must not be rash to affirm on the contrary more than is certain. But
so far as we may venture, the common way seems the far safer: Because God is
unchangeable not only Morally, but Naturally. And this Action as distinct from
the Effect, is made by him, to be neither the Creator nor a Creature, but a
Creating, or moving Act, between both; which is not convenient. And as it is
intelligible that God can Velle or Decree ab aeterno, mundum fieri, Petrum
justificari, etc. in hoc tempore; so we are not sure that God cannot do all
that Act from Eternity, which shall effect only in Time, by the concurrence of
his will. Though I confess that the case much differs, between an Ego quidem
fateor nostram libertatem cum Voluntate Dei facilius conciliari juxta eorum
sententiam qui dicunt, actum volendi and intelligendi non esse operationem
immanentem elicitam, aut libere additam ipsi essentiae; quam si dicamus esse
actum quendam liberum elicitum: Utroqu^ tamen modo conandum. Vasqu. in 1 Tho.
q. 23. d. 99. c. 2. And if this will make it easy, easy it must be: For Gods
free Volitions and knowledge of things extrinsick are commonly said to be no
real additions to his essence, but dum unus, simplex, immutabilis, plura, and
mutabilia scit, vult, facit, his will and understanding are denominated by
relation and connotation as various from the various objects.
Immanent Act, (such as nuda Volitio,) which does nihil efficere, and an
Effecting Act. But many conceive that God causes all things merely by willing
them. (Though I see not but that will must be a Powerful emanant operative
will, which is more than mere will.) And we are so unacquainted with God, and
all Active natures, as that we cannot say that Action exparte agentis may not
be sine termino, objecto and effectis. And all Philosophical Divines agree that
God has no Power out of Act; but an Active power always equally in act,
exparte sui, and so is a pure act. Let us (per possibile vel impossible)
suppose the Sun to be what it is, and no other Creature to be with it in being:
This Sun would in vacuo emitt its motive, illuminative and calefactive radios
by Action. And yet nothing would be moved, illuminated or heated by it: There
would be no Terminus, and no effect. And suppose afterward all other Creatures
to be made; then the diverse Termini and Recipients would make a diversity of
effects, and the various disposition of the Recipients would make that one
Action of the Sun, to produce motion in one, light in another, heat in another,
sweetness from the Rose, and stink from Weeds, and so of other effects. I do
but tell you why we must not peremptorily deny much more of God.

279. Prescience with Predefinition or Decree do not infer causally That the
Potentia executi^a ia Deo is principium absolut^ p^oximum agendi ad ex^^a, See
^ennot. l. 3. c. 13. n. v. and A^uin. 1. d. 45. a. 3. ad. 2.
that necessity of the event as predetermining premotion does: Because they do
(alone) nihil ponere in objecto. So that if it could be proved that God does
eternally Decree or will the event of sin, and men's damnation absolutely, it
would not prove (alone) that he is therefore the cause of them. It is not
therefore the Predetermination of bare Decree which we lay those consequences
on, but efficient predetermination.

280. Lombard, d. 45. well concludes That even that free will of God by which
he wills, decrees, and loves the Creature, is his essence: Bradwardine l.
3. c. 5^. p. 8^9. argues that Gods will de creandis, was antecedently free;
and yet concomitantly and consequently necessary, and both immutably from
Eternity.
But yet the Name [Amor Petri, odium peccati, etc.] signifies not his Essence
as such, but his Essential will as denominated from the created or humane
object.

281. Therefore it cannot be inferred hence, that God is a Creature, because he
Wills or Loves the Creature: Because his Loving it denominateth his Essence
as terminated on or connoting the object, and not as in it self simply.

282. It is not fit or lawful to ask after any Cause of the Will of God;
Because it is the first cause of all things else, and has nothing Superior or
antecedent to Cause it; And God is absolutely independent, and is not to be
called the Cause of himself. Ruiz who says that Gods will has a final cause,
means but a final object, as he confesses. A Tree is a passive recipient
cause of the Termination of the Suns calefacient act and of the ^ffect as
received: but not of the act ex part sol^^.


283. Even the Acts of Gods free will or Decrees, have no Cause even in God
himself; no more than those called Necessary. For we must not say that any
thing in God is an effect.

284. Yet as Gods Acts are often denominated by Connotation from the object,
(which in man is a constitutive Cause of the Act, loco materiae,) so extrinsick
objects may be called The Causes (but rather the Objects) of God Will, Love or
Knowledge, not as his Essence, but only as so denominated by that Connotation
of the object.

285. These distributions of Gods Volitions in Number, and by specifying
objects, and individuating objects, which are called material constitutive
causes of the act, are all according to humane weakness; in us who know God but
enigmatically, and in a glass: But yet if any man use such words in a broader
manner than we think fit, before we censure and condemn him we must hear his
sense explained. For all that ever we can say of God is improper, analogical,
yea metaphorical; And it is but in degrees of impropriety that all words about
Gods attributes and actions differ; For (as is often said) no man has formal
proper conceptions of any thing in God. If God should not speak to us in this
improper language of our own, he must not speak intelligibly to us, unless he
create another understanding in us. And he himself in Scripture using such
language of himself, allows us to use it, while we profess to disclaim
ascribing to God any of the imperfection which it seems to import.

286. On these terms not only Various Volitions are ascribed to God in
Scripture, and exterior causes of them, (as John 16. 27. the Father Loves
you, because ye have loved me, and believed, etc.) So Genesis 22. 16. and 26. 5.
Prove. 1. 24. Luke 11. 8. and 19. 17. Gal. 4. 6. Ephesians. 5. 6. 1 Samuel 28. 18. 1
King. 9. 9. and 11. 34. and 20. 42. 2 King. 10. 30. 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Psalm. 91.
14.
But also Fear, Affliction, Grief, Hatred, Repenting, Rejoicing, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.
27. Isa. 63. 9. Genesis 6. 6. Psalm. 5. 5. Genesis 6. 7. 1 Samuel 15. 11. Joel 2. 13.
Jer. 15. 6. Hos. 11. 8. Zeph. 3. 17. Jer. 32. 41, etc. and exterior causes of
them.

287. That which is to be understood by all these, is 1. That man is so far the
Cause of the Effects of Divine Volitions, as the Dispositio receptiva, may be
called a Cause. And I before showed in the instance of the effects of the Suns
Influx, how great a hand the various Dispositiones materiae receptivae have in
the diversifications of effects. 2. And that Gods Volitions themselves are
hence relatively denominated.

288. Therefore we must say, that Gods electing Peter and his rejecting Judas,
his Love to Peter and his hatred of Judas, are not in specie the same act of
his will; nor his Loving Peter, and his Loving Paul the same Numerically; As
his knowing of Peter to be a Saint, and his knowing Judas to be a Saint, is not
the same numerical act of knowledge; Though as they are Gods Essence, all are
but one. And we must say that he Loves one because he is good, and hates
another because he is evil; and he justifies men because they believe, and
condemns men because they believe not; that he forgiveth a sinner because he
repents, etc. Though Gods Will have no efficient Cause.

289. Those Volitions of God which are but Immanent as to Efficiency, but
Transient Objectively, are some of them to be denominated as before the thing
willed, and some as after. The Will of effecting is before the thing willed:
The Will ut finis, or Complacency and Displicency (as also Intuitive Knowledge
of the thing as Existent, estimation, approbation, reprobation of it) the Will
of Continuing, modifying, altering, perfecting, destroying, suppose the
existence of the thing willed in esse objectivo. And so many Volitions may be
denominated as beginning in time, as connoting the objects. Pennottus li. 4. c.
24. p. 235. confidently argues, that because God can Love him that he hated or
Loved not, he can therefore Predestinate him whom he reprobated, or change his
decrees without any change in himself. I answer, 1. I grant that God can Love a
Saint whom he hated as a sinner before, and cease hating him without any change
save relative and by extrinsecal denomination. 2. But his inference seems to
me false and dangerous, unless he had meant it of executive Election and
Reprobation which he does not. For 1. Proper Love and Hatred connote an Object
as existent, and by such connotation are named: And his fourth supposition is
false, that Love is nothing but Gods Will to give a man life Eternal. For the
formal Act of Love is Complacency: And the Velle Bonum is another thing, as I
think an effect of Love; or at the most another act of Love. And we deny that
any absolute. Velle bonum alicui is ever changed, though displicence be
changed: Because it is the same with Decree. 2. And the reason why the said
Decree or Volition (if absolute and proper) may not be denominated changed is,
because it makes its own object, and so supposes it not pre-existent, and
depends not on it denominatively: And therefore it would infer God to be
mutable, to change it; But it is not so in the other, which as to the Relation
and Name follows the Mutable creature; as does Gods Knowledge of present
existents and preteritions as to denomination and connotation.
And it is no more wrong to Gods Immutability so to name them, than to his
simplicity to name them many and diverse.

290. And in this sense it is no more wrong to Gods Immutability, to speak of
Him as being before in Potentia only as to such Relative denominations. As the
Rock in the Sea has not yet that proximity to the Wave which a twelvemonth
hence will touch it, and yet is not therefore mutable: Or as you are yet but in
potentia to the termination of his Relations who will pass about you, before
and behind, on the right hand and on the left. So God was but Potentially the
Creator and Redeemer of the World from Eternity. Though as to any real passion
God has no passive power.

291. In this sense of relation to the objects and effects, it is that we
conceive of Gods acts of Knowledge and Volition in a certain order of nature,
as one being before and one after another; Though not as they are Gods Essence.

292. Yet because the use and truth of words or names, is their signification
of Things as indeed they are, and we should put no name on any creature, but
what is adapted to notify it aright to man's understanding; we must much more
be afraid of putting any cau^eless, unmeet, unnecessary names of reality or
distinction on the Will or Acts of God.

293. Gods Will is not Appetitus rei desideratae; for he wants nothing.

294. God wills efficiently all that he effects; and finally by
complacence, all that is Good.

295. Gods Willing or Loving Himself, is Himself; or an inadequate Conception
of Himself as he is. But his Willing or Loving Creatures, is (as is often said) a
relative connotative Conception of Himself as extrinsecally denominated, and
not as he is himself.

296. Gods Will ad extra is Free; And therefore it cannot be said that he
Wills or Loves ad ultimum potentiae, all that by Power he is Able to Will,
or Love, or do: or that he does all that he is Able to do.

297. Therefore it cannot be denied that there is in God a Negation of
Volition: that is, that he wills not some things which he Could Will. As to
have made the World sooner, greater, with other sorts of creatures: to have
made some men better, wiser, richer, etc. The exterior objects of Gods Will are
finite, and contingent beings.

298. Therefore to ascribe to God a Negation of some Possible Volitions cannot
be charged as making Gods Will to be Idle, or Neutral, or as any Imperfection:
seeing it is but his free-negation of his own Act, through his perfection.

299. Nor can it be said, that hereby we make God Finite in that his Will is
made Finite in Act, which is Himself. For his Will is Infinite as it is his
Essence, and as it Acts upon Himself; though as it acts ad extra on finite
temporary Creatures, it must needs be relatively, and connotatively as to the
terminus denominated finite: which all must hold de re, that think not the
World is Infinite. If the Sun were alone in Vacuo, it would be as Great as now
it is, and as perfect: And yet as its beams are terminated on this or that
recipient Creature, they are more limited.

300. We cannot prove that really God has any Positive Decrees or Volitions of
Nothings as such.

301. Therefore none such should be asserted by Divines, much less pretended
necessary to be believed, to our Concord.

302. It seems more allowable to hold the Negative, that God has no such
Decrees; because Nothing is not a capable terminus of a Divine act: And
therefore it is a fiction of Scaliger, that [Omnipotentia agit in non ens, ut
fiat ens,] Exercit. 365. n. 9. page 1074. And si entia non sunt multiplicanda
sine necessitate, much less Divine acts. Also Non-volition is enough to a
nonexistence or a Nothing; Therefore a Nolition need not be feigned to it: and
frustra fit per plura, quod, etc.

303. Yet knowing so little of God as we do, I dare not boldly assert the
contrary: But it is enough to know that this must not be asserted, and built on
in our disputes.

304. How God Wills future Contingents troubles the Schools with many
needless difficulties as well as how he knows them. About his knowledge of
them, before treated of, there are besides the Dominicans that lay it on
Pre-determination as decreed, and the Scotists that lay it on Decree or Will
alone, several other opinions: One is of Ambr. Catharinus de Praed. Sanct. who
holds that God knows not future Contingents, cert^ sub condition causali,
but only by conjecture: Because the object is not otherwise scibile. 2. Vasquez
says, that God cannot know a future contingent merely contingent, as being not
determinate: And that the Proposition hereof is ever false, because it is
spoken by way of Causality and Consequence, when there is none. 3. Suarez and
others say, that God knows future contingents, even when the Condition is
disparate or of no Causality, a true Connection of the terms suffering.
Albertinus Princ. 4. To. 1. qu. 4. dub. 1. p. 292. pretends to a middle way,
viz. 1. That future contingents sub condition are certainly known of God,
whether the condition be Causal or merely Conditional. 2. But quando Conditio
est disparata, non potest futurum Contingens sub illa Condition cognosci a
Deo. 3. But because there is a Concomitancy between the terms of the
propositions, such a disparate Proposition may be known of God, sub ratione
Concomitantiae.

And accordingly they diversifie Gods Decrees. To the question, Whether
conditional future contingents may be known of God in his Decree, he first
tells us of a threefold Decree, 1. Conditional quoad Actum and Objectum, ut
[si discernerem concursurum cum voluntate creata, si talis occasio occurreret,
hoc futurum esset.] 2. Ex part objecti only, (being absolute ex part actus.)
3. Absolute on both parts; I refer you to him p. 296, 297. if you will see the
decision, lest I perplex and weary you: And for the same reason pass by a
multitude of other controversies of these men.

SECT. XIV. Of several Distinctions of Gods Will.
305. MAny distinctions of Gods Will are used about these Controversies: As, 1.
The Positive Acts of Gods Will are distinguished from his not-acting (or
not-willing.) 2. The Positive objectively, from the Negative-quoad objectum. 3.
The Positive from the oppositive. 4. The Immanent and the Transient acts. 5.
The Transient efficienter, and the Transient only objectively. 6. The Natural
and the Free. 7. The Efficient and Permissive acts. 8. Beneplaciti and signi.
9. Absolute and Conditional. 10. Effectual and uneffectual. 11. The Decreeing
Will and the Preceptive Will. 12. Antecedent and Consequent. And because you
will meet with all these, I shall tell you in what sense only they must be
received.

306. I. Of the first I have said enough before. Gods free will has its
free-not-willings, that are no nolitions.

307. II. The meaning of the second is, that God does positively will some
Beings, and some Negatives. If they mean Negative Propositions, it is true, but
inept; Because those are Positive Beings. If they mean in the second branch
[Nothings] they cannot prove that God Positively at all wills them. But he
often wills their Antecedents and consequents, and occasions, and he wills
all creatures to be Limited and Imperfect, and so Negations must needs
consequently pass upon them: And in that he wills not-more, and wills
causes which may be deficient, men improperly and consequently say he wills
negatively, ne sint Plura, and the defects. But this is not strict speech.

308. Yet in a Moral sense God is often said to will Nothings (or Negatives quoad
esse:) (As that men shall not have grace, that they shall not live, or not be
pardoned, or saved, etc.) 1. Because he does properly and positively Will and
make that Law which condemns them to these penalties; 2. Because he will have
Christ positively Condemn them to Privative punishments; 3. Because he does
positively take away some of the mercies which tend to save them; 4. And he
does freely and penally not-give them that which they are deprived of. So that
this Language is not unfit while we speak of Moral Subjects, and of God after
our manner. But in strict speech it cannot be proved that any [Nothing] is the
proper object of a Volition of God.

309. The opinion of Scotus and his followers is known this way. And subtle
Albertine To. 1. princ. 4. qu. 4. p. 297. says, that Congruentius dicitur Deum
non actu Positivo velle negationes, -- and Resp. Deum non See after the
Additions of Divine Nolitions.
habere actum positivum non concurrendi, sed negationem actus Volendi dare
concursum efficacem: and ^uxta hunc modum melius intelligitur quomodo se habet
Voluntas Dei circa peccatum. Nam Deus non vult peccatum actu positivo, sed
tantum negative se habet circa concursum efficacem dandi remedia illa per quae
efficaciter impediretur peccatum -- Vid. caet.

310. III. The third distinction is between Gods Love and Hatred, his Volitions
and Nolitions; And this must be used. But Hatred and Nolition in man have more
of imperfection, than Love and Volition, importing somewhat contrary to us,
and either hurtful, troublesome, feared, or that possibly may be so. Therefore
we must confess here, that we speak of God with greater impropriety, and must
disclaim the imperfection in the sense.

311. But if you would not be abused into many errors, swallow not the name
[Love] and [Hatred] without distinction; Lest the forecited reason of
Pennottus cheat you; viz. [God Loves a man converted whom he Hated while
wicked: Ergo he can decree or predestinate a man to salvation, whom before he
decreed and reprobated to damnation.] And all rose from this falsehood, that
[Love is nothing but the Willing of salvation to us] and so the same with
Decree: Whereas Love is also, yea, most properly a Complacency in Good as Good,
and Hatred a Displicency in Evil as Evil. Benevolence is sometime Antecedent
and sometime an effect of this in man.

312. IV. The Immanent and Transient acts, I need say no more of.

313. V. But Divines use to omit the next distinction (of Transient D'Orbellis
in 1. d. 4. Quando quaeritur utrum Electio vel Reprobatio rationem Meritoriam
habeant, hoc non intelligitur quantum ad Voluntatem divinam, au^ ^jus actum,
qui est Deus: sed quantum ad transitum ejus super ob^ectum; seu quantum ad
ordinationem ad ipsam Voluntatem.
acts) so much, that few of them let you know, whether that which is but
Objectively Transient, be numbered by them with Immanent or with Transient acts.
Briefly, 1. As Gods Will is the first efficient, and with his Wisdom and
Executive Power does effect ad extra, it is effectively Transient, (though
Essentially Immanent in it self.) 2. But as Gods Will is (as aforesaid) the
Final Cause or End of all things, and wills things only Complacentially,
supposing all that is Complacent to be Existent (in esse reali, vel in esse
cognito) so is it only Objectively Transient, and not effectively; and
therefore by many is numbered with Immanent acts. And as God may be said to know
and will the creature in himself, and to Love the Idea of it in himself, the
phrase is not to be blamed: But as the Creature in it self considered by
foreknowledge or present knowledge (if we may so distinguish) is the object,
it seems unfit to call the act Immanent, though it do nihil ponere (vel
efficere) in objecto.

314. But Gods Will as it effects Relations ad extra, is even effectively
Transient, as well as that which alters qualities: e. g. his Pardoning,
Justifying, Adopting acts of Will.

315. VI. How far Gods Volitions of creatures are free, the subtilest confess
to be unsearchable. Vasquez (ut supra) in 1. Thom. q. 19. disp. 80. p. 504.
[Licet assignemus in Deo libertatem comparatione facta cum objectis and rebus
creatis, tamen non assignamus sufficientem rationem ex part Dei cur nunc actu
libero efficaci reseratur ad has potius quam ad illas; Siquidem Idem omnino
manens in s^, poterat eas non velle quas vult: Quare cum rem exactius enodare
contendimus, difficultatem praedi ^am e^adere n^^ possumus.] See more of him
before.
Gods Natural Volitions are those which ex natura rei, could not be otherwise;
that is, All his Volitions of his own being and perfections; To which some
number natural necessary objects, in the creatures: As his Volition that
Contradictions shall not be true; that two and two shall be four, or two more
than one, etc. His Free Volitions are those which might have been otherwise as
to the nature of the thing, and as to the power of the Divine will. Such is the
Volition of the being of all the Creatures.

316. The Schoolmens contention whether the Son be freely begotten, and the
Holy Ghost freely proceed, arises from the ambiguity of the word [free;] which
I will not trouble you with.

317. Yet all agree that Gods Volitions are all eternal, and therefore
eternally necessary necessitate existentiae.

318. And some think it best to say that they are respectively to be called
both Necessary and Free; Because Gods will chose that which his wisdom saw was
Best, and he must necessarily choose the Best. But we must not be here too bold
in our Conclusions.

319. VII. The distinction of an efficient and permissive Will is no better,
nor other, than that of a Volition and no Volition. But to distinguish the
Efficient and Permissive Act, implies a falsehood, That Permission as such is
an Act.

320. Yet Gods Law may be said to have a permissive Act, that is, He may
declare [This I permit you to do, or leave indifferent] as to political
permission. And as to Physical permission, I have showed before, that some
positive removal of Impediments, are sometimes called non impedire, or
permission: But permission it self as such is no act.

321. VIII. The distinction of Vol. Beneplaciti and signi is old and common:
But not a distinguishing the Acts of Gods will, but rather his Volitions from
the signs of them. For it is his Voluntas beneplaciti that there shall be such
signs.

322. The five signs commonly named by the Schoolmen are Praecipit ac prohibet,
permittit, consulit, implet. And the older Schoolmen say that these are called
Gods Will Metaphorically only, yea by a remote sort of Metaphor, they being not
man's will properly but metaphorically Aqu. 1. q. 19. art. 11, 12. Pet. de
Alliaco 1. q. 14. A. Voluntas Dei sumitur Proprie; and tunc signat divinum
beneplacitum, quod non est aliud quam ipse Deus volens. 2. Improprie and
metaphorice pro aliquo signo ejus, etc.
only when applied to man, and accordingly called Gods will. But some of the
latter say that they are proper signs of Gods real will. The truth is, they
that first used this distinction seem to have intended only Gods Government, if
not his word alone with the performance of it, by Voluntas signi, (of which
next.) Indeed the whole sensible world and all things in it, is some way or
other a sign of Gods will: especially the nature of man himself, with the
nature of all creatures about him, and the order in which he stands to them;
which is therefore called, The Law of Nature.

323. Physical Permission is no positive sign, nor of a positive will (as For
this read Alliaco ib. further after cited: And his citation of Gregor. that
Voluntas beneplaciti is respectu complexi Volitio, prosecutio aut fuga, Aut
simplex complacentia and displicentia, and est ipse Deus praeter connotationem.
before opened:) But Legal permission may be.

324. The distinction between praecipit and consulit would be vain, but that
Aqu. and some others expound consulit by Persuading. For God counsels to
nothing but what is Best; and that which is Best, precept (even natural) makes
it our Duty to choose: But Precept going before and Making Duty,
Perswading-counsel may come after and urge us to perform it.

325. Gods Voluntas signi and Bene-placiti are never contrary properly taken:
Nor does he give us any false signs of his Will; And therefore his word is
always true: But there are many things which ignorance mis-judgeth to be a
sign of some Divine Volition, which they signify not; and some dark signs
which are not easily understood. If men mistake Gods works or word, the sign
was not false, but their exposition of it. But of this next.

326. IX. Dr. Twisse uses instead of this the distinction of Volunta^
Beneplaciti and Praecepti. His sense is Right, but the terms are too narrow.
^^^^ si^^^ seu praece^^^^, ^^^^ di^^tur du^^^^ ^^^^. 1. Q^^^ ita sit q^^^ per
tale signum vel prae^^p^^^^ signatur ad intentionem praecipientis: Et sic
semp^r impl^^^r. Nam p^r tale praeceptum significatur aliquid debere fieri a
Cr^atur^: and ita est: Aliter tale sign^m non ess^t verum. 2. Quod ita sit vel
^iat sicut per tale praeceptum signatar de^ere fieri: and sic non semper
impletur. Pet. de Alliaco 1. q. 14. F.
The true Distinction is of Gods Will of Natural Things and Events as such, and
his Will de Debito vel Jure as such: His will as it is the Fountain of Nature,
and as it is the fountain of Morality or Right: O^ his Will of Natural Events
and his Law.

327. This distinction is of Greater and more Necessary use to us than any of
the rest; yea so great that it is included in the first principle of Religion
and morality; and is understood (distinctly or more darkly, but really) by all
Christians and moral agents.

328. The distinction is fetched from the objects: The common object of the one
being Nature as such, and of the other Debitum or Jus as such.

329. As Gods Will de Naturalibus is his Been placitum; and the effects of it
are the signa subsequentia, and prophecy a prognostic of the effect; so Gods
will de Debito is his Beneplacitum, signified by his Law and Judgment.

330. Though the word [Law] be usually taken more narrowly for only [Statute
eminent Laws] yet I here take it general^y; And it is [The Governing Will of a
Rector signified, constituting or confirming Right (or Dueness) from and to the
Subject; or A Rectors constitutive Determination of Right; or, The sign of a
Rectors Will constituting Right.]

331. God being most Great and Wise and Good, and man's Creator, and thence our
Ab^olute supreme Rector, his Will must needs be the fountain of all Morality
and Right. 1. Sicut Divina volunt as in g^^^re causae e^^ici^^is est prima ^^^^
causa, sic ips^ in ge^ere ^eg^^ obligantis est p^ima ^ex seu Regula. 2. Sicut
divina voluntas est efficiens causa quia vult aliquid esse vel ^^^^: sic ipsa
est ^ex obligatoria quia vult aliquid ad aliqualiter esse vel non esse tereri.
3. Sicut divina Voluntas est ^ex perfectissima rationalis creaturae, sic Lex
Christi vel doc^rina est signum perfectissimum volu^^^tis divinae. Pet. All^^.
Camer. in 1. se^; ^^^^.

1. ^^^^ Dei signi non semper impletur. 2. Voluntas ^en^placiti antecede^s, non
se^ per impletur. 3. Volunt^s beneplaciti constque^s semper impletur.
Prohibiti^ ^et non signat Deum Nolie efficaciter illud fieri quod prohibet
fieri. Idem 1. q. 44. F. De praecepto and prohibitione s^t^^ patet quod
quilibet ten^tur se conformare universaliter tali Voluntati -- D^^^^ri
obligationem, non est proprie l^quendo effectus o^ligationis ^^^^; sed te^^ri
ad implendum est ^jus e^^^^tus. Idem ib. ^. H.




332. It is not the Will in it self that is a Law, nor does any Immanent act
oblige us, or constitute Duty: But it is Gods Will as signified. And therefore
Lex aeterna is an improper speech.

333. Tilenus and others who think it fitter only to distinguish Quid Deus ipse
vult facere, and Quid a nobis vult fieri, do but hide and not open the truth:
For the terms seem to express the Event in both, and distinguish not of Event
and Duty. Whereas if God Willed the Event of what he commands us, as he does
of what he effects, it would be done. And he does also by his Absolute
Decree, Will many things to be done by us, which his Law commands not. Such
as are many mere Natural actions, quas a nobis vult fieri.

334. Morality being but Modality and Relation of Natural Entities, the Acts or
Habits themselves commanded and forbidden are quid Natural in themselves
considered, and so far are under Gods will de naturalibus; But it is only the
Debitum or Jus that is constituted by his Legislative will.

335. Though Gods will de Naturalibus must operate by real efficient efflux,
yet his will de Debito effects by mere signification or notification to the
subject.

336. Legem facere vel signum dare is an act of Gods will de quodam naturali
vel eventu: (For the signum is aliquid natural.) But per signum facere Jus is
that which is proper to the Governing or Legal Will.

337. If we will denominate Gods will here ab origin, It is, 1. Antecedent to
the Creature, (supposed;) And that is his Creating will. 2. Supposing the
Creature in Being; and that is, 1. His will as Proprietary and Actor of all
things; And that is his Moving and Disposing will, of Events. 2. His will as
Governor (Morally) And that is his Morally Ruling will. 3. His will ut Amator
and Finis; And that is his Beneficent and felicitating will. And among these it
is his Regent will which I am treating of. And though his Law as making Jus, be
the first and chief part, yet his Judgment as it decideth, and his Execution
as it gives every Man his Right and Due, is included.

338. It is not Gods will without the sign (as is said) nor the sign without
his will, but the sign as notifying, and his will as notified that is a Law,
and Jus the Effect: Gods will is the principal Cause, and quasi Anima Legis;
and the sign is the instrumental Cause, and quasi Corpus.

339. The Sign re^pecteth these things, 1. The matter due. 2. The dueness or
right. 3. The will of God concerning or constituting it. 4. The mind and will
of man to whom this is signified.

Or, 1. Gods will as the Efficient of Right. 2. The matter and form of Right as
Constituted. 3. The mind and will of man as the terminus.

340. These signs of Gods will are, 1. Natural, called the Law of Nature: which
is the Natura and ordo rerum, especially ipsius hominis as before described. 2.
By extraordinary Revelation. The latter have the great advantage of plainness,
significandi rem praeceptam. The former has the fuller evidence of its Author
and Original that it is indeed of God. Both are his Laws to man.

341. La^, Judgment and execution (the three parts of Government) differ in
that, 1. Law makes the Debitum or Jus; 2. Judgment determines It is of great
use for a Divine who handles Gods Laws to understand the nature of Laws in
genere (as Suarez in praes. de Legib. shows; which Book is one of the best on
that Subject that is extant among us.)
of it by dec^sive application; 3. Execution distributeth according to it.

342. The Jus vel Debitum, instituted by the Law, is twofold. 1. A Subditis:
What shall be Due from the Subjects: the Debitum Officii. 2. Subditis: what
shall be Due to the Subjects: viz. 1. Antecedently to their merits (which is 1.
The act of our Governing Benefactor. 2. Or a Divider: such was the Law for
dividing the Israelites inheritances.) 2. Consequently; which is by the
Retributive part of the Law (commonly called the Sanction,) which is 1. By the
Premiant part, what Reward shall be due: 2. By the Penal, what Punishment.

343. Accordingly Laws have several parts: 1. Precept and Prohibition, making
Duty: 2. Retributive, 1. Premiant, 2. Penal; called Gods Promises and Threats:
3. And subservient or accidental; 1. Narratives Historical, Chronological, etc.
2. Pure Donations: 3. Prophesies; 4. Doctrinal, 5. Exhortatory, 6.
Reprehensive, etc.

344. Though Debitum vel Jus facere, be the formal operation of a Law; (which
is to be Fundamentum Relationis) yet the Act of the chief parts (preceptive or
penal) is commonly called Obligation: And so many say that obligare aut ad
obedientiam aut ad poenam is all the action of a Law. But Obligare is a
Metaphor, and therefore in dispute to be laid by, or to give place to the
proper terms: And the Premiant act is not properly called obligation; nor the
penal act, save in a secondary notion, as he is ^bligatus ad poenam ferendam,
if judged, who is first Reus poenae, or to whom it is made Due by the Law.

345. The ^bligation aut ad obedientiam aut ad poenam is not of equality in the
disjunctive. As if God were indifferent which we chose: But it is primarily ad
obedientiam, and but subserviently ad poenam as a means against future
disobedience, and a securing the ends of Government, in case of sin.

346. But the Preceptive and the Premiant parts, are each chief or final in
several respects: God Commands us a Course of Duty or Right action to this
end, that we may be Happy in his Love. And he promises us first, and gives us
after in foretaste, this Happiness, to draw us to Duty.

347. But here is a wonderful inseparable twist; and in the main an Identity.
God Rules us as a Father, or Regent Benefactor: All his Benefits are
Free-gifts, as to the Thing and Value; But given 1. In an Order. 2. And the
rest as means to the ultimate. In which respects they are a Reward, or means to
it. His very Law is a Gift and a great Benefit. Duty is the means to keep his
first Gifts and to receive more. The very doing of the duty is a receiving of
the Reward; the object of duty being felicitating. (As if feasting or accepting
offered wealth or honor were our work.) Holiness is happiness, in a great
part. And in our End or state of perfection all will be one: To Love God,
Rejoice in Him and praise him, will be both our duty and felicity, means and
end, as it were, in one.

348. Whereas some say, that if there were no Law, sin would deserve
punishment, it is an error: For it is due only by Law. But it is true Of all
the following distinctions, note these words of Bonavent. in 1. d. 4^. a. 1. q.
1. Volunt^^em D^i Antecedentem s^^ Conditionalem, possibl^e ^^^^ non impleri:
-- at consequentem and absolutam nequ^ ^uam. S^^un^um Da^^sc. Voluntas
ben^p^aciti ^t ^apl. Antecedens seu Conditionales and consequous, qua vult
quantum in s^ est omnium salutem; and alsoluta sive consequens, qu^ determinate
vult aliquid q^^d no^it certitudin (...). Intelligendum ^^^ n^llam Dei
Voluntatem p^sse superari aut cassari; Aliquam tamen posse non imp^eri (^t
antecedentem) Aliq^^m ut consequentem impossible ^sse no^ impleri, ^^^
impedi^i: -- Non ^tiam possibil^ est Voluntatem Dei cassari: Nam cassam di^itur
aliquid dum pri^^tur e^^ectu p^^^^io ad quem est: Voluntas aut^^ nullo privatur
esseciu ad qu^m est p^^p^ie. Nam quod dicitur quod Deus vult omnes homi^^s
salvos fieri quant^m in s^ est, haec Voluntas non connotat salutem; nec proprie
est ad effectum salut^s: sed connotat ordinatio^^m naturae, sive natur^m
ordinabil^n ad salut^n. ^^^^ ni^il plus est di^^re Deus vult istum sal^^^ fieri
quantum in se est, q^^m De^ placuit dare isti ^^^^ram per quam posset p^^^^^ire
ad sa^u^em; and quod Deus para^^^ esset ju^^re, ita quod salus non deficit
prop^er dese^tum a p^nte Dei. Therefore it connoteth also all the helps which
God affords men.
that it is due by the mere Law of Nature, without any superadded Positive Laws.

349. Gods will called Legislative, or Governing is ever fulfilled in strict
sense, that is, So much as is Gods part and the Laws part to do, is ever done:
e. g. God says [Perfect obedience, etc. shall be Adams duty] and it is done:
It is his Duty whether he will or not. He says [To steal shall be sin] and it
is sin. He says [He that believes shall have right to Justification and
Glory, and he that believes not shall be Filius mortis, that is, Death and
Hell shall be his Due] and so it is. Thus strictly all Gods Will is done.

350. But in the secondary remote sense every sin violateth the Will of God, by
breaking his Law: For when he says [Obedience shall be thy duty;] we use to
say, It is Gods will that we should obey him: And so when we do not obey him,
we are said to Violate his will. But this is but metonymically: For that which
is Gods will indeed is but that we shall be bound to obey (whether we do or
not:) And the event, whether we shall or not de facto, is not at all determined
by the Law.

351. Therefore if it were proved that God did Decree one thing, and command
the contrary, it would not prove two contrary wills in God; nor is there any
great show of a contradiction in it. For to say [I forbid Judas to hang
himself] and [I decree that he shall hang himself] are no contradictions; It is
but to say, [It shall be his Duty to preserve his life] and [Eventually he
shall not preserve it.] All that is a man's Duty does not come to pass: And to
determine of Duty, is not to say, It shall come to pass. Otherwise Gods word
were false whenever man sinned. Nay in reality, Augustine (truly) judged that
by Gods Law Hell was Due to Paul unconverted, and yet then he was a chosen
Vessel, and God Decreed to save him. He thought that Perseverance was the Duty
of some that after fell away, and that Heaven was their Due on condition of
perseverance till they fell away, (though not presently to be possessed;) and
yet that God decreed that ipso permittente eventually they should fall away and
perish.

352. If a King made a Law that no man shall murder another, and yet knows
that a certain Traitor that has broken Prison, is like to fall into the hands
of some Thieves or Enemies that will kill him, If he be secretly willing that
he be killed by them, it is no contradiction: The Law makes it their duty not
to Kill; But it says not, that they shall not de eventu, by way of
Prognostication.

353. But yet indeed God never does command an act or forbid an act; and yet
Decree that the same Act immediately commanded shall not be ^one, or that the
act directly forbidden shall be done. Because sin is a thing that God cannot
decree or will, (of which anon.)

354. But the effect of the commanded or forbidden act is sometimes said ^o be
commanded or forbidden: And this may be contrarily decreed of God. And men that
think not truly of the matter, think that this is to Decree a thing forbidden,
and so they err by such confused thoughts. E. G. Gods command is that I shall
relieve a poor man, and not let him fa^ish; and that I shall heal the sick,
etc. and yet God may decree that this ^oor man shall be famished, and this sick
man dye; And yet no contradiction. For indeed [Relieving] in effect, is but the
End of the Act which is commanded me, and not the act it self: I am bound to
offer him ^elief: But if one cannot take it, and another will not, yet I have
done my duty: And so in the other instance. So God commanded Abraham ^o
sacrifice his Son, and yet decreed that he should not be sacrificed; And ^his
without any contradiction. For the act that under that name was commanded
Abraham, and made his duty, was not actual eventual sacri^icing. (For then it
had been a duty to resist the Angel and do a thing ^mpossible.) But to consent
and endeavor on his part to sacrifice his Son: which he did. So the
preservation of our own and others lives is commanded us by God, and yet at the
same time men's death decreed: Because the thing indeed commanded, is not
Preservation as it signifies the effect and success, but only Preservation as
it signifies our true endeavor. So the Jews were forbidden to kill Christ,
and yet God decreed that Christ should be killed: For the thing forbidden them
was their own Consent and wicked act: But the thing that God willed and decreed
was only the effect, without any Will of their Act that caused it (unless in
genere actus,) but only a permission of it. Men of gross brains that cannot
distinguish and judge accurately, may blaspheme God in their ignorance, in a
case that to a discerning judgment is very plain.

355. Of which see Amyraldus against Spanhem. de Great. Universali.
The next distinction of Gods Will, is into Absolute and Conditional; which
some Divines use and others condemn, and say that God has no Conditional Will.
The common answer which most Schoolmen and other Papists agree with the
Protestants in, is, that there are Conditions rei volitae of the event of the
thing Willed, but no Conditions of the act of Volition in God. As Aquinas says
of Causes, De Vol. Conditionali, and authoritatibus and rationibus pro eadem
Vide Ruiz. de Vol. Dei, disp. 20. But his assertion that [Una creatura est
Ratio movens tanquam objectum materiale (secundario) ut Deus velit aliam
producere] is a fiction, though he lay his stress on it about the ordo
decretorum. For movere is causare, and nothing does cause or move God to act.
There are Rations effectuum and eorum ordinis: but none of the efficient Acts
of God in him: If you say, It is absurd to say, that God had no Reason to will
the creation of this world rather than another: I answer, That is an Act of
efficient Wisdom, above all Reason: But to fetch Reasons from the object, and
thereby to be moved to Act, is the part of the imperfect creature. Reasoning
properly is below God: much more to be moved by extrinsick objective reasons:
Yet on this Ruiz disp. 24. lays a great fabric; and so men may draw twenty
Schemes of Gods Reasonings as they variously fancy.
Deus vult hoc esse propter hoc; non autem propter hoc vult hoc. 1. There are
both Causes and Conditions of the event willed of God. 2. Denominatione
extrinseca ex connotatione objecti his Will is hence called Conditional;
meaning but a Volition of Conditionals.

356. That God wills Conditions, and Conditional Propositions, and Grants, is
past all controversies. For he wills his own word, which is his work: But his
word has conditional promises and threats: And as his word also may be called
his will, he has a Conditional will, because a Conditional word.

357. Gods eternal Omniscience proves, that at no instant he had a will
properly Conditional quoad actum: Because he that at the same instant
fore-knoweth whether the Condition would be done or not, must needs have his
will to be thereby absolute. But yet if it had pleased God to suspend the Act
of his own Volition, upon a humane Condition, it would not have exposed him at
all to the charge either of mutability or dependence: which is very clear. For
1. It is presupposed his Will as Voluntas and Essentia is unalterable, and is
not that of which we speak. 2. But only his Volition as terminated on this or
that object, and so as haec volitio ab objecto denominata. 3. And his efficient
Volition, and Power is terminated on objects in time, without mutation in God.
4. And N. B. that God does suspend his own Possible Volitions in many cases; As
he does Not will to make more Worlds, more Men, more Suns, more Laws, etc. than
de facto he will make. 5. And it is no more defectiveness in God to suspend a
Volition for a time, than thus to do it for ever. 6. And it is no more
Dependence on the Creature to Terminate his Volition only on a qualified
subject (performing the Condition) than to terminate his Efficient Power and
will on such or such a qualified subject. As e. g. He terminateth his
Omnipotent Concurse for Generation only on the materia seminalis recte
disposita; He concurreth to burn by fire, etc. And if his Acts effectively
Transient may be terminated only and temporarily on disposed objects, If he did
so in acts Objectively Transient, and did freely not-will the damnation of man
till he had actually sinned, but suspended his will freely till then, and then
de novo terminated it on the said qualified object, I see no show of Dependence
or Mutability. For I often cleared it before, that the termination of Gods
Knowledge, Will or Power on any particular Object, is in him no addition to its
estence; And doing it de novo, is no change in him but in the Creature only; no
more than it would be a change in the Sun or its active Emanations, if a
thousand new creatures newly receive its Influx and are moved by it variously
according to their several Conditions. Yet I have before given reasons why
incipere jam praedestinare is more incongruous language.

358. I put in this only to deprecate the blind uncharitable censures of
dissenters in this point, who think that Gods Volitions are New and Conditional
and suspended, quoad actum hunc ad hoc objectum; and cry out, It is blasphemy,
and makes God mutable and dependent. I am against their opinion as well as you
as to Conditional Acts: But false charges prove you not to have more truth, but
less love and sobriety than others.

359. XI. The next distinction of Gods Will is into Effectual and Uneffectual.
And here he that would see a great deal said on the question, Whether God have
any uneffectual Will, and whether man's will can frustrate it, may see too much
in a multitude of Schoolmen on 1 Sent. q. 45. and 46. Some answer (as
D'Orbellis, etc.) that the Voluntas Beneplaciti is Aq. a. 1. Scot. q. un.
Durand. q. 1. Bonav. art. 1. Greg. Arim. q. un. ar. 3. Pennot. l. 4. c. 22.
Alvar. de Aux. disp. 32. Ruiz de Volunt. disp. 18. Gran. de Vol. Dei. Tract. 4.
disp. 3. Suar. l. 4. de Pradest. c. 8. Gr. Val. disp. 1. q. 19. p. 6. Cajct.
Nazar. Ban. Zum. Navar. Gonzal. Molin. Vasqu. etc. in 1. p. q. 19. ar. 6. Ripa.
Arrub. Fasol. ibid. Nic. D'Orbel. 1. d. 46. and many other Scotists, etc.
ever effectual, but not the Vol. signi; which yet seeing he well explaineth to
be only the making of Duty, he might well have said is still effectual to its
proper primary effect. Greg. Arimin. (and many others) distinguish of the will
of Complacency and Displicency, and that Prosecutionis and fugae; and say the
latter is effectual, and not the former: which others say of the Absolute Will
as distinct from the Conditional. The plain truth I have often opened before:
Gods Will is the first Efficient, the chief Dirigent, and the Final Cause; (in
which the three Principles, Power, Wisdom and Goodness are eminet.) 1. His
efficient will is ever effectual, and never frustrate. Whatsoever pleased the
Lord (to do) that he did, in Heaven and in Earth, in the Sea and in the depths,
Psalm. 135. 6. And who has resisted (this) his will? Romans 9. 19. 2. His
Directing will is ever effectual as to the making of the Law or Rule, and of
Due or Right thereby: For so far it is efficient of that effect: But it is too
often violated by our sin. 3. His final will or Complacency is Gods being pleased
with the Being, or Action, or relation of the Creature, and supposing it, is
not efficient, and therefore not effectual. And I know no need of more upon
this question.

360. XII. The last now to be named is, The Antecedent and Consequent. will.
This also is handled by many Schoolmen, and much used by the Jesuits and
Arminians. To pass by others, Pennottus handles it propugn. l. 4. c. 21.
having first showed, c. 20. p. 225. that Chrysostom and Damascene first used
it. His explicatory Propositions are, 1. Vol. Antec. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 1.
Damas^. fid. Orthod. l. 2. c. 29. and cont. Manich. ad ^^nem.
and Cons. non est in Deo respectu omnium Volitorum, sed solum respectu ^orum
quae aliquo modo pendent ex lib. arbitrio creaturae. 2. Voluntas antecedens est
illa qua Deus vult hominis salutem quantum in ipso est, and qua illum ad
salutem ordinat, and media ad salutem necessaria praeparat, quibus nisi per
ipsum hominem steterit, salutem assequatur. 3. Non semper Voluntas antecedens
and Consequens circa objecta contraria versantur, sed potest idem objectum esse
Volitum a Deo Voluntate tum antecedente tum consequente. 4. Voluntas antecedens
in Deo est Voluntas beneplaciti, and non solum voluntas signi. 5. Voluntas
antecedens est formaliter Alliaco Camerac. 1. q. 14. D. E. tells you the sense
of Thom. Scotus, Ockam, and Gregor. of this distinction: and that of Scotus and
Ockam is to the same purpose with what I here say of it; including that
antecedent Grace which they call sufficient, which God gives to persuade men
to consent.

The Schoolmen are disagreed of the sense of this distinction: and not
understanding it, contend about it. See Ruiz de Vol. Dei, disp. 19.. 2, 3, 4,
5. p. 195, 196, etc.


and proprie in Deo existens, and non solum per metaphoram ad eum modum, quo
Voluntas signi.

361. I tell you their sense, that I may the better open the plain truth to
you, which is as follows. 1. This distinction of Vol. antec. and cons. is not
applied to God as he is our Creator, or End, nor as he is mere Proprietor or
Benefactor; but only as he is Rector, or Moral Ruler of man. 2. As Government
has an Antecedent and Consequent part, viz. Legislation and Judgment (with
Execution) so Gods Antecedent will is nothing but his Legal will, or his Will
as Rector signified by his Laws: And his Consequent will, is his Judicial will,
or expressed in Judgment; One Antecedent to Man's part (obedience or
disobedience) and the other Consequent to it. 3. It is most certain that God
wills Antecedently all that is in his Law, that is, that all that believe and
repent shall be saved: And that he wills Consequently that Judas e. g. and
every finally impenitent unbeliever shall be damned. For what God does, that he
wills to do: But God does himself make such a Law, and pass such a judgment:
Ergo he is willing of it.

SECT. XV. Of the Order of Gods Decrees by way of Intention and Execution.
362. THere is no part of this Controversy more contentiously and I fear
presumptuously and too audaciously handled, than this of the Intentional order
of Gods Decrees. Of which many have said much, but no man has laid so great a
stress on it as those two very good men Dr. Twisse and his follower Samuel
Rutherford. Scotus's order is elsewhere recited: Take Vasquez's as in 1. Tho.
q. 23. a. 3. d. 95. c. 6. Both of the adult and infants: [1. Praeviderit Deus
omnes in Massa perditionis peccato obnoxios propter transgressionem Adami: 2.
Hoc non obstante, voluit primaria voluntate ex seipso quosdam parvulos and
omnes adultos ad beatitudinem pervenire, and ad hoc media sufficientia
concesserit, quamvis efficacia and congrua negaverit; non intention excludendi
^os a regno, sed ostendendi divitias suas in vasa misericordiae. 3. Ut viderit
^os in p^cca. orig. aut actuali decedere, and 4. Ob id efficaciter decreverit
ipsos expellere a beatitudine, and adultos ad poenam ignis destinaverit, ex quo
quarto instanti incipit Reprobatio eorum a gloria. Circa alios vero parvulos
quibus non concessit posse applicari remedia, Ordo in divina praescientia and
eorum reprobatio a negatione gratiae incipit.] Would you not think that he took
all these for distinct thoughts in God? when he means no real diversity at
all.
But on this supposition we have had many very bold Schemes of Gods Intentional
Decrees given us; of which you may see some in worthy. Mr. Perkins Golden
Chain, and in Beza, and out of him in English his Tractate published with Mr.
Gilbies of Predestination, and in Piscator, and others.

363. By this way the Anti arminians are fallen into the distinct parties, of
Sublapsarians, and Supralapsarians; And these into two parties; one making man
as not existent in esse cognito, the other man in innocence, the object of
Predestination.

364. 1. The common way is to distribute the Means among themselves, as any of
them are subservient to others, as their end, and so to make a great many of
Decrees or parts of the Decree, first of the ultimate end, and then of the
next, and the next to that, and so on, till you come to the first means which
is no end; as the Writer imagines them to lie.

365. 2. The second way is invented as Conciliatory by Dr. Twisse (and so it
is) viz. that God has but two Decrees, one de fine, and the other de mediis,
and that all the media are the objects but of one Decree, and so that we need
not trouble the Church with disputing which of them is first or last.

366. 3. A third opinion I have long ago read in a MS. of Animadversions on Dr.
Twisse by a Learned Judicious and Godly Doctor (yet living) who proves that
God has but one Decree de fine and de mediis, which casts away all the
matter of the Controversies about the priority and posteriority. And it were
well if the Controversy were so ended.

367. 4. Many Arminians write as if the order of Intention and of Execution
were the same, and so begin at the other end, and give us a Scheme just
contrary to the first sort, (Beza, Perkins, etc.)

368. 5. Some hold that Intendere finem is proper to the imperfect creature,
and not belonging to God; and therefore that he has no order of Intention in
his decrees at all, because no proper end.

369. 6. Some hold that the whole business of the order of Intention is utterly
beyond our reach: And therefore that we should meddle only with the order of
Execution: Thus says the most judicious Bishop Davenant soundly, Dissert. de
Praedest. and Reprob. cap. 9. page 209. Haec argumentatio (Corvini) vocat nos
ad speculationem valde difficilem and dogmaticae Theologiae fundandae minime
accommodatam. Nititur enim consideratione Prioritatis and Posterioritatis in
illis duobus Voluntatis Divinae decretis de dando Mediatore and de Electis
servandis, quae utraque ab aeterno fuere concepta and constituta. Ad me quod
attinet, scio ordinem Executionis, secundum quem Deus voluit beneficia ad
homines pervenire, nullo negotio poss^ delineari: At quo ordine Deus consignata
ea tenuit ab aeterno in mente ac voluntate sua, is solus enarrare praesumat,
qui se Deo ab arcanis and aternu consiliis etiam affirmare audeat. Fatemur Deum
ab aeterno constituisse, ut omnibus salvandis Christus primo in loco
proponeretur, dein per fidem apprehenderetur, hinc ut eorundem justificatio
sequeretur, tum sanctificatio, and demum Glorificatio. Sed siquis minime
contentus hoc ordine exequutionis velit etiam nobis describere seriem
Decretorum Divinorum ordine conceptionis in mente and Voluntate Dei quasi
distinctam, atque urgeat cum Arminio Divinam justitiam impugnari nisi hoc
consideretur ut illo prius, is mihi videtur nimium ingenio suo fidere.

And he cites Gabr. Biel in 3. d. 2. q. dub. 3. saying Prioritates illas in
Divinis hisce decretis non esse ponendas, sicut nec pluralitates actuum
ordinatorum. Ac proinde siquis considerare velit talem ordinem horum decretorum
ut ponat Christi incarnationem electione priorem, vel e contra, hanc
considerationem esse falsam specnlationem.

370. Dr. Twisse who reduces them to two, excludes man's salvation from the
Decree de fine, and thus enumerateth the decreed Means: Twiss. in Vindic. Great.
ll. 3. Digres. 3. page Vol. minoris 52, 53.
[1. The Permission of sin (of which more anon.) 2. The gift of a Savior. 3.
The grace of Vocation, Faith, Repentance and Perseverance. 4. The Salvation of
persevering penitent believers.] And so as to the ultimate end only [quod Prius
est intention, posterius est executione.] But that the order of execution only
is to be observed among the Means.

371. The matter it self (or at least my thoughts of it) I shall open as
plainly as I can with brevity. First premising that their own doctrine should
take them off their confidence and contention about this order of intention.
For, 1. They often tell us that all Gods Decrees are eternal without any order of
Time. And should we not then be afraid of boldness about any other order?

372. 2. They often tell us, that Prescience and Science, Predestination and
Destination are all one in God, and not to be thought of as acts past and
ceased.

373. 3. They often tell us, that God is one, and his Will is himself;
Praedestinatio Dei est ipsa Dei essentia quae est necessaria. Alliac. Camer. in
1. q. 12. D.

See in Ruiz de Vol. Dei, disp. 24. how they are confounded about the ordering
of Gods decrees as to the order of Intention and Execution: His Solution
supposes that Unius objecti Volitio est ratio determinans ad aliorum
volitionem: When as ex pa^te Dei there is but One Volition, and that has no
cause; and the Ratio is a deceiving ambiguous word.


and his Decrees are his Will, and therefore are all but one.

374. 4. They cannot deny but that all our conceptions of God are improper, and
analogical or metaphorical more or less; and that what Knowledge and Will in
God is formally, no mortal knows. And should we dispute then audaciously
about this Order?

375. 5. None can deny, but that these Mysteries require the highest reverence,
and that it is dreadful to take Gods Name in vain, and dally with the Consuming
fire. And yet shall we presume?

376. 6. They all confess that our Lord Jesus, his Prophets, Apostles, or
Scriptures, lead them not this way, and decide not these Controversies, so as
that they can stand to their decision alone.

377. 7. They cannot deny, but that desiring arrogantly to be as Gods in
Knowledge, was our first Parents sin, that ruined them and us, and that this
was Satan's first successful game. And that our disease is like to be such as
its original.

378. 8. Lastly, They cannot choose but know, that it is the troubling of the
Church with new Articles, and new practices, and leading them from the
simplicity that is in Christ, even as the Serpent beguiled Eve, (with the
promise of more knowledge,) which has been the great plague and divider of the
Churches in all Ages; though the Apostle foretold them that It was this that he
feared of them. And are we not self-condemned, if after all this, we will
censure and reproach one another, and foment divisions for that which most
certainly no mortal understands?

379. I. And first your very foundation is uncertain, that God does properly
Intendere finem. Nay, it is certain that (as Aquinas afore-cited Vasqu^z says,
that Gods own Goodness is not a final Cause of his Volition; supposing that
movere ad Electionem medii is final Causality. Ruiz asserteth the contrary;
taking final Causality to be first esse primum objectum: And thus men strive
about artificial notions.

Vasq. 1. d. 82. c. 1. Ruiz de Vo^. Dei, d. 15.. 1. p. 159. But that nothing is
the Ratio Volendi but his own Goodness, see Albert. 1. p. tr. 20. q. 19. m. 1.
a. 1. Alex. 1. p. q. 35. m. 3. Henric. quodl. 4. q. 19. Gabr. 1. d. 14. q. 1.
a. 2. Dried. de Concord. p. 1. c. 3. Vasq. disp. 82. Scotus 1. d. 44. Molin. 1.
q. 19. a. 5.


says) though Vult hoc esse propter hoc, non tamen propter hoc vult hoc. He
prescribes Ends to Man, and sets Ends to Means which are fi^es operis; But
that he Intends an End Himself, must be said very improperly, or very
uncertainly, or not at all. The truth is, that we must say that God does finem
intendere, because we must speak of him after the manner of men, or not at all.
But it is not true in the same sense as we speak it of man, and as the word
properly signifies; but equivocally.

380. For, 1. To Intend an End, is to make that End a Cause why we choose the
means (as most say:) But Gods Election or Actions have no Cause. All deny that
there is in God Cause and Effects; or that propter hoc vult hoc.

381. 2. In man to Intend an End, does imply that a man yet wants his end;
and that it is somewhat that he needs, or at least does not yet obtain. But
God needs nothing, and has no end that is desired or wanting, nor but what
he continually possesses or enjoys, as well now as hereafter.

382. 3. We know no such thing as Intendere finem where the Act and the End are
the same. Intendere is not the same with Finis. But in God they are the same:
He that is most simple has no Intention, which is not Himself, and no End
which is not Himself, and so both are one.

383. 4. Our Intendere finem is not the same really with Electio mediorum. But
God has no Intention but what is really the same with Election, though not
denominatively, connotatively and relatively.

384. 5. Divines usually say, that Nothing below God himself can be his End.
But where there is no means, there is no End or intention of it. But to God
there is no Means. He is not a Means of himself; And no creature can be a means
of him: If we say, that any thing can be a means ut Deus sit, vel ut sit
Maximus, Sapientissimus, Optimus, it were no better than Blasphemy. God then
has not an End like man.

385. Yet necessity constrains us to use the phrase, but these things must
still be understood when we use it. 1. That no creature can be Gods End; unless
you will call an object as terminative, an End; or else an Effect.

386. 2. That it is not Gods Essence and perfections that is an end as to any
medium; But it is his Will: For his Free Will is the Beginning, and the
Complacency of that Will is the End of all things. But if you call God his own
Object, and so call the final Object an End, so we must consider God as Loving
Himself; and Himself is the End or final object of his own Love or Complacency;
and he himself as Loving himself, is said to Act on that End or Object. And
indeed eternal self-knowledge and self-love (which some of old ventured to call
the second and third Persons) are the Great Immanent Acts of the Divine
Essence, (with the sibi vivere.) And it seems the chief Notion of Holiness in
God, that he Loves Himself in primo instanti, and that he is most Amiable to
his Creatures in secundo instanti, and that he is the Cause and End of all that
is good in them. Thus a final object of his own and our Love or Complacency,
God is past all doubt. And secondarily his Will is pleased and fulfilled in all
his works.

387. 3. Yet by that Complacency we mean not that God is passive, or receives
any Delight from the Creature, or has any addition by it to his felicity: But
as he is a Communicative Good by way of Efficiency as the first efficient
Cause, so is he a felicitating Good to the Creature as its End, and he is Love
taking the creature into its nearest Communion with him: which is his
Complacency, and the End of all things. And hence it is that God is said when
he had finished his works, to Rest complacentially in all as very Good.

388. 4. As the Complacency of Gods Will is his End, in the formal notion (so
far as it may be said of God) so his Glory is his End in the Material notion.

389. That his Glory is not Formally his End, is confessed by all Divines who
say that nothing below God can be his End. But by his Glory is meant something
below himself; some creature, or action of the creature. Ergo, etc. For if by
his Glory be meant Himself, there is no Means to such an end.

390. Therefore by Gods Glory is meant the shining luster of his Image; or the
Appearance of God in his Works: And not only man's Praising and Glorifying
thoughts and words of him: which though they are our highest duty, are unfit to
be Gods End, alone. Yet are they part of that Glory which is materially his
End, though not the whole.

391. This Glory or Appearance of God, which is materially his End, is, 1. The
perfection of the whole Creation. 2. Next that the Glory of the Celestial
Kingdom, containing Christ and all the holy ones. 3. Next that the Glory of
Christ's own person alone. 4. Next that the Glory of the Holy ones alone, etc.

392. Because this perfection of the Universe is not yet accomplished, but
shall be, improperly we may say that God has not yet attained his End, that
is, his Material End.

393. 5. But properly and formally Gods End is never unattained: Because his
Will is never unfulfilled, though the things willed be not yet perfected. For
when e. g. the first days work was made, all was done which he then willed to
be done, and so for the second day, etc. And now all is done which he would
have now done: And his Will is ever perfectly pleased; And he wants nothing.
So that an End not attained, is not to be ascribed to God, except materially.

394. Thus God is said to have made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4.
Because for His Pleasure they are, and were created, Rev. 4. 11.

395. For his Decreeing disposing Will is fulfilled by all, even the wicked
that are for the day of Evil: Though his Commanding Will being not fulfilled by
sinners, according to that he is said to have no pleasure in them, but to hate
them, Psalm. 5. 5. Heb. 10. 38. Mal. 1. 10. Ezekiel. 18. 32. 23. and 33. 11. Jer.
22. 28. and 48. 38. Eccles. 5. 4. Psalm. 5. 4, etc.

396. And lest any think that thus God misseth of his End, let it be well
noted, 1. That this phrase of Gods taking no pleasure, is objectively both
Positive, Privative and Oppositive, that is, It signifies that God will
deprive the wicked of felicity, or the Communion of his Love, and will load
them with sorrows, and will set himself against their Comforts. But 2. As to
Gods own Complacency of will, it is but equal to a negative: His felicity lies
not in theirs: And so as Gods will has no actual Complacency in Nothings (as
in more Worlds, or Creatures, than ever will be) and yet his Complacency is
perfect; so though he have no Complacency in the Holiness or Salvation of those
that are never Holy or Saved, Hence they dispute* Whether Gods Providence
always attain his Ends: and Ruiz cites for the affirmative, Cajet. Naz.
Alvar. and Scot. Marsil. Okam, Gabriel, Hervaeus, Driedo; and for the negative,
Alex. Aquin. Durand. Marsil. Capreol. Ferrar. and communiter recentiores,
Molina, Zumel, Vasq. Suarez, Valent. Becanus, Sirenus, Pennottus, Arrubal, etc.
And all this difference is about names and words. And Ruiz is for the Negative,
sect. 3. page 56. qui^ aliquos fines Deus intendit volitione conditionata, and
non totaliter efficaci. So that the question is, An Volitio condi^ionate and
inefficax sit Deo ascribendae quando v^lt ea auxili^ quae consensum hominis
reddunt possibilem, vel hominem faciunt potentem? Et an volitio haec dicenda
sit Intentio finis? For he concludes as agreed on by all, that Gods Providence
is never frustrate, hindered, deceived, or fluctuating, nor any thing done
against it absolutely, or against its total adequate End.
yet his Complacency is perfect.

397. There is no doubt but Man has Ends and Means, because God has so
appointed it, and made him not in a state of perfection, but in via: Yea,
Angels have an End and every creature, because defective dependent beings; even
in a formal sense.

398. God is this Ultimate End of man, as he is to be perfectly Loved and
Pleased; to which all are means: And the means are ordered as Ends to one
another.

399. Usually where the Scriptures and Preachers do speak of God as the End,
and of Intention of Ends, they mean Man's Intention and End, prescribed him by
God. But if they speak of Gods, they mean only, formally the fulfilling of his
will, and materially his Glory, or the perfecting of his works.

400. The finis operis as distinct from the finis operantis is nothing but the
aptitude and tendency of the work to the Authors Intended End, or to some
effect: Not that the opus qua opus finem intendit.

401. If all these difficulties lie in the way, Whether and how far God intend
an End at all, judge how far it is fit to contend about the Mental Order of his
Intentions, and whether Judicious Davenant was not in the right.

402. II. If it were granted, that Quod prius est Intention, posterius est
executione, nothing would follow to gratify either party in these
Controversies. For all would be but this, that [God Intended Himself, and the
Fulfilling or Complacency of his own Will, before he willed any thing else that
ever comes to pass.] And what is this to the business?

403. But they say, It is his Glory that he first intended: I answered before,
His Glory is, 1. Himself (and then it is the same which I asserted:) or 2. a
Creature (and then it is not formally his End.) 2. His Glory as it is his
Complete Image on the whole perfected World, is his End indeed Materially: But
that is but to be the Complete Means: The perfected means may improperly be
called his End: But forma denominat.

404. When they say, that it is the Glory of his Mercy and Justice, 1. They say
but the same and need no other answer. 2. They speak very defectively: For it
is to ascribe to God a defective Decree or Intention, which is not for the
glory of all his revealed perfections: Doubtless whatever is materially the
perfect means of glorifying God, must glorify his Greatness and Active Power
or Life, his Wisdom and his Goodness, and therein his Veracity or fidelity, his
Justice and his Holiness, his Benignity and mercy, his Immutability,
Independency, etc. All this must be in the means it self.

405. If Mr. Perkins, Beza, Gilbie and many other good men had well considered
this, they had never made the glorifying of Gods Mercy and Justice in the
salvation of some and the damnation of others, Gods ultimate end; Thereby
committing many palpable errors. 1. Making quid Creatum vel Creaturae to be
formally or properly Gods end, which is but a Means. 2. Making one little
parcel of that means, to be the end. 3. Inserting two acts or parts only of
that which they themselves confess to be but Means. For what should the names
of Salvation and Damnation do in the description of the end? Are they any part
of the end? Why is not Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, Preservation,
Resurrection, etc. as well put in? Is he not Glorified in them as well as in
final salvation or damnation? Yea and in Creation and the fr^me of nature too?
Yea why is not the glory of Angels, and all the world put in, as part of the
same means to his end?

406. If it be said that it is only Gods Glory of Mercy and Justice in men^
salvation and damnation which is the end of Redemption, Conversion, Preaching,
Ordinances, Sanctification, Adoption, etc. 1. I deny it: His Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, and his forementioned subordinate attributes are thereby Glorified
also. 2. It is an injury to God unworthy of a Divine, to make God to have as
many distinct ultimate ends, as they think there are particular aptitudes or
tendencies in the means.

407. For undoubtedly we must feign in God no more ultimate ends than one. And
undoubtedly the means consisting of innumerable parts, make up one perfect
whole, in which Gods Glory shines so, as it does not in any part alone. And he
that will cut Gods frame into scraps and shreds, and set up the parts as so
many wholes, will more dishonor him than he that would so mangle a Picture, or
a Watch, or Clock, or House, or the pipes of an Organ, or the strings of a
Lute, and tell you of their beauty and Harmony only distinctly. Well therefore
did Dr. Twisse reduce all the Decrees de mediis to one: But they are one in
their apt composition for one end: And the Glory of Sun, and Stars, and Angels,
and the whole Creation is a part, and the Glory of our salvation and damnation
is but another part.

408. The order therefore of Gods Decrees in respect of the Execution is on^y
fit for our debate: (Any farther than that we may moreover say that Gods will
or Himself is all his ultimate end, and his Glory shining in the perfection of
his entire works is the perfect means.) And there is nothing else that we can
reasonably controvert. And about this our Controversy is next to none at all.
Here we may well enquire what is prius vel posterius, quid superius, quid
inferius, etc. and that to our edification.

409. Seeing then that we are agreed (as is said) with Aquinas that Ruiz de
Vo^^n. Dei disp. 15.. 4. p. 163. prettily argues that Si non potest dari ratio
ipsius ^olitionis divinae, sed solius denominations extrinse^ae resultant^s ab
e^^^^lis creat^^, sequitur ^anas esse plurima^ Th^o^ogorum de ordine,
depend^^tia vel ratione divi^^^um volitionum, post quam inter illos constat
quem ordinem, dependentiam v^l ration^m habeant externa objecta inter se. The
conscquent is true. They are vain indeed, though he deny it. And all his
reasons p. 161, 162, etc. to prove that dantur i^ creat^^a rations finales
moventes divinam voluntatem, are but triflings with the ambiguities of the word
Ratio and abuses of the word Causa, having before confessed that there is no
Real Cause. And are there Causes that are not Real? 1. We grant the Creature is
an Object of Gods will: and the object is b^ some called the material cause of
the act in ^^^^ ^^^^ numero. 2. It is the Terminus and Recipient of the divine
influx. 3. It may therefore ^e causa material^s of the diversity of the effects
of Gods influx as Received in patiente ex di^ersitate dispositions. 4. Our acts
may be the effects of Gods Volitions. 5. And may be second Causes of other
effects. 6. Those other effects may be said to be Gods nearer ends, speaking of
him after the manner of imperfect man. 7. Where our acts are not causes, they
may be conditions sine quibus non, of many of Gods acts quoad effectus, (as sin
is of punishment at least.) 8. In all these respects Gods Volition which is One
in itself, may and must be denominated diverse from the diversity of these
effects and objects, which therefore are the Ratio nomin^^: And he that would
prove any other Ratio or Cause of the first Cause, the will of God or any of
his acts as in himself, must first renounce all natural and Scholastical
Theology at least. He cites Durand. Major, Richardus, etc. But Durandus 1. d.
41. q. 1. does but say that Gods Acts are thus to be reckoned secundum
rationem, as likening Gods reasoning or thoughts to ours, (ut. n. 7.) and not
^uxta rei veritatem. Richard. is full for what I say; 1. d. 45. Voluntas sive
volens de Deo secundum essentiam dicitur: non est aliud Velle, aliud Esse: But
yet his Velle hoc speaks not his esse qua esse; and therefore he adds that
when God is said scire aut velle, it is his Essence; but to say, Hoc aut illud
scit aut vult is but to say, Hoc aut illud est subjectum scientiae vel
voluntatis quae ipse Deus est. Et Voluntas Dei est prima and summa Causa
omnium; cujus Causa non est quaerenda; and non est diversa Voluntas, sed
diversa locutio de ea in Scripturis. And Richardus in loc. p. 141. says but
this, that Ipsius divini Velle nulla est ratio motiva, cum realiter idem sit
quod Deus: Tamen Ordinationis quae est inter divinum velle and ipsum volitum
been est ratio aliqua respectu alicujus voliti. Which is no more than I have
said. And as to Major, Ruiz did ill to cite him, who there professes that
Predestination and Volition is but Relatio rationis and denominatio extrinseca
as to God. And his ordo signorum in mente divina is but the Scotists
assimilating Gods acts to man's.
Deus non propter hoc vult hoc, sed vult hoc esse propter hoc, that which we
have to do is but to enquire, 1. De re, how one thing is a Cause or other means
of another; 2. And so how God Decreed it to work and be.

410. And 1. It is agreed that the Creation was Gods first work (that we know
of or have any thing to do with:) This had (as to the first part) no Antecedent
Object, but produces its effect, which some call its object. But the latter
days works had an antecedent object, and also a produced effect. And
accordingly God Decreed from Eternity that this should be his first work. From
whence by connotation that may be called, his first Decree.

411. That sin or the Permission of sin, or other mere Negatives, are not to
have place among the asserted Means and Decrees, I am anon in due place to
manifest.

412. 2. God having made man, did give him a Law both Natural and Positive:
This was next done, and therefore decreed to be next done.

413. 3. Man having broke this Law, God judged him, and laid on him some
indispensible penalties. This was decreed to be done in the third place.

414. 4. At the same time God promised Man the victory by the Woman's Seed, and
giving him pardon of the destructive penalty, became his Redeemer, and put him
under a Covenant of Grace; first given to mankind in Adam, and afterward in
Noah. And this was decreed to be so done.

415. 5. Though all were thus put under this Covenant, and God forsook none
that first forsook not him, yet did he give more Grace to some, than to others,
to Abel, e. g. than to Cain, so that those that did actually repent and believe
and live to God, were justified and adopted and made heirs of life. And thus he
decreed to do.

416. 6. Perseverance also was the effect of his special Grace, which
accordingly is Decreed to be given.

417. 7. The Cainites, Canaanites and others that were the wicked Seed of
wicked Parents, who forsook him and his Grace, he accordingly judged, punished
and forsook: And so decreed.

418. 8. The Seed of the faithful he eminently blessed, especially of Abraham;
whom he took (by reward) into a further special Covenant, superadded to the
common Covenant of Grace, taking his Seed into a peculiar political and
gracious relation to him, promising the multiplication and prosperity of them,
and that the Savior should come out of them: All which was so decreed to be
done.

419. 9. The Messiah came in the fullness of time, and did and suffered all that
is mentioned in the Gospel: And gave us a more perfect Edition of the Covenant
of Grace, and greater grace with it, even more of the Spirit, with a better
Ministry, Ordinances and Church State: Which were so decreed to be done.

420. 10. To some Nations of the Earth this second Edition of the Covenant of
Grace, (that is, the Gospel) is freely promulgate or Preached, who deserved it
no more than others, while others for sin are left under the first darker
Edition, and under desertions and grievous punishments, for their forefathers
and their own violation of it.

421. 11. Where the Gospel comes among many that all deserve rejection for the
resisting of grace, God gives to some that grace which infallibly Converteth
them, and consequently justifies, adopteth and sanctifies them. All which he
decreed.

422. 12. Giving also Perseverance as aforesaid, he finally justifies all such
in Judgment, and Glorifieth (Christ first, and) them with Christ: singly and
conjunctly at the final consummation. And he Decreed to do all this accordingly.

423. If the Decree of God be called but One, for the Reasons before given, the
Controversy is then at an end: But if it must be distinguished and called Many
Decrees or parts, it must be either from the Effects o^ from the supposed
objects.

424. 1. If from the Effects, there will be no Controversy about the Decrees
but what is first about the Effects themselves. And most of them now named are
uncontroverted.

425. 2. And we cannot well denominate and distinguish the Decrees from any
thing else but the Effects, (even as we do his operations, as Creation,
Redemption, etc.) But the objects then are past doubt such as follow.

426. Viz. 1. The object of the Decree of Creation as such (distinct from the
Effect) is Nothing: that is, There is no object.

427. 2. The object of the Decree of Legislation is man considered merely in
his Being and Naturals as such.

428. 3. The object of the Decree of the first Judgment, was man newly fallen.

429. 4. The object of the Decree of the giving of the Promise of Christ, the
New Covenant in the first Edition and pardon and grace by it, was fallen man
first judged.

430. 5. The object of the Common grace of that Covenant from first to last, is
fallen judged man brought under that Covenant of grace (ut norma officii, judicii
and beneficii.)

431. 6. The object of the Special grace of God (at first) viz. for effectual
Conversion, to men under that Covenant, was the same as last mentioned, Man
brought under the Covenant of grace; of whom 1. Some were prepared and disposed
by Common grace for Special. 2. And it is like some not, but suddenly surpirzed
by mercy.

432. 7. The object of Abraham's special promise, (besides the Common Covenant
of grace) was Abraham eminent in faith and self-denying obedience to God: And
afterward his Seed for his sake.

433. 8. The Object of the actual gift of Christ incarnate, and the perfect
Edition of the New Covenant by him, was the sinful world that had transgressed
both the Law of Innocence and the first Edition of the Covenant of grace, and
the Jews that had broken Moses's Law.

434. 9. The object of the gift of the Gospel as promulgate or published is the
same, adding, the world as now Redeemed by the Actual sacrifice, Merits and
Resurrection of Christ incarnate.

435. 10. The object of the Commonest grace of the Gospel Covenant, is Redeemed
man brought under this Covenant as the Norma officii, judicii and beneficiorum
(quoad jus;) or, subditi obligati.

436. 11. The object of the grace of this Covenant proper to the Visible
Church, and common to its members, are Visible Christians, or Baptized
Professors.

437. 12. The object of the first effectual grace of saving Conversion (says
and repentance) is certain persons Redeemed and brought under the obligation of
this new Covenant; Of whom some are prepared by common grace, and (it is like)
some are not.

438. 13. The object of the gift pardon, justification, adoption, the spirit of
sanctification and right to life, (and all this in Christ by union) is a
Penitent Believer, and the seed of such dedicated in Covenant to God.

439. 14. The object of many acts of auxiliary grace, and of higher degrees of
grace is (ordinarily) such as have well used former degrees of special grace:
But also, who God is freely pleased to give it to.

440. 15. The object of the grace of Perseverance is the same last mentioned:
If not all the Justified; which I reserve as almost our only real Controversy
to handle in its proper place in the next Chapter.

441. 16. The object of the Act of Raising the dead is all the world, as
appears in Joh. 5. 22. to 32.

442. 17. The object of the Justification of the soul alone at the first
appearance is, the soul of a member of Christ, or one faithful and persevering
August. ad Simplic. l^. ^. qu. 2. Quia non inv^^^^ Deus opera in hominibus qu^
^lig^t, id^o man^^ propositum justification is ips^us: s^d quia ill^d ^^^^, ut
justifi^^t cred^nt^s, id^o inv^nit opera quae jam ^ligat ad r^gnum c^lor^^.
in his Covenant: or a Saint.

443. 18. The object of the final justification of the whole man, is a Saint
^isen from the dead.

444. 19. The object of Glorifying Grace, is a member of Christ, or a Saint
thus finally Justified (either in soul first, or in soul and body after as is
said.)

445. 20. The object of Gods greatest felicitating complacency is the Glorified
Church of all the holy ones: And the object of his utmost universal complacency
in the Creature, is the Glory of his image shining on the whole Universe in
perfection: (As the object (as we may call it) of his Essential Volition, Love
or Complacency, is Himself.)

And as these are the objects of the grace thus distinguished by the effects,
so are they of the will or Decree of giving it, as denominated according to the
order of Execution. Besides which Davenant on one account, and Twisse on
another grant that quoad media there is no other for man to know.

446. By this it appears that the Corrupted Mass simply considered was the
object of no one of all these graces. But the Corrupted Mass as Judged first,
and after as Redeemed, and after as under Covenant, etc. Much less was it any
effect of God, as corrupt.

447. The corrupted Mass judged, was not as such the object of Gods
discrimination by Election of some, and rejection of others: For they were
commonly brought all under the Covenant of Grace, and had a common sort of
grace, before the discrimination.

SECT. XVI. Of the Order of the Decrees called Reprobation. And of Election and
Reprobation in themselves.
448. ACcordingly in the order of execution we must reckon the objects of that
which some call Reprobation, answerable to what D'Orbellis in ^. d. 40.
[Distinguuntur, Scientia, Praescientia, Providentia, propositum, electio,
dispositio, praedestinatio and reprobatio. Haec differ^nt secundum rationem,
licet sint idem reali^er in Deo. 1. Scientia Dei est certa Cognitio omnium
praeteritorum, praesentium, futurorum, fierique possibilium tam bonorum quam
malorum. 2. Praescientia est futurorum praecognitio -- Reprobati vero
appropriate dicuntur Praesciti -- Providen^^a est praescient^a futurorum in
quantum ^^nt ^ praescient^ in ^in^m ordinabilia -- 3. Propos^t^^ est actus
Voluntati^ Divine tam respec^^ ^uturorum ag^ndorum, quam permittendorum. 4.
Electi^ supra Propositum addit discretionem electi a ^uo contrario, s^il. boni
a malo. 5. Dispositio est praescientia faciendorum, respiciens fi^ri rei, and
cognitionem; sicut provientia respicit esse rei postquam facta est -- 6.
Praedestinatio est propositum divinae voluntatis, conferendi gratiam and
gloriam praedestinatis. 7. Reprobatio est propositum permittendi reprobatos
permanere in obduratione finali, and ^etribu^n^i eis interminabilem p^nam,
propter little iniquitat^m.]
is before said of Election: But order requires that I first speak of Election
and Reprobation as in themselves, what they are.

449. Election as to the etymology I need not explain. It is taken 1. For a
Temporary actual Taking one rather than another by way of Choice. Which is 1.
By mere Volition, or Election of the will. 2. Or also by manual Apprehension or
Executive Election (As a man takes a woman to wife.) 2. Or it is taken for An
Eternal Electing Decree of God.

450. Gods Executive Election in Time is twofold 1. By giving one man
converting effectual Grace which he gives not to another. 2. By taking
confequently that Converted person to be one of his Adopted and Justified ones,
as his choice peculiar treasure.

451. Gods Mental Election being an Act of his will, is either his mere Decree
of the Event, 2. Or his Decree as efficient, 3. Or else his complacency. The
first is eternal. The second is eternal ex part Dei, but not ex part
effectus. The third is eternal as it is Gods essence, but is denominated
Temporary by connotation of the object; as also may the second be: About these
there needs no quarrel.

452. All the special grace which God gives in Time, he decreed from Eternity
to give: And though some decrees have special objects in esse cogni^^ supposed,
none of them have a proper exterior cause.

453. It is not possible that any Creature can have any good which is not a
pure gift of God, however he may require of man Conditions of Reception, in the
order of Collation. Therefore the Decree must nee^s be free.

454. As to the question whether God elect men upon foresight of any good in
them, enough is said before to answer it. If the question mean whether Gods
Knowledge or Volition be first in themselves? I answer, neither; For nothing in
him is before or after other. But if God might be spoken of as man, we must say
that his Understanding is the first specifying primiciple, and the will the
first quoad exercitium actus. And therefore that the Divine understanding
represented to his will, the object i^ its Eligibility. If the question be what
is the objects represented eligibility in esse cognito vel Ideali, it is
answered, 1. We must distinguish of the Divine Volitions called Elections by
the diverse effects: 1. (To pass by the rest) It is one thing to Elect to Glory,
or Velle Glorificare; And here the object of Actual Glorification, is a
persevering Saint: And you must distinguish Gods Volitions by his executions,
or not at all (which you had rather.) 2. It is another thing to choose one to
the first grace of faith or true Conversion. And here the object of the
execution is, as is aforesaid, sometime one prepared by common grace (though
without merit,) sometime one extraordinarily wicked: Look over what I said of
the objects, and the question of foresight is answered, as far as it belongs
to our enquiry.

455. Those that deny all special arbitrary Election, must deny all special
arbitrary effectual differing grace: which I shall prove elsewhere by it self;
And now referr such to Davenants Dissertation de praedest. where it is fully
proved, and defended.

456. One thing which deceives such men is, that they forget that God stands
to man, not only in the Relation of a Rector per Leges, (for so he deals
equally with all that make not the inequality themselves:) But also as a
Proprietor and a Benefactor, in both which Relations he is free to do with his
own as he pleases. And free Lords and Benefactors use not to distribute
equally their gifts. Nor do they consider that de facto God visibly makes
wonderful inequalities; He makes not men as great or good as Angels, nor Stars
as glorious as the Sun: The whole shows us admirable variety, arbitrarily
made by the great Benefactor, who gives not to us a Reason of his will.

457. The word [(...)] Reprobus, in Scripture is used no where that Jer. 6. 30.
I remember, but Romans 1. 28. 1 Cor. 9. 27. 2 Cor. 13. 5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 3. 8.
Tit. 1. 16. Heb. 6. And the word [Reprobation] is not used at all, as any act
of God. But predestination and election are often used on the better side, and
rejecting, hating, forsaking on the other side. And electing implies that some
are not elect.

458. About the object of that which many call Reprobation, be sure to
distinguish, between a true object of any Act, circa quod versatur, and which
is subjectum inhaesionis, and a mere object of speech, or subjectum
praedicationis: Else you will with many be ensnared to think that every subject
or object of a predication which in the series of Gods judgments you meet
with, is the object of some positive act of God.

459. And though we would quarrel with no man about mere words, yet lest words
deceive you I add, that as the word Reprobation seems to signify a positive
Act, and yet a great part of the desertion of the Reprobates is by Gods
preteritions and not-acting and privations; therefore it is not the whole
series that the word Reprobation aptly expresses, but only some particular
Acts.

460. The word Predestinate used Romans 8. 29, 30. and Ephesians. 1. 5. The
presumption of the Schoolmen in defining the Act of predestination is
tremendous: See Ruiz de provid. disp. 3. sect. 9. ad 11. who concludes that
Predestination is an Act of Gods Intellect, and a Practical act, and is Actus
affirmans D^i volitionem libere decern^nt^m de finibus rerum and mediis, etc.
q. d. Volo Petrum beatificare and per talia media, etc. It is not this will,
but the knowledge of it.
1 Cor. 2. 5. (it is (...) though not spoken of persons) Act. 4. 28. (translated
[fore-determined]) when applied to persons is ever taken in Scripture as an act
of mercy: And the ancients Augustine, Prosper and Fulgentius use the words
[Praedestinati and Praesoiti, the predestinate and the fore-known] as of late
men use among us the words Elect and Reprobate.

461. Though men differ as their opinions lead them in the exposition of such
texts as Vid. Bezam in Romans 8. 28. de proposito.
Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and some take them to
speak of predestinating Individuals, and others only of species, that is, of
believers, sufferers, Lovers of God, etc. yet as to the matter it self none
that is judicious can or does deny but that God eternally Predestinateth
Individuals; The Jesuits commonly confess it, though they differ on the
question, how far it is on foresight of faith: But that foreseen Believers
individually are eternally elected to salvation, thev cannot deny. And the
Learned Jesuits maintain that God gives faith in time, and electeth
Individuals to faith it self from eternity: That is, eternally decreed to give
them faith, or to give them that Grace by which he fore-knew that in the
advantageous circumstances in which he decreed to put them, they would freely,
and he deereed should infallibly, believe.

462. The conceit and supposition of many, that Election and Reprobation are
such perfect contraries, as that they run pari passu, and that God wills in
the one just as he does in the other, End and means, for matter and order, is a
gross mistake. Augustine, Prosper, Eulgentius and Davenant of late, with many
more have showed, that God predestinateth Leg. Dauen. Dissert. de Praed. and
Reprobat. copiose hae^ probant^m. Et Zumel Disput. 5.. 5. p. 335. and ^^^^. and
objec^o elect. page 367, etc.
men to Faith, and perseverance, and to Glory, and not only to Glory upon the
foresight of faith and perseverance: But that he p^edestinateth or decrees men
to damnation, only on the foresight of final impenitence and infidelity, but
not to Impenitence or Infidelity it self.

463. The Grand difficulty that occasioneth all our Controversies herein is,
How to discern that God is the Author of all our Good, and yet not the Author
of Sin, nor of Damnation saving for sin. And both parties are very desirous to
hold and see that both these are true: Nay, both believe them: But they differ
only in the way and method of manifesting it.

464. There are three opinions about Reprobation: 1. One is, that ^od
Positively decreed from eternity to glorify his Justice in the damnation of
the most, and to that end to occasion and permit their hardening and unbelief:
so that Reprobation is Positive both as to the Act and Object. 2. The other is
the opinion of the Synod of Dort (as expressed) defended at large by Davenant
and many others, that Reprobation is Gods Positive Decree not to give says and
and repentance to the same men, and to damn them for impenitence and
infidelity: and so is Positive quoad Actum, but Negative quoad Objectum, (as to
the first part, not giving faith.) 3. The third is the Opinion of subtle
Scotus and his followers, that in primo instanti Reprobation is Negative quoad
Actum and Objectum; So Albertine before cited.
that is, It is no Act of God at all, but only a Non-election or preterition:
which is I suppose the meaning of Dr. Stern of Dublin Co^ledge, who has
written a Latin Tractate maintaining that God Reprobateth none, that is, by any
Act.

465. The method laid down by Scotus is this, [Offertur Voluntati s^^ hunc
peccaturum vel peccare: Primo voluntas ejus circa hunc non habet Scot. 1. d. 47.

Vid. Signa Mayronis in fine.

Against Scotus his foundation, that God knows future contingents only ut
Volita, says Alliac^in 1. q. 11. N. [Sed ista propositio non est
intelligibil^s, 1. Quia talia instantia and prioritatem and posterioritatem
esse in Deo no^ est verum. 2. Quia impossible est quod pro aliquo instanti
talis complexio de futuro sit neutra: Alias pro tune daretur medium in
contradi^^ione. 3. Quia pon^^ aliquid esse medium and rationem cog^oscendi in
Divino intell^^lu.]


Velle: Velle ^nim ipsum habere peccatum non potest. 2. Potest intelligere
Voluntatem suam non volentem hoc: and tunc potest velle Volunt^tem suam non
velle hoc: and ita dic^^ur Volens sinere, and v^luntarie permittere: sicut ex
alia part praesentato sibi Juda, primo Deu^ habet non Velle sibi Gloriam, and
non primo Nolle -- and potest tun^ secundo reflectere super istam negationem
actus and Velle eam: and ita V^lens sive voluntary non eligit Judam finaliter
peccaturum, and non nolitione^ gloriae, sed non-volitionem gloriae.

466. It is notable that both Dr. Twisse and Bishop Davenant, do disclaim this
opinion of Scotus without offering us any one argument against it; which is so
unusual a course with one of them, as would persuade one to think that they had
not much to say against it, but (what they intimate) the harsh sound of the
words, that God should be here a non-agent.

467. The truth seems to me, that as Davenant says, Scotus was the first
artifex of this ordering of various Acts in the mind of God: So here he says
too much, and is too bold, and feigneth a subsequent Volition of a former
non-volition without cause or proof, merely to escape the censure which yet he
now incurreth, of making God too little active.

468. So far was Scotus from being the first Author of this Opinion, of a
Negatio volendi peccatum in God, that their common Master Lombard Lombard. 1.
d. 47.
most expressly asserteth it, and that more plainly and soundly than these
over-subtile men. Upon which his Commentators copiously dispute An in Deo
p^ssit esse pur^ omissio absque volitione and nolitione positiva? of which
besides the Scotists and Nominals, you may see Aquin. 16. a. 2. Durand. 1. ^.
47. q. 1. Ruiz de Volunt. disp. 8. sect. 3. concl. 2. Albertin. To. 1. princip.
4. q. 4. dub. 2. Vasquez 2. p. 1. disp. 79. number. 17, etc. Suarez Metaph. disp.
30. sect. 9. n. 59. Fonsec. Metap. li. 7. c. 8. q. 5. sect. 3. Aluiz Tract. 2.
disp. 6. sect. 3. Montepil. 1. p. disp. 33. a. 8. c. 1. and 3. Durandus
distinguishes of contra and praeter Voluntatem, and says that Voluntas etiam
beneplaciti antecedens, quae est solum quaedam Velleitas, may be such as many
things are praeter and contra eam. But Voluntas beneplaciti consequens is such
as nothing is contra eam, but sin is praeter eam; etiam mala fieri. Neque enim
vult fieri, nec vult non fieri. I like not what he adds: Idem forte diceret
aliquis de quibusdam bonis quae fiunt mere a libero arbitrio, sed non de
omnibus, viz. quae fiunt a praedestinatis, etc.

469. And it is to be noted, that Durandus with other Schoolmen argue, that if
sin were willed by God, God would be the Author of it: Gods Volition, say they,
being efficient. And Estius (a yet plainer Schoolman than Durand) says,
Quicquid sit Deo Volente, fit Deo authore: who also citing Aquinas's consent,
says, Omnimode tenenda est in hac part doctrina magistri, mala nec esse nec
fieri Deo Volente. And against the vain distinction of Aquin. 1. q. 19. ar. 9.
ad 1. and 3.
[Deus non vult malum, sed vult malum fieri sen eventre] he says that [Velle
mala, and velle mala esse seu fieri] idem est. Voluntas enim adrem simpliciter,
est ad rem ut sit. -- Qui vult virtutem, vult virtutem esse; Qui vult peccatum,
vult peccatum esse -- neque aliud sit velle mala, and velle mala esse aut
fieri. 1. d. 47. sect. 7. page 228. (It seems there were some then of Dr.
Twisses and Rutherfords opinion.)

470. And that you may see Estius mind further in this, and also see all the
Objections now used answered, I will here annex (though out of place) his
answer to them.

Obj. 1. Sin is not committed Deo nolente: ergo Deo volente fit.

Resp. Neque nolente, neque volente Deo fiunt, sed permittente.

471. Obj. 2. Mala esse aut fieri bonum est 1. Ad perfectionem universi, Aquin.
1. q. 1^. art. 9. ad 3. answers in the same manner.
2. Ad decorem, etc. Ita August. Enchir. 10. and 11. and c. 96. Bonum est ut
sint mala.

Resp. Neg. Major: Et 1. Mala sunt Universi non ornatus and perfectiones, sed
id deformant, etc. 2. August. non dliud vult, quam Bonum esse mala permitti.

472. Obj. 3. They cannot be, unless God will them to be. August. Enchir. 95.
Non fit aliquid nisi Omnipo^ens fieri velit.

Resp. The reason assumeth a falsehood. And Augustine is interpreted as speaking
only of the Permission as willed, and not the Event.

473. Obj. 4. Omne verum est a Deo: esse and fieri mal^^ verum est: Vid. Aquin.
1. d. 47. q. 2. ad 1.
Ergo.

Resp. Non Hugonis sed sophistarum est: Nam verum qua verum est a Deo: De rebus
malis sunt conceptus mentis very. (Indeed malum qua objectum scientiae non est
malum.)

474. Obj. 5. Aug. Enchir. 100. Peccatum non fit praeter Dei voluntatem, quod
fit contra.

Resp. Loquitur de permissionis voluntate, non ipsius mali.

Albertinus words To. 1. Princip. 4. q. 4. dub. 2. page 297. I cited before for
a Negation of Will.

475. Suarez distinguishes of Gods Will Voluntarily determining to go Metap.
disp. 130. sect. 9. number. 59.
no further, and a will suspended without such a determination: And the first
he denies not, but the latter he denies in God as imperfection: But upon
reasons so weak, likening God to man, that I think them not worth the reciting.

476. No mortal man can prove, that God must needs have actual Volitions of
Nothings as such. And consequently that he has any such: And Yet let the
Reader note, that though I hold that no man can prove a Positive Volition or
Nolition of Nothings (ordinarily at least) and so would shorten the
Controversy, yet my Conciliation does not at all rest on this, but will
proceed sufficiently if you say that God Positively wills his Not-willing and
his Permissions.
that his perfection excludes them not.

477. Yet I grant that he wills the Truth of humane Negative Propositions:
For those are something, though about Nothing.

478. That such Decrees or Volitions de nihilo are not necessary, appears, in
that 1. Either they are necessary in All instances de nihilo, or only in some.
Not in All: Ergo, not qua tales: For if only in some, it must be from some
singular accidental reasons: A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia. That they
are not necessary in all, is granted in that no man (that I know of) ever
asserted it. And to assert it, is great presumption: For then there must be
infinite Negative-Positive Decrees: As e. g. that there shall not be
innumerable more Worlds, more Suns, more Atoms, that this and that and every
particular atome or sand shall not be a Sun, a Star, an Earth, a Man, a Dog, a
Fish, etc. And infinite Decrees, about every Stone; as many about every pile of
grass, and as many about every creature, what they shall not be. And infinite
Decrees about infinite (or innumerable) Possibles, that they shall not be
existents, that they shall not be thus or thus named, etc. Who can prove or
dare affirm, that all these Infinite Nothings, have Positive acts of Decretive
Nolition from Eternity in God?

479. 2. We must not feign unnecessary Acts in God: But such Positive Nolitions
of Nothings seem unnecessary: For Nothing will be nothing, without a Nolition,
as well as with it: What need God Nill the Being of Petavius Vol. 1. li. 9.
Theol. dogmat. de praedest. cap. 16. page 656. thus describes the old opinion
of our Countryman Johan. Erigena Scotus, Docuit u^icam tantummodo
pradestinationem esse in Deo, qua electos ad aeternam foelicitat^m destinat:
nullam outem ad aeternam esse damnationem. How near is this to the other Joh.
Scotus Duns. See what Bishop Usher says of this Scotus Erigena and
Goteschalcus. Petavius says, [Idem a Ca^olo Calvo unice dilectus erat.] See to
this sense the Decrees Synodi Carisiacensis contra Gott^chaltum, in 1 Tom.
Council. Gallic. p. 66.
more Worlds, more Creatures, more Names, etc. when it is not possible that
ever they should be, unless he positively will and make them. Yea, if (per
impossible) there were no God, Nothing would be Nothing still. To feign or call
for a Divine Nolition to keep Nothing from becoming something, is too presuming.

480. 3. All those Schoolmen and Divines who tell us, that every Will of God,
except his complacency and displicence, is effective, must needs be against a
Positive Nolition of Nothings: For that effects nothing. If they say that
they mean it only of Volitions and not of Nolitions, I answer, 1. Is not Gods
Nolition a Velle non? What is it, but a Will that this or that shall not be? 2.
And in man as Volitions are for some Good, so Nolitions are for the depulsion
of some Evil: But Indifferent-Nothings, that are in esse imaginato neither Good
nor Evil, have no Volitions or Nolitions even in man.

481. 4. Gods Will is his Essence, variously denominated as variously
terminated on the objects: But Nothing is no object, and so no termination of
Gods Will; and so no object to constitute an act in specie velindividuo by
connotation or extrinsick denomination: Therefore God is not to be said to Will
it, or Decree it. If you say, that it is something in the Idea of Gods
Intellect; I answer, It is presumptuously asserted: Who can prove, or ought to
feign that there is in God Idea's or Conceits of such nothings as never will be
any thing, in the forms of somethings? For Nothing as nothing, has no form to
be conceived of.

482. Object. Thus you deny Nothings as such to be known of God. For if they
cannot be the objects of his Nolitions, then neither of his Knowledge.

Answ. Properly Nothing as such, is not an object of Knowledge at all. But a
Proposition de nihilo is: But of this more anon.

483. 5. Certainly God does freely suspend or limit the Acts of his Power:
Therefore he may for ought we know (that I say not, It is certain that he does)
suspend or limit the Acts of his Will. God does not make more Worlds, nor more
Men, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Plants, Stones, Sands, Atoms, Names, etc. than are
and will be. He does not sanctify more than are and will be sanctified; nor
give more grace to the sanctified than ever they will have: when he Could if he
Would. And when the Principles of the Divine Nature are Coequal, why should we
say, that he who undenyably suspendeth the possible acts of one, freely,
suspendeth not the acts of the Free Principle (the Will) itself? or is it like
that one should be here active, and not the other?

484. 6. Positive Nolitions of Evil do seem in man to come from the
Imperfection of his created nature; As being Passive, and Capable of, or
obnoxious to evil, or in danger of it, and so needs defense against it, and
his Nolitions are the defensive and depulsive principle. And though we must
speak of God according to our mode, we must say nothing needlessly which
imports weakness or passiveness or danger in him.

485. Again let the Reader note that my Cause lies not on this, but because I
have said so much of it, I think meet to take notice of the most that is said
against me: Vasquez in 1. Tho. qu. 19. a. 3. disp. 79. c. 3. does purposely
confute Scotus, and affirms, that Gods will is not to be conceived of as
Negative quoad actum about any Negatives; but that he has a positive act of
Nolition of every nonentity and non-futurum, and so (ut alibi) has infinite
nolitions of infinite non-futures. He himself confuteth their reason that say,
God is not in potentia ut, velit, and I need not answer it. But he lays all
his cause on this as a demonstration, (and makes it a very useful doctrine for
the explication of reprobation) that Quodcunque non esse creaturae cujuscunque
referri potest ad divinam Voluntatem ut objectum appetibile, quod ipsa velle
possit: Ponamus Deum velle rem aliquam non esse: deinde ut dicatur negative se
habere, opus est variationem aliquam intrinsecam esse aut in Deo, aut in rebus
non futuris: At non, etc. Voluntas autem Dei non necessario negative se debet
habere, quia illud non esse est app^tibile: The sum is, God can Positive Will
nonentity, ergo he does. And this is his All, to which elsewhere he often
refers us. But let the sober Reader consider, 1. He confesses, that Gods
Will is his immutable and simple Essence, and in it self is not at all
diversified to or by objects, but only extrinsecally denominated diversely: so
that all this is but de relatione and nomint. 2. And is it not presumption to
frame a Logic of second notions, and say, This and not that is applicable to
God, as if it were to man, when their Logical notions as to man himself are so
arbitrary? 3. He answers none of the arguments to the contrary which I use.
Nil frustra must be feigned of creatures: much less of God. 4. We being agreed
that whoever be in the right, it infers no difference in God, but in our
denominations of his Will, the seven cases here granted him; may fully satisfy
them that will so denominate Gods Will. 5. But in a Physical and proper sense I
deny his supposition. It is no Nonentity that is properly bonum and
appetibile, though it may be Malum. Bonum as well as Unum and Verum are
affectiones seu modi entis. Et ubi non est Ens non est modus. That which is
not, is not Good; or appetibile. Morally we say improperly, It is good not to
be sick, not to have an enemy, not to dye, etc. But we mean but 1. It is Good
to live, to be well, to have all that good which an enemy would deprive us of,
and 2. That it is Evil to, dye, to be sick, to have an enemy. We say, Its Good
not to be erroneous, wicked, deprived of Heaven, etc. that is, It is Good to
know truly, to be godly, to be glorified, and it is Evil to err, to be wicked,
etc. 6. Gods Will is considered either as 1. Efficient, 2. Or as finally
fulfilled and pleased. As Efficient it cannot Will nothing: for nothing is not
made or caused. And impedit^^ ut ^^s fiat, may be by effecting the hindering
Cause. And as final, or as fulfilled and pleased, Nonentity can properly be
said to be but the not displeasing of it. Nothing is no object of the Will:
though a Proposition or in men an oppositive thought be somewhat. It seems to
me a presumptuous playing with the Majesty of God to affirm, that we must
ascribe to him infinite Positive Volitions that infinite Atoms, Names, etc.
shall not be; when even to men we only ascribe reductively and morally, the
nolition of things evil. 7. It is certain that God suspendeth his Velle and
facere about non-entities? And why not as well his Nolle? or Velle non esse? as
aforesaid. But here after others a late philosophical Physicion says, that
Nothings may be Bona Moralia, though not Naturalia. I answer, It is not true
save by a reductive improper speech. Morality is Modality. The negative
Commandments forbid evil, and command the nolivion and resistance of it: To
murder, etc. is evil: and to nill it and positively resist and subdue all in us
that tends to it, is good: But the bare non occidere is not moral Good. All
moral Good is radically in the Will, and no farther in any forbearance of an
act, than a positive act of the Will makes it Obedience: And yet here I go not
so far as Ockam, as I have said elsewhere. I grant that when the positive
nolition and restraint of an act to which we are inclined or tempted, is the
good of obedience, the not-doing of the Act is loco materiae circa quam, and so
must go to an adequate conception of the duty, although it be no proper part,
nor good in it self: But Ockam goes further, and maintains that the external
act of duty with the internal Volition has no more moral goodness than the
Volition alone: But I think that the action is a subject (or loco subject^) of
a derived secondary goodness, as Scotus asserteth.
They that are against this, are moved with a fear, lest we make God an Idle
Spectator, and not the Governor of the World. But they consider not, 1. That
the suspension of his Powerful Operation infers no such thing: God is not
Idle, because he Causes not, or makes not infinite Nothings (or possibles to
exist:) Not is he the less Governor of the World: And yet Idleness and
Government are words that more directly signify non-operation and operation,
than any mere Volitions or Nolitions. Men may thrust out words, but no rational
answer against this argument.

486. 2. And note well, that Gods not knowing, or not-nilling nothing is from
his Perfection; and not any privative Ignorance or Negligence: For he knows
all that is an object of Knowledge; and wills all that his Wisdom judges
meet to will (or nill respectively): So that to tell God that he is Ignorant if
he know not an unintelligible object, or Idle if he Will or Nill not at our
direction, is as much blasphemy, as to tell him that he is Impotent if he
cannot sin, or cause Contradictions to be true: The case is the very same.

487. Object. But Scripture often ascribes both Nolitions of Nothings, and
Knowledge of them unto God.

Answ. And so must we in that sense as the Scripture does: We will say, and
must say of some Nothings, that God Nilleth them. I hope the Learned will not
take it amiss, if I speak where the Schoolmen are too silent, as well as desire
silence where they unprofitably speak, as long as the case is, 1. Weighty, 2.
And made plain, 3. And I go the middle healing way.

488. In all these cases and respects we ascribe Nolitions unto God^ I. He that
by a Positive operation causes a limited cause, may be said to cause the
limitation of effects by consequence. And he that positively wills realities
with such limitations, from whence the consequence necessarily follows
[Nothing else will ever be] is said Morally, or ^reputatively or by Consequence
to Will that Nothing else shall be. And he that knows all things that belong
to the perfection of knowledge, is improperly said to know all Nothings, in
that he knows that Nothing more is or will be. And so as knowing Beings is by
consequence reputatively or morally called the knowing of Nothings by men, we
are sain to use such terms of imperfection even of God, lest we seem to make
him Idle or Ignorant. When we say, that God is the Cause that th^re is no more
creatures, we mean but that he causes not more creatures. And so to say, that
God wills that there shall be no more Worlds, means but that God wills
not that there shall be more.

489. II. This Interpretative consequential Act, which is but morally so
called, is fitlier expressed in the gross of universal Nothings, than of
millions of imaginary particulars. It is fitter to say, that by willing a
limited or finite World, God willed that there should be nothing more, than to
say, He willed that there should not be a Sun in every man's pocket, or Heaven
and Earth in every man's fist, etc. Though as to the truth all is one.

490. III. When God positively wills the Positive hindering of a thing, he
may morally be said to Nill the thing, or to Will that it shall not be. That
there are Positive Impeditions of God (by Dr. Twisses leave) I have elsewhere
proved: But then you must suppose that as the fountain of Nature, as it were by
a Decree, he has resolved to continue the Nature of things and his natural
Concurse: which supposed, their Natures may incline them to such Action as
needs Positive Impedition. So God hindered the fire from burning, and the
Lions from killing Daniel (it is like) Dan. 3. and 6. Certainly if a man can
stop a Cart-wheel with a Stone, or bind a man in chains, God can do the same.
And men's Inclination to sin needs a Positive Impedition. Now though non-agere
is nothing, and has no cause, yet he that destroys or hinders the Cause of
Action, is morally said to be the Cause that there is no Action: Though
strictly it be but destroying the Cause of Action, and so preventing further
action. And this moral language even of God is the fitter, because it is of
Moral things.

491. IV. And here Gods Law being called his Will, though it be formally but de
debito, yet being materially de re ipsa, a double reason will thence arise. For
when God forbids and condemns sin, etc. 1. He does very much to hinder it,
and that positively (and so he does by his grace), 2. And his prohibition may
be called his Nolition signified.

492. V. And God properly wills the Being and Truth of Negative propositions,
[viz. This or that will not be.] and knows them (as made by man at least).
And as I said, sin as the subject of a proposition is not sin, or has no harm
in it. As sin repented of, or the object of repentance and hatred makes up a
Virtue, and is not sin indeed, but the knowledge of it: So here. But yet hence
the phrase may be borrowed, and it may be said, that God Nilleth the existence
of such Possibles, because he wills the truth of the proposition, They shall
not be.

493. VI. But here note, that when God is Morally and most fitly said to Nill
such Nothings, it is not as Nothings, but as Possible Evils: For only Evil is
the proper object of Positive Nolition: so that it may be spoken fullier of
sin, than of other Nothings, even fitly in a Moral sense.

494. VII. Lastly, Acts of Will are ordinarily ascribed to God, when it is mere
operations or privations that are meant; and so the phrase is as they say ab
effectu ad affectum. When a man 1. Denies his aid, 2. And actually hinders,
it is a sign of nolition. And so from Gods 1. Not causing, 2. And his
hindering, he is said to Nill that Nothing (that never shall be.) So much of
the phrase.

495. Now for application. 1. Non-dare fidem, aut gratiam, not to convert, is
Nothing; Therefore it is not Positively willed or decreed of of God: or at
least no man can prove it so to be: So not-to give the Gospel, the Spirit, etc.

496. Yet note, that when man's sins have so forfeited such gifts that they are
penally withheld, this non-agency has the denomination of a Moral Act. And
also that the making of the Penal Law, which makes this Privation due as a
punishment, was a positive act of God, and had a positive Volition. But
Negations not-penal are not so.

497. 2. Not to hinder sin, or to Permit sin (barely as permission) is Nothing:
(As elsewhere I have proved.) Therefore it has no Positive Decree or Will:
save that when it is penal, and the execution of a Law, that Law being a real
natural being, and the Jus thence resulting a real relation and the executive
Privation quid Morale, they are Willed and Decreed answerably as they are. To
permit a man to be spiritually Dead is [not-to make him alive:] To permit his
Darkness or Ignorance, [is not-to give him Light or Knowledge:] To permit his
unbelief is [not-to cause him to believe.] To permit his want of Love, is
[not-to give him Love.] To permit his positive sins of Malignity or Carnality,
is but [not-to cure and hinder them by Grace or Providence,] supposing the
Natural support and concurse, whith the Author of Nature gives to all things.

498. Therefore when Gods Acts in themselves are his Essence and all one, and
are diversified but by connotation of diverse objects, relatively and
denominatively; when he knows all things uno intuitu, and wills all that he
wills unica Volitione; when nihil physicum is no denominating terminus, of a
physical act, (though so far as it may be called Moraliter, id est, Reputative
aliquid, as a Privation, it may be said to denominate reputatively, as a quasi
aliquid;) and that which is moraliter vel imputative nihil, cannot morally
denominate; when both Non dare spiritum, gratiam, fidem, vitam, etc. and
permittere infidelitatem; peocatum, etc. are truly Nothing, and even in
Reputative Moral sense, are wihil morale, when they are not penal; (And as
antecedent to sin, they are not penal;) Judge now impartially whether 1. Those
men deal not presumptuously with God, 2. And troublesomely with his Church, who
assert the Being of Positive Decrees and Volitions in God about such Nullities,
and raise Controversies about the Reasons and the Order of them, yea, unto
dangerous inferences; when as 1. They can prove no such thing in God as they
assert. 2. Nay, when we say so much to prove the contrary.

499. And here consider, whether Scotus himself assert not without all need or
proof, that God has a positive knowledge and reflexive Volition of his own
Non-Volition? and so that a Nullity as to his own act, must be the terminus of
a positive act? When that Nullity is neither God, nor a Creature, nor aliquid
vel Dei vel Creaturae; and so seems to be no denominating terminus of a
distinct act. Yet no doubt, God is not to be called Ignorant of such Nullities
or Idle; for those are terms of privation: If God be said either not to Know
nothings or not to Will or Nill them, it is because it signifies his
Perfection: And no part of perfection is wanting to him. But we must not place
his perfection in a conformity to our imperfect mode of knowing or willing.

500. For we dare not here presume peremptorily to determine Negatively, that
God does not positively Will his own non-agency or non-volitions; because we
know how dark we are and distant from God, and unfit to say any thing but
certainties of him, as certain truth: But we abstain from the contrary
assertion, as utterly unproved, and we will impute no needless acts to God as
his Perfection: Though we yield to reputative moral denominations.

501. And so I contradict not the language of Aquinas 1. q. 14. 9. who says,
that God knows such non-entities as never will be, ut possibili^. And esse in
potentia quamvis non in actu is more than nothing. But remember that esse in
potentia speaks the esse Potentiae, but the possibile is a pure nothing. So
that this is but to know the Potentia, and not any thing else. Yet no doubt but
God knows all things as they are in himself; that is, he knows that he can
do all things, and knows what he knows and wills; but this is no esse
creatum but God himself, at least as to that which never will be. But if any
will call it a knowing of things possible which are nothings, when God knows
his own Power to make them, we quarrel not with words, while the sense is known.

502. But remember that it is not the Knowledge, but Decrees and Volitions of
God that our enquiry now is about: And Aquinas and his followers commonly say,
that Gods will goes not so far as his knowledge; and that he knows indeed
mala ex bon^ of which they are the privation (as no doubt he does so far as it
is not imperfection to be said to know them, or as they are objects of
knowledge) but yet that Mala neque vult, neque ^^lit, sed tantum non-vult, as
Lombard said.

503. Ockam Quodlib. 3. q. 6. has the question, Utrum Cognitio intu^tiva
potest esse de objecto cognito? And he 1. concludes that per potentiam divinam
potest esse de object^ non existente; but he means only quod fuit vel fuerit.
2. That naturally it cannot be. And faith that Contradictio est quod vis^o sit,
and tamen illud quod videtur, non sit in effect^ nec esse possit: Ideo
contradictio est quod chimaera videatur intuitive: fed non est contradictio
quod illud quod videtur nihil sit in actu extra ca^som suam, dummodo possit
esse in effectu, vel aliquando fuerit in rerum natura -- Unde Deus ab aeterno
videt omnes res factibiles, and tamen ^unc null^ fuerunt -- By which it is
plain, that he means as Aquinas, that it is not as Nothings, but as Possibles
and Futures they are known even by God, saving that Aquinas and his followers
judge that they are from eternity fore-known in their proper existence, by
reason that all times and things are present in Eternity. Now to know a
Possibility of a thing, is not to know the Thing: But to know the Power. For
Possibile is nihil. And as Ockam proves, that Universale is qualitas mentis,
and is nothing else, nor any where else existent, so we may much more clearly
say de Possibili that besides Potentia it is nothing but the Conceptus mentis
what that Power can do.

504. And if an Artificer get the Idea of a fabric or frame which never was in
the World, and Resolve to make such a real thing, that which is in his mind, is
but his own Thought or Imagination, and nothing else: And to call it Domus vel
Navis Possibilis, signifies nothing else, or it is delusory.

505. Holkot Quodlib. li. 2. qu. 2. lit. C. D. E. ad primum dicit [Dico plane
quod aliae res a Deo nullum esse habuerunt ab aeterno distinctum a Deo: Neque
esse quidditativum, neque esse Potentiale, neque esse repraesentativum,
secundum quod diversi antiquit us opinati sunt.] Quod probat. Ad art. secundum
he says, that the Creatures had no being in God from eternity, but improperly
good men have so spoken, because he knows them, and can produce them.

And ad art. 3. q. Whether it be true, that Rosa e. g. non existens, concipitur
aut intelligitur? he recites twelve arguments for the affirmative, and then
recites the negative as the opinion of others: And though he say not which
side he takes, yet he confuteth the arguments for the affirmative, and
brings nine arguments for the negative, which he says nothing against.

Thomas's opinion of the question you may see in his Interpreters in 1. d. 36.
and 1. q. 14. ar. 9. Ruiz de Scient. d. 17. Valent. 1. q. 14. punct. 7. Tanner.
1. d. 2. qu. 8. dub. 8. Gran. 1. p. Cont. 2. d. 5. Aluiz. tr. 2. d. 9.

506. Yet let it be still remembered that all this Controversy is not properly
de re, but de modo loquendi; or of the extrinsick denomination of Gods Will,
and not of his Will as in it self, which is his Essence, and but One. But yet
here denominations must be carefully used.

507. And by the way, that you may understand what I mean by denominations,
from connotation and relation to the terminating object, note what Ockam says
in Quodlib. 5. q. 25. that Conceptus est vel 1. Absolutus e. g. hominis, 2.
Connotativus, e. g. albi, 3. Relativus, ut patris: and differunt in hoc: 1.
Conceptus absolutus omnia sua significata significat aeque, primo, and uno
modo, -- in recto -- 2. Nomen Connotativum proprie significat primo unum, and
aliud secundario, and unum in recto and aliud in obliquo -- 3. Conceptus
relativus maxim concretus habet omnes praedictas conditiones quas habet
connotativus: sed differunt in hoc quod quandocunque conceptus connotativus
vere praedicatur de aliquo, convenienter potest sibi addi suum absolutum, in
aliquo solum: quia nihil est album nisi sit album albedine: sed Relativo potest
addi casus obliquus qui non est ejus absolutum -- ut servi dominus -- Omnis
Conceptus Relativus est Connotativus: at non e Converso.

508. If any shall think that he has any advantage against what I have said by
Scotus his opinion, that Voluntatis objectum non est Bonum tantum, sed and E^s;
and Voluntas potest Velle Malum qua Malum; and that the Will has other
objects, praeter finem and media, viz. Entia absoluta not so related in the
apprehension, and consequently that there may be a Nolition of Non Enti^, and
not only as Mala; And the like of Ockam in 3. d. 13. qu. 13. ad dub. 3. Gabr.
Gregor. etc. Let him remember that the greater part of the Schoolmen are
against this opinion; And that the owners of it, assert not this consequence of
Divine Nolitions, commonly, but say as Guil. Camerar. ibid. p. 1. q. 2. page
158. that between Volitions Leg. Guil. Camerar. disp. moral. li. 1. q. 2. and
3. page 156. etc. and Phil. Fab. 1. d. 3. qu. 3. cap. 2. and q. 4. c. 7. Scot.
1. d. q. 4. ad 4. and q. 1. a. 2. and 2. d. 3. qu. 10. and d. 6. q. 1. and de
Anima q. 19, 20, 21.
and Nolitions there is this order, that Volitions go first, and we nill things
only, because they consist not with what we first Willed. And Gods will need
not to rise up with an actual opposition especially against its own acts or
suspensions, where a non-agency will do the same thing.

An Additional Explication of Divine Nolitions.
LEst all this seem not clear enough in so mysterious a business, and because I
have often insisted on it, I will yet add this further explication of my thoughts
in these following Theses.

1. Understanding and Will in God being not the same thing as in man, we must
not think that we have any other conceptions or expressions of them than
Metaphorical or Analogical.

2. Therefore we must not say, Thus and Thus God understands and wills, but
After the manner of men we must thus conceive of it.

3. But there are several degrees of impropriety of speech: and in a greater
degree repentings, wrath, hating, grief, etc. are in Scripture spoken of God;
but in strict disputes the lesser degree must be chosen, that is, such
conceptions as have least of imperfection.

4. In man the Will is an Appetite, and essentially connoteth the want of what
we have an appetite to, or a self-insufficiency: but so it does not in God.

5. And Nolitions in man yet signify greater imperfection, viz. that there is
some evil or hurtful thing which is at enmity to him, or against his good, and
which he would be delivered from, or overcome: and it is in the will the
beginning of a war, or resistance: But it is not so in God.

6. That which is Good we Will, and that which is Evil we Nill, and that which
is neither, we neither Will nor Nill. Accordingly we must after the manner of
men ascribe to God, 1. Volitions of Good, 2. Nolitions of Evil, 3. A Non-velle
and Non-nolle of that which is neither.

7. Nothing is Good, but 1. God himself simply and primitively, and 2. The
works of God secondarily and derivatively as the glory or splendor of his
perfections is found in them, and as they are the products of his will: 3. And
the Acts or Works of his creatures in a third degree.

8. The Goodness of the creature being essentially relative to Gods will, that
is, Its conformity to it as its product, the creature is eo nomine Good because
it is that which God wills.

9. Hence the grand difficulty is resolved, Whether God could have made the
World Better? No: not in the first and properest sense of created Goodness,
because he cannot make it any other than what he wills it to be: But he might
make it otherwise and might diversifie it, and make particular creatures Better
to themselves and one another, which is a lower sense of Goodness: But in all
diversifications they would be still perfectly Agreeable to his Will, and so be
still equally Good or Best.

10. The Goodness of the third rank of beings (The Acts of Free-Agents) is
their Conformity to his Law or Governing Regulating Will.

11. God has as Creator and Motor become the Voluntary Root or Spring of
Nature and natural motion, and accordingly stablished all second causes as
natural agents under him, and does by them operate in a natural necessitating
and constant way: And this is antecedent to his Laws to free agents: And this
natural course of agency we must not expect that he should alter, but rarely by
miracles.

12. Nothing is at enmity and Actively opponent to Gods natural agency or
motion: for else there should be something besides God and his works which he
must overcome: Though some natural motions may oppose each other, yet all
concur to one end.

13. Nonentity or Nothingness, is not contrary to God as an opponent.

14. Therefore seeing Says Alliac. Camerac. 1. q. 12. a. 1. B. [Reprobatio
secundum aliquos est non-propositum dandi vitam aeternam. Et ille dicitur
Reprobatus secundum aliquos cui Deus non proposuit dare vitam aeternam.]

Et postea [Certum est de multis quod Deus non vult quod in bonis meritoriis
perseverent -- Et non vult quod conditio impleatur; Quia si vellet utique
impleretur:] But he says not [Vult non impleri, etc.]

Gregorius non debuit infer quod non misereri est effectus Reprobationis, cum
sit ipsa Reprobatio. Id ibid.


Nolle is not a mere Non velle, but a Velle-non, which is the war of the will
against an opponent, and the root of opposition ad extra, it is an unmeet
phrase to say that God does Nil any Nonentity, or any mere Natural opposition
to him: or that he Wills any natural entity or motion which he effects not.

15. But God being secondarily the Rector of free-agents, and making them Laws
to Rule their own Volitions and actions, he does by those Laws oblige their
reason and will, to restrain and resist some natural or sensitive appetites and
inclinations, and so to resist some natural motions of God in nature, in which
he is pleased to operate by second causes but in tantum and resistibly (as a
stronger natural motion may resist a weaker.)

16. And God does by his grace and help internal and external, assist them in
that resisting agency which he obliges them to.

17. Therefore God may two ways be said to resist his own natural motion, by
his Laws, and by his assisting grace: (But his Laws contradict not one another.)

18. To God as mere Rector therefore two things may be said to be opponent, 1.
Such sensitive and natural inclinations and actions as are by Grace to be
resisted; 2. And all moral evil.

19. And therefore as God may be said to Resist these, so also first to Nill
them: And so to have Decrees against them.

20. Gods Volitions and Nolitions here are his essential will denominated from
the effects and objects. And that effect of God from which he is said to Nill
both these, is as is said, 1. His Laws, 2. His grace or help. And in this we
are agreed, 1. That he forbids sin and commands us the restraint of
appetites and senses, etc. 2. And that he helps us so to do: Therefore the
rest of the School-Controversies here that trouble the world, are but
logomachies, about the Names of Nolitions and Nolitive Decrees.

21. The thing properly willed by God in a Law, is but the debitum, the duty of
the subject to do what is commanded, and not to do what is forbidden.

22. It is not a mere non-agency that is meant by a prohibition, but a positive
nolition of the subject, restraining him from the forbidden act: And all proper
moral obedience or disobedience, Good or Evil, is primarily in the will, and no
further secondarily in the exterior act or restraint, than as they are
Voluntary; and in non-agency but in a third sense or instance as the consequent
of nolition and the refraining act.

23. If any therefore will say in this sense, that God does positively Nil the
forbidden Act, and so will a nonentity sub ratione mali moralis in this remote
sense, we will not contradict him but say as he.

24. And accordingly we may say that God has a positive Decree of
non-entities, or against moral evil; where non-agency is loco materiae, that
is, in tantum, so far as to do all that he does against it; but not absolute ne
eveniat, ubi evenit.

25. But we may not therefore speak so unaptly as to say that he wills
positively all or any nonentity or non-futurity of mere naturals that are
non-futura.

26. Therefore we may much less say it of his own Natural Impeditions, that he
positively wills non-impedire ubi non impedit: For he is not to be thought of
as a restrainer of himself by Law or self-opposition. It is enough to say that
non-vult impedire.

27. Much less may we say that positively vult non velle-impedire, lest we make
another Velle necessary to that Velle, and so in infinitum. ^annes in 1. q. 23.
a. 3. p. 2^^. confe^^eth that the sense of all this question is but which way
God, who is one pure act, unvaried about all varieties, is most conveniently to
be mentioned by us: and that Deus respect^ culpae quae futura ^^at in reprobi^
non habuit a^^um voluntatis affirmati^um quo voluerit esse pec^ata, a^^ illos
p^ccaturos. (Whence it follows that All futures or existents are not
positively willed: Even the formale p^^cati is quid ^uturum.) But he thinks it
most fit to say that God positively wills the permission of sin, 1. Because
it is Good. Ans^r. Nothing is ^^^ther Good nor bad. 2. B^^ ause else the
difference between the predestinate and reprobate would not fall under
providence. Answ. As if giving that grace to on^ which is not given to another,
made no diffe^^^^e. 3. Because else ^n would come by cha^^^e as to Gods
foreknowledge. Answ. As if nothing would not be nothing without a positive
d^^r^e that it shall be nothing? or God could not know a nothing, or a crime,
as such, so far as it is quid intellect^i perfe^^^ ^im^ intelligibile, without
positive willing it: How then knows he the fo^male peccati?


28. It is proper to say that Deus non vult permittere peccatum, ubi id non
permittit; and that vult permittere aliquid indifferens quod per legem positive
permissum est: quia permissio ista est quid positivum.

29. After the manner of men it may be said that consequentially he wills or
decrees a thing, when he wills or decrees that from which it necessarily
follows, though it could not be proved that the will of God is directly
terminated on that consequent thing it self: And so it may be said, that Qui
vult quid majus, consequenter vult minus illud quod in majore includitur. And
so as when God commands duty he does more than politically permit it, he may
be said eminenter to permit it, and so he may be said to will or decree his own
permission of it: But that is not formaliter as permission, or a negative
non-impedition, but eminenter, because he formally wills the quid majus, viz.
the command.

30. So God may be said eminenter to will his non dare gratiam, aut Gloriam,
when he penally as a Judge, denies it to a sinner. But here the thing formally
willed is a positive judicial denial, rejection or exclusion of the sinner,
which the privation follows.

And now for the application of all this to our case it may be perceived, 1.
That the very Controversy is such, as a sober Christian should be afraid to
resolve on either side. Aristot ad Nichom. inq^it, Est hominis modi^ati non
majorem in disputando certitudinem aut subtilitatem explicationis dis^derare,
quam rei ipsius de qua disseritur natura ^^^^tur. Han^ sludiosis in m^^oriam
r^^^co, ^t qu^^ sit ^imis argu^^^ in disserendo contra Ecclesia d^^ri^an de
causa peccati, and contingentiae. Strigelius in Melan^th. Loc. page 297.
Quisqu^ plus ^^sto non sa^it, ill^ sapit.
It is a tremendous thing to poor sinful worms, who know not the nature of one
arenula or pile of grass, or the soul of an insect, nor how the perceptions of
a poor Be is ordered in gathering her Honey and Wax, and making her Combs,
etc. to determine insolently and contentiously in what order God conceives of
things, or wills them? which first and which second, and what reasons move
him? and for what use and end each thing is willed? and whether he have
positive Volitions of every nonentity that it shall not exist then? etc. I am
afraid lest my very opposing and rebuking of this presumption should be found
guilty of bold profaneness, while I so much meddle with so unsearchable a
thing; which I should avoid, had not disputers and railing censurers made it
necessary.

2. That though while we talk together familiarly and popularly, men may leave
each other to liberty to say that God Decrees non-entities, or wills that
Infinite species and individual nothings shall never be, yet to make this the
matter of a Church-dispute, and censure those that say not as they say, and
calumniate them as favoring some perilous error, seems to me no better
than diabolical.

3. All men that have the brains, hearts and faces of Christians who hold that
all these distinctions signify no true diversity in Gods will exparte sui,
should openly tell the world in the beginning, middle and end of such disputes,
that It is but about words that we dispute, even what Logical terms Artists
must use in distinguishing of that which has no real diversity? even about the
dreadful Majesty of God and what Names to put on his simple volition?

4. And they should well bethink them how far it is safe, to think of that as
diverse which is not diverse; and to multiply conceptions and distinctions of
Gods simple essence beyond true necessity: and whether then to contend about
the priority of such conceptions be more holy or profane?

5. For all the reasons before given, If they will say that God Decrees
penally to deny or not to give Grace or Glory or any good thing to them that
forfeit it, there is reason for the expression according to Scripture, after
the manner of man: But if they will fly higher and say that Gods Simple
essential will, is to be called A positive Decree or Volition that Judas, e. g.
shall not be named John, Thomas, etc. that there shall be millions of distinct
non-entities, etc. or that any positive Volition is of necessity to
non-futurities or non-existences in mere physical respects, where no positive
action is necessary, (save only that by consequence he that decrees and
wills to make such and such finite creatures, may consequentially and
improperly be said to will that there shall in general be no more, in that he
wills not that there shall be more, and they cannot be without his will,) I
fear such are over-bold with God. And so are they that say that he has a
Positive Decree or Will, non dare Christum ante lapsum Adami, non dare fidem,
non impedire peccatum, in such instances or cases wherein the [dare] is no Act
of a Rector, nor the [negare] the positive Law, judgment or penal denial of a
Judge, but only the dare belongs to a free Dominus-benefactor. Bannes ubi
sup. p. 272. argues [Omne ordinabile in bonum finem quod invenitur existens,
est volltum a Deo: sed Permissio peccati est, etc.] Ans. Permissio illa quae
nihil est, neque exiestens est neque ordinabile: De permission^ autem activa
verum est.

So Ruiz de Praedef. Tract. 2. disp. 12. copiously proves a positive will or
decree of Permitting sin: But then he defines Permission so as to include both
Production of circumstances and general concurse; And who denies that such
positive beings must have positive Causes? But what is that to mere
non-impedition? (Thus still words are the matter of our quarrels.) Yet sect. 7.
he confesses that he finds none of the ancient Schoolmen that expressly say
that the Permission of sin is fore-decreed, nor that the Later deliver it sub
iisdem verbis.

Adrian in q. de Clav. sol. 982. [Ret^nere nihil positivi dicit, sed solum non
solvere: and ergo non oportet Claves esse, sicut nec Deum causam effectivam
esse.]

See Alliaco before cited showing that Lombard took Permission of sin to be no
Act, either Velle or Nolle, but a non-velle and non-efficere, which he himself
contradicts not.




Penal permission or non-impedition of sin, and denying or not-giving grace,
may be said to be decreed or willed, because God threatened them antecedently by
a Positive Law, which should make them due, and that Law was the product of
Gods will. Though strictly it is but the Positive Law and the Debitum poenae
here that God wills, which the non-impedire and non-dare gratiam follow.

But Gods not making men Angels, or Stars, or Suns, and his making us men, free
and defectible, and his permitting the first sin, and his giving men no more
grace antecedently (before forfeiture) as free benefactor and dominus suorum,
none of these have the same reason on which to found such denominations of Gods
will and essence.

And seeing Nolitions in man are the results of his Insufficiency and war
against noxious evils, we must not ascribe such Imperfections to God; but only
such Nolitions as his Actions as Rector per Leges and Judicia have made to
signify no imperfection, as being not contra nocumenta, but only contra
injurias as against himself, and contra nocumenta as against his creatures, i.
e. contra peccatum.

And now I may answer the solitary argument of Vasquez, mentioned in the Margin
(that non entia, non dare gratiam, non impedire peccatum, etc. may have aliquam
rationem boni and amabilitatis, and so may be Willed, Loved or Decreed.)

Answ. 1. In mere Naturals, Negations are not properly any way good or evil;
but Privations are Natural Evils, and not good.

2. To be occasio sine qua non of good, (as sickness is of the Physicions
honor, and sin of Gods,) is not any true ratio boni vel amabilis: The bonum
and amabile is only the good that on that occasion is done: The occasion is
neither efficient, constitutive or final cause of any good, nor any causal
proper medium.

3. In Morals, mere Negations are neither good nor evil, nor have any Morality,
but only Positives and Privations.

4. In morals God judicially does that whence Penal privations follow, and he
may penally non agere, non dare gratiam, to execute his Law, and demonstrate
his truth and Justice on sinners, and occasion the perception of his mercy to
others. And here the non-agere, non-dare, permittere, being loco materiae
volitae, may after our mode be said to be Volita seu decreta, and bona. But
properly it is not the nonentity, that is bonum or Volitum, but the positive
Law and Judgment, and the relatio debiti p^nae, and the ratio poenae in the
privation, and the demonstration of truth, justice, holiness, etc. therein.

5. But sinful privations, that is, sinful Volitions, nolitions, or
non-V^litions of the Creature, are not properly per se or per accidens, propter
se vel propter aliud good or amiable, or willed or decreed of God. And they
that prove that God cannot be the Author of sin, because he cannot be Causa
deficiens, must mean as much, or speak impertinently and deceitfully.

It is not impertinent which Judicious Strangius says, Lib. 3. c. 13. p. 677,
678. If Scientia Media be an useless conceit, how much more cum extenditur ad
ejusmodi infinitas and vanissimas connexiones rerum disparatarum quae nunquam
futurae sunt? (He instanceth in many, and adds [De hac re Ariaga disp. to. 1.
d. 21. sect. 7. -- dicit, non sibi videri in Deo esse scientiam harum, quia
talis scientia videtur plane impertinens: Ad quid enim nosceret Deus quid
Chimaera esset factura sub tali condition impossibili, etc.] Et ipse D.
Twissus de Scient. Med. p. 472. Si plures Angelos Deus condidisset certe
decrevisset ut etiam illi agerent aliquid in Gloriam Dei: Nec tamen decretum
aliquod hujusmodi Deo decenter tribui potest, etc.

I know the case is not just the same with that before us: but the reason is
the same for both.

But still I profess that If it be not an injurious imputing imperfection to
God to assign him positive Volitions of every negative, I shall concur with
them that do, and extend Gods Volitions as far as ever the object and his
perfection will allow; And say of them as Judicious Blank does of Gods
knowledge (De Concord. lib. cum decret. 1. n. 64.) [Saltem ille minus
periculose errat qui putat Deum scire ea quae forte scibilia non sunt, quam qui
negat Deum scire quae revera scit, and quae intra Divinae omniscientiae
objectum continentur.] So here; so be it that God be not feigned to will sin, I
contend the less against them that say He positively wills Infinite numerical
Nothings, and his own non-acting. Bradward. l. 1. c. 13. Cor. 10, 11. brings in
(too profoundly like one of Thom. Anglus his Ergo's) that God is the Causa
prima of every nothing (non esse) because he is so of negations: As if Nothing
could be an effect and have a Cause: or as if a negative conception or
proposition were not something, viz. a Thought or a Word, as well as an
affirmative: Such workmen make the world with words.




509. BEing afraid of wearying the Reader I pass by other School-controversies
here, and only propound to each man's Conscience, whether 1. He that is the
affirmer of unproved acts of God, 2. And that about his secret unsearchable
Volitions, 3. And of such acts as make the difficulties inextricable about Gods
being the Cause of sin, be not on the far unsafer side, than he that only
says, Quae supra nos nihil ad nos? If these be not certainly false, they are
certainly unproved, and therefore not to be here received.

510. And I say here as Buridane says about the forementioned nature of
Liberty, Ethic. li. 3. qu. 1. p. 152. Simpliciter and firmiter credere volo --
quod Voluntas caeteris omnibus eodem modo se habentibu^, potest in actus
oppositos -- Et nullus debet de via communi recedere propter rations sibi
insolubiles, specialiter in his quae fidem tangere possunt aut mores: Qui enim
credit se omnia scire, and in nulla opinionum suarum decipi, fatuus est. De
festuca enim tibi sensibiliter praesentata, formabuntur centum rations, vel
quaestiones, de quibus contraris sapientissimi doctores opinabuntur: propter
quod in qualibet harum deceptus erit alter ipforum vel ambo: Ideo non miror si
in hac altissima materia non possum per rations and solutiones satisfacere
mihi ipst.]

511. To proceed in the application, Vasquez in 1. Tho. q. 23. a. 3. d. 95. c.
1. Sunt non-nulli Thomistae qui tam severe hanc sequuntur opinionem ut
affirment, ^undem ordinem servasse Deum in reprobatione quem in
praedestinatione tenuit; scil. ut ante praevisa peccata sola sua Voluntate
decreverit quosdam a regno Coelorum excludere, licet non ad poenam sensus
destinaverit. -- Deinde quos voluit excludere permiserit labi in peccatum ea
intention ut eos excluderet a regno sicut decreverat.

Et c. 2. Parum ab hac sententia dissert Scotus, qui qu. 1. d. 41. asserit in
Deo duplicem esse Reprobationem; alteram vocat Punitivam, alteram permissivam
-- Et punitivae dari causam, and ex praevisis peccatis factam fuisse; --
Permissivae non dari causam, quia quod homo permittatur labi in primum
peccatum, nulla ex part illius datur causa: hujus enim solum nititur Scotus
causam negare -- Hinc ordinem hune in mente Divina assignat: (etc. ut alibi.)
Scotum sequuntur Bassolis, Corduba, etc.

Objicit Bradward. Privationes ut eclipses, mors, etc. habent positivas causas.
To which what I have said is a sufficient answer. And 1. Sometimes they have
not; but only the cessation of a causation: 2. They never have a positive
efficient of themselves, (for nothing is not made) but only a positive remover
of the cause of that which the subject is deprived of, or an interposer or
hinderer of the causation of it, e. g. of Light or life; And death has no
cause but that which cease the causes of life.


Reprobation is commonly looked at in the two most notable parts (as called,)
1. Gods Reprobating men to unbelief and impenitency; 2. His Reprobating men to
final damnation. The last of these also is considered in the execution, 1. As
Privative. 2. As Positive, called Poena damni and sensus. And both (especially
the Privative part) are considerable, 1. As executed by man himself on himself
freely. 2. Or as executed by God: Concerning each of these observe,

512. 1. Not to Believe and Repent is no real entity: And not to Give faith and
Repentance (as is said) is no real entity: And to Permit Infedelity and
Impenitency is no real entity (as is proved:) And not to Decree the Giving of
says, and the hindering of unbelief is nothing: And (most clearly) besides
these four nothings, nothing can be proved either existent or needful. All that
comes to pass, will come to pass without any more ado. Therefore.

513. As far as any mortal man can prove God has no such Act of Reprobation at
all, as is, 1. Either a Decree that a man shall not eventually Repent. 2. Or a
Decree not to give him Repentance. 3. Or a Decree to Permit his Impenitence. 4.
Nor can we prove an after Volition of his own former non Volition which is
asserted by Scotus. But the three first we have great reason to lay by; and so
not only to say as Davenant that this part of Reprobation is an Act negative
quoad objectum, but that it is no Act, and there is no other Reprobation as to
this part save, 1. Gods not decreeing to give faith, 2. And his not giving it.

514. 2. And as to Damnation, so much of it as consists in sin it self, God
no otherwise causes than as he does all sin, which is properly, not at all; It
being but the Act as an act which he causes as the Cause of Nature, and not as
sinfully qualified: and so no more decrees this than other sin.

515. And most men little think how much of damnation lies in sin it self, and
the privative consequents which need no other cause. 1. To be ignorant of God
and Goodness. 2. To be void of the Love of God and Holiness, and Holy persons,
and all the Holy employment of Heaven. 3. To be thereby void of all the
Delights of Holy ones, which consist in such Knowledge, Love and Employment,
Praise, Obedience, and holy Communion. 4. To be incapable of the Reception of
Divine complacency; as he that makes himself blind is incapable of the light,
or he that makes himself unlovely is incapable of immediate Love. 5. To be
defiled and diseased with all kind of sinful lusts, and malignity, and made
like the Devil. 6. To have all sorts of Lusts in violence when they can have no
fuel or satisfaction, and so to be tormented with these lusts. To have extreme
selfishness and Pride, when they have cast themselves into the utmost shame and
misery. 7. To see that no Creature can deliver them, and to despair of ever
being better, as having no hope from God or any other. 8. To see or know that
others enjoy the Glory and everlasting felicity which they have lost. 9. To
think how easily once they might have attained it; and how it was offered
freely to their choice. 10. To think of all the solicitations of mercy that
importuned them, and all the time and means they had. 11. To think for how base
a vanity they lost it, and that misery was their wilful choice. 12. To be
tormented with envy and malice against God that forsakes them, and against his
Saints; And to feel conscience awakened setting home all their former folly;
All this is nothing but sin and its own effects, which has no Causation at all
from God, but to continue the nature which he gave them, and is not bound to
destroy. And how great a part of hell is this?

516. Nay we know not how much sensible Pain may be the consequent of their own
sin, without any other Act of God, than his common continuation of nature it
self: As a man that eats Arsnick, or unwholesome meat, is tormented by it,
without any other act of God, than as the universal Cause of Nature.

517. All this much of Damnation then being merely the work of the sinner
himself, so far as there is no Act of God in the execution, so far no man can
prove any Positive Act of Volition or Decree.

518. But 1. As God in these is the universal cause of Nature, and so of
natural acts, 2. And as in other instances he actually further punishes them,
3. And as he actually made that Law which made these penalties the sinners due;
so far God has a Positive Decree and Volition, that these persons shall be
damned: And moreover, as improperly or morally his not sanctifying them, and
not saving them is called his Act, and is really their penalty, even so may his
not-willing to save or glorify them be called his Decree and will to damn
them, if you will.

519. By this time we are ready to answer our first question, What are the
objects of these several acta of God, so far as connotatively we must call them
several.

And 1. Besides all before cited against Volitions de nihilo, see Ruiz de Vol.
Dei, disp. 6.. 1. p. 36. [Antiquorum gravissimi sentiunt Deum non omnia Velle,
sed ea duntarat bona quae in aliqua differentia temporis existunt: proinde
possibilia que nunquam futura sunt non amari a Deo, ^^^^ Mala: and inde Deum
not esse omni-volentem: and n^llam creaturam a Deo amari necessario: Ita
Albertus, Alexand. Bo^^vent. Richard. Gaby. Bannez, Zumel, Molina, Valentia,
Scotus Against which he brings frivolous reasons, and asserteth, that God
wills as a material object, the Goodness which the Creature would have if it
were made, and this as to all Creatures which never will be. What putid
contradictions are here? to will Goodness which is no Goodness, of all
Creatures which are no Creatures, as material objects, which are nothings? God
wills his own Power, whence man calls that Possible which is nothing. But
was there from Eternity any Possibles not-future to be willed? What was there
from Eternity but God? And are all the^e Nothings God himself?
Gods not giving the Gospel to any persons, is no Act, and so has no object.
But reductively or improperly the object is, Man sinning against the grace of
the first edition of the Law of Grace: that is, These are the subject de quo,
of which it is truly said, They are without the Gospel.

520. 2. Gods not converting effectually some that have the Gospel, is no Act,
and has no object: But the subject of the Privation, called the Object, is,
Some part of those men who have forfeited the helps of special Grace by their
abuse or neglect of the Gospel and the Commoner grace which was given them.

521. 3. Gods not Pardoning, Justifying, Adopting and Sanctifying men, is no
Act and has no object: But the subject of the Privation, and object of the
Laws contrary sentence, is, Impenitent, Unbelievers, or the non-performers of
the condition of Justification, etc. in the Covenant.

522. 4. Gods not Glorifying men, is no Act, nor the damnation which consists
in sin as aforesaid, is none of Gods act: But the sentence of condemnation is
Gods Act, and no doubt some other Positive Execution. And the object of these
is, All finally Impenitent Unbelievers, and unholy ones, that is, who performed
not the Condition of that Edition of the Covenant of Grace which they were
under.

523. And it being past all denial that these are the objects of the Executive
Acts, we must say that these also are the objects of the Decrees accordingly,
where a Decree is proved, and when we speak of them only juxta ordinem
executionis, and not Intentionis, which I laid by before.

524. And lest you recurr to it, once more I will recite (more of) Davenants
words de ordine Intentionis. De Praed. and Reprob. cap. 1. p. 107. [1. Sciendum
and tenendum est si Dei naturam and perfectionem in se consideremus, illum non
prius unum videre, deinde aliud, neque prius hoc decernere aut velle, deinde
illud; sed unico and simplicissimo actu, etc. -- 2. Ex part tamen Rerum quae
decrevit signa quaedam prioritatis and posterioritatis distingui possunt, --
Hic tamen observandum est, inter ipsos Scholasticos non admodum certam and
constantem esse hanc doctrinam de hisce signis seu instantibus prioritatis --
Scotus, qui primarius est ad haec signa fabricanda artifex, videtur non-nullis
non solum eadem posuisse priora and posteriora secundum nostrum intelligendi
modum, sed etiam statuisse unum esse in ipso Deo prius natura alio. (But from
this he vindicateth him.) Ex adversa part Occamus noster haec signa quocunque
modo considerata negavit, in 1. d. 9. q. 3. Et Biel ejus sententiam amplexus
haec signa oppugnavit. in 3. d. 2. q. 1. dub. 3. [Prioritates, in Divinis non
sunt ponendae, sicut nec pluralitates actuum ordinatorum. Unus est enim Actus
in Divinis, re and ratione indistinctus, qui est ipsa essentia Divina. -- ne
secundum nostram quidem considerationem talem ordinem Prioritatis and
posterioritatis concipi posse in decretis Divinis, ut talis consideratio non
sit falsa speculatio.] If this hold, our Controversy of the order is at an end.

525. And he added the words even of a rigid Thomist [Domin. Bannes, quamvis
non omnino explodat haec signa cum Biele, perpendens tamen discordiam
Theologorum in his assignandis [Animadvertendum est, inquit, quam pro libito in
negotio praedestinationis and reprobationis multiplicentur instantiae a
Theologis, and quam parum illa conferant ad assignandam rationem differentiae
inter praedestinatos and reprobos. Liceat itaque hic paucis monere, non esse
nimis confidendum, aut certo dogmati adhaerendum, ulli certo ordini decretorum
divinorum, sive a Protestantibus, sive a Pontificiis assignato, cum difficile
sit duos reperire, sive inter nostros, sive inter adversarios, qui ad amussim
per omnia consentiant in hac serie decretorum divinorum describenda. Caveat it
aque un^squisque ne talem considerationem praedestinationis and reprob inducat
quae vel Divinae justitiae, vel gratiae gratuitae adversetur, and t^m non
multum refert quo ordine prioritatis, etc.]

SECT. XVII. Of Gods Causing, and Decreeing Sin.
526. BUt because it is the avoiding of Gods Causing and Willing sin Of too
many such enquirers it may be said with Augustine, de Utilit. Cred^ndi cap. 18.
Dum nimis quaerunt unde sit malum, nihil reperi^nt nisi malum.

Obj. Omnis determinatio di^ina est immutabilis: Omnia siu^t Deo determinante:
Ergo omnia siunt immut^hiliter. Respondet M^lan^th. Ad maj. Est immut^bil^s
necessitate conseq^entiae. Ad minor. Dissimil^s est determinatio in bonis and
malis actionibus: Mala siunt, 1. Deo praesciente and non impedi^nte, non autem
adjuvante vel impellente: Item, Deo sustentante naturam and suum opus: Item,
Deo eventus certos decernente: Strigel. in Melancth. page 296.

Carbo Compend. Thom. 1. q. 19. a. 9. Malum ut malum nullo app^titu potest
appeti nisi per a^^id^ns. Deus ^ullo modo vult malum Culpae -- Deus neque vult
si^ri malum, ^^que non vult, sed permitti.

Ruiz de praedesin. Tr. 2. disp. 13.. 3, 4. would prove a decree to permit
mortal sin in the unjust and just ex destitutione and circumstantiis. And d.
16.. 3. he tell^th us of many ways by which God makes sin the occasion of his
Grace without causing or willing sin, in form or nearest matter.


which is a great reason of these Controversies, I shall say somewhat more
particularly of that. About which there are various Opinions.

1. Some think (as Hobbs) that no acts of the will are so free as not to be
necessitated, as the motions in an Engine, though unobserved by our selves, who
see not the Concatenation of Causes.

527. 2. Some Dominicans, and our Dr. Twisse and Rutherford held, that no act
natural or free can be done by any creature, without the Predetermination of
Gods Physical efficient immediate Premotion, as the first total Cause of that
act: But yet that this stands with Liberty, because God causes contingentia
contingenter fieri. And that he so causes every Act of sin in all its
circumstances; and the totum materiale peccati; and all that the sinner
causes: But yet that he is not the Author of sin, nor causes the form;
Because 1. They say, that sin has no efficient cause, but a deficient, which
God is not, being not obliged to act: And sin is nothing, but a privation. 2.
Because God is under no Law: and therefore though he do the same things that
man does, it is sin in man, but not in him: And says Holkot, he is the cause
of sin, but not the Author, because he commands it not by his Law. 3. At
other times they say, that sin is formally a Relation of disconformity to the
Law of God, and God causes the whole act as circumstanced, but not the
relation, which resulteth from it. 4. And God causes not sin as sin, but as a
means to his Glory, or as a punishment of former sin.

528. 3. Others say, as Camero, that the Intellect necessitateth the will, and
the Objects and temptations necessitate the Intellect, and God causes the
Objects and Laws, and permits the Tempter.

529. 4. Others say, that God only as the Cause of Nature, 1. By Support and
Concurse necessary to all agents, causes the Act as an Act in general, 2. And
gives Power also to act or not act freely, 3. And as Governor of the World
does that which he knew men would make an occasion of their sin, 4. And also by
his Providence causes many effects, of which men's sins are also a cause, 5.
And after brings good out of their evil: 6. But as to the sin it self he is
no cause of it, either as sin or punishment, either of the form, or of the Act
as morally specified, that is, as it is about this Forbidden object (or End)
rather than another. And this opinion I take to be the undoubted truth.

530. Let it here be noted, 1. That the five things here granted are all
certain truths, 2. And that they are as much as is necessary on Gods part, in
respect to the events which we see; And unnecessaries are not to be asserted;
3. That they fully show God to be the perfect Governor of the World, and all
therein; 4. And yet to be no Author of sin: Let us consider of the particulars.

531. I. It is certain that God as Creator has made man a Vital Agent, and
therefore a self-actor (under him); and an Intellectual Agent, and therefore is
not tied to follow the perceptions of sense alone; And a Free-willing Agent,
and therefore has a Power to Act or not Act hic and nunc, or to choose or
refuse, or to choose this rather than that as far as consists with his
Necessary Volitions (which I acknowledged and enumerated before: which is part
of Gibieufs and Guil. Camerarius Scot. meaning by their servato ordine finis:
Though I think that Annatus does not unjustly accuse Gibieuf of confusion and
unskilfulness in the managing of that matter.)

532. II. It is certain that as Motus vel Actio is quid Natural, it is of God
as the first Cause of Nature: Vid. Gregor. Arim. in 2. d. 28. q. 1. a. 3. ad
arg. 8. and 12. whose judgment many Schoolmen follow: Vasquez thus
abbreviateth and reports him in 1 Tho. q. 23. d. 99. c. 4. [M^tionem Dei
ordine causae priorem esse co-operatione and determinatione nostra in operibus
bonis: at in operibus peccati, etiam secundum substantiam and seclusa malitia
priorem esse nostram determination^m: and codem ordine baec inter se comparari
in aeternita^^. -- Ex quo inserunt Deum praefinisse opera bona ante
det^rminati^n^m nostram ullo modo praevisam; sed mala secundum substantiam
nequaquam, nisi praecognita determinatione nostrae voluntatis.

Vid. Marsil. in 1. q. 45. ar. 2. post 4. conclus.


And so when a sinner acts, it is not without this Universal first Cause:
Whether God do it only, as Durandus thought, by the mere continuation of the
nature of all things, Active and Mobile, or by any superadded concurse besides,
is nothing to our present business; which only shows that God is the Cause.

533. III. It is certain that Governing Providence by doing good does set
before men that which they make an occasion of all their evil: Every thing is
turned into sin by sinners, Titus 1. 15, 16.
and to the unclean all things are unclean, through the uncleanness of their
own minds and consciences: As to the pure and holy all things are pure and
sanctified. Bad stomachs corrupt the wholsomest food. All Gods mercies are
abused to sin.

534. It is certain that God fore-knew this: And yet that he is no way obliged
to deny men life, or take it away, lest they abuse it, or deny men all those
mercies, or remove them, which he foreseeth that they will turn to sin.

535. IV. It is certain that God often concurreth to the causing of the very
same effect which sin also causes; and so is as a concause of it with sin: And
this effect is so near to the Act of sin, as that the sin it self is ost called
by its name as if it were its nearest matter (which it is not.) And this is the
occasion of the Great mistake of men in this case, that cannon distinguish. Of
which more anon in the instances.

536. V. And it is certain, that God as the Governor of the World, does do
much good by the occasion of men's sin. But this is not to turn the sin it self
into good.

537. VI. And to these five operations of God, I add, as to his Volitions, that
all this which he does, he wills or decrees to do. And he has no contrary
will at all.

538. But that which we deny is, that He is any proper cause of the sin it
self, efficient or deficient, culpable or not culpable, Physical or Moral; For
the opening of which we must enquire what sin is, and what goes to its being
or constitution.

539. All grant that God is our Ruler by a Law, and also our ultimate End as he
is Optimus and Amabilissimus, and that he is our absolute Owner: And that as
rational free agents we that are his own, are also his Subjects and
Beneficiaries, and made capable of Loving him as our ultimate end, and of
obeying his Laws: And that sin is our Disobedience to these Laws, with our
denying God our selves as his Own, and withholding or perverting the Love which
we owe him as our End.

540. As Logic has confounded us in most other cases by arbitrary unsuitable
second notions (making us a Shoo not meet for the Foot,) so that it is easier to
know Things without those unfit notions than with them; so has it done here.
Men may more easily know what sin is, and what it is to disobey a Law, and that
either by doing what we should not, or by not doing what we are commanded, than
they can know by what Logical or Metaphysical name it should be called: Whether
a privation, or a relation, an act or no act, etc. But it is not only for
Logicians that God made his Laws; nor is it only a Metaphysical Conscience that
will accuse men or condemn them, and torment them for their sin.

541. No Act merely as an Act in genere is forbidden of God. For the soul is an
Active nature, and can no more cease all action, than to be: though it can
forbear a particular act as to this object, and at this time. And God is the
Cause of Acts as such.

542. I have showed before that as Action it self is no substance, but the mode
or motion of a substance, so to choose this object rather than that, has no
more of Action in it than to have chosen the other, or than Ex to verb quod
D^us conc^^ at nobiscum ad actum peccati, prout facultas liberi arbitrii
postulat, sive prius, sive posterius, sive simul, non sequitur malitiam Deo
esse tribuendam, cum illa solum ex modo operandi creaturae sequatur. Vasquez in
1 Tho. q. 23. d. 99. cap. 4.
the general nature of action when existent has: So that this Moral
specification adds not to the natural generical entity.

543. It is therefore 1. Acting, 2. Not acting, 3. Moral disposition, which are
Commanded and Forbidden by God: And not any one only: and these not in
themselves, but about the Materials commanded or forbidden Objectively, in the
Law. To Act on a forbidden object; Not to Act on an object when commanded, and
to be viciously disposed to either, is a sin.

544. You may see then, that sin is a Connotative notion, yea, and a Relative
notion; It connoteth a Ruler, a Law, and End, a Subject, and is thus variously
Related.

545. As Subjection is the Root of Obedience, and all obedience Virtually,
being A Consent to obey, and Love is the Root of benefits; so to forsake God
simply as our Rector or our End, or our Owner, is Atheism practical, and all
sin in one: But to violate only a particular precept de mediis, is but a
particular sin.

546. God is the Cause of the Law which commands and forbids, and God is
the Cause of Nature, and Objects, and Action as Action: That therefore which he
has made man's part is to Love God and Holiness, and not to over-love the
creature, nor to love it as our End or in his stead: and to do all that he
commands, and not to do the particular acts about such particular objects as
he forbids.

547. The remote subject or relatum then of sin, is the person sinning; But the
nearest is the Act, Omission or disposition; The fundamentum or ratio referendi
is the said Acts, Omissions or dispositions, as such or such, about such or
such objects, commanded or forbidden; which is a Relation; And the form of sin
is the Moral Relation of Disobedience, or Disconformity to the Law. So that if
you must needs have it in Logical notions, Sin is a Moral Relation, resulting
from a Physical relation of Actions, Omissions or dispositions of Gods
subjects, which are modified contrary to his Law.

548. It is a Moral Relation as it is Disobedience, found in a Moral agent
against a Law and Rector as such. It is a Physical Relation as the Act, etc. is
prius natura quid natural, about an object that is quid natural. Its
fundamentum (of both relations: And one Relation may be sounded in another) is
the Mode of the Act, Omission or disposition, as to an undue object, etc. as it
is forbidden by the Law. Of the subjects and relatum I have spoken before.

549. So that the form of sin being Relative can have no Cause but that which
causes its fundamentum: and cannot possibly but result when that is laid.

550. It were an injury to God to feign him to make such a Law as should say,
[Though thou hate me, see that that hatred be not Related formally as a breach
of my Law,] or [I forbid thee not to commit Adultery, but only forbid that thy
Adultery be quid prohibitum or a sin.] For if God forbid not the act, it cannot
be a sin: and if he forbid it, it must needs be sin; And so of omissions.

551. They therefore that tell us, that sin is nothing, but a Privation, speak
not satisfactorily, nor altogether truly. It is no substance indeed; nor any
such Reality as Man cannot Cause without Gods Causing it (supposing his
Universal Natural Support and Concurse.) But the thing forbidden is often Acts
and Dispositions as well as Omissions: and the form of sin, is a Moral
Relation, which has so much reality as a Relation has (if that be any). And
that Relation has a positive name; It is not only a mere Nonconformity, but
also a Disconformity, becaused founded in See Dr. Wallis against the Lord
Brook of this, very well.
Actual Volitions and Nolitions as forbidden, and not only in Omissions.

552. Subtle Ockam Quodl. 3. q. 15. disputing Utrum rectitudo and deformitas
actus differant a substantia actus? denies it; and after a Confutation of the
common saying, that Deformitas est carentia rectitudinis debitae, and
distinguitur ab actu, quod in peccato Actus est materiale, and carentia
justitiae debitae inesse est formale, concludes, [Quod deformitas non est
carentia justitiae vel rectitudinis debitae inesse actui, sed est carentia
rectitudinis debitae inesse voluntati: Quod non est aliud dicere, nisi quod
voluntas obligatur aliquem actum elicere secundum praeceptum Divinum quem non
elicit; and ideo rectitudo actus non est aliud quam qui debuit elici secundum
rectam rationem.] But I conceive, 1. That the rectitude of the Will can be
nothing else but the rectitude of its acts, suspensions and dispositions; 2.
That Ockam here describes only sins of omissions, whereas the Rectitude of the
Will is ofren also materially in not doing or willing what is forbidden. And
with these two animadversions I am reconciled to Ockam: who adds, [Ad aliud
dico, Quod illud dictum de Materiali and Formali est falsum; Quia aut est
peccatum commissionis aut omissionis: si primo modo, est Materiale sine
formali: quia ibi non est carentia rectitudinis, debitae inesse actui: si
secundo modo, tunc est ibi carentia quae est formale sine materiali.] Resp. 1.
To the first I add, that It had been true, if it had been the Act as an act
that had been forbidden, or else the species of the act as quid natural; But
it being the Act not as an act in genere, but as this act thus modified or
specified by an undue object, that Act with its Relation as quid physicum are
presupposed as the relatum to the moral relation of Pravity or Disconformity.
And to the second I say, that it is true that Omission is not Materia Physica;
but it is an inadequate first conception of sin, and so is materia moraliter
dicta vel loco materiae. And the Omission being considerable, 1. Quatenus
Non-agere, 2. Qua privatio naturalis, 3. Qua and Privatio and disconformitas
moralis, these three inadequate conceptions take up the whole nature of the
sins of omission.

553. The same Ockam Quodl. 1. qu. 20. Utrum actus exterior habeat propriam
bonitatem vel malitiam moralem? even as dependent on the Will? And he denies
it against Scotus who affirms it: I will not trouble the Reader with their
reasonings; not doubting but Ockam erred, and that it is true, 1. That no
exterior act is Morally good or evil primarily, 2. But that secondarily and
participatively as it is voluntary, there is a morality in the acts. Words, and
deeds, and passions are under Law next to the Will, and in dependence on it. As
the body conjunct with the soul is a secondary part of the man, so are our
exterior acts of sin.

554. The conceit that making sin a mere nothing, does seem to justify God as
not Causing it, is a mere vanity. For, 1. It justifies the sinner more; who no
more is the Cause of nothing than God. 2. Either man is able to do that
Something or Act which sin is the privation of, without any other Power than he
has, or not. If he be, then even the Act of sin is not imputable to God: If he
be not, then every sin is like our not making of a Sun, or Moon, or World:
which if it be a culpable defect, they make God the first deficient.

555. He that would see more of this question of the essence of sin, may read
Rada lib. 2. contr. 16. (who first ingenuously confesses that Tho. and Scotus
differ but in words and not in sense, and then lays down eleven conclusions
of little use.) And Marius Scribonius Cosmo. disp. 18. Scotus in 2. d. 37.
Bonavent. in 2. d. 35. dub. 6. Henric. Quodl. 1. qu. 25. Alm^in. Moral. tract.
3. cap. 17. Richard. in 2. d. 34. ar. 1. qu. 7. Alex. Ale^s. 2. q. 94. memb. 2.
Durand. 2. dis. 31. q. 2. Medin. 12. q. 71. ar. 6. Specially Vasquez 12. disp.
95. cap. 9. Guil. Camerar. Scot. Disput. Philos. Part. 1. Mor. q. 3. page 162,
etc. Argent. in 1. d. 35. q. 1. ar. 2. Gabriel Biel 2. d. 36. q. unica. Valent.
1. 2. d. 2. q. 14. p. 3, etc. Suarez 1. 2. tract. de act. hum. d. 2. sect. 2.
Azor. li. 4. c. 24. Tanner. 1. 2. disp. 2. q. 5. dub. 2. and 3. and disp. 4. q.
1. dub. 1. Vega in Trident. 6. c. 39. and li. 14. c. 13. Cordub. l. 3. q. 10.
and Cajet. Zumel. Curiel, and alios in 1. 2. q. 19. ar. 4. and q. 71. ar. 6.
And, who is usually sounder than most of them, Lombard himself Did. 35. and
Ripalda opening him and citing others did. 34, 35.

But the ordinary Christian that understands but what Disobedience
signifies, needs none of them all.

556. It is not only Dr. Twisse (after confuted) that supposes sin to be
willed of God as conducible to the perfection of the World, but even Ruiz the
Jesuit de Provid. dis. 2. sec^. 4. p. 27. maintains that Minus perfectus
evasisset Mundus si nulla permitterentur peccata; nune autem ^^asit perfectior
occasion peccatorum: and cites Aquin. Alexand. Albert. Bonav. Richard. Agid.
Caiet. Ferrar. Marsil. for the same. But 1. An occasion is no cause nor medium,
as such, and therefore never the more willed, if that were true. 2. But I have
before briefly confuted the Schoolmen on both sides about this question, viz.
Particular Creatures would be to themselves better, were there no sin: but
whatever possible alterations were made by God, the Universe would be neither
worse nor better than it is, as to that proper Goodness which must absolutely
denominate it: For the Goodness of all Creatures is to be conform to the
Creators Will, which is the denominating measure of fundamentum; And so they
are, and so they would be, were they altered: But sin is disform to his
Commanding Will, and not conform to his Complacence or Efficient Will. He
argues, Had there been no sin, there had been no such exercise of Liberty, no
Savior, etc. Answ. And are the Angels worse than man? And had not all this
been as good, if God had willed it?
Though the five acts of God forementioned about sin, are as far as we need to
go, to the common Ends which we agree in, yet many objections are made against
this much as not sufficient, but God must have a greater hand in sin: And 1.
They object, that to make God but an Universal Cause, is to put something in
being, viz. the Act in specie morali, which God is not the Cause of; And so, 1.
To make Him idle and unactive as to that: 2. To deifie man by making him a
first Cause of that moral species. To which I shall lay down such answers as I
think will satisfy the considerate, to this Objection which is indeed their
All: But I am sorry that the subject occasioneth me to repeat what I said
before.

557. 1. Remember that even an Act in genere is not a substance; And that the
moral specification is less as to natural entity than it; indeed making no
addition of Entity to it, as was showed. And Dr. Twiss asserteth, that this
moral specification is not a proper specification of acts.

558. 2. Note that few dare say, that God is not Able to make a free agent with
Power to choose or refuse without Gods further predetermining premotion. And if
God can do it, we have no reason to debase his work, and think he did not.

559. 3. Note, that for God to make a self determining agent that shall act
without his predetermination, is but to put forth his own Active Power with
limitation or suspension, that is, To Will and Act or Operate, so far and no
further.

560. 4. And note, that this restriction of the Divine operation is not from
any finiteness of his power, as if he could do no more, but from the freedom of
his Will, and the Conduct of his Wisdom, who sees it good to do no more.

561. 5. Above all note, that as all Divines agree, that God does not Act ad
ultimum posse, as natural agents do, so the truth is most evident in the
finiteness of the World, and the effects of his Power: For God does not make as
many men or other creatures as he could do: He does not make every man as
strong, or wise, or good, or long-lived as he could do: He does not make every
Stone, or Clod, or Tree as Active as he could do, nor move every thing as
swiftly as he could do. Now all that is undone which God could do, all
possibles which are not existent or future, do tell us plainly that God does
freely suspend the action or operation of his Power, totally as to them: which
is much more than to suspend it but in part with free agents, and to give them
a Natural self-determining power, without further pre-moving predetermination
of them. If all the World tell us, that he has the far greater suspension, why
should we think the less absurd?

562. 6. And Reason tells us (what the Schoolmen often say) that God who
shows us that he delights in wonderful variety of his creatures, does very
fitly thus beautify the Universe by a middle rank of creatures, that stand
between Confirmed Angels, and the Brutes, viz. Intellectual-free-agents, left
to a natural Power of free choosing or refusing, without necessitation, in the
midst of various objects, to prepare them by trial for a better state.

563. 7. And note too, that we say not that Gods predetermination of man's will
destroys its best Liberty: God can predetermine the will to Good as he does
the Angels, as a great blessing and felicity: To predetermine the will
physically, is to end that Liberty to that particular act, which consisted
partly in being undertermined: But that Liberty which consists in deliverance
from all true evil, is increased by such a Gracious predetermination: And
therefore Jansenius pleads only for the necessity of predetermination to Good
by medicinal Grace, and not to Evil, or mere Natural actions. Yet we say, that
even to Good, God can procure the will to determine it self, by moral means,
which infinite Wisdom can sufficiently improve. But it is only 1. A natural
power to act without predetermination from God or Others, 2. And a Liberty of
Condition, from all predetermination ab extra, to evil (from God or Creatures)
which I here assert and plead for in this cause.

564. 8. Much less do we take the Will from under the Power and Government of
God: For, 1. It could have no self-determining Power but of God, one moment. 2.
He gives it this power, to make us capable subjects of Moral Sapiential
Government. 3. He gives us Governing Laws accordingly. 4. And he attaineth all
his Ends and fulfilleth all his Will, as perfectly in consistency with our
power and freedom as if we had none such at all: so that God has his proper
Will, whether men Will or not.

565. But the turning point of difficulty here is, Whether God is ever Causa
partialis? and if we so make him, is it not injurious to his perfect
operations? All our Controversies turn upon the decision of this one question.
See the End.
For if we may conceive of God, as Scotus speaks, like one that draws at
the same Ship with another; and the act of both must concur to the effect;
then all is easy, and we may say when men Love not God, repent not, believe
not, etc. that God did his part, but the sinner did not his, and so the effect
failed. As if a Father did resolve that he will help I remember one derideth
John Goodwin for this similitude or the like, (Mr. Roborough.)
his little Child to lift up a weight, and will put to nine hundred ninety nine
parts of the strength that is necessary, but no more, because the Child shall
do something (one part) to show his willingness and obedience; Here if the
thing be done, it is the Father that deserves nine hundred ninety nine parts of
the praise: If it be undone, the Child only does deserve the blame. But we have
more to say.

566. Note therefore, 1. That here the Child has in himself a Power
independent on his Father, and therefore the whole effect is not to be ascribed
to the Father. But man has no Power but of God, and what he holds, yea, and
uses in dependence on him. And therefore the praise of all his Power and his
Acts as Acts are due to God. 2. And all the good Inclinations of his will, and
all the Laws, promises, persuasions, threatenings, mercies, afflictions,
examples, convictions, which tend morally to turn his will, are from God; so
that in every good Volition or action man does no more than God did both enable
him, command him, persuade him and help him to do, and so procure the actual
determination of his will. So that de re we see how much God does always
(besides that Grace may sometimes for ought I know otherwise predetermine:) And
we see what man does: And all that you can desire more is, that no man that
does any good act, should be able at that instant not to do it, or to do
otherwise; and then it must follow that no man that omitteth a good act, or
that sins, could do otherwise: which are false. Molina makes God Causam
partialem 1. p. q. 14. a. 3. disp. 6. Sotus li. 2. Phys. disput. de causis
denies it; And Zumel disputes against it in Disp. in 1, 2. Thom. p. 43.
Concl. 2. And so do many others; And great diversity here is among them while
some affirm and some deny, but none of us understand the mystery of divine
concurse.
So that here is only the lis de nomine left, An Deus sit Causa partialis? I
think it fittest to say, that he is Causa totalis of his own Act, and of the
effect as it is an Act, and of all that is laudable in it too, for the reasons
aforesaid. But yet he is not the Causa sola, nor in that sense totalis of the
Moral specification, as if when he gives his Creature a Power of choosing or
refusing freely, it could not be done, without his further physical
predetermination.

567. And (under favor) I take the name Causa partialis, to be improper, and
that it should properly be called Pars Causae: For when diverse concur in
efficiency, all make but one proper efficient Cause. So say Ockam and Gabriel
Biel though Zumel call it a most improper mode of speaking, because so no one
Cause could be called Total: And why should it, if it be not? (except that God
is above our order, and so not a Part.)

Bonavent. in 1. dis. 38. q. 2. inquit, Futurum triplex est: Quoddam est cujus
Deus est tota Causa, ut Creata: Quoddam cujus Creatura, aut Voluntas est Tota
Causa, ut sunt defectus and peccata: Quoddam cujus Deus and Creatura simul sunt
Causa, ut sunt opera naturalia and moralia; quia Deus cooperatur creaturae:
Respe^^u primi futuri Divina praescientia est tota causa: secundi non causa:
tertii est Causa sed non tota. Gab. Bi^l in 2. d. 37. brings in Scotus saying
[Licet Deus Volendo causat omnia quae causat, non tamen ideo est Causa totalis:
quia vult etiam secum concurrere alias causas, and utrumque vult, and effectus
esse, and secum concurrere Causas secundas, non diversis, sed una Volitione,
nec unum plus alio, sed aeque utrumque and simul -- Et nulla Creatura est Causa
totalis -- Quia semper concurrit Deus ut Causa partialis -- Et ad dub. 2. ex
Greg. Arim. Nobiscum ^anquam Causa partialis producit actum malum.

Gregor. Arim. his words are (in 2. d. 34. a. 3.) Actus mali quem efficit
Peccator, Deus est immediata Causa: Partialis tamen, co-efficiens actum eundem.
Of Greg. Arim. see more in the conclusion of this Chapter.


Now I suggest to the Learned Reader that is against me, How he will decide the
forementioned hard question, Whether there be more Entity in God and the
Creature than in God alone? It is dangerous saying Yea or Nay: and we know not
well what to say: But for my part, as I said, I will not say that God is Pars
Entitatis, nor yet that the Creature is not Ens, nor yet that it is God: But
the solution must be either from the Equivocation of Entity, or from the
Creatures Inexistence in God, or from somewhat rather which I know not. And
just so here; the question is, Whether Gods Causation and Man's be more than
Gods alone? And I will not say that Gods is a Part; nor yet that Man's is none,
nor that it is the same with Gods: But that Gods acting and concurse are quite
above the reach of Mortals.

568. But here again note what I said even now, 1. That it is no more sign of
finiteness in God, nor dishonor to him, to be a limited or Partial Cause, than
to be no Cause, and limited totally by suspension of the whole act: And yet so
he is as to all Possibles which he does not make or move. 2. And that it is his
own free will only that thus limiteth him; As it does from giving all men more
grace, etc. So that really here is matter of satisfaction.

569. Though he offend me by making God the Cause of sin, I will here cite the
words of our Countryman, Holkot Quodl. lib. 2. qu. 1. [Est sententia omnium
Theologorum quod Deus est Causa immediata omnis rei productae, sic quod omni
creaturae agenti, sive sit Natura sive Voluntas, Deus coagit: and sic
imaginandum est quod in omni action creaturae qua aliquid producit, Deus and
Creatura sunt duae causae Partiales illius producti: Non sic imaginando quod
Deus producit unam partem effectus, and creatura aliam, and ob hoc dicatur
Causa partialis -- sed ideo quia concurrunt in agendo vel causando -- Unde tam
causa universalis quam particularis dicitur communiter causa partialis: and
ideo etiam Sol and Hom^ sunt duae causae partiales hominis generandi; and
similiter Vir and Mulier: Quia ad hoc quod aliquid dicitur causa partialis
sufficit quod sit tale quod propter ipsum and quoddam aliud vel quaedam alia
res ponatur in esse, sit quod illis positis res est, and aliquo istorum ablato
res non fiet.]

570. Further I desire that it may be specially noted, that God is our Creator
in order of Nature before he is our Ruler; And that Nature is before Morality,
(obedience or sin.) And that God as Creator first settled the order of Nature
so, as that the Alteration of that Law or settled Order should not be ordinarily
expected by us, though he can alter it: And therefore that man is man, and has
a Natural Power of Self-determination, and that God upholdeth him, and
concurreth as an Universal Cause, belongs to this fore-setled natural order,
and is presupposed to moral determinations and specifications, either as from
God or man.

571. And note, that to Good Acts we have need of more Help from God, than this
mere Natural Causality and Concurse. And therefore God affords us more
accordingly; but not to all alike.

572. It is further objected, against this way, that our making Reprobation to
Infidelity, Permission of sin, not-giving faith, etc. to be no Acts of God,
comes all to one as to men's sin and damnation; because man cannot believe, nor
avoid sin, without those Acts of Grace which God withholdeth?

Answ. I confess it were all one if the supposition were true, as it is not:
For we have proved after, that man has power without those acts of Grace which
God suspendeth, by that Common Grace which he gives, to do more good and
forbear more evil than they do: Of which in due place.

573. It is objected also, that while we make Gods Providence to fill the World
with occasions of sin, which he fore-knoweth men will take to their damnation,
yea, as long as God could prevent all sin, and save all souls, and yet will
not, it comes all to one which way soever you go in these Controversies.

I answer, 1. Undoubtedly Gods Judgments are unsearchable. But when we come
into his Light, we shall be perfectly reconciled to them all. 2. And
undoubtedly God does whatsoever he will, and all that he thought meet to Decree
or Will, shall come to pass in despite of sin. 3. And when we have said all,
flesh and blood will be unsatisfied, till faith and the will of God do satisfy
us. 4. But yet be it known to you, that there is a great difference between
Gods permitting sin (after great means against it) and his causing it: Between
the making of a free agent, and putting life or death in his choice; and his
causing men unavoidably to sin, and then to damn them for it. The Holiness of
Gods Nature will stand with the Being of sin, by man's causing; but not with
Gods causing it. And the Truth of Gods Word must be considered.

574. If this were all one (to Damn men unavoidably, and to give them their
free choice of Heaven or Hell, in the means) it is strange that so many Learned
men as among the Jesuits, Arminians, Lutherans and Greeks, do hold no other
Grace at all, but what leaves man to such a free Choice, could ever be so
satisfied: (when others hold that the Elect have more.)

SECT. XVIII. A Confutation of Dr. Twisse 's Digr. 5. l. 2. sect. 1. Vind. Great.
575. I Come now to consider of what is said by them that go further about Gods
will or Causality as to sin. And because Dr. Twisse has a peculiar Digression
(Vindic. Great. li. 2. p. 1. Digr. 4.) I will somewhat animadvert upon it. He
begins [Sententia nostra haec est, Deum hactenus dici posse Velle peccatum
quatenus vult ut peccatum ^iat -- viz. ipso permittente: And so he makes the
question, An Dens Velit ut peccatum eveniat ipso permittente? Arminius thought
God willed only his own Permission of the sin: Twisse says, that he willed
that sin should come to pass, God permitting it. Arminius his concession cannot
be proved (as I have showed;) But Twisses must be disproved. And 1. I will give
you our Reasons against it. Bonavent. in 1. d. 46. q. 3. resolves this
question very plainly and truly [Mala ^ieri nullatenus bonum esse potest: sed
been occasio boni: And showing the difference between Causa, Casus and Occasio,
he says that Causa est procedens and intendens: Casus p^ivat Intentionem sed
non operationem: Occasio private utrumque. And he distinguishes Occasion into
that which has ratio^^m Acti^i and excitat agentem; and that which has but
rationem passivi, as one by another evil exciteth himself to do good. And also
between the evil and the ordinability to good. And says the evil is but the
occasio passiva of the good, and the ratio boni quod substernitur, is occasio
aliquo modo activa -- Vide locum.


576. Let the Reader remember, that what the Author says of Gods Willing, he
also in the point of Predetermination says of his working: viz. that he
Causes as much as he wills: But I pass that by now because I have largely
confuted it elsewhere. And to speak to One is to speak to both.

577. 1. All sober Christians are agreed, on what side soever, that God is not
the Cause of sin, except some odd presumers who are condemned by the
generality: One or two spoke some hard words that way in Belgia, whom the Synod
of Dort rejected: Mr. Archers Book was burnt for it by the Parliament or
Westminster Synod. Beza himself (in Romans 8. 28. and passim) abhors it as
intolerable blasphemy. But this Doctrine in question plainly makes God the
Willer and Cause of sin: Yea more, very much more than wicked men or Devils
are: which is not true.

578. For they make Men and Devils to be but a second pre-moved predetermined
Cause of the Act (of Volition and Execution) whence the formal obliquity
necessarily resulteth: But 1. God is certainly the Cause of the Nature which is
the Agent: 2. He is the Cause of the Law which makes the act in specie to be
sin: His saying, Thou shall not commit Adultery or Murder, makes Adultery and
Murder to be sin, when they are committed, which they would not be without the
Law. 3. God causes and orders all the objects and occasions. 4. And now they
also say that God wills ut peccatum fiat, (and is the first predetermining
Cause, even the total Cause, of all that is in the act and all its
circumstances, without which predetermination it could not be.) So that man
does but will what God first wills, and act what God first moves him
unavoidably to act, as the pen in my hand. 5. And the Law and the Act being put
in being, the Relative obliquity is but the necessary result, and has no other
cause.

579. And note here what Estius before cited (after Aquinas) says that to Will
that peccatum sit vel fiat, is all that the Sinner himself does, when he
wills sin. And therefore it is a vain thing here to distinguish between
willing sin, and willing the event, futurity and existence of it, ut peccatum
fiat vel eveniat: (Though I confess I was long detained in suspense if not
deceived by that distinction.) For he wills sin, who wills the existence of
it, or that it be or come to pass.

580. And note, that it is both matter and form, Act and obliquity which they
say God wills ut fiat: For it is sin: And forma dat nomen. It is not sin, but
by the form of sin. But if they had said otherwise, it had been all one: For he
that wills the fundamentum, relate and correlate, Says Twisse Vindic. Gra^.
li. 1. P. 1. Sect. 7. p. 137. [Posito quod velit per^ectiones istas
manifestare, necesse est non impediat ingressum peccati, sed permittat.] 1. As
if he had proved that God was not able to manifest his Mercy and Justice by
Laws, and Illuminating men to know them, without execution by the occasion of
sin? 2. Yet does he make Christ's death unnecessary and his satisfaction to
Justice so far as that God could have accomplished our pardon and salvation
another way if he would: And is sin better or more necessary than Christ's
satisfaction? 3. And methinks they that lay so little on Moral means and
operations of Grace in comparison of Physical, should not give so much to sin,
which were it a means (as it is not, but a Passive and opposite occasion) is
but a moral means.

And himself says page 136. [Permissio peccati proprie medium est assequendi
^inem a Deo praefixum: At peccatum non est Medium proprie dictum, sive
manifestandae Dei misericordiae, sive justitiae: Media enim ejus sunt naturae,
ut ad ea facienda, mov^atur quis ex intention finis.] Would the Reader have a
better confuter of him than himself? But he there adds that it is Materia
etsi non medium, as stone and Timber to an House. And yet sin they say has no
matter besides the subject and object, but is a mere Privation of moral
Rectitude. But if it be to the Devils Kingdom loco materiae, it is not so to
Christ's. Rather, if a beggar Want a house, is that Want the Materia domus? no
nor the Materia of his mercy or bounty that builds it. Thus the defectiveness
of the subtilest wits abuses God and his Church, when the Christian simplicity
of modest souls with a holy life would honor him. So Sect. 9. page 137.
Peccatum mihi videtur propri^ dicendum esse materiam manifestandae Dei sive
misericordi^, sive i^stiti^ poti^s quam medium: Permissionem vero peccati
medium esse ejus manifestandae proprie dictum. But 1. how often elsewhere does he
forget and contradict this? 2. Permission it self is nothing (being but
non-impedire.) And is nothing, or non-agere, a proper means? But especially I
entreat the Reader to observe that in that very place Twisse and Arminius are
herein professedly agreed, that it is the Permission of sin, and not the sin,
that is the Divine medium (only one says Praedestinationis, and the other
providentia:) And yet they will differ while they agree: And I that differ from
both, would agree with both.


wills the Relation.

581. There is nothing left to be said then, but that God wills that sin be
done, but not as sin, or because it is sin; But this is nothing. For, 1. Either
none or few of the Reprobate do will sin because it is Sin, but because of the
pleasure of sense or imagination, or for seeming good. 2. And if a man or Devil
do maliciously Will sin as sin because it is against God, so doing is but one
of their sins, which they say God wills ut fiat before they willed it (and
predetermined them to it:) so that here is nothing in it but what is first and
chiefly of God.

582. If they say that God wills it for the Glory of his Justice, and so do
not wicked men, but for wicked ends or in enmity to God; I answer, That proves
that God has a will which the wicked have not, but not that the wicked have
any will which God has not: For that Will and that Enmity to God still is but
one of their sins which they say God first wills ut fiat.

583. Obj. But it is only ut fiat ipso permittente, non faciente.

Answ. The hypocrisy of that addition makes it but the worse in the
assertors. For 1. They usually make Gods will effective of the thing willed. 2.
They maintain that there is nothing in the act as circumstantiated which God is
not the total first efficient Cause of. 3. They confess that the formal
relation necessarily resulteth from the act and Law: And why then do they put
in the word [permittente?] Would not that deceitfully insinuate to the Reader
that the sinner does something which God does not do, but only permit, when
they mean no such thing? For that is my second reason against them.

584. 2. By their doctrine God never permits sin (which is false:) For that
which he Wills and Causes as the first total Cause, he cannot be said to
Permit: To do a thing, and move another to do it, will not stand with proper
permission.

585. Obj. But God preserves our own Liberty in acting.

Answ. 1. By Liberty you mean nothing but Willingness as such, that God does
not make men's Nilling to be a Willing or contra in the same act. Which is but
to say that God causes me to Will sin, and not to Will-nill-it? 2. If you mean
more, I deny that ever God gave Power to the Will, to Will or Nill contrary to
the Volition and ph^sical premoving predetermination of the first cause. 3. But
if all this were so, it is nothing to the present case; and does not prove that
God is not the Cause of the sin, but only that man is a Cause also, caused by
the first Cause; and that God Wills and Causes us to sin willingly and
freely.

586. 3. By this means they make God equally to Will and Cause our Holiness and
our sin: For they cannot possibly tell us what he does more to Cause our
Holiness, than to Will it, and to predetermine the will of man to it, (besides
commanding it, which is a moral act, and we speak only of proper efficiency.)
He does but will that Holiness be, and cause all that has any entity in it;
And so they say he does about sin.

587. Obj. He loves our Holiness for it self, and so he does not sin.

Answ. The first is denied by themselves, if you speak of Gods end: For they
confess that God only is his own end, for which he loves all things: 2. And
his Love is either his efficient or complacential Volition. 1. The efficient
which is all that is now in question they must confess is equal to both, if he
equally will the existence of both.

Object. But he has a Complacence in Good only.

Answ. 1. He has a Complacence in the fulfilling of his own will as efficient.
Therefore if sin be the fulfilling of his Will, he has a complacency in it.
The formal reason of a pleasing object to God is, as it is the fulfilling of
his own Will; And to break his Law they make to be such: ergo, pleasing. 2. But
if it were not so, that is nothing to our Case, of the efficient Will.

588. 4. To avoid tediousness, in sum, This opinion seems to me, to leave
very little or no place for the Christian Religion. For 1. It overthrows the
formale objectum fidei, which is Veracitas Divina, and leaves no certainty of
any word of God: For if he do will and predetermine by premotion, ut fiat omne
mendacium, quod fit, then we have no way to know that he did not so by the
Prophets and Apostles. 2. It makes the Scripture false, which says so much of
Gods hatred and unwillingness of sin. 3. It obliterateth the notion of Gods
Holiness, which is made the great reason of our holiness. 4. It makes man's
Holiness to be no Holiness, but a common or indifferent thing. 5. It makes
sin, so little odious (as being a Divine offspring) as will destroy the hatred
of it and care to avoid it. 6. It will thereby nullify all our Godly sorrow,
repenting, confession, and all practice of means against any sin. 7. It will
hardly let men believe that Christ came into the world, and did and suffered so
much to save men from sin, and to destroy it. 8. Or that it is the work of the
Holy Ghost to sanctify souls and mortify sin. 9. It will hardly let men
believe that there is any Hell, and that God will damn men for ever, for that
which they did upon his prevolition and predetermination, unavoidably. 10. It
seems to give Satan's description to God, and more. For Satan can but tempt us
to sin, but they make God absolutely to will that it be, and physically to
predetermine us to it. And so Christ that came to destroy the work of the
Devil, the father of lies, malice and murder, should come to destroy the work
of God. 11. It takes away the reason of Church discipline, and purity, and of
our loving the Godly and hating wickedness. 12. It would tempt Magistrates
accordingly to judge of vice and virtue, good and bad in the Commonwealth.

589. Now to their arguments. 1. Rev. 17. 17. [God put it into their hearts to
do his will, and to agree to give up their Kingdoms to the beast.]

Answ. 1. He that reads Dr. Hammonds exposition applying this to Alaricus
sacking Rome, with the effects, will see that the very subject is so dubious
and dark as not to be fit to found such a doctrine on. 2. It was the effect of
the sin that God willed, and not the sin. 3. He is not said to put the sin into
their hearts, whether pride, covetousness, cruelty, etc. but only to do his
pleasure and agree (or make one decree) to give up etc. which he could most
easily do by putting many good and lawful thoughts into their hearts, which
with their own sins, would have that effect which he willed: If a thief have a
will to rob, God may put it into his heart to go such or such a way, where a
wicked man to be punished will be in his way.

590. But for brevity, besides what is said, I shall farther direct the
^mpartial Reader, how to answer all such objections: And withal let the
^onfounding cavillers against distinguishing, see, what blasphemy and
subversion of Religion may enter, for want of one or two distinctions which
^onfused heads regard not.

1. Be sure to distinguish the name of sin, from the nature. 2. And ^emember
that no outward act is sin any further than it is Voluntary (by privation or
position of Volitions.) 3. Distinguish between the Act as it ^s Agentis, and as
it is in Passo. 4. And between the Act and the effect. 5. Between the effect of
a single cause and of diverse causes, making a compound effect. 6. And between a
forbidden object compared with the ^ontrary, and one forbidden object compared
with another.

591. And then all this satisfying Truth will lie naked before you. 1. That the
same name usually signifies the sin and the effect of sin; or the Act as Acted
and as Received. Adultery, Murder, Theft, usually signify the Acts of the
Adulterer, Murderer, Thief, as done and as received ^n Passo, and as effecting.

2. That the former only is the sin, viz. first the Volition, Nolition, or
Non-Volition, and secondarily the imperate act as animated by the Will: And no
more. The reception of this act in Passo is not sin (as such;) nor the most
immediate effect of this act: It is but the effect of sin.

3. And you will see that the same effect may have several causes: a Good and
bad; And so God may be a cause of that effect, which man's sin also concurreth
to cause: And God does not therefore Will or Cause the sin.

4. And you will see that God may morally cause the effect as it is on this
object rather than another forbidden, though both make the act sinful, and yet
not Cause it as it is exercised on either of those objects compared with such
as are not forbidden.

592. And you will here plainly see that God has many ways to Cause the
effect without willing or Causing the sin. As for instance, 1. He can do it by
adding (as I said before) a good act to the sinners bad one. As when Caiaphas
is willing to kill Christ, God can put into Caiaphas's De hoc vid. Ockam ubi
supra.
thoughts, the jealousy of the Romans over the Jews, and the visible danger
they are in if they should be thought to have another King: which thoughts in
themselves are true and good: So he can put into Pharaoh's thoughts the loss of
the Israelites service, which was not sinful of it self. The wise Reader that
can impartially receive truth without respect of persons, may find much in
Episcopii Institut. Theol. li. 4. sect. 4. de provident. in his answering all
these Texts of Scripture, as mis-expounded by some. And his moderate opinion
expressed in Conclus. 2. in the end of that Section, how far doctrines are or
are not damning which subvert the foundation, is laudable, and his reason very
good and clear, (viz. so far as they actually prevail with the will and
practice: Even as our faith is saving as effectual and practical, and not as a
dead opinion, so is error damning.) I think as he does.


593. And 2. God can set that object before a sinner which he is most inclined
to abuse: Which is not to Will his sin: But may proceed from Gods Willing the
Effect. As if Absalom be by Pride and Lust inclined to Adultery, his Fathers
Wives may be in his eye and way. And God may will to punish David by their
passive pollution, without willing his act of sin at all, interior or exterior.

594. 3. And God can remove other objects out of the way, so that this object
shall be solitary, or most obvious to the sinner. As if a drunken man were
resolved to kill the next he met, God can keep Peter, John, etc. out of his
way, and so Judas shall be the next.

595. 4. Yea God can suspend his own intrinsic concurse as to some one sinful
act by which it will follow that it will fall upon another object. Many other
such ways God has, which are unknown to us.

596. And if you suppose a man so inclined to Murder or Adultery as that he
will exercise it on the next most provoking object, if God now did Cause the
Act, as exercised on a forbidden object, compared with another it were to Cause
the sin. But if he only be the moral Cause that he e. g. kill Judas rather than
Peter, this is not to Cause sin: For to choose Judas rather than Peter for the
object, is no sin: For, as I said, God c^^ do it only by removing Peter, and
Willing that he shall be preserved.

597. Suppose a King that has made Laws against Murder forekno^ that a Robber
is waiting in such a Road for a prey, and that a Traitor broke out of Prison
will go that way, and so will be robbed and killed, He may will or desire the
Death of the Traitor as a punishment; He may restra^^ some that would travail
that way before him; and may restrain some that would lay hold on the Robber,
or drive him away, that so this Traitor may be killed: And yet only Permit, and
not Will at all, the Robbers Will or Ac^ as it is Agentis, but punish him for
it, and hate it, and Will only the effect.

598. The next Text cited is, 1 Pet. 2. 8. Whereunto also they were appointed
(viz. to stumble on the rock of offense.) Resp. 1. This has respect to Luke 2.
34. [he is set for the fall of many, etc.] and of Christ's own words, that he
that falls on this stone shall be broken in pieces. And no more can hence be
gathered, but that God has decreed that as a Punishing Judge, 1. He will leave
the rejecters of Christ to go on i^ their own sinful way, 2. And that their
opposition to him shall be the^^ ruin. So that 1. He does not speak this of
any but the rejecters of Christ that deserved it. 2. He speaks not at all as
willing their sin, but only as one that penally denies them further grace. 3.
But the thing that he is said to Ordain them to, is not sin, but Ruin the
consequent of their sin: The word [stumbling and falling] signifying their
destraction.

599. The next Text is, 2 These. 2. God shall send them strong delusions (or the
acting of deceit) that they should believe a lie. Answ. Here is nothing
signified, but 1. That God shall permit Magicians and false Teachers to vent
deceits, 2. And permit wicked men to believe them: which is mentioned as a
permitted consequent, and not as an end intended by God: And the word sending
is used because the permission was Penal for their sin. And his
punishing-providence might morally cause the deceivers rather to go toward
these men than toward others.

600. The next is Romans 1. 24, 26, 28. God gave them up to uncle^^ness, to vile
affections, to a reprobate mind, etc.

Resp. Here is nothing at all said but a Penal desertion and permission, and no
Will or Cause of sin in God.

601. The next is Act. 4. 28. To do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done.

Answ. Here is nothing said of sin at all, but of the effect of it: All that
was done on Christ, even all the effect in passo God fore-determined should be
done: But the Act ut volentis and agentis he neither willed nor caused as on
this forbidden object. And though elsewhere the Doctor deride this answer (that
God decreed Christ should dye, or be sacrificed, and yet decreed not that the
Jews or any one else should do it,) It is a great and necessary truth: He that
willed the effect, and did much himself to cause it, willed not the murderers
sinful act: And permitting and foreseeing it was enough.

602. The next is Isa. 10. 6. and so Amos 16. 17. Prove. 22. 14. 2 Samuel 12. 11.
1 King. 11. 31. and 12. 24. God sends the Assyrian as his rod. Thy Wife shall
commit Adultery, and thy Children fall by the sword.] They that are hated of
God shall fall therein -- ] David was foretold his Wives should be vitiated:
The ten Tribes fell from Rehoboam: It was of God that he took not good counsel:
Pharaohs heart was hardened by God.

Answ. The first is only a Prophecy, and a penal effect of sin, and nothing of
Gods Willing or Causing sin. And so is the second: Though God can send
afflicters by the ways before mentioned, without willing their sin. The third
speaks only of a penal permission of sin. And the rest all speak only of Gods
penal permission of the sin, and his decreeing and foretelling the effects of
it, and his occasioning the sinner to take one sinful object (not as such, but)
rather than another.

603. As the Wind has its natural course, and so has the Water, and the
Miller Causes neither of them, but supposing them, does so set his Mill to
Wind and Water that by the mere receptive qualification of the patient, they
shall fulfill his will, and he is the Cause of the effect, viz. that they turn
his Mill and grind his Corn: so is it easy for God to use men's sins
(permitted) to his ends without willing them Even Vasq. in 1 Tho. q. 23. d. 49.
c. 8. page 758. says that Of men's [non respondere vocationi] God is Causa per
accidens, ut removens prohibens, dum negat auxilium efficax congruum. But this
is but a Controversy about a Logical name [causa per accidens] which Gibieuf
and many others do with as good reason deny to be fitly applicable to God, as
to man's sin.
.

604. Next the Doctor comes with Reasons: And the first is, because Pet.
Alliac. Came. 1. q. 14. A. [Secundum Bradward. and alios qui tenent quod Deus
vult mala culpae, and quod respectu cujuslibet rei habet Velle vel nolle, nec
habet solum non velle; Deus illo modo non permittit mala culpae fieri; sed ideo
secundum hunc modum dicitur permittere, quia non approbat ea, ne^ impedit ea
fieri cum poss^t -- sed secundum Magistrum Deus permittit ea, quia nec vult ea
fieri, nec vult ea non fieri; quia si nollet non fierent, sed solum non vult:
and per consequens non habet actum voluntatis respectu hujus quod est malum
culpae fieri -- ] Says Bonaventure, (that plain and honest Schoolman) li. 1.
dis. 47. dub. 2. Di^^nd^m quod non est sig^um quod De^^ velit illud quod ^^^^
^i^^itur; sed quod velit illud quod ex ^o elicitur.

Alli^co ^^ q. 14. A. 1. Permittit qui. nec pr^cipit, nec ^^^^, nec consulit,
sed indul^^t: and talis Permissio est signum Voluntatis Dei: quia aliquem actum
significat in si^ permittente: and ita Deu^ non permittit mala culpae -- ^^
Permittit fieri quia nec habet Velle, nec habet nolle, sed solum non Velle ut
flat: Et talis Permissio non est signum Divine Voluntatis: quia ^ullum actum
Volendi significat in sic permittente: and isto modo secundum Mag. Deus
permittit mala culpae.


Permission is a sign of Willingness as well as command: And what is permitted
(and that for good) infallibly comes to pass.

Answ. All this is before confuted. If he really hol^ with Bradward. li. 1. c.
33. that God wills all that he permits, why is it denied that he wills
the formale peccati as much as the materiale, seeing he permits it? But his
citation of Bradwardine I think not my self obliged to regard; nor do I consent
any more to that doctrine in Bradwardin^ than in him. See Alliaco before of
Bradward.
It Is false that non impedire efficaciter is a sign that one wills the thing.
The King that only forbids drunkenness or murder by a Law with penalties,
could also lock up or guard some men, and effectually keep them from the sin.
And does he Will it because he does not so? And it is false that all comes to
pass, that is not hindered.

605. His second argument is spoken very plainly and grossly, viz. [Both sides
confess that the substrate act is done, God not only willing it, but effecting
it, v. g. Absalom 's congress with his Fathers Concubines: Yea not only the
congress as an exercised imperate act, but that the Volition of congress, the
internal elicite act, was efficiently and Principally of God: why then should
it be denied that the very evil and deformity of the act was done, God willing
it, though not effecting it, or any way failing of his duty? Especially when
the Malice and Deformity does necessarily follow the substrate act, in respect
of the Creature though not of God.]

Answ. Hobbes could desire little more. But we vehemently deny that the
substrate act is of God as it is morally specified, that is, as it is exercised
on this forbidden object rather than another lawful one ex part eligentis: God
did not as a principal efficient cause Absalom to Will that Congress with his
Fathers Concubines, nor to Act it. The nature of the Wind and Water, and God as
the Cause of Nature, cause the wind and water to act, and to act as they do, on
their own part: But that they turn this wheel and millstone, and run in this
Channel rather than another, is long of the Miller. Absalom's Motus qua motus,
and qua cupido ordinata, was natural from God: but not as acted hic and nunc
toward this object: And the Reception of the Act by that Object supposing his
lust and action, might be morally and penally from God.

606. If you here bring forth the common Medusa's head, and tell me, that It is
injurious to God that his act be determinable by a Creature, and so dependent;
I confidently answer you for God, 1. No man is injurious to himself: And God
did not wrong himself, when by making a Creature with free self-determining
Power, he resolved so far (partially) to suspend his own operation, so as not
to necessitate the will: no more than he wrongeth himself by a Greater
suspension, in making no more Worlds or Creatures.

2. You quite mistake: We do not at all alter or limit Gods Acts or influx, nor
determine it, but terminate it, and determine of that effect which requires
both Causes, God and Man, and cannot be (ordinarily) by one alone, because God
has otherwise appointed. And again I beseech the adversaries to note, How
great and innumerable changes are made in the world, by the various Disposition
of Recipients? The Rose and Vine and Weed and Dunghill, do not at all Change
the Action of the Sun: but their various Reception and cooperation is the
Cause, that its Act has such various effects. And it is the Millers work in
making a various and special Receptivity in his Channel, Wheels, etc. which
causes the variety of effects. And God has enabled men Variously and freely
to Receive his Influx.

607. His third Argument is, God gives not that effectual Grace, without which
he fore-knoweth sin will not be avoided: ergo he is willing that it be done.

Answ. I deny the Consequent: It only follows that he does not Absolutely and
effectually Nill it. If the King have several subjects inclined to eat a
luscious poison; And his Children he effectually keeps from it; one he
locketh up, another he commits to a Keeper, another he keeps the poison
from: But to a Traitor he says, [I once forgave thee, and saved thy life, and
I now command thee that thou avoid this poison, and if thou do not, it will
torment and kill thee; but if thou will take no warning, take what thou gettest
by it.] Can you prove that it is his Will that this man eat the poison
prohibited?

608. Next he cites Augustines threadbare sayings, and blames Aquinas and
Arminius for denying his Authority, and commends the greater reverence of
Bellarmine: And so Anselm, Hugo, etc.

Answ. 1. We stick not on one man's Authority; God holds not his Holiness and
the Church its Religion on Augustines authority. 2. Augustine has ten times
more plain enough for what I hold: See the places cited in Paul. Eiren. Triad.
Patrum. 3. He knew it is like that Estius and many more expound Augustines words
as terminating Gods Volition on his own permission, and not on the sin, or
fieri. 4. I think plainly that Augustine there spoke not of inward Volitions,
but outward Acts, and that not as Agentis but in passo or the effects. And so
it is true, that no murder, theft, treason, or other effect is produced in the
world, but what God positively decrees shall be produced, either by doing some
effects himself (as drowning the world,) or permitting sinners to do them,
while he causes not their act but the Receptivity of the Passum, and so the
effect, etc.

609. Page 194. Retorting on Aquin. he thus argues Because God does will his
own Goodness, therefore it is necessary that God will that sin be done, he
permitting it. For it is not to will his essential Goodness, which needs no
acquisition, but he wills to manifest his Goodness. But the evil of sin is
not opposite to the manifesting of Gods Goodness: Yea nothing is more So Twiss.
contr. Armin. pro Junio page 91. dissenteth from J^niu^ that says peceatum ad
rationem universi facere per accidens, and says Mibi vero dicendum videtur
Peceatum conducibile esse per se ad bonum universi quatenus conducit ad
illustrandos tales divinae majestatis radios -- And if so, it must per se be
Loved of God as Good. Yet contr. Corvin. he says, that No sober man says that
sin is a medium of the execution of Reprobation, but only the Permission of
sin. Reconcile them that can.
conducible to it than this; I say to the manifesting of Gods Goodness by way
of mercy in sparing or by way of Justice in punishing.

Answ. Horresco recitans, 1. Gods Volition of his Essential Goodness is his
Necessary Volition. 2. God has no End to acquire, but always has his end,
and is never without it. 3. If God had necessarily willed the particular way of
manifesting his Goodness, then he does all things necessarily, and could do no
otherwise, and it seems by you could not manifest it without sin. 4. Does he
not manifest his Goodness as much to the Innumerable Glorious Angels, who never
sinned? And would it not have been as much manifested to us if we had been as
they? 5. The very indetermination of the will, and its mediate Liberty is not
the highest excellency of his Creatures: It is better than the sensitive
Necessity of Bruits, and lower than the confirmed Necessity of the blessed: It
is our defectibility. And the excellentest or Best of his works most honor
Gods Goodness. 6. Is it not the strongest temptation that men have in this
world to doubt of or dishonor the Goodness of God, to think how he permits
the world to be drowned in wickedness, and be so like to hell? 7. Does not
Christ turn the Prayers of all Christians against your doctrine, viz. that Gods
name may be hallowed, his Kingdom come, and his will done on earth as it is in
Heaven (which is not by any sin?) 8. Do not your words tempt men to be
indifferent to sin, if not to love it, if nothing be more conducible to honor
Gods Goodness? 9. Is not that conclusion a great wrong to Christ, Scripture,
Ministry and Holiness, as being no more conducible to manifest Gods Goodness
than sin is? 10. It is not true that sin is any Cause, or true Means at all of
glorifying God or doing any good. It is but a presupposed Evil, by delivering
us from which God is glorified. As your eating poison may occasion the honor
of an Antidote and Physicion: It is no Cause or proper medium of it, but only
an occasion, and mischief sine quo non; But if God had not saved us from sin
committed, he could have glorified himself in saving us from committing it: God
loves and is glorified most in that which is most like him as his Image, which
is, the Holiest sinless soul. To be a medium to Gods glory is to be good: To be
as conducible to it as any thing, is to be as good as any thing save God and
his glory. But sin has no Good, much less such good. Why else does not God
equally delight in sin, and in the death of the wicked, as in holiness,
repentance and our life? seeing all things are for himself, and that which
glorifieth him most, is best. 11. Here also confusion causes mischief: one
distinction might have scattered this mist, viz. Between sin indeed and sin in
notion. Sin indeed, or essence and existence never did good nor honored God.
Sin in notion or in esse objectivo is no sin, but the Matter of Virtue and 80
Joh. a Combis compend. Theol. l. 3. c. 1. tells us that sin is profitable three
ways, 1. Ut been ordinatur, ut fur in patibulo. 2. Propter co-actionem, and
amaritudinem. 3. Propter mall considerationem: And many popular Books say the
like: But this is but abusive language tending to deceive: As if sin did good,
because punishing sin, and repenting of it, and hating it do good: As if hating
sin were sin. Thus unhappily is the world troubled by abused words.
Holiness, and does much good. When you say God knows sin from eternity,
you will say with Scotus, that in esse cognito sin was in God from Eternity: But
so sin is not sin. David says, My sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51. And we
daily Repent of it, and confess it: But this is but to have the Idea or
conception of it in the mind, and so it is not sin indeed but the notion of it,
which is in esse objectivo. Else it would defile us to think of it, and repent
of it; whereas thus sin objectively is the matter of the grace and duty of
Repentance, Hatred, fear, watchfulness, prayer, confession, etc. And so sin in
esse objectivo as a grace may glorify God.

610. To Aquin. that says Malum non est appetibile he says, that Malum moris
quod opponitur bono, est proprium uniuscujusque; meum malum bono meo -- Though
the sin of a man willing that which is forbidden him be his sin, -- yet it
follows not that God may not will this Evil of another: The Reason is,
because it is not forbidden to God to will it: wherefore though it be evil and
dishonest in man to will it to whom it is forbidden, yet not to God -- And
seeing that Moral Evil or sin is sum conducibile, chiefly or most conducible
to make way to represent Gods Goodness, this abundantly suffices to prove it
desirable to God -- We say that this evil which we affirm to be willed of God,
is not at all evil as it is objected to the will of God, but as to the will of
the creature, being forbidden the creature, but not forbidden God.

Answ. Shall we preach thus to the people? Will this Doctrine convert souls to
repentance or faith in Christ? 1. The question is not, Whether to will sin be
sin in God? But Whether he will and cause the sin of man? which you sadly
assert.

2. Gods Glory is our End, and to forbear things prohibited is but the means:
If sin conduce as much as Christ and Holiness to Gods Glory, why may we not
desire it sub ratione medii, though not as praeceptum? We must desire that
which is most conducible to Gods Glory.

3. Though God be under no Law, his Perfection of Nature and Will is the
fountain of all Laws, and instead of a Law to him. And we must be Holy because
our God is Holy.

4. It is still false that sin is any Medium to Gods Glory, or desirable, or
has any good.

5. God is Good and delights to do good. And he is the Just Ruler Of which
vid. Gibieus at la^ge.
of the World: And I would not have Kings take such Justice for a pattern as
you describe, as if God vehemently forbad sin, and sent his Son, and Spirit,
and Ministers as an Army against it into the World, and will da^^ men for it
for ever, and yet wills and causes it, as sum conducibils August. de Not.
and Great. c. 25. fol. 314. Non hoc eis dicimus quod sibi iste (Pelagius)
opposuit, ut esset Causa Misericordiae Dei, necessarium fuisse peccatum: Utinam
non fuisset miseria, ne ista esset misericordia necessaria. Id. ibid. cap. 31.
Et altius Dei consilium fateor me ignorare, cur etiam ipsam superbiam, quae in
re^^e factis animo insidiatur humano, non cito Deus sanet, pro qua sananda illi
piae animae cum lacrymis and magnis gemitibus supplicant, ut ad ^am superandam
and quodammodo calcandam and obterendam dextram conantibus porrigat. Even
Vasquez the Jesuit says of Gods denying men grace, and of non-entities that
God wills them, thus [Non-esse alicujus rei secundum se quat^nus malum
quoddam ipsius rei est, non placet Deo -- Sed sub alia ratione placere potest;
nec enim in eo est omnis ratio mali. Nam in non-esse alicujus rei, potest
comparatione ad reliquum universum, vel ad justitiam vel ad poten^iam D^ialiqua
ratio boni apparere, ob qua^ non tantum potest placere Deo, simplici
complacentia, sed etiam efficaci volunta^^, qua discernat rem illam non facere:
Similiter cum Deus alicui negat gratiam suam au^ gloriam non placet ut malu^
quoddam ips^^s est, ^ Quia sicut non disp^^cet persona, sic nec malum illius ut
il^ius est placet ^^ sed placet sub alio respect^, sub quo etiam non potest non
placere: qui^ scili^^t o^tenditur in eo potentia Dei, miser^cordia in elcctos,
etc.] By this he will teach men to say so of sin: But 1. He confesses that
this controversy is not of any thing real in God; (as if he had distinct real
acts); but only of the extrinsecal denomination of Gods Essence. 2. He can give
no reason why the malum poenae of a ^reature as such may not ^e willed of God,
as much as nonentity, though not finally for it self. 3. Nonentity has not
omnem rationem mali, but it is enough that it has nullam rationem boni. 4. It
is the imperfect conception of man that takes Nothing to be any way Good. A
n^gatione subjecti ad negationem modi valet argument^m: Non-entities are no
true modes of the Universe. It is improper to say that Gods Power, Wisdom or
Mercy is glorified by any nothing or nonentity: It is by some being that God
is glorified. 5. It Is a contradiction to say Voluntate efficaci vult aliquid
non esse: How is that efficax quae nihil efficit? -- But God does efficaciously
hinder many inclined agents to act according to their inclination. And that
impedition may be a Positive act. So disp. 95. c. 9. he says that the end of
Gods Permitting sin, is oftendere divitias gratiae suae and liberalitatem qu^
usus fuit erga praedestinat^s: denegans congruas vocationes reprobis, ostendit
praedestinatis, easdem vocati^nes, quibu^ fu^runt ad gloriam praeparati, grat^^
omnino ipsis fuisse donatas. But 1. Man's act comparing himself with another is
quid reale, and v^lltum a Deo: And the proposition [that the other has no
grace] is quid reale, or ^ns rationi^. But nothing declares nothing. ^. If
Gods will be his simple essence, only diversely denominated from effects and
objects, how can nothing denominate it but as non-efficient or not-willing?
Indeed it might denominate a Nolition existentiae, if an Act of Gods were
necessary to hinder existence; but not where non-efficere is enough.

Antonine better says, l. 1.. 17. (...), etc. Ut, quantum ad Deos attinet ac
suggestiones, adjutationes, inspirationes ab ipsis profectas, nihil obstet
omnino quo minus juxta naturae praescriptum confestim vivam, nisi ipse tandem
in culpa sim, qui Deorum submonitiones, and tantum non claras praeceptiones,
neutiquam observem.

I marvel the Doctor insisteth not on his own great Reason, viz. Futurity is
eternal, and therefore has an eternal cause, which is God: And he that wills
the futurity of sin, wills the sin, that is, that sin shall be. This seems
stronger than all the rest, if the antecedent were true: And so he might prove
that the futurity of the very form of sin is God: For nothing is eternal but
God: But the futurity of the form of sin (according to these men) is eternal
(or ab aetern^): Ergo it is God. But says excellent Le Blank de Concord. lib.
cum decret. 1. n. 55, 56. Praesertim nullo modo probare possum quod Gu. Twis^us
pluribus locis asserit, Decretum Dei and ejus Voluntatem esse solam and unicam
Causam futuritionis cujuslibet eventus: e. g. inobedientiae Adami, etc. At
inquit doctus ille vir, Futuritionis quae ab aeterno fuit, nulla Causa dari
potest quae ab aeterno non fuit. Resp. Hoc supponit futuritionem esse aliquid
reale a re ipsa distinctum, and quod causam aliam habeat quam res ipsa futura:
At hoc falsissimum: Nam futuritio nil aliud est quam respectus quidam rationis
and extrin^eca denominatio rei futurae -- Recte ponitur arg^mentum, Ab aeterno
nihil fuit praet^r Deum: Ac pro^^de futuriti^ quae ab aeterno fuisse dicitur
vel nihil reale fuit, vel fuit ipse Deus. -- Quod est Causa cur res in tempore
existat, idem plane Causa est cur res ab aeterno extitura fuerit. Sicut quod
Causa est quod res aliquando fuit, Causa est cur in aeternum dicetur praeterita
-- Ad effectum futurum sufficit Causa futura, sicut ad praeteritum sufficit
Causa praeterita -- This is plain and easy truth.


to his Ends, and says [It is not evil to me, though it be to you. I Will
^^^ment you for doing it, though it was by my Will and predetermination.] And
what Justice should Kings rather imitate than Gods?

6. Sin is not malum Deo so as to Hurt him, or make him Guilty: But it is, so
as to be a Violation of his Laws, and a contempt and dishonor to his Wisdom,
Goodness, Greatness, Authority, Justice, Mercy, Truth, etc. If all the World
joined in hating and blaspheming God that made them, though you say, that this
is not malum Dei, but malum nostri, and therefore God may will it ut fiat as a
desirable thing, we cannot be content with such confusion. Malum is either
Physicum vel morale; and either in aliquo or contra aliquem. God is not capable
1. Of Physical Evil in himself, and therefore we cannot hurt him; 2. Nor of
Moral Evil, and therefore he can have no sin or malignity. 3. But he is capable
objectively of Injury; we can wrong him when we cannot hurt him. 4. And we are
capable of being Reputative vel moraliter Hurters and destroyers of God, whom
we cannot hurt: Because the sinner does it quantum in se; and therefore is
called an Enemy to God. It is no thanks to the wicked that there is a God, who
would have none (as to his Holiness and Justice) if it were in his power.

Moreover, God is Good and does good. And though he made Man freely, yet
supposing that he will make him Man (a Rational free agent in his Image to Know
and Love him)* it necessarily follows that he must make him Holy. God cannot
make a man in the Image of the Devil, and call it his own: As Parents generate
Children in their own likeness, so God does regenerate his own in his Image: He
that thought it a good argument, [What Communion has light with darkness,
Christ with Belial, etc.] would sure have taken our part in this, that God
cannot be the Author or Cause of the Image of the Devil, and of the works of
darkness.

611. Therefore where he adds, that God Wills Malum esse that sin be, as
the Matter of exercising his mercy and justice, not as his sin, but tantum vult
fieri malum alterius, I deny it with horror as a reproach of Gods holiness. The
terminus a quo is not the Materia misericordia vel justitiae exercendae. God
wills the glory of his Mercy and Justice, in pardoning and punishing foreseen
presupposed sin: But he wills not the sin, but only our deliverance from it,
or punishment for it. Suppose (per impossible) that the King had power to
restrain all men from offending him, and yet says, [I will do only what is
Congruous to the Rational free nature of my subjects as such, and not all that
I can do, and therefore will restrain them only by Laws, except some few
beloved ones; but I will honor my Mercy and Justice on offenders.] Can you
hence prove, that he wills, decrees or loves ut appetibilia all the
Treasons, Rebellions, Murders and Blasphemies that are committed? It is not
these that he wills ut Materiam, but deliverance from these as from the malum
a quo. If your prodigal Son be addicted to Robbing, and you could lock him up,
but you resolve that you will try him once more, and if he ro^ you will let him
suffer imprisonment and come to the Gallows, and then beg his Pardon, that
suffering may hereafter be his warning; Here if you choose rightly it is not
his Robbing that you will, no not ut sit vel fiat (for you had rather he would
forbear:) But only his forsaking it, and his suffering to that end, on
supposition that he rob again.

612. Page 105. He says that [By the same reason as God might not will the
being of sin, by his permission, he might not permit it.]

Answ. A raw unproved assertion: God might not make an Indifferent free will,
left to its own liberty, with a thousand warnings and helps against sin, unless
he may also Desire them to sin. Prove this, else you say nothing.

613. He adds that sin be or exist is not only Bonum per accidens, because
God will make it the matter of glorifying his mercy and justice; but it is ex
natura sua quoddam ordinabile ad Gloriam Dei, and consequenter Bonum est ex
natura sua in genere conducibilis --

Answ. All unproved and false. 1. Sin is not so much as Bonum per accidens. 2.
God does not make it the Matter of glorifying himself, but only glorifyeth his
Mercy and Justice against it as the terminus a quo, and not by it as the
matter, though it may be called an Occasion sine qua non, as to this particular
act and way of his said glorification. 3. Much less is it conducible hereto,
which implies a Medium that has some natural or moral causality. 4. And least
of all is it ex sua natura conducibile. It is not sin, but 1. Some effects or
consequents of sin, 2. Our deliverance from sin, and the punishing of sin,
which are conducible to Gods glory.

614. Next he insulteth over Aquinas twice, as unhappy and vain in his
censures, with a Magna est Veritas and praevalebit: laborare potest, vinci non
potest: And argues that because ex permissione infallibiliter sequitur
peccatum, therefore to permit sin is the same as to will that sin shall be ipso
permittente.

Answ. 1. It Is pity that sin should have so good an Advocate, and Gods Holiness
so good an Adversary, through mistake. And that so unhappy a Cause should be
managed so confidently and triumphantly, though it is well that it is done so
weakly. 2. The falsehood of his assertion about permission as general I have
opened before. 1. Three sorts of things may be said to be Not hindered (which
is all that Permission signifies.) 1. Things bent to a certain motion, 1. By
Natural inclination (as a Stone in the Air to descend) 2. Or by Moral
Vitiosity, as the Will of a wicked man. 2. Things merely indifferent; (1.
Naturally, as some think the Air is to motion: 2. Morally: as suppose a Will
such, to Good or Evil.) 3. Things averse to that Motion (as 1. Naturally a
Stone to ascend, 2. Morally, as the will of an Angel or Saint to hate God, or
the will of a wicked man to Love him.) Also you must distinguish between
Not-hindering at all, and not hindering effectually.

And so it is clear, 1. That in the first case, the Motion will be if it be not
hindered. But that it is not caused by not-hindering it, but by its proper
moving causes. In the second case the consequence of futurity is false: And
where the inclinations to good and evil (that is, to superior and inferior
prohibited good) are equal; yea, though antecedently somewhat unequal: Yet bare
permission ascertaineth not futurity. 3. Much less in the third case; where the
soul must have positive help or provocation. Sure he did not think that all or
any ungodly men would infallibly Love God, if God did but Permit them.

But Gods Permitting or not hindering sin may respect diverse acts. 1. I^ God
continue not his natural support, man will be no man, but be a^^^^lated, and so
will neither do good nor evil. 2. If God uphold man's nature, in its Integrity
as it was in Adam, and give him not Moral means and helps of Grace, and his
natural concurse, Adams sin would have necessarily followed. 3. If God give
Adam both such support and means to stand, and do no more, Gods permission
would not have inferred the certainty of Adams sin, when he fell, any more than
before: For God withdrew no grace from him which was necessary to his standing.
4. I^ God give a lapsed sinful man Nature and common grace, it follows not
necessarily because God does no more, that he will commit every sin that he is
not further hindered from: but it is certain that he will not do the works to
which special grace is necessary. 5. If God give to the faithful the Holy
Spirit, and continue his influx necessary to the continuation of the Power and
Habits of holy actions, with necessary means, and do no more, this man will do
some good and some evil, and though he may be equally said to be Permitted to
do this sin as another, yet he may do one and not another. 6. God totally
permits no man to sin, but hinders them many ways, though he hinder not
all alike. 7. It Is possible for two men to have equal helps to duty and equal
hindrances to sin (or the same man at several times,) and yet for one to do
the duty and forbear the sin, and the other to commit the sin and omit the
duty; As many Schoolmen have copiously proved. Yet in this case Permission
would be the same thing to both.

But if you use the word [Permission] as connoting the Event, then indeed you
may say that the event (from another cause) will follow. And Gods
non-impedition will ab eventu actionis be extrinsecally denominated Permission
in the one case and not in the other. But this is but from your arbitrary use
of the word.

615. Next the Doctor assaulteth Durandus who thus argues, Gods will follows
only his approving Knowledge. But he knows not sin approvingly; being of
purer eyes, etc. He answers, 1. God approves that sin be, though he approve
not sin. 2. God wills the manifestation of his mercy and justice: Ergo, he
wills the existence of sin as that which is necessarily required to it.

To which I reply, 1. The first answer is unproved and false. God approves not
that sin be. If he did, few wicked men do more, as Esti^s says: For it is not
sin as sin or evil that they will, but that it be for other ends which seem
good. 2. He phraseth it with his [ad qu^d necessario, etc.] as if God first
willed this manifestation of his Justice, etc. as the end, and then sins
existence as the means (yea, the necessary means): But this is false, as I have
fully showed. 1. And his own opinion should confute it, that makes one Decree
only de mediis: And this particular Manifestation being some Acts of God, and
not God himself, ^or the Complacency of his Will, must needs be part of the
media ad finem ^^timum. 2. And indeed sins existence is not a necessary means
willed for ^ods glory: but it is a presupposed mischief, our Deliverance from
which ^^ punishment for it, is willed for his glory: It is indeed necessary,
but ^^ly necessitate existentiae in esse praecognito as a foreseen evil, and so
pre^pposed to those acts of God which are the Means of his glory.

Therefore his assertion of a Notitia approbationis rei tanquam Bonae in ^nere
Conducibilis, etsi non honesti, is detestable.

616. Ibid. p. 196. He again says, that Though it be dishonest in the ^eature
to sin, because forbidden, it is not dishonest in God to will that he ^^ it by
his permission, it being unice conducibile to his glory -- ^nsw. 1. Fie upon
this conducibile and unice too. 2. Fie upon this often ^peated [permittente non
efficiente;] It is utterly lusory or immodest: ^or a man that maintains that
no sinner does any thing in sinning, but that God as the first total cause
predetermined his will to, even as to all ^e entity in act and circumstances
imaginable; and that in all omissions, ^ was a natural Impossibility to have
done one omitted act without this ^edetermining premotion: And for the man that
in the next says that ^alum non est Objectum Volentis aut facientis, but ipsa
effectio rei, I ^y for this man yet to say, that the creature effects sin,
and God effects ^ not, is too too gross. The common evasion is, that sin is
not any ^^ing, and therefore not effectible: But why then do they say, that the
^eature effects it? when they have said and defended, that the crea^re does
nothing but what God does, and what he unavoidably makes ^^m do.

617. Durandus argues, that Sin cannot be judged convenient by a ^^ght
understanding: Ergo, not by God. The Doctor answers, That ^es own sin cannot
be judged convenient, but another may. He in^anceth 1. When a man wills that
an Usurer lend him money on usury: ^ When a Christian Prince wills a Turk to
swear to a League by Ma^^met: 3. When God willed that Absalom should defile his
Fathers Concu^nes. And he adds, that for us to sin, is contrary to our right
rea^^n, because it is forbidden and hurtful to us: But for God to will that ^e
sin, is not contrary to his right reason, as not forbidden or hurtful ^ him.

Repl. 1. No man should will unlawful usury: He that wills to Bor^^w, though
he cannot have it without usury, does not will the usury, ^ut the money
non-obstante usura. As he that chooses to travel with Blasphemer, rather than
to go alone in danger, he does not will his ^lasphemy, but his company, non
obstante blasphemia. 2. The same is to ^e said of swearing by Mahomet: It is
only the Oath as an Oath that is ^^ be willed, and not as by Mahomet; that is
not willed but unwillingly ^^dured. 3. Absaloms instance is answered before:
God willed only ^avids punishment, and the Passive Constupration as an effect
of sin, ^n a foresight of Absaloms active Volition and sin, and not as willing
^is at all.

And we have hitherto thought that Gods holy Wisdom and will is the Cause of
his holy Law, and much more against sin than man's is: And that God wills not,
and causes not the sin of man: And is it now come to ^his, that sin is
contrary indeed to our right reason, but not to Gods, because ^e is no subject:
You may next say, that Holiness is meet for man, but not ^or God.

618. Page 197. Again he is at it, Bonum esse ut sint mala: Quia bonum est ut
Deus finem sibi praefixum assequatur: At hoc sine intervent^ mali and peccati
nullo modo potest.

Repl. 1. It is not per peccatum ut medium, though not sine peccat^. 2.
Interventus therefore implies a falsehood. For in esse cognito sin is
antecedent or presupposed to the way of glorifying Justice and Mercy upon
sinners; sinners are the object: And consequently you must take it (as before
proved) for antecedent to the Volition or simultaneous.

619. He urges, Oportet haereses esse, ut qui probati sunt manifesti fiant.

Answ. That neither means that men ought to be Heretics, nor yet that God
loves, wills or approves that there be heresies: But only 1. God decrees
to manifest the difference between the sound Christians and the rest: 2. And he
foreseeth that there will be heresies. 3. Therefore he decrees to try them by
the occasion of those heresies which he foreseeth (and hates.) The same is the
case of all trial by persecutions: And God wills not the sin of active
per^ecution, but only the effect or passive part. So that the oportet (by your
own confession of it) signifies no more than a Logical necessitas
consequentiae, which ^oreknowledge without Volition will infer.

620. He adds [Obj. It suffices that God permit sin, (and not will it) Resp.
But either the existency of sin infallibly follows the Permission of it, or
not: If not, Gods Intention may be frustrate: If yea, What matter is it,
whether God will that sin shall be, he permitting, or s^ permit it as that
infallibly it will be? so we obtain either of these, it is all one to our cause
of predestination.]

Repl. 1. If it be all one, take up with that agreement; and make ^^ further
difference with them that grant you enough. 2. In case of ve^^ment Inclination
to a sin, it would follow upon Gods total permission: (but God never totally
permits sin.) But in other cases, it will not follow: that is, It is not a
good consequence, that This or that sin will be done, because God does no more
to hinder it, than that which sometime hinders it not. And yet Gods Intention
is not frustrate: For ^^ will infallibly come to pass, from its proper cause,
which God foreknoweth: And the consequence is good from his foreknowledge. And
is not that all one, as to the certainty of Gods intentions? 3. You phrase it
as if sin followed Gods permission, as a deficient cause, or as that which
cannot be otherwise, unless God do more to hinder it, and so we^^ necessary
thence necessitate consequentis (or as others call it necessitate ^^tecedente)
which is false, and often denied by your self. 4. The very truth is, Permission
is a word of so great ambiguity and laxity, as relating to so many sorts of
Impedition, that it is but delusory with^^ much distinguishing, to say sin will
or will not follow it. If you restra^ it to a non efficaciter impedire, as is
usual, it takes not away the amb^guity much. For still the question is, What
must make it effectual, unless you call any impedition effectual merely ab
eventu, whatsoever it be ^^ it self.

621. He says that the Universe would not be perfect, if there were perfect
holiness and no sin, and so no pardon or punishment. But ^^ gives us no proof,
but confident assertion, at all. I need not say, the It would be more perfect
if there were no sin; It suffices me to say, tha^ It would be as perfect: And
so that it is not Necessary to the World perfection, that there be sin or Hell.
God could have freely willed the contrary. And Gods Goodness could have been as
fully manifested if i^ had so pleased him, and his Holiness too, without sin or
Hell. It Is unpleasing to me, that this good man pleads so hard against a
necessity of Christ's satisfaction for sin, (in another digression) and yet
pleads as hard for a necessity of sin; As if it were more necessary to Gods
Glory than Christ.

622. It is very observable in all this controversy, that he asserteth page
198. [That it is past all controversy, that neither God, nor the most sinful
creature, do will any thing, but as Good. And that no man can be instigated to
malice (or evil) but only to the Act which is evil; because he that is
instigated, is instigated to do something. But to the evil of an act, no
efficiency is necessary, but deficience only.] How far this is true or false, I
have opened before. I here only note, that he confesses that he that causes
the Act of sin, (which he says God does more than man) causes all that is
causable.

623. Yet p. 199. he says, Sin is of man only as the cause, when he professes
that man does nothing but what God does to cause it (yea, as the first total
cause) and that as to Deficiency, man can do no more than he does without
predetermination, which if God withhold, man can no more help it, than make a
World. So that all the mystery of his language is this; that because man is
under a Law, and God is not, therefore man doing the same act as moved by God,
must be called the only cause of sin, because it is no sin in God. But, if we
spoke as plain men ought to do, should it not rather be thus expressed by you
[God is the chief cause of sin in man, but not in himself?]

624. Page 200, and 201. he has the same over and over again, that Non
abhorret a recta ratione Dei velle peccatum fieri ab hominibus -- Quod ex se
habet quod conducibile est ad ^onum tanquam Materia scilicet, non tantum
idonea, sed and necessaria exercendae divinae justitiae and misericordiae: and
that this manifestation conjunct with sin is Deo multo appetibilius, than that
Good which sin depriveth us of (that is, Holiness:) Because this Holiness is
only the Creatures Good, and the other is the Creators Good. Answ. But as the
assertion is all false, so the reason is vain: For if he distinguish the
Creator and Creature as subjects, he is quite mistaken: For both is the
Creatures good, and neither the Creators: For to manifest Justice and Mercy is
not Gods Essence as in it self, but his Work of Punishment and Mercy. And the
glory of this, is but the resplendent excellency of it as it is the appearance
or Image of God. And all this is in the Creatures Holiness: The Holiness of
Christ's Humane Nature, and of Angels and Saints in Heaven is as much the
Creators, as is his Works of Mercy and Justice; And Gods glory shines as much
in them: And it is the glory of his Goodness, if not of Mercy which preventeth
sin and misery: yea, and of Mercy too: For though mercy relate to misery, it is
as well to possible misery prevented, as to existe^^ misery removed: And if he
speak not of Subjects, but Proprietors, the Bo^um Creaturae is also Creatoris.

SECT. XIX. The same doctrine in Rutherford de providentia confuted.
625. I Have been too long in confuting this Digression of Dr. Twisse which is
contrary to the commonest doctrine of Protestants; and The sum of their
opinion.
I think sounds not well in Christians ears: The sum of which is this:
[Neither God nor Devil do will sin as it is evil; but God is the first willer
of its existence, because it is in its own nature sum and unice conducibile
to the manifestation of his Justice and mercy: And willing and Loving being all
one in God, he thus singularly Loves the existence of sin, above its contrary
(holiness) for this end: And by Predetermining premotion (which he much more
largely writes for elsewhere) he causes as the first total Cause all that man
Causes; But it is sin in man because forbidden him, but not in God, because
not forbidden him; And therefore God is not to be said to cause sin (though he
cause all that is caused) but to permit it, because he causes it not in
himself; nor is he to be called a Deficient cause of our omissions, because he
is not bound to Actuate us; but man is to be called the efficient and deficient
cause, because he is under an obliging Law, Though God made that Law: And
though he can no more than a stone act without physical predetermination, nor
forbear acting when so acted, yet he is to be called free, because he is
actually willing (or his will does act) and because he is predetermined by none
but God.] This is the true sense of their opinion as opened by themselves. I
shall now briefly consider what Rutherford says to the same sense.

626. Cap. 15. page 186. To Annatus charging Twisse as denying Gods permission
of sin, because he makes him the Nec omnino negari potest Voluntatem Dei esse
Causam rerum omnium quas fieri velit. Twiss. recitante etiam Rutherf. de Prove.
c. 15. p. 186.

See all their Reasons for Gods causing sin, or willing its existence answered
by Ruiz de Vol. Dei disp. 26. p. 262, 263, 264, 265.

As also against Gods predetermining to the immediate materiale peccati: disp.
27. p. 270, etc. disp. 28, and 29, and 30, etc. usque ad p. 580.

As to the common saying that God wills not sin as sin; all men will confess
(Dr. Twiss. often) that neither does a wicked man do so. Peccans ut sic non
intendit peccatum quoad illud quod est formale in peccato, seu carentiam
conformitatis; sed intendit actum ut est in genere moris, inquit Aureolus in 2.
d. 42. a. 3. page 319.

I will not conceal a more difficult argument than most of theirs, which may
occurr to others: God caused (e. g. in Nathana^l, Peter, etc.) this act of
says before Christ's coming; [the Messiah is to come hereafter.] When Christ
was come, this was false, and so evil: God still caused the faith which he gave
them. Therefore he caused an untrue belief and evil, and that supernaturally.
But I answ. 1. God caused the habit of their faith, and the act. The nature of
the habit was in general A belief of all divine revelations: and in special A
belief in the promised Messiah. The termination of the act on the Messiah as
future rather than as Incarnate, required nothing positive in the Habit: The
same Habit served to both acts, unless the latter being for the nobler act had
some addition; but the former needed none. 2. And that this Habit might bring
forth the act in that circumstance, no more was necessary but 1. Gods word
[Christus venturus est.] 2. And Gods influx on the habited faculty to cause it
to act according to that habit: So that when God had reversed that word
[Christus venturus est] he was no longer the cause determining the mind to
believe that word; but only the cause that the habit of faith was still toward
Christ: But not at all sub ratione venturi. For the determining word was called
in, and it was an imperfection not to know so much, where it was not a sin.


Cause of the Act, the Liberty and the Prohibition, and to Cause is not to
Permit; he has no better answer than to say, that God does not permit the Act,
nor the Evil of the Act, but he permits the evil act: and 2. To say that the
Dominicans and Jesuits hold the same as he. Which is to jest with holy things,
and not to argue. As if he said, God made neither the soul nor the body, and
yet he made the man. What! is it (as it is said, that non animased unio est
vita) so Does God permit the Union of Actum and Mal^m? No, that he pretends
not.

627. To prove that God wills the existence of sin, he brings the instance
of Joseph's case, Genesis 45. To which I say that the text says not at all that
God willed the Will or Act or Sin of Joseph's brethren; but only the Venditio
passiva or effect and the consequents; Nay only the consequents are mentioned
in the Texts: His replies to the answers prove no more than the five things
which I before asserted about sin. Nothing so much deceives them, as not
distinguishing between the sinful act, and the effect or passion, when they are
called by the same name (as Selling, Killing, etc.)

628. His next instance is of Christ's death, of which I said enough before: But
1. He understands his adversaries as ascribing only the Consequents of
Crucifixion to Gods will; which is his mistake: It is Crucifixion it self
passive sumpta which they ascribe to it (some of them at least.) And let men
too wise against God deride it as much as they will, God can will and Love that
Christ be Crucified, and yet hate and not will the will and act of the
Crucifiers, but only foresee it, as aforesaid. And let them jeer God as Idle or
asleep, if he neither will nor effectually nill the sin; we will believe it to
be his perfection and liberty, which they so deride. 2. And whereas he adds
that Active Verbs are used as Genesis 45. Misit me Deus, Isa. 53. Deus voluit eum
conterere, Zech. 13. Ego percutiam Pastorem: and God delivered Christ to death:
I answer, It is too too gross to persuade us hence that any of these Texts say
that God wills the sinners will or Act. [God sent me] speaks Gods act, that
is, his disposal of the effects and consequents of them: But does this
signify, [God willed your malice or your act?] God did bruise Christ; which
signifies that he was a concause of his death: but not that he willed or
Caused the Jews to will or act his death. And so of the rest.

629. The rest of his instances are such as I have answered before, or as the
former answers fully invalidate; And therefore I will not weary my self and the
Reader with them.

630. Cap. 18. p. 230. he asserteth, that [Sin is a Medium to Gods Glory, and
that not per accidens but per se. Because sin by how much the worse it is in
genere mali inhonesti, by so much the better and fitter means it is, in genere
boni utilis and conducibilis to Gods glory, etc.] All which I have before
confuted: and think not his defense of it worth repeating.

631. Many assertions he has cap. 18. which all depend on the false
supposition that Sin is a medium per se of Gods glory, and the unproved
supposition that God positively wills the Permission of it (which is
nothing:) whence he infers that God Intends it in this and that order, and
much other vanity. And still they confound sin in esse reali which is no
medium, with sin in esse objectivo which may be a part of holiness, and no sin
at all.

632. Cap. 19. he argues, God uses men and devils in the very act of sinning
as his instruments, viz. to punish, to try, to humble, etc. ergo, he wills
the event that they sin.

Resp. Here is deceitful ambiguity in the words [instruments] and [useth.]
Properly an Instrument is an efficient cause moved by the principal to an
effect above its proper virtue. And so a sinner in and by the Act of sinning is
no Instrument of God. For God moves him not to that Act as specified or
circumstantiated so as is prohibited; And being not at all so moved by him (as
David to murder Urias, and to vitiate his Wife) he is not properly thus his
Instrument. But sometimes the word Instrument signifies a presupposed Agent,
whose Action another can improve to his own ends: As the wind and water are
improperly called the Millers Instruments of turning his Mill; and the spring
and poise are the Clock-makers Instruments of moving his Clock or Watch; and a
Mastiff Dog is my Instrument to keep away Thieves; and a Greyhound is my
Instrument to kill a Hare, and a Ferret to catch a Rabbet, and a Hawke to catch
a Partridge, etc. And yet we cause not at all the Nature or Motion of the Wind,
or Water (but we can hinder the Water,) nor the nisus of the spring, nor the
gravitation of the poise (but set the recipients so as that the effect shall be
done as we would have it:) nor cause we the fierceness of the Mastiff, the
inclination or motion of the greyhound, ferret, hawk, etc. but only tie them up
and let them loose as our ends require. But zeal makes some men deride that
God should be said to be no more the cause of sinning; and they cannot allow
him the skill of every dull Artificer, or at least a will to use it, without
willing and causing the thing which he forbids.

2. And the word [using] signifies, sometime using by motion, as I do my pen;
and sometime by ordination, and adjoining some concause, or fitting the
receptivity of the patient to the effect as aforesaid; as we use; wind, water,
dogs, hawks: Thus only sinners by sinning are Gods used instruments: supposing
his natural concurse and support.

And they are not his Instruments thus neither in the same sense as these
creatures are ours: For their fierceness, craft, inclination, action, is good,
and we do and may will it for our ends: But sin is not good; And therefore God
wills not it at all, but only the consequent of it, or effect: And that
Effect is not Good, as it is the effect of sin, but as God sets in, and
causes the same effect which a sinner causes (as in generation per concubitum
illicitum.) But when God wills and causes the effect, and foreseeth and
permits the sinful Volition and act, which concurreth to that effect, such a
sin is improperly called his used instrument or medium, but properly is none.

633. To Gibieuf and others saying that God acts not by sin as an instrument,
and wills it not, but the effects; he answers that It Is absurd, because the
sin it self is castigatory, and has such like effects; and therefore God need
not will that effect as after it. But all this is from the fore-noted
confusion: It is not only the distant effect, but the very immediate effect,
which is the Act it self ut recipitur in passo, which God sometime is said to
Will. As he willed that Jobs Cattle were taken away, and that Christ were
killed, and that Malchus ear be cut off, and that Paul be scourged, and
smitten on the mouth, and that the Apostles were often imprisoned, etc. And yet
God only foreseeth but wills not that will and act of the agent, which he
forbids.

634. And here note, that when the name of the Effect or Passion connoteth the
sinfulness of the Act, then it is less meet to say that God wills it: As to
say that he wills that we be persecuted, murdered, slandered, belyed, etc.
But if any will so speak, they must mean only the Passion, as distinct from the
action: And then the difference is but in nudo loquendi.

635. To those that object that thus he makes God the chief author of sin, the
effect being more to be ascribed to the Principal Cause than to the instrument,
he first ill-applyeth some frivolous distinctions, and instanceth thus: [The
hangman as the Judges instrument hangs a man in malice or revenge: Ergo, the
Judge much more, in revenge: Non sequitur.] Putting in Revenge which is but a
Cause, as if it had been the Effect, which was in question.

And thus [The Sword that kills a man is not culpable: ergo, nor the striker:
Non sequitur.] As if the question had been of the Negation of an effect, and
not of the position of it.

And thus [If two servants role a stone, one being commanded and one forbidden,
one being father to the other; The Son (forbidden) roleth it unlawfully: ergo,
the father (commanded) much more: non sequitur.] Resp. 1. As if the act of the
Father and the Son were the same act, because the effect is the same, which is
notoriously false: unless de specie. 2. Whose Instrument do you suppose the Son
to be? If the Fathers, it is because the Father commanded him contrary to the
Master; And if so, the argument is good: The Sons act was a fault who obeyed:
ergo, the fathers more who commanded him: saving that commanding makes another
no necessary Instrument, because he can disobey: But Gods premotion is supposed
by you unavoidably to predetermine us.

636. But page 255. he gives the true answer, that the consequence holds,
not of a metaphorical improper Instrument, who has somewhat of his own which
he has not from the principal agent, yea such have somewhat of Principal
Causality, and somewhat mixed of their own which they have not of God, besides
the nature of a pure instrument: such are sinners to God. Therefore it holds
not, that the horse halteth: ergo, the rider halteth (no nor causes it.) Thus
insciously he unsaith what laboriously he writes a Book to prove: and the very
same that I say. The Rider does not cause the halting as it is halting at all;
but only as it is Motion in genere: so does God by sinful acts: That they are
exercised on the forbidden object rather than another, is not at all of God,
but that they are Actions in genere is of God.

637. So p. 256. he well says that the fault of the pen is not to be ascribed
to the Writer, nor the effect as from that fault; nor of the Saw to the Sawyer;
And so of the Sabeans robbing Job: And he asserteth, p. 257. that Diabolus and
Impii homines sunt causae principales in actu peccandi. And what need we more?
Remember then that sin is an effect, and has a Cause, and to make man a
Principal Cause in actu peccandi is not to deifie him: And he says p. 256.
that if God were the moral impeller as a principal agent, he were the principal
cause of sin. But if you mean by moral impulse, only commanding it, let others
judge whether Physical premotion be not much more than command: And whether I
cause not my pen to write, though I command it not: And quoad terminum, to
impel a man physically to moral acts, is moral impulse.

638. But the plausiblest argument is Cap. 20. p. 261. viz. God wills sin as
it is a Punishment of sin: Vid. Aureol. in 2. d. 37. p. 300, 301. showing six
ways how sin is a punishment of sin, without God's willing the sin: But if we
make it sin, he will make it be a punishment.
ergo he wills that the sin come to pass or be. And indeed Augustine says
much contr. Julian. to assert Gods willing of sin as a Punishment of sin. But I
answer this, 1. Even these men themselves often say that God wills not the
formale peccati, but the materiale: And forma dat nomen: ergo he wills not
sin as a punishment, in proper sense.

2. Sin it self (though denied by many Arminians) is verily a Punishment, and
more to the Sinner himself than to any other. Gab. Bid in 2. d. 36. concludes,
1. Omne peccatum est poena. 2. Non omnis culpa est peccati alterius poena (viz.
non prima.) 3. Omne peccatum posterius poena est prioris, and causa (nisi
ultimum fuerit) posterioris. And Bonavent. there cited by him shows how sin
brings poenam damni and sensus. And he shows there how each sin is its own
punishment, the formale peccati being first, and the formale poena next in the
same act: And how the latter sin is the punishment of the former, as being an
effect of it; For when we have cast away the Intention of the right end, there
is nothing sufficient to hinder more sin. Biel. ib. In a word, God antecedently
so formed nature, that if we will sin, that sin shall be our misery, and as a
voluntary self-wounding, cause our pain, and let out our blood and life.
And it is the most difficult part of the question, how God makes sin a
Punishment to the sinner himself; which yet I have plainly opened before, and
here repeat it. To be sin or disobedience and to be Punishment are no absolute
entities, but are two Relations of one and the same Act; but not as referred to
one and the same correlate. God is not at all the Cause of the Act which is
sinful, in its forbidden mode and circumstances (as Claudicatio equi before
said) but only in genere actus, or hujus actus when two sins are compared: But
that the Act when done is sin and is punishment, God is the Cause of both: That
is, he makes man's nature first, and in that and by revelation, his Law: by
which he first makes man's duty, and tells him what shall be sin if he do it:
And next he does by his threatening tell him, that this sin it self shall be the
sinners own misery if he do it: As if (as aforesaid) God first made man of such
a nature as that poison would torment him ex natura rei: And then commands
him to avoid it; And then threatens that it shall torment and kill him if he
eat it. Here now God makes the Man and the Law: God makes not the Act of sin
as modified or oblique, or as that circumstantiated act. But when the act is
caused by Man, God by his Law causes two Relations to result, first that of
sin, and then that of punishment. So that man first causes the sinful act, and
then that it is quid prohibitum, and quid poenale result from Gods Will and Law
made before.

Now if God cause not that sin which is a punishment to our selves, he causes
not that which is a punishment to others; And yet supposing it, he makes it a
punishment to us and them, on several accounts.

639. But though God cause not the sin, yet when he has before in his Law
threatened to withhold his grace and spirit if we sin, without which grace and
spirit we will sin, If God now for former sin do deny us, or withhold that
grace or help which we need to keep us out of it, he is morally and improperly
said to cause that sin as a punishment, because that penally he refuses or
forbeareth to save us from it, and so permits it (as is said.)

640. The Arminians grossly err, if he cite them justly, Remonst. in Script.
Synod. art. 1. p. 202. saying that God may predetermine and pre-ordain the
obstinate and rebellious to sin by his penal judgment, and yet those sins are
not be reckoned to them for sins, nor increase their guilt: unless the word
[sin] be used equivocally: For to have sin and no sin, are contraries. Whether
God determine Idiots and Madmen to those acts which would be sin in others, as
he does Bruits, I leave to others.

641. I am weary of pursuing this ungrateful dispute. As to his controversy Q.
Whether things be good because God wills them? or he will them because they
are good?
against Camero cap. 22. Whether God will Justice and holiness because it is
good, or whether it be good because God wills it? It troubles me to read
bitter and tedious disputes about that which one easy distinction puts past
all controversy. Of things ad extra Gods will is first the efficient, and then
the ultimate end, as is often said: Gods will as efficient gives first the Being
and then the Order to all things: or else they could never be what they are.
All created Justice and Holiness is such, that is, Good (for Goodness is their
essence) because Gods efficient will made them so: And then Gods final will
takes complacency in them or Loves them because they are so. But if they talk
of Goodness or Justice, etc. as it is in God, there is in him no effect and so
no cause of himself or any thing in himself.

642. But some things God makes moral duties by the very work of Creation, and
Ordination of the World, without any other Law: And these are called Duties by
the Law of Nature, because the very Natura rerum is a Law, that is, a
signification of Gods will constituting man's duty. It is man's essence to be an
Intellectual-free-agent; It is impossible that such an agent Created of God
should not be Gods Creature, and Gods own, and dispositively a Moral governable
agent, and that he should not owe God all that he is and has and can do, and
that God should not have the Jus Dominii and Imperii over him, and Jus ad
summum ejus Amorem Deus non posset obligare nos ad hoc quod teneatur sibi non
obedire: Quaero enim an tenetur obedire, an non? si sic, habetur propositum:
quia tenetur and non tenetur, quod est impossible -- Consequentia patet, Quia
teneri non obedire, est teneri ad aliquid. Pet. de Alliaco 1. q. 14. T.

Yet after he thinks it possible for God to have made a Reasonable creature
not obliged; As if his very nature were not obligatory: His instance of the Mad
is vain; for they are not actually Reasonable.

Ockam presumptuously concludes that God could command a man to hate God and
make it meritorious, it being no contradiction: His follower Greg. Arim.
confuteth him; And Cameracensis invalidateth the confutation, and leaves it
doubtful. But it is a contradiction to be a man, and not obliged by Nature to
Love God; And a contradiction to be bound by nature to Love him, and yet stante
natura bound to hate him: And a contradiction to hate God and be good or happy.


It is a contradiction to be a Created Man, and not Gods Own, and his obliged
Subject and Beneficiary. Therefore it is a contradiction that submission,
obedience and Love should not be his Moral duty and good, and that
self-alienation, rebellion, or disobedience and hatred should be no sins.

643. To dispute then (as he does with Camero and his followers) Whether it be
good ex natura rei, or by Gods mere free will? is a strange dispute, and of
most easy resolution. Either they speak of Gods creating will, or of some
other subsequent Volition. Man is made man by Gods free creating will: And the
foresaid Relations, and duties are made such by making him Man. And the duties
of Love and Justice to others are made such by his Creators placing him in a
world where his Neighbors are about him, who are due objects; as a part of the
society, This he himself confesses page 329, 330.
like a Wheel in a Clock: The Creators will is before Nature, and therefore
before natural duty, as the Cause before the effect. God could have made beasts
instead of men, who had owed him no more than beasts can do. But from the
Nature of a Man coexistent with God, his said duties to God so necessarily
result, that it could not be otherwise; nor did there need any subsequent act
of Gods will to make that duty.

644. But those that are not Duties by Nature, must have moreover a Vid.
Durand. 1. d. 38. qi 4. n. 9, 10, 11. Scot. 3. d. 37. q. 1. Gabr. 3. d. 37. a.
2. Suarez de Legib. l. 2. c. 15. Aquin. 1, 2. q. 94. a. 5. and q. 100. a. 4.
further act of Gods will as signified to make them so; As the Mosaical
Ceremonies, our Sacraments, etc.

645. And many Natural Laws and duties are mutable, toward one another,
because the very Nature and Natural Location or Order of the Things from which
they did result, are mutable; And a word of God can make a change: when yet
before such antecedent mutation, the duty must be duty still.

646. As to Mr. Rutherfords often saying that Omnis actus entitativus simplex est
moraliter de se indifferens, neque bonus neque malus; And then that per actum
simplicem he means such as include not the object, It is ludicrous or vain
talk. There is no such Act as has not an object, any more than physical form
without matter. Quicunque movet, aliquid movet; Quicunque intelligit, aut vult,
aliquid intelligit aut vult, (vel seipsum vel aliud.) An Act without its object
is but a partial or inadequate Generical conceptus of that Act which has an
object; or an abstract partial notion of an act. Why then does he talk of that
which is not? Had he said that every act is in the first instant rationis, or
abstract-partial conception, an Act in genere, before it be intelligible as
this or that act, about this or that object, he had spoken intelligibly as
other men do.

647. Such another question many called Arminians much use, Whether Whether
Justice etc. be eternally good or have rationem boni aeternam?
Justice etc. be eternally good? Or An dentur rations boni and mali aeternae
and indispensabiles? which needs no other solution than this last. There is no
such thing as an Universal, existent per se and not in some Individual: And so
no such thing as Love, Justice, etc. Bonum, Malum, which is not alicujus
Justitia, Bonum, etc. There was no Creature from Eternity being Just or unjust,
good or bad. But Gods perfect Nature But that Gods own eternal perfection has
in it that root of humane virtue (truth, justice, etc.) which therefore
analogically have the same name (our holiness being Gods Image) I would prove
to the Reader by this weighty reason: Because else we have no certainty that
Gods word is true: For all our certainty is hence, that God cannot lie. But if
Veracity be not in God, we cannot prove that. And if he have not that which is
eminenter Justice, mercy, etc. how can we prove that he has Veracity?
might be called Eternally Just, in that he must necessarily be Just, if he had
been a governor: And necessarily was Just, when he freely became a governor.
And also this proposition was Eternally true, (if there were eternally
propositions) [Si Homines existerent, Justitia in ipsis debita foret: and
quandocunque Homines fuerint, Justitia in ipsis debita fuerit.] But when all
the sense of these questions is no more, but what Duties are natural, and what
superadded (called Positive,) and what natural duties are immutable and what
mutable, it is an unhappiness that the world must be troubled with such uncouth
forms of speech as make the question unintelligible, till unravelled.

648. As to Rutherfords charge of Camero and his followers in France,
Amyraldus, etc. with Semipelagianism and Arminianism and filthy opinions, it is
but the effect of the good man's overweening, and conceitedness of his own
apprehensions, which must be allowed or endured in most of these contenders;
And the fruits of such disputes is like to be little better. But the worthy
praises of Blondel, Dallaeus, Placeus, Capellus, Amyraldus, Testardus, etc.
shall survive such reproach. And a thousand pitties it is, to read a good man
Voluminously proving God to be a Willer of sins existence, and a
prime-predetermining Cause of all prohibited Volitions and acts, and
reproaching the Jesuits, Lutherans, Arminians and Socinians as the great
enemies of Gods Providence for denying this; As if he would tempt the World to
think that Socinians were in the right, and that Jesuits, Lutherans and
Arminians were the only defenders of the Holiness of God, whilst Calvinists
made him the Lover of all the sin in the World, as the most appetible
conducible Medium to his Glory.

649. But (to proceed) his next Argument is, cap. 23. Sin conferreth something
to the splendour, ornament, and plenitude of the Universe: E^go, See Bonavent.
well confuting this in 1. d. 46. q. 3. Malum fieri nullatenus bonum esse, sed
been occasio boni.
God wills its existence: This is answered before. The antecedent is utterly
unproved. Sin adds nothing to the ornament or perfection of the World. His
word is no proof.

650. Afterward he heapeth up many frivolous arguments against that which he
calls reproachingly, The Idle Permission of sin; and says, that it
frustrateth the prayers of the Saints, and their patience, their gratitude,
trust, hope, fear, joy, allows the arrogance of the persecuters, fights
with Gods Wisdom, Clemency, Justice, Providence, with the Ministry of the Word,
the Promises, Threatenings, with Ministers confirming ^^^ against sufferings,
and it is blasphemously injurious to God, and contrary to the order of things
in the world, that he should permit sin, and not will the being of it.

Resp. What is it that a man, yea, a pious man in a blind zeal of God and
self-conceit, may not pour out confident words for? What a case is the poor
Church in, when the unlearned people must be on both sides charged by their
Teachers with blasphemy, what way ever they go? This man will tell them that
they are Page 370.
blasphemous, and overthrow all reason and Religion, if they say that God only
Permits sin, and does not himself will the being of it, and move unavoidably
all wills, and tongues, and hands, to all the blasphemies, persecutions, and
murders that are done, and damn men for it when he has done. And others will
as confide^^ly say that he is a Blasphemer, for charging God to be much more
the cause of all forbidden acts of wickedness than Devils and men are, and the^
damning them for it, and for putting God into the shape of the Devil, and
painting him odious to humane nature, that man may not love him: What shall
poor people think when they are thus torn and tormented by their holy Guides?
But all his arguments are before answered, when I showed him how many ways God
has to secure the Effects and Events in the world, and attain all his Ends,
and yet only Permit, and neither Will, nor Love, nor Cause the sin.

651. Cap. 26. he comes to plead for Predetermination, and says p. 385. God
predetermineth us (to the Act of hating God) in linea me^^ physica, and non
morali. Mere delusory words. He makes it by the Law of Nature a sin to hate
him, and then he makes men hate him ^^ linea physica and non morali! as if the
moral sinfulness resulted not from the Law and act; that is, here from Nature
it self, viz. of the Man and act, both which God made.

652. Page 386. he says, that [Directa and expressa and efficax Dei V^litio,
qua Vult ut sit seu fiat actus Dei odii, non facit Deum Malitia q^^ I confess
Gab. Biel in 2. d. 37. speaks too like these several atheological assertions:
as do many others.
per accidens sequitur actum, authorem.] Resp. But that per accidens is no
reason of the denial, if God cause that accident also, as the first cause. If
he make a Law, and make the forbidden act, the relation of sinfulness is an
Accident indeed, but arises from the said fundamentum so necessarily that it
cannot be otherwise. But it should have made a holy Divine to tremble to have
said, that God directly, expressly and effectually wills men's Act of hating
God, viz. that it exist or be.

653. And it is false that he says, that God is equally the Cause that men
hate him, if he will the Act hypothetically, ineffectually and determi^ably by
another will, as if he willed it efficaciously. And so when he makes the
Doctrine of Universal Concurse and Causation, as guilty as ^is predetermining
pre-motion. As if God could not make man a free-^iller and agent, and as the
spring of Nature, enable him and concur ^o his Act as an Act, in genere,
without causing it to terminate on the forbidden object in specie. As if it
were impossible for the Sun to be ^n universal cause of the stinking of a
Dunghill and Weed, without being ^he special: or as if God must be made the
cause of every blasphemy, unless ^e will make the blasphemer speechless, and of
every villainy, unless he will strike men dead to prevent it. This is not
reverent and holy judging of the most holy God the Judge of all.

654. The sum of all his Vindication of God from being the chief Author of all
sin (page 387. and passim) is but this one reason, God is under no Law. But if
this be all, why do you not speak out what you mean, but hold that which you
dare not name, viz. [That God is the chief So Bannes in 1. q. 23. ^. 3. p. 270,
271. Voluntas hominis mal^ est quia exercet actum odii Dei sine regula
rationis, immo contra legem Dei; Deus autem bona vol untate vult fieri illum
actum, permittens defectum Caus^ secund^ in ipso, ut inde aliquod majus bonum
faciat: which is true of the act in genere, but not as it is Odium Dei. For so
if he will it and cause it, he does more than permit: and the defectus Causae
secundae is that very odium as against God. And does God cause the greatest sin
that he may do good by it? He can do as much good without causing the evil.
^nsuperable cause of all the sin of Devils and men for which he damneth them,
and that both as to the matter and form; but yet thus to do is no sin in God
himself, because he is under no Law.] This is your most ^lain undoubted sense,
or else your Book is nonsense; What need we then any further enquiry what you
hold? It is delusion to pretend that you are accused for making God a sinner.
We charge no such thing on you: But only for making him the chief insuperable
cause of all the sins of men and Devils.

655. Page 400. he plainly professes that the Will as a physical agent is the
cause of the act as physical, and as under a Law, and that act is against the
Law, so he is the cause of the Malitia actus, and culpablo. So that God causing
by his own confession both Act and Law, there is no modest subtersuge left for
his not openly professing that he asserteth God to be the cause of all sin, the
principal cause, both as to matter and form.

656. The rest of that Disputation strikes me with such horror in the reading,
that I confess I have not the patience to proceed any further ^n it, nor shall
further thus exercise my Readers patience. The case is plain. Either Hobbs, or
Free Will permitted, must carry the cause in the case of sin: There is no
middle way. He that will read Ruiz and Rutherfords answer impartially, needs
no more of mine for the confutation of his vain responses.

657. But cap. 29. p. 484. he falls also on our most Learned and Judicious
Dr. Field, because in his lib. 3. c. 3. of the Church he contradicts his
opinion; and it must move just indignation in the Reader that he adds [idque
probare conatur contra reformatas Ecclesias.] Unworthy injury to the Reformed
Churches, more than to the worthy Dr. Field! How falsely are they interessed in
your unhappy cause! See the Synod of Dort, where there is not a word for it. Is
one Twiss with his Rutherford, or Maccovius, or a few such, the Reformed
Churches? Let the Reader peruse the Articles of the Churches of England,
Scotland, France, and all the rest, and see where he can find your Doctrine of
Predetermination unto sin. Even Jansenius himself is against it among the
Papists, when his Dominican Predecessors are the Fathers of it. Nothing more
common with English Divines than (as you did before your self) to explicate
Gods causing the acts of sinners, by the similitude of the Riders spurring a
halting Horse, or the Suns making a Dunghill stink; which only speak the cause
which we call universal, and is the very thing which we assert. And it is most
unsavourily done, to get into the Chair and magisterially say [Fieldus vir
alioqui doctus, in his controversiis minime se versat^^ esse prodit -- and
Zumelem Zumel in Disp. 1. Thom. de Voluntat. hom. and lib. arb. page 219, 220.
Quod D^^s non sit causa peccati, though he speak cautesously and as in other
men's names, yet concludes plainly, that God is but the Causa Universalis of
sin, and that man is the specifying determining cause, even que universalem
determinat ad speciem concursus and actus ipsius, sive solum determinet eam
formaliter ad speciem, etc. Yet this is a high Thomist and defender of absolute
grace.
non satis intelligit, quippe non satis g^^rus controversiarum Arminianarum,
and scripsit dum aulam Armini^^ plus aequo faventem haberent. Thus
magisterially did good Dr. Twisse censure Junius and Vossius (his Son-in-law)
as men unskilled in Scholastic Divinity, who were both most excellent men, and
hit upon the reconciling truth, above most in their age. Junius his Discourse
of predetermination is one of the first that ever I found that excellency in,
and with his Irenicon is most worthy of great esteem.
] But how easy is it for a man to overvalue himself, and contemn another? I
highly value the piety in Mr. ^^therfords Letters. I am no fit arbiter
ingeniorum: But when I hear other men say that one Field was more Judicious
than many Rutherfords, I c^^fess by reading their several writings I find no
temptation to deny it; And why should Field and consequently Davenant, Usher,
Carlton, M^ton, Hall, the Synod of Dort, and I think the far greatest part of
Protestants (I verily think fifty if not an hundred for one) who are against
you, be made odious by the supposition of being not far enough from Arminians,
rather than Maceovius, Twisse and Rutherford take it for a disgrace, to hold
the same opinions against Gods Holiness, which the D^^nican Friars hold, who
have been the bloody Masters of the Inquisition, and murdered so many thousand
Protestants or Waldenses and Alligenses?

And that which he says of Fields writing when the Court favored Arminianism,
is notoriously false, and such insinuations unworthy of so good a man as the
speaker. Fields Works were printed singly before they were printed together in
Folio. And his fifth Book was printed A^no 1610. and the words cited are in the
third printed before. And the Synod of Dort was called An. 1618. and sat 1619.
also; And King James was a zealous suppressor of Arminianism, and sent five or
six Divines thither to that end. And long after in King Charles his days, Pet.
Heylin in the life of Archbishop Laud will tell you, that the Armini^^ Bishops
then were but five, Neale, Laud, Buckeridge, Corbet and Hows^^, to whom Learned
Montague was after added: So that they durst not trust their Cause with a
Convocation. Field then shall be a most Judicion worthy Divine, when partiality
has said its worst.

658. And what is his error? Why he says that it is a contradiction to say that
God causes the Act (in all its state,) which is the Material^ peccati, and
causes not the formale, which is inseparable. A foul error indeed, to tell you
that he that causes the subjectum, fundament^^, rationem fundandi and terminum
causes the relation; and that he that makes an European white and an African
black causes the dissimilit^de, and so does he that makes the straight Rule
and the crooked line, the forbidding Law, and the forbidden act.

659. Were it not that the necessity requires such work, because such Books
are in men's hands, I should think I had injured the Reader, by th^^ much: For
my work is not to confute Books, but to assert sure reconciling truths.
Otherwise the confutation of the rest of that Book (for Gods willing and
causing all forbidden acts in their full state, and the existence of sin) is
most easily answered.

SECT. XX. The old Reconciling Doctrine of Augustine, Prosper and Fulgentius.
And first Prosper ad Gallorum Qu.
660. IT is a strange thing to me that when Pelagius, Julian, Faustus, etc.
thought Augustine a Novelist, and (as Usher asserteth) would have fastened the
title of Predestination-Hereticks on his followers, and almost all confess,
that Augustine was, if not the first, yet the most notable public Vindicator
of absolute Predestination and Grace, yet the Judgment of Austin, with his
Disciples Prosper and Fulgentius, does not serve turn to quiet, if not to end
these controversies, among those who profess to be their followers! when as
they have so copiously and plainly written upon the case!

661. I entreat the Reader that is inclining to any extremes, but to read ^over
first those short answers of Prosper ad Capitul^ Gallorum and ad Objectiones
Vincent. And most of the Sententiae de Capit. I shall think it worthy my labor
to recite, to force them on the Readers observation, and let him see the
highest old Doctrine of Gods Decrees.

Sent. 1. Whoever says, that by Gods Predestination, as by fatal necessity,
men compelled into sins, are constrained to death, is not a Catholic. For Gods
Predestination does by no means make men bad, nor is the cause of any man's sin.

Sent. sup. 2. He that says, that the Grace of Baptism received does not take
away Original sin from them that are not predestined to life, is not a
Catholic. For the Sacrament of Baptism, by which all sins He means that
those that sincerely covenanted with God in Baptism, were truly pardoned,
though he thought some of them fell away and perished.
are blotted out, is true even in them who will not remain in the truth, and
for them that are not predestined unto life.

Sent. sup. 3. He that says, that they that are not predestined to life,
though they were in Christ regenerated by Baptism, and have lived piously and
justly, it profitteth them nothing, but they are so long reserved till they
fall to ruin, and they are not taken out of this life till this happen to
them, as if the ruin of such men were to be referred to Gods constitution, is
not a Catholic. For God does not therefore prolong the time of any man's age,
that by long living he should fall to ruin; and in his long living, fall from
the right ^aith: seeing long life is to be numbered with the gifts of God, by
which a man should be better and not worse.

Sent. sup. 4. He that says, that all are not called to Grace, if he speak of
such as Christ is not declared to, is not to be reprehended --

Sent. sup. 5. He that says, that they that are called, are not equally
called, but some that they might believe, and some that they might not believe,
as if to any man the Vocation were the cause of his not believing, says not
right. For though faith be not but by Gods Gift, and Man's Will, yet Infidelity
is by man's will alone.

Sent. 6. He that says, that Pree-will in Man is Nothing, but it is Gods
predestination which works in men, whether it be to good or to evil, is not a
Catholic: For Gods Grace does not abolish man's choice (or free will) but
perfecteth it; and revoketh and reduces it into the way from error, that that
which was bad by its own liberty, may by the operation of Gods Spirit be made
right. And Gods predestination is always in Good; which knows how either to
pardon with the praise of mercy, or punish with the praise of Justice, the sin
which is committed by man's will alone.

Sent. 7. He that says, that God for this cause gives not Perseverance to
some of his Children whom he regenerated in Christ, to whom he gave faith, hope
and Love, because by Gods foreknowledge and predestination they were not
differenced from the mass of perdition: If he mean that God endowed these men
in Goodness, but would not have them remain in it, and that he was the cause of
their t^rning away, he judges contrary to the Justice of God. For though Gods
Omnipotence could have given the grace of standing to them that will fall, yet
his grace does not first forsake them, before they have forsaken it. And
because he foresaw that they would do this by a Voluntary desertion, therefore
he had them not in the Election of Predestination.

Sent. 8. He that says, that God would not have all men saved; but a certain
number that are predestinate, speaks hardlier of the altitude of Gods
unsearchable grace, than he should speak; Who would have all men to be saved,
and to come to the acknowledgement of the truth; and fulfilleth the purpose of
his will on them, whom being foreknown he predestined, and being predestinate
he called, being called he justified, and being justified he glorified. Losing
nothing of the fullness of the Gentiles, and of all the seed of Israel, for whom
the eternal Kingdom was prepared in Christ before the foundation of the World.
For all the World, is chosen out of all the World; And out of all men, all men
are adopted -- So that they that are saved are therefore saved, because God
would have them saved: and they that perish, do perish because they deserve to
perish.

Sent. 9. He that says, that our Savior was not Crucified for the Redemption
of the whole World, looks not to the Virtue of the Sacrament (that is,
Sacrifice) but to the part (or participation) of the unbelievers: When as the
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the Price of the whole World. From which
Price they are Aliens who being either delighted in their Captivity, will not
be redeemed; or when they are redeemed return again to the same Captivity: For
the Word of the Lord falls not, nor is the redemption of the World evacuated:
For though the World in the vessels of wrath knew not God, yet the World in the
vessels of mercy knew him. Which God without their preceding Merits, took out
of the power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of the Son of his
Love.

Sent. 10. He that says, that God substracteth from some the preaching of the
Gospel, lest perceiving the preaching of the Gospel they should be saved, may
decline the envy of the objection by the pa^^onage of our Savior himself, who
would not work Miracles with some, that he says would have believed had they
seen them: And he forbad his Apostles to preach to some people; and now
suffers some Nations to live without his Grace --

Sent. 11. He that says, that God by his Power compels men to sin, is
deservedly reprehended: For God, who is the Author of Justice and Goodness, and
all whose Statutes and Commands are against sin, is not to be thought to
compel any to sin, and precipitate them from innocence into crimes: But if
there be any of so profound impiety, as that they are reckoned to be beyond the
remedy of correction, they receive not an increase of their iniquity from God,
but are made ^^^^ by themselves: because they deserved to be left of God, and
given up to themselves and to deceivers, for their former sins: that so their
sin should be a punishment of their sin.

Sent. 12. He that says, that obedience is withdrawn from some that are called
and live piously and righteously, that they may cease to obey, does think ill
of Gods Goodness and Justice, as seeming to constrain the godly to ungodliness,
and to take away good men's innocence from them; When as He is the Giver and
Keeper of godliness and innocence: He therefore that adhereth to God, is acted
by the Spirit of God; but he that departs from God, does fall from his
obedience (or cease it) by his own will.

Sent. 13. He that says, that some men are not made by God to this end that
they might obtain eternal life, but that they might be the ornaments of their
times, and for the good of others, would speak better if he said, that God who
is the Creator of all men, makes not them in vain, who he foreseeth will not
be partakers of life eternal: Because even in bad men, nature is Gods good
work, and Justice in their damnation is laudable. But he cannot well be blamed
that says, that even by the condition of such the World is adorned But not by
their sin i^ self.
, and that those that hurt themselves by their own iniquity, are born for the
good of others: For the multitude of the ungodly though innumerable is not
disgraceful (or a deformity) to the World, or unprofitable to the Kingdom of
God, seeing that by their propagation comes the generation that is to be
regenerate; and by tolerating and loving them, Gods people become the more
illustrious. --

Sent. 14. He that says, that they that believe not the preaching of the
Gospel, are unbelievers by Gods predestination, and that God so decreed, that
they that believe not be unbelievers by his appointment (or decree) is not a
Catholic: For as Faith which works by Love is Gods gift, so unbelief is none
of Gods constitution: Because God knows how to ordain Punishment for sin, but
not sin it self. And it follows not, that what he remitteth not, he
commits: The predestinate therefore lives by the faith which is given him:
The non-predestinate perish by Voluntary and not constrained infidelity.

Sent. 15. He that says, that Foreknowledge is the same with predestination,
doubtless in our good works, conjoyneth (or mixeth) those two: For what we have
of Gods gift, and is said to be foreknown, must needs be predestinate: And what
is said to be predestinate, must needs be foreknown. But in our evil works,
only the foreknowledge of God must be understood. Because as he foreknew and
predestined, the things which he does himself, and gives us to do: so he
FOREKNEW ONLY and DID NOT PREDESTINATE the things which he neither does
himself, nor requires us to do.

SECT. XXI. Prosper 's answers ad Object. Vincent.
662. I Will crave the Readers patience while I add the sum of hi^ Answers
also to some of the Objections of Vincentius.

Obj. 1. That Christ died not for all --

Resp. His death is a remedy in it self sufficient to profit all; but if it be
not taken it will not heal.

Obj. 2. That God would not have all saved, though they would.

Resp. We must sincerely believe and profess that God would have all saved: --
That many perish, is by the merit of them that perish: That many are saved, is
the gift of him that saved them. For that the guilty are damned is Gods
inculpable justice; that the guilty are justified is Gods unspeakable grace.

Obj. 3. That God made most of mankind that they might perish for ever.

Resp. God is the Creator of all men; but No man is made by him that he might
perish: For the cause of being born is one, and the cause of perishing is
another. That men are born is Gods gift; that they perish, is the sinners
desert: He makes men, that they may be men --

Obj. 4. That the most of men are made of God, not to do Gods will, but the
Devils.

Resp. It is madness, and against reason to say that it is by Gods will that
Gods will is not done: and that the damner of the Devil and his servants would
have the Devil served. --

Obj. 5. That God is the author of our sin, in that he makes men's wills evil,
and makes a substance which by natural motion cannot but sin.

Resp. This objection they make because we hold original sin and misery -- But
we hold that whatever is of Nature is of God, and none of that which is
contrary to Nature. But sin is contrary to nature, from whence comes death,
and all that is of death: -- God is the author of no man's sin, but the Creator
of his Nature, which voluntarily sinned, when it had Power not to sin; and by
his own will man subjected himself to the deceiver. And it is not by Natural
but by Captive Motion that he lives in sin, till he die to sin, and live to
God; which without grace he cannot do.

Obj. 6. That God makes in men such a will as is in Devils, that of its own
motion can and will do nothing but evil.

Resp. The whole world lies in wickedness -- But even very bad men may be
reconciled, and Devils cannot. -- And God put not evil affections in men.

Obj. 7. That it is Gods will that a great part of Christians neither will nor
can be saved.

Resp. If you speak of them who forsaking the Godliness of a Christian
conversation and faith, do irrevocably pass over into profane errors and
damnable manners, it is doubtless that having such a will, they will not be
saved; and as long as they will not be saved, they cannot be saved. But it is
by no means to be believed that such men fell into this desperate case by the
will of God, when rather God lifts up all that fall -- For no man is raised
or established but by his Grace. It is therefore Gods will that they continue
in a good will; And he forsakes no man before that man forsake him, and
converteth many that do forsake him.

Obj. 8. That God will not have all Catholics to persevere in the Catholic
faith, but will have a great part of them to apostatize from it.

Resp. The same answer serves to this blasphemy as to the former.

Obj. 9. That God would have a great part of the Saints to fall from the
purpose of holiness. The Reader must note that their common opinion then was
that some true Saints do fall away* and perish.


Resp. This madness also needs no other answer.

Obj. 10. That Adulteries and corrupting consecrate Virgins do come to pass
because God predestined them to fall.

Resp. It is a detestable and abominable opinion, which believes God to be the
author of any man's evil will or evil action: whose predestination (or decree)
is never without Goodness and Justice That is, [of nothing but good and just.]
. For all the ways of God are mercy and truth: Adulteries and Corruptions of
Virgins God knows not how to institute, but to damn; not to dispose That is,
ut sint*
, but to punish. Which evils when men commit, they serve their own lusts --
Gods predestination neither exciteth, persuades or impelleth the fall,
malignity, or lusts of sinners; but plainly predestinateth his own Judgment,
by which he will reward every one according to what he has done, whether good
or evil: which Judgment would never be, if men sinned by the will of God. But
be it will: And every man whom the discerning of Gods knowledge shall set at
his left hand, shall be damned, because he executed not Gods will, but his own.

Obj. 11. When incest is committed between Fathers and their Daughters, Mothers
and their Sons, it is therefore done, because so God fore-decreed that it
should be done (or come to pass.)

Resp. Let the Dominicans not^* this.
If it were objected to the Devil himself, that he is the author and incenter
of such villainies, I think that with some reason he might discharge himself of
the envy, and overcome the committer of such wickedness by his own willing of
them. Because though he be delighted with the madness of sinners, he can yet
prove that he forced them not to sin. With what folly and madness then is that
ascribed to God, which may not be wholly ascribed to the Devil, who is but the
adjutor of the baits of sin, and not the Causer (Generater) of the Will? God
then fore-decreed not that any such businesses should be done, nor prepared
that soul to any such end, who will live wickedly and filthily. But he was not
ignorant that it would be such, and he fore-knew that he would justly judge of
such. So that to his foredecree nothing else can be referred, but either 1.
That which belongs to the due retribution of Justice, 2. Or to the not due
bestowing of grace.

Obj. 12. That by Gods fore-decree men are made of Children of God to be
Children of the Devil; and of Temples of the Holy Ghost, the Temples of Devils;
and of members of Christ, members of a Harlot.

Resp. Gods Predestination, though to us while we are in the perils of this
life it be uncertain, with him is unchangeable -- But those of whom it is said,
They went out from us because they were not of us -- did willingly go out, and
willingly fall away. And because they were foreknown to be such as would fall
away, they were not predestinate. But they had been Predestined, if they had
been such as would have returned, and remained in holiness and truth, So that
Gods fore-decree is to many a cause of standing, and to none a cause of falling.

Obj. 13. That all those faithful and Saints who are fore-decreed to eternal
death, when they return to their vomit, seem indeed to do it by their own vice:
but the cause of that vice is the fore-decree of God; which secretly
withdraws from them good wills.

Resp. -- Indeed to all that relapse from faith to infidelity, from Holiness to
filthiness, and are not purged by emendation before the end of their lives,
nothing but eternal death is due: But it is wickedness to ascribe the cause of
such ruins to God: who though he foreknow by his eternal knowledge, what
reward he will give to every man's deserts, yet this his Impossibility of being
deceived, does not bring into any man either a necessity or a will Note this
you that are for his first predetermining all forbidden Volitions and acts.
of sinning. If therefore any man fall from Godliness, he is carried headlong
by his own will; he is drawn by his own concupiscence; he is deceived by his
own persuasion. There the Father does nothing; the Son does nothing; the Holy
Ghost does nothing: nor does any thing of the will of God intervene in such a
business; by whose help we know many are kept from falling, but none impelled
to fall.

Obj. 14. That this great part of Christian faithful Catholics and Saints who
are fore-decreed to ruin and perdition, if they beg of God perseverance in
Holiness, shall not obtain it, Because Gods decree cannot be changed, by which
he foreordained, prepared and fitted them to fall away,

Resp. To the breach of the Law, to the neglect of Religion, to the corrupting
of discipline, to the forsaking of the faith, to the perpetrating of any sin
whatever, there is no predestination (or fore-decree) of God at all. Nor can it
be that men should fall into such evils by him, by whom men rise out of such.
If therefore men live in holiness, if they profit in virtue, if they remain in
good studies, it is the manifest gift of God, without whom the fruit of no good
work is acquired. But if men fall away from these, and pass over to vice and
sin, God there sends them no evil temptation, nor does he forsake him that
will fall away, before he be forsaken by him. And for the most part he keeps
men from forsaking him, or if they depart does cause them to return. But why he
upholdeth one and not another, it is neither possible to comprehend, N. B.
nor lawful to search; seeing it may suffice to know, both that it is of him
that men stand, and it is not of him that they fall away.

Obj. 15. That all the faithful and Saints who are predestined to eternal
death; when they fall are so disposed of by God, that they neither can nor will
be delivered by repentance.

Resp. Falsely said and foolishly: For they that fall away from faith and
holiness, as they fell by their Wills, so by their Wills they rise not* -- But
God takes the way of amendment from none; not depriveth any of the possibility
of good: For he that turns himself from God, takes from himself both the
will and the power of good. It Is no good consequence, as the Objecters think,
that God takes away repentance from men, because he gives it them not; and
that he casts down those that he takes not up. For it is one thing to act
the innocent into a crime (which God cannot do;) and another not to pardon the
Criminal, which is the desert of sin.

Obj. 16. That this great part of the faithful and holy, which is foredecreed
to eternal death, when they pray to God in the Lords prayer, Let thy will be
done, do only pray against themselves, viz. that they may fall and be ruined;
because it is the will of God that they perish by eternal death.

Resp. The Truth says not this, that it is the will of God that the faithful
and Saints do fall from faith and innocence and perish. But Truth says, This
is the will of the Father that sent me, that of all that he has given me I
should lose none -- But if by the generality of Vocation, and the abundance of
Gods goodness, even those that will not persevere are mixed with the
persevering, when these fall away from Godliness, they fall not (or are not
forsaken) of Gods help, but of their own wills: nor are impelled to fall, nor
cast off that they may forsake; but yet are fore-known to fall away by Him that
cannot be deceived: And when they pray, Thy will be done, they pray not that
they may fall -- Which God will not do (or Cause) any way, by any means: For
this by their own naughtiness, their own liberty will do: But this they pray
against themselves, (which doubtless is Gods will) that when the Son of man
shall come in his Majesty, etc. they that will not do Gods will, and yet pray,
Let thy will be done, are heard in that which is Gods will, that the imitaters
of the Devil be judged with the Devil. For they that have despised Gods
inviting will, shall feel his revenging will.

SECT. XXII. The words of Fulgentius to the same sense.
663. I Must crave of the Reader that he remember that my reciting the
Judgment of these Fathers for the falling away and perishing of many that were
in a state of Life, is not at all as declaring my own judgment, but Theirs;
none then that I read of thinking otherwise. Except Jovinian be truly accused
by Hierome, the brevity and obscurity of whose accusation and confutation,
leaves us very uncertain what it was that Jovinian held. But we are sure that
the spirit o^ uncharitableness and concention though in a good ^^^^ learn^d
man) had no ^^all hand in the stigm^^zing of him and Vigilantius as Heretics.
. I shall (for the End sake) be yet a little more ^edious in citing some of the
sayings of Fulgentius.

Fulg. l. 1. de Verit. praedest. cap. 6. To good men God gives what good they
have, and keeps it: But to the wicked and ungodly, God neither ever could
prepare or give evil works, which they should damnably serve: nor did he ever
put into them evil wills by which they should culpably will things unjust: but
he prepared for them the punishment of Hell, that they might feel revenging
justice in endless fire. An evil will is not of God: And therefore the just
Judge does punish it in men, because the good Creator finds not in it the
order of his Creation. And perseverance and contumacy in sin and pride, because
it is not of Gods giving, is condemned by God revenging.

Et l. 1. ad Monim. c. 26. He will punish in the wicked, that they are bad,
which he gave not, nor did he predestinate them to any iniquity: and that they
willed unjustly was none of his gift. And because the persevering iniquity of
an evil will, ought not to remain unpunished, he predestined such to
destruction, because he prepared just punishment for them -- Observe that God
predestined wicked and ungodly men, to just punishment, not to any unju^^
work: to the penalty, not to the fault: to the punishment, n^^ to the
transgression: to the destruction which the anger of a just judge requiteth
sinners with; not to that destruction (or death) by which the iniquity of
sinners provokes Gods wrath against them. The Apostle calls them Vessels of
wrath, not Vessels of sin.

Cap. 27. The wicked are not predestined to the first death of the soul, but
to the second death they are: -- That which follows the sentence of a just
Judge; not that which preceded in the evil concupiscence of the sinner.

Ibid. c. 23. It beseems believers to confess that the good and just God,
fore-knew indeed that men would sin, (for all things to come are known to him.
For they were not future, if they were not in his foreknowledge:) But not that
he predestined any to sin. For if he predestined man to any sin, he would
not punish man for sin. For Gods predestination prepares for men, either the
godly remission of their sins, or the just punishment of them. God therefore
could never predestinate man to that, which he had resolved both to forbid by
his precept, and to wash away by his mercy, and punish by his justice. God
therefore predestined to eternal punishment, the wicked who he foreknew would
persevere to the death in sin. Wherein as his foreknowledge of man's iniquity
is not to be blamed, so his predestination of just revenge is to be praised:
That we may acknowledge, that he predestined not man to any sin, whom he
predestined to be punished deservedly for sin.

And ad Monimum li. 1. page (edit. Basil.) 68. reciting Augusti^^^ words he
says [He taught that only pride was the cause of man's iniquity, and that God
predestined not men to sin, but to damnation; and that they are not helped by
God, the cause is in themselves and not in God.] The same he recites again ex
lib. 2. Aug. de baptis. parvul. [that their wills be not helped by grace, the
cause is in themselves and not in God.] The same he again repeateth page 69.
70, 71, 72. and [that Augustine's mind was that good works God both fore-knew
and predestined: -- But evil works, that is, sin, he foreknew indeed, but did
not predestinate (or decree.) For there is not Gods work, but his judgment.
Therefore in sin Gods work is not, because that sin should be done was not
decreed by him: But therefore there is his judgment, because it is not left
unrevenged, that an evil man works without God working.]

And ib. li. 1. page 15. [That which is not in his work, never was in
predestination. Therefore men are not predestined to sin.] So p. 29. And p.
31. and forward.

And p. 29. [No man justly sins though God justly permit him to sin: For he
is justly forsaken of God, who forsakes God. And because man forsaking God,
sins, God forsaking man keeps justice.]

664. I am loath to weary the Reader with more. Should I do the like by
Augustines words it would be too wearisome. His judgment is the very same as
theirs. I will only cite one passage out of him, about man's Power to believe.

Tract. 53. in Johan. having showed that God only foreknoweth men's sin, and
foretells it (as the Jews) but causes it not, he comes to answer John 12.
39. They could not believe etc. If they could not how was it their sin? --
saying, [You hear the question, brethren, and see how deep it is: But we answer
as we can. -- Why could they not believe? If you ask me, I quickly answer,
Because they would not. For God foresaw their evil will, and foretold it by the
Prophet -- He blinded their eyes, etc. And I answer that their own wills
deserved this also. For God blinds and hardens, by forsaking and not
helping; which he may do by a judgment secret, but not unjust. This all
religious piety ought to hold unshaken. Far be it from us then to say that
there is iniquity with God: If he help, he does it mercifully; if he help not,
he does justly.]

665. By all this the Reader may see past all doubt, that Augustine and his two
disciples, (than whom none known to us in the whole world then went higher for
Predestination and Grace) did plainly take up with this, that 1. GOD NEITHER
CAUSED OR WILLED SIN, no, not ITS BEING, or the forbidden ACT.

2. That OUR SIN was of OUR SELVES.

3. That ALL GRACE and perserverance was OF GOD.

4. That ELECTION was ABSOLUTE of GOD's mere will, and not upon his
foreknowledge of any merits of man's.

5. That God predestined none to sin, but predestined men to Punishment,
ONLY ON THE FORESIGHT of their wilful sin.

6. That he hardened men but by deserting them.

7. That he never forsook them till they forsook him first, and deserved it by
sin.

In a word, that man's destruction is of himself, but his help of God; who
resolvedly chooses some to salvation, and helps them accordingly with that
effectual grace, and especial perseverance, which he justly gives not to
others, though if he would he could.

SECT. XXIII. Healing Principles and Concessions of the Synod of Dort, etc.
666. I Know not how to conclude this discourse more suitably to my ends, than
by opening to the Reader who is sensible of the Churches sin, misery and danger
by our contentions and divisions, how much the parties whom I endeavor to
reconcile, are agreed in judgment about these matters, and that in their own
words. Remember still that it is not some few that run further than the rest
(either Episcopius, Curcell^^^, etc. on one side, or Maccovius, Rutherford or
Dr. Twisse, or Alvarez and other Predeterminants on the other side,) whose
particular opinions I cannot undertake to reconcile: But only the generality of
the Calvinists who go no further than the Synod of Dort (which is my test of
the party) and the moderate Arminians, Lutherans, and Jesuits (in these points)
on the other side. And let none reproach me for putting in the Jesuits, for as
I know that very few Calvinists fly near so high for Predetermination as the
Dominicans do; so I know that (though Arminius himself was a sober man, and
Episcopius is cried up by some, as Volkelius and other Socinians are by others,
as most clearly rational, yet) there is none of them all that equal in
accurateness of search and clearness of reason, either many of the ancient
Schoolmen, or Suarez, Ruiz, Vasquez, Albertinus, and many other latter School
Jesuits.

667. The first thing that I will desire of the Reader is to peruse those many
healing concessions contained in the writings, especially Irenicons, of many
Learned Calvinists already extant: Especially Davenants two dissertations, Dr.
Sam. Wards works; the Judgments of Davenant, Morton, Hall, to Dury about this:
Bishop Robert Abbots, and Bishop Carltons works often on the by: Bishop Usher of
Redemption, etc. Mr. Fenn^r of wilful Impenitency, and Hidden Manna, Joh.
Bergius for Reconcil. I^dov. Crocii Syntag. Conrad. Bergii Praxis Can. Junii
Irenicon and of predeterm. Paraei Irenicon. Amyrald. Defens. doct. Calv. and
Irenicon. Testard. de not. and Great. Hotton. de toler. Theses Salmur. but above
all Le Blanks Theses, Vossii These. and Histor. Pelag. Musculi Loc. Commun. And
the geral Irenicons, as all Durie's, Hall's Peacemaker and Pax terris,
Buroughs Iren. Acontii stratagem. Satana (an excellent book) etc.

668. Next I will insert some words to this end, in the Synod of Dort.

I. About the first Article (of Predestination) they open free election, but
mention no other Reprobation but Gods not-electing, or passing by, some whom he
found in sin, and in the misery in quam se sua culpa praecipitarunt, etc. and
not giving them effectual grace of Conversion, but leaving them in their sin.
And can any doubt of this? or do any Jesuits or Arminians deny it?

Where also they declare that God is no cause of men's sin, but themselves; And
that the Children of the faithful are by Covenant so holy, that their salvation
who dye in infancy is not to be doubted of: And that those that find not saving
grace in themselves, but yet use the means, have no cause to be cast down at
the mention of Reprobation.

669. II. About Christ's death they say, that His satisfaction is of infinite
value and price, abundantly sufficient to expiate the sins of all the world;
And that the promise is that whoever believes shall not perish, which is to be
preached to all: And that many yet repent not, believe not, but perish, is not
through any defect or insufficiency of Christ's sacrifice, but by their own
fault. And that others believe is of undeserved grace.

670. III. In the third and fourth Art. sect. 8, 9. they say that the fault is
not in Christ or the Gospel, that many that are called are not converted and
come not, nor in God that calls them and gives them many gifts, but in the
called themselves that receive not the word of life, etc. And that you may see
that they hold a conditional will or decree not only of future but of
non-future contingents, they say that [As many as are called by the Gospel are
seriously called, and God seriously and truly shows by his word, what would
be acceptable to him, viz. that the called come to him.] So that here is a
serious declaration of Gods will to those that never will come to him
conditionally if they would come. These kind of notions please or displease
men, as the interest of their opinions requires.

671. And the confession of Pet. Molinaeus received by the Synod, is worthy
observation page 290, 291. where he says [Sin is the Meritorious Cause of
Destination to punishment] And [Though natural corruption be cause sufficient
for Reprobation (as we kill new spawned Not only of punishment it self.
Serpents before they hurt any) yet there is no doubt but that for what cause
God damneth men, for the same he decreed to damn them: But he damneth
reprobates for sins committed; For they suffer in hell not only for original
sin, but for all actual sins; whence is the inequality of punishment: Therefore
God Decreed to damn them for the same sins: For nothing hinders but that God
who considers men in natural corruption and pravity may consider them also
polluted in the actual sins which they will thence commit. And among the sins
for which any one is Destinated to punishment no doubt, is unbelief and
rejection of the Gospel -- No reason suffers, that he should be Reprobated
for rejecting of the Gospel -- to whom the Gospel was never revealed -- That
God destinated any to eternal punishment, without consideration of impenitence
and unbelief, we neither say nor think -- And though God predestinate the Elect
to faith, he does not predestinate the Reprobate to unbelief; For we must
distinguish the media which God finds in men, from those which he makes. He
finds in men unbelief the means of damnation: But faith he finds not, but
makes. Therefore he predestinateth to faith, but not to unbelief: For he
predestinateth but to that which he decreed to make. Lastly, Impenitence in
order goes before Reprobation; but faith is after Election as being its effect
-- ] Is not here enough to reconcile?

And next of Christ's death he says that [It is abundantly sufficient to save
all men in the world, if they would believe: And that all are not saved by it
is not through the insufficiency of Christ's death, but of their pravity and
unbelief.]

672. And page 295. he says that Arminius holds irresistible grace, and that
the Elect are drawn of God by effectual grace, whose effect is most certain and
infallible (by Congruity.) --

673. The British Divines in their Suffrage say that [Pag. 11. Th. 1. Expl.
God in the decree of Election prepares Glory, and effectual Romans 9. 11. 15.
21* Joh. 10. 26. Romans 6. 21.
grace, intending that it shall be effectual: This he does not for the
Reprobate; and besides this negation, they know no act of Reprobation, as
opposite to Election.]

And they say that [the Gospel and grace, are denied to none but the unworthy
(sinners,) And that God damneth none, nor destinateth none to damnation, but
out of the consideration of sin.]

674. The Hassian Divines ibid. Par. 2. page 34. say [The just Judge (God) does
not for one cause Decree to punish; and for another execute it on the guilty,
but both have the same cause: that is, both original and actual sin.] --

675. The Helvetian Divines there say, p. 37.. 12. [Which is the Order and
Number of Gods Decrees, seeing Gods thoughts and ways are not as ours, and
none of us are of his Council, we leave to Him alone whose understanding is
infinite.]

676. The Embdan Divines ibid. p. 75. say [No one is predestined by God to
sin] which they there prove.

677. On the second Art. the British Divines say (p. 78.) [God having Act. 10.
43. Romans 3. 24, 25. Ma^k 16. 15, 16.
mercy on fallen mankind, sent his Son, who gave himself a price of Redemption,
for the sins of the whole world.

These. 4. In this Merit of Christ's death is founded the Universal Gospel
Promise --

Th. 5. In the Church, where for this Gospel-promise salvation is offered Isa.
59. ult. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Tit. 2. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Luke 10. 9, 11. Joh. 15. 22.
Heb. 2. 3. and 4. 3. and 6. 4. Mat. 10. 15.
to all, there is that administration of Grace, which is enough to convince all
the impenitent and unbelieving, that they perish and ^o^e the offered benefit,
by their voluntary fault, and neglect or contempt of the Gospel.]

678. On the second Article p. 103, 104, etc. there is the suffrage of the
famous Matthias Martinius, in 26 Theses of universal Redemption, and seven
Theses of special Redemption, and seventeen Errors rejected, so sound, so
full, so accurate, that I know not whither to referr the Reader to see the
whole controversy more shortly yet clearly and soundly opened: And therefore
entreat him to peruse it, seeing I may not be so tedious as to transcribe it
all; and know not how to leave out any.

679. To the same sense have Iselburge and Lud. Crocius adjoined the^
suffrages, the last being both brief and full.

680. The same Breme Divines say no more of Reprobation but these three These.
1. That there is a Decree of preterition as to special saving Romans 9. 12, 19,
etc. Mat. 7. 21. Deuteronomy. 4. 34.
grace. 2. That none are condemned but justly, for their sins. 3. That others
as unworthy are converted in Mercy: And if others had said no more of this, it
had been never the worse.

And of Infants they say [Of only Believers Infants, who dye before they are
capable of doctrine, we determine that they are beloved of God, P^tavius
chideth Gerson, Biel, Cajetan, Catherinus for their found opinion of Infants
salvation without Baptism.
and saved, as holy by Covenant Relation: which Baptism is a Confirmation of --
]

SECT. XXIV. On the other side.
681. ON the other side read but Suarez and Ruiz to save me transcribing, and
see what they grant (besides that Ariminens. and many old Schoolmen go as far
as the Synodists, as the Dominicans do much further.) Petr. a S. Joseph. Suav.
Concord. writing for Scientia Media, summeth up the difference between them and
the Thomists (that is, the Arminians and Calvinists) so briefly as is worth the
reading: In which he grants,

1. [That God from eternity antecedently to any absolute foresight of merits
(or preparation in us) did freely and of mere mercy elect all those to Glory
that are saved:] But denies [that God antecedently to the absolute foresight
of sin, did absolutely decree to exclude any from glory, or to addict them to
eternal punishment: or that the Creation of Reprobates, and all natural or
supernatural good conferred on them, are the effect of reprobation.]

2. He grants that [the Decree of Predestination is certain and immovable in
three respects: 1. In that just so many shall certainly be saved as God has
predestined. 2. In that the same species of men shall be saved whom God
predestined to glory: so that both materially and formally, the number of the
predestinate is certain. 3. In that by the force of Predestination, anteceding
all Merits That is, Rewardable act^ of man.
, yea, and Causing them, God gives to the predestinate, effectual helps of
grace, by which they shall infallibly come to glory.]

And is not here a fair concession for peace? And must not the remain^ing
differences be only 1. About words, 2. Or unsearchable Orders of Gods Decrees
and Modes of operation? Read him further, and see.

682. Dion. Petavius the Jesuit is too large to transcribe. Vol. 1. Theol.
Dogm. lib. 9. of Predestination is worth the reading; especially to know what
the Fathers held of Gods Decrees, who generally agreed, that God Which he
largely shows in their own words; better than any that ever I saw, and may
save the Reader much labor in the investigation of the sense of the Ancients
herein.
decreed none to Hell, but upon foresight of their own sin. Though he himself
does furiously rail at Calvin, and Amyraldus, yet he so far acquitteth all
other Calvinists save Beza and Piscator, and a few that he calls mere fools,
that he says, They have all forsaken his opinion, and instanceth in the whole
Synod of Dort, who he says desert him. And he professes that Augustines
judgment may safely be held, which is it indeed, that those now called
Calvinists own, except in the point of perseverance. See his lib. 10. c. 1. and
9, 10, 11.

But what a plague, livor and faction is to the Church and the owners souls,
let but these ugly words of his be witness, lib. 10. cap. 14. p. 728. [Calvinus
nocentem nullum, innocents omnes damnari statuit] When ^e had made Amyrald an
impudent liar, for proving Calvin to think otherwise. O take heed of the spirit
of a Sect.

683. Suarez de Auxil. l. 3. cap. 6. about sufficient and effectual grace, See
Zumel reciting the opinions of Molina, Bellarmine and Suarez de Gratia
efficaci, Part ^^^^. page 50, 51, etc.
(into which all the other controversies fall,) confesses that [Sufficient
grace is that quod satis est ad efficiendum supernaturalem actum, quod tamen
non facit, non ex insufficientia auxilii, sed ex liberate Voluntatis: But
effectual grace is called such not only ab eventu and effectu, sed etiam quia
vires praebet efficacissimas Voluntati, and singularem vim habet ad agendum.]
And is here no ground for Christian Concord in this point?

But of this subject, I must speak more particularly in the Third Part.

684. Bellarmine himself has enough I think to convince any man, I am told to
my face that our Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation we have learned from the
Papists; Another professes that the Jesuits ten of them for one favor the
absolute irrespective decree, follow herein, as they think S. Austin, but
especially their S. Thomas and Scotus, with all the rabble of rotten Schoolmen,
and the whole tribe at this day of the Dominicans, who are busy Zealots for
the Cause, of whose consent some among us are not ashamed to brag. Twisse
against Hoard li. 1. page 85. This reporter makes us at one with Jesuits and
Dominicans. And yet may we not be so with Protestants?
that he must have a subtle contentious wit, that can find any great
intolerable difference herein between him and the Synod of Dort: (I Write not
for them that will revile Gods truth, if Bellarmine do but own it.) De Great.
and lib. arb. li. 2. cap. 9. this is his proposition [Though a Grace sufficient
be given to all, yet no reason from us (or our part) can be given of Gods
predestination, -- By which we exclude not only Merits properly so called, but
also the good use of free will, o^^^ grace, or both as foreseen of God, though
it be not called Merit, but de congruo, and though it be not called a Cause,
but a Condition ^^^^ qua non praedestinaretur.] (And what else would you have
excluded?) And he goes on in diverse Chapters at large to prove from
Scriptures, Augustine, Tradition, Reason, that there is no foreseen Cause or
Condition of predestination in our selves.

685. And I desire the Reader to note his Order of the Decrees (for they must
all be meddling with the Order of Gods inward acts* But he does i^ most briefly
and plainly thus) ib. cap. 9.

[According to our mode of understanding, this seems to be the Order of
Predestination in Gods mind: 1. God foreseeth that if he make man he will fall
with all his posterity; And withal he sees th^^ he can deliver all or some as
he please. 2. He decrees (or wills) to create man, and to permit him to
fall, and mercifully to deliver some of the number of the fallen, leaving
others justly in the mass of perdition. 3. He contrived apt remedies for the
saving of the elect: I^ which the incarnation and passion of our Savior has
the first place* 4. He approved those remedies, and then chose Christ and us in
him, before the Constitution of the World. 5. He disposed, ordained, and in a
sort commanded that so it should be done.]

Is not this as high as the Synod of Dort goes? yea, more rigid than many of
the Suffrages? For he mentions no giving of Christ, or any remedy at all to
any but the Elect, nor carrying the rest any further tha^ the common mass of
perdition, before they be forsaken; contrary to what Martinius, Crocius,
Molinaeus, the British Divines, and others delivered to or in that Synod: And
indeed it is unsound.

686. If you say, that he begins with a Scientia Conditionalis. I answer, It Is
no more than what all sober men will grant de re, that is, that God knew from
eternity that if he so made man as he did, he would fall: or, if there were
eternal propositions, God eternally knew the truth of this hypothetical
proposition, [If I so make man, he will fall.] If this was quid intelligibile,
no doubt but God knew it. But de ordine and de nomine, whether it be fit to
parcel out Gods knowledge (and Volitions) into such shreds and atoms, and so
denominate them, let them look to it on both sides that trouble us with their
divisions.

687. And note Bellarmines further explication [Of these acts* (says he) the
first is of the understanding, the second of the will, the third of the
understanding, the fourth of the will, and the fifth of the understanding; and
in that last the essence of predestination especially consists.]

688. Yea, cap. 15. whereas many distinguish predestination to faith or grace,
from election to glory, and say that the latter is upon the foresight of faith
as a condition, though the first be absolute, he opposes them and copiously
labors to prove that election to glory is absolute without any foreseen
condition in us, as well as that to grace: Though without something in us, we
have not a Right to glory: Even (says he) as if a Physicion were sure that by
such a Medicine he can cure a man, and so resolves to give it him, the
Medicine is the Cause that he is cured, but not that it was ascertained by the
decree of the Physicion before.

689. And c. 15. ad obj. 2. he proves Gods certain foreknowledge ^erein,
because [Though all have pro loco and tempore sufficient grace to be converted
if they will, yet indeed no man is converted, and no man persevereth, but he
that has the special gift of Repentance and Perseverance, which is not given
to all, but to those only for whom God decreed it.]

689. And to them that say, the Elect can refuse grace, he answers that [They
can indeed; but it is certain that they will not; because God will call them so
as he sees so congruous, that they may not refuse his call: For thus true
grace is refused by no hard heart, because it is given with a purpose to
mollify it. And there is no danger lest God should want skill or arguments, to
persuade any man to what he please.]

690. And indeed before de Gratia efficaci li. 1. cap. 12. he tells us, that
^here are three opinions wherein the efficacy of grace consists: The first
is, that it is called effectual only from the event, through man's con^ent:
which he disproveth. The second, that it is only efficacious by necessitating
physical predetermination, which he thinks to be an error on ^he other extreme:
And the third which he defends is [that it is efficacious by Gods will that
it shall be so, and by the Congruity or moral ^ptitude of inward and outward
persuasions and means which God uses with a decree to turn the will.] And who
can say that God cannot do this? or if he can, that he does not? Is here yet
any room left for quar^elling and bitter censures in this point? When even
Bradwardin^ holds, that Gods Volition of man's act alone (which Bellarmine
includes) is the effectual unresistible Grace ^^ part Dei operantis.


691. Lib. 2. cap. 16. he makes two acts of Reprobation the very same that
almost all the suffrages in the Synod of Dort assign, and the same doctrine
that Davenant, and the Synod deliver. His first act of Reprobation is Negative,
the second Positive; [1. Non habet Voluntatem eos salvandi, 2. Habet Voluntatem
eos damnandi:] And as to the first, [Nulla datur ejus causa ex part hominum,
sieut neque praedestinationis: Posterioris causa est praevisio peccati.] They
are unmerciful contenders that this much Reprobation will not satisfy.

692. He proves as the Calvinists do, [that it was not so much as for original
sin foreseen, that God is said to hate Esau; because then he would have hated
Jacob also: but it must be referred to the ^eer will of God, that one was loved
to salvation, and the other so hated as not to be saved.] Just as the Synod of
Dort says.

693. Francisc. a Sancta Clara, alias Davenport, a Learned Scotist in his Deus,
Not. Great. Probl. 1. page 3. describing Predestination out of Augustine,
Arriba, Scotus, Suarez, etc. says [And with all these agrees the description
of Predestination Art. 17. of the English Confession.]

694. And Probl. 2. of the Causes of Predestination he notes that [ We mean
not the Causes of Gods will, ex part actus volendi, sed ex part volit^rum, in
quantum Deus vult unum esse propter aliud.] And on that supposition how easy
is it to agree?

695. But he adds [If you had rather say as Suarez 1. p. l. 2. de praed. c.
1. that also ex part actus divini (there is a Cause,) it must be, not as Gods
act is absolutely considered, for so it is his essence that has no cause; but
as terminated on the Creature.]

696. Page 7. he himself professes, that when the Protestants say that [on the
part of the Predestinate there is not so much as any merito^^ous Cause,
Disposition or Condition, they speak but the common opinion of all the School
Doctors, taking it properly and in Scripture sen^e.And what Montague and the
Arminians speak of foresight, he disowneth, as contrary to Paul, August. Aquin.
1. p. q. 23. a. 5, etc. Scotus, Bradwardine, Estius, Smisings, -- Yea, he
rejects Abbot Joachim who denying any Cause of predestination in God, yet
asserted a cause of it by an aptitude in the Predestinate and the Reprobate,
one being foreseen more humble and prepared for Grace, and the other more proud
and unprepared] page 5, 6.

697. Yea (ordering Gods Decrees after the usual presumption) be Ruiz de
Praedefin. tr. 2. disp. 6. sect. 2. p. 86, 87. Deus pro suo beneplacito
decrevit ab aeterno efficaciter causare liberas operationes honestas prius
ratione quam illas praevideret ut absolute futuras -- Unde infallibiliter
sequitur liberi arbitrii operatio (necessitate consequentiae:) Page 87. 1.
Scriptura fidem, sanctitatem and quodlibet discrimen sanctorum a reprobis,
reducit ad electionem gratuitam: 2. Ex vi sortis, etc. 3. Divina electio absque
meritis est causa quae discernit justos ab impiis. Quamvis (n) liberum
arbitrium sit secundaria causa s^ipsum discernens, qua potuit resistere vel
consentire -- Haec tamen liberi arbitrii cooperatio revocatur in Deum ut in
primariam causam suaviter praedefinientem. E^ Tr. 3. d. 18. sect. 3. p. 222. Ea
merita nihil obsun^ quidditati gratiae quae tanquam ex prima radic^ nascuntur
ex prima gratid data absque ullo prorsus merito: At^amen quodlibet etiam
levissimum and remotissimum meritum de congruo, si ex illo nascitur prima
gratia, vel propter illud datur, obesse quidditati gratiae: Yea, he adds p.
223. Conditio, ratio, vel occasio prorsus separata a merito, impetratione and
dispositione, adhuc repugnaret (primae) gratiae: quoniam adhuc maneret debitum
connaturalitatis, quamvis abesset debitum obsequii.
asserteth, that God first intends our blessedness as the end, before he
intends us grace, faith, etc. as the means: And therefore cannot do it for
foreseen faith, etc. Yea, that he first decreed to give us blessedness, before
he decreed to create us, as Scotus 3. d. 7. and Ovan^^ ibid. q. 3. a. 2. Yea,
that God wills all this, before he knows that it will be, as Scotus 1. d.
39. And that seeing all Gods Volitions of giving any good, are free, without
any precedent Cause in man, it must needs be that the Decree of glory and not
of grace only, must be without Merit. And he concludes p. 13. that they have
no quarrel here with the Doctrine of the Articles of the Church of England.

698. Probl. 3. he resolves with Smisings, that the reason why this absolute
decree of God consists with free will, is because that God does not only
decree the event, but also the mode, that it shall be freely done: And
therefore his decree does not only consist with Liberty, but makes it
necessary.

699. His feigned order of the decrees is page 27. that 1. God decreeeth to
glorify, 2. To give grace and merits to obtain it, and that definitively: 3.
Then he foreseeth that they will concur with grace. 4. Then he decrees the
execution, that glory shall be given them by the means of their operations.

And of Reprobation; 1. That God effectually decrees to do so much as he does,
on his part to give them glory; 2. And also so far to give them grace; 3. Then
he foreseeth that they will not cooperate with that grace; 4. He decrees to
permit them to fall into sin; 5. And then decrees their damnation.] I would
not cite this man if he were a Thomist or Dominican (who are known to go higher
than the Synod of Dort, though their reputation at home with their party tempt
them to rail at the Calvinists:) But as he is a Scotist, and so of a middle
profession. (Though Dr. Twisse perceived how much their founding Gods
foreknowledge in his Volitions, advantaged him.)

700. Supposing you to remember the ordo signorum of his Master Scotus before
cited, I adjoyn the order Doctoris illuminati (viz. Fra^. Mayronis) in li. 1.
d. 41. q. 4. Sunt quatuor signa: Est ergo pri^^^ in quo Judas and Petrus
offeruntur Voluntati Divinae ut neutri: and t^^ Voluntas Divina ordinavit
Petrum ad gloriam: nullum autem actum positivum habuit circa Judam, secundum
Augustinum. Secundum signum es^ in quo ordinavit Petrum ad gratiam: and tunc
circa Judam nullum act^^ positivum habuit. Tertium signum est in quo
relinquuntur sibi ip^^s^^ and uterque cadit in peccatum. Quartum signum est in
quo Petrus res^^git; Quia non potest permanere: quia praedestinatus
intelligitur ex primo signo. Judas autem non resurgit; eo quod non habet
relevantem in Deo: ideo reprobatur.]

Here you see a Reprobation that is no Act of God, but a non-acting, or is
negative quoad actum and not only quoad objectum. And he before says out of
Scotus and with him [Ideo dico sicut dicit Doctor noster, Quod prius Deus videt
merita quam reprobum; licet prius non vide at merita quam eligat:] which is the
commonest Doctrine of the Schoolmen and other Papists, as well as Augustines.

701. So D'Orbellis in 1. d. 41. [Et dicunt quidam quod non est alia ratio
quare Deus istum elegit, and non illum, nisi quia placet -- Eo enim ipso quod
placet, ideo rectum est, propter summam ipsius Voluntatis rectitudinem -- Sic
dicit Scotus, quod licet non videatur aliqua ratio praedestinationis a part
praedestinati, aliquo modo prior praedestinatione; Reprobationis tamen est
aliqua ratio, propter quam scilicet ista actio terminatur ad hoc objectum and
non ad illud: -- Cum Reprobare sit Velle Damnare, Reprobatio habet ex part
objecti, rationem, scilicet peccatum finale praevisum -- Non videtur autem
dicendum conformiter de Praedestinatione and Reprobatione; Quia Bona Deo
principaliter attribuuntur, Mala autem nobis. Quia tamen* Apostolus videtur
totum ho^ imperscrutabile relinquere, Romans 9. O altitudo, etc. ideo dicit
Scotus quod eligatur opinio quae magis placet; Dum tamen servetur Libertas
Divina, absque injustitia. Hoc autem debet fieri absque assertione pertinaci.
Rations namque particulares, propter quas ex part diversorum Divina
inferuntur judicia, sunt imperscrutabiles.]

But note, that as to the first part of Reprobation, non velle dare gratiam,
Scotus, Mayro, etc. hold it to be nothing, or no act at all.

702. And what D'Orbellis next adds of Bonaventure sets us at no further
odds. [Bonav. dicit quod licet non sit aliqua ratio Causalis, seu meritoria,
praedestinationis a part praedestinati, (quia siquis posset de condigno mereri
primam gratiam, tunc Gratia non esset Gratia) Potest tamen esse aliqua ratio
congruitatis and condeoentiae praedestinationis; Non quantum ad significatum
quod est Volitio Divina, sed quantum ad Connotatum quod est Gratia and Gloria.
Potest enim dici quod Deus praedestinat istum proper praevisionem bonorum
operum ut aliquo modo sunt a libero arbitrio: Licet enim Gratificatio vel
Justificatio sit principaliter a Divina Voluntate, hoc tamen est cum
cooperatione and praeparatione liberi arbitrii; quia ut Aug. Qui fecit te sine
te non justificabit te sine te. Unde cum peccator facit quod in se est, meretur
de congruo justificari, seu secundum quid, ex condecentia Divinae
liberalitatis.]

But the true meaning of this is no more than Protestants commonly hold, that
God gives special Grace usually to such only as are prepared for it by more
common Grace; and so this preparation is quid praevisum in Gods decree, but no
Cause of his Act of Volition or decree.

703. And in the next words he grants, that even this Preparation to special
grace, is not always necessary, [Deus tamen sine aliqua praeparatione and
cooperatione aliquos justificat, ut patet de sanctificatis in utero, and de
parvulis post baptismum ad coelum evolantibus; aliis sine baptismo decedentibus
-- etc.]

704. And though they often say, that God would have all men saved quantum in se,
they mean not, that God does all to it that he can, but that he makes all
capable of salvation, and so far helps them, that the failing shall not be on
his part. For so Bonavent. ubi supra in 1. d. 47. a. 1. q. 1. explaineth it,
plainly adding, that here Gods will connoteth not salvation it self, but only
the said Capacity and helps.

705. Obj. But many say, that Predestination does not necessitate the eve^.
Answ. Twisse told you before that we are agreed all in this; It infers a
Logical Necessity Consequentiae, though not a physical Consequentis: As
Bonavent. 1. d. 40. q. 2. Ex part rei evenientis nullam: ex part De^
praescientis aliquam; scilicet immutabilitatis certitudinem: Yea, as to grace
and salvation it is certainly Causal as they confess.

706. Obj. Many say, that a predestinate person may be damned. Answ. Even as
D'Orbellis in 1. d. 40. a. 2. [Ista propositio, [Pradestinatus potest damnari]
est falsa in sensu composito; and vera in sensu divise] Vide explicat. It is
unchristian and unmanly to revile men that say the same that we do, merely
through distaste, or because we will not be at the labor to understand them.

707. Obj. We cannot be reconciled to them that give so much to man's free will.
Ans. How much do you mean? It Is a dreadful thing to hear some good men
ignorantly blaspheme God, as the chief cause of every villainy in the World,
merely ^poh a factious prejudice and partial opposition to other men, whom they
never understood! Would it please you to hear that God draggeth men into sin as
by the hair of the hea^, when the Devil himself can but allure them? I know it
would not. D^ but make it plain as a granted thing, that God does not Will or
Love sin, and do more to Cause it, than the Devil, or the wickedest sinner
himself does, and you can scarce tell how to differ from the greater part of
the Schoolmen themselves, or sober moderate Lutherans that are thought to be
dissenters. Let it be the Devils work, and no good Christians, to paint God in
the shape of the Father of lies and all iniquity: Our God is Holy, and Holiness
becomes all that draw near him, and is the mark of all that shall see his
face. Dear Brethren, let not us that daily and justly condemn our selves for
sin, and take such odious titles to our selves, make our selves yet Holier*
than God, and make God a far greater Lover and Cause^ of sin than we are.

I will add one description of Free Will out of the last named Schoolman,
D'Orbellis a Scotist, in 2. sent. d. 25. dub. 2. And tell me what the most
rigid opposer of Free Will can desire more. [ Q. Whether Free Will be equally
in all that have it? Ans. Free Will may be compared 1. To that which it is free
from, 2. And to that which it is free to 1. In the first sense, there is a
threefold Liberty; 1. From constraint, 2. From sin, 3. From misery. Liberty
from sin is not equally in good and bad, nor in man on earth and in Heaven. As
Aug. Enchir. That Is the freest will, that cannot at all serve sin. And Liberty
from misery is not equally in all: But Liberty from constraint is equally in
all, because the will cannot be forced. Though in God and the blessed there be
a Necessity of Immutability, yet not of Co-action. And necessity of
Immutability, repugneth not Liberty: For the will is called Free simply, not
because it so wills this, as that it can will the contrary: but because that
whatever it wills, it desires it by its own Empire; Because it so wills
any thing, that it wills to will it: And therefore in the act of willing, it
moves it self, and uses dominion on it self; And so far it is called Free,
though it be immutably ordained to it. But it were not so, if it were immutably
ordained and moved to sin.
2. But if free will be compared to that to which it is free, viz. To do right
(for as Anselm says, It is a faculty or power to keep rectitude) so it is not
equally in all: For this Power is in God of Himself; and in the Creatures
received from God: And it is more in the confirmed than the nonconfirmed, and
in the good than in the bad. And seeing to be able to sin, is a diminution of
Liberty; therefore according to Anselm, to be able to sin, is no Liberty nor
part of liberty* taking Free Will according to the Common Reason of it. But to
have power as to the Act which deformity is annexed to, may well be a part of
Liberty, not simply, but of Created Liberty. And so the deformity in the Act
more agrees with free will as it is a Creature, or as it is of Nothing, than
as it is Free. -- Dub. 3. Can free will be compelled? Answ. God can destroy it,
but not force it; for that is a Contradiction: But he can well effectually
incline it, and make it move it self freely to which part God will. But to sin
he will not so incline it.


I think this is as high as you can desire. And yet there is nothing in all
this, but what both parties may well bear with, and it has indeed much
soundness in it. But here he treats only about equality of Liberty, but how
much of it the unsanctified have, he elsewhere shows, and I have often told you
how much the most are agreed in it.

708. To conclude, The heart and sum of all our differences is how to make God
the total first Cause of all Good, and not to make him the Cause of sin, and
the damner of man for that which he himself insuperably causes. I hope both
sides hold fast both the conclusions (that our sin and destruction is chiefly
of our selves, but in God is our help, and our good and happiness is all from
Him.) And if they both hold this, it is not the difficulty of joining them
together, and opening Gods unsearchable methods, that must disjoynt us, and
draw us to withdraw our Love, or contemn each other, or disturb the Churches
peace and unity.

709. Gregory Ariminensis and Gabr. Biel have come so near the rigid Dominicans
that the Reader may think that they plainly say the same of Gods Causing all
the Act of sin, as Alvarez, Twisse and Rutherford say. But let the Learned
Reader note these things; 1. That over and over they affirm that though God
Cause all the Act of sin, yet he is but the Causa partialis: I like not the
phrase my self for the reasons before given; but by this they do greatly differ
from the aforesaid Authors: see Greg. 2. d. 34, 35. ar. 3. frequently saying,
that God is Causa partialis. And in answering Aureolus ad nonum he thus fully
explaineth it: Dicendum quod Causa dupliciter potest accipi Totalis: Uno modo
Totalis totalitate relata ad Causam; id est, sufficiens Causare effectum absque
concursu alterius Causae praecise causando sicut Causat: and sic neganda est
ista Consequentia: Quoniam nec Deus nec Creatura est sic Totalis Causa actus
mali. Nunquam enim talis actus fieret, si De^s non Causaret ^um; Neque etiam si
Creatura non causaret, and Deus non aliter causaret, quam nunc de facto causat,
concurrendo cum Creatura. Alio modo Totalis totulitate relata ad effectum, id
est, totum effectum causaus: Et ejusdem poss^nt esse plures totales Causae:
ejusdem enim Volitionis secundum totum est Causa Notitia and etiam Voluntas.

Here note, that 1. He takes not Causa totalis for the same with Solitaria. 2.
That he asserteth only, that God causes the Totum of the Act, but not by a
total Causation of it: And that Gods way or sort of Causation is not sufficient
to cause it if man concurred not, which they say he freely does, and could do
otherwise.

710. So that these men's way of freeing God from being the cause of sin is like
Scotus his; As if (as I before made the similitude) a Father to try his Child's
obedience, bids him lift up a Stone, which he cannot do of himself; and the
Father holds his hand and joyneth his strength, yet not ad ultimum posse, but
with a purposed restraint so far that if the Child will not put forth his
degree of strength, it shall not be done. But who can comprehend the ways of
Divine concurse?

711. And it is to be noted, that when Aureolus argues, that [if God
immediately concur, either he determines man's act, or man determines Gods
act, or neither; which are all absurd:] here Biel cites Scotus as holding the
third, and answering Neither, as no absurdity. But Greg. Arim. that seems to
go higher, yet says, [ Ubi suprae ad 8.
Juxta modum loquendi arguentis dico quod Deus sequitur determinationem
Voluntatis: non qu^^ determinatio Voluntatis fit aliqua Entitas distincta a
Voluntate and act^ ejus, quia primo fiat a voluntate -- nec intelligendo quod
prius natura Viluntas agat actum quam Deus, proprie loquendo de priori natura:
Quoniam tunc sequeretur quod posset illum agere, Deo non coagente. -- Sed ad
hunc sensum dico Deum sequi Determinationem Voluntatis; Quoniam ideo Deus agit
illum actum, quia I think it should be [Eum.]
cum Voluntas agit. Et non ideo qu^^ Deus agit, ideo Voluntas agit: and ideo
magis proprie dicitur Deus coager^ Voluntati in talem actum causandi, quam
Voluntas dicatur coagere De^.] You see that these Nominals do toto coelo differ
from Alvarez, T^isse and Rutherford. (And yet Alvarez would fain be moderate in
that one Disputation which Dr. Twisse in a peculiar Digression oppugneth.)

712. And note, that the thing which moved Gregory to go so far as he does is,
Lest God should be denied to be the Cause of all Natural Entity: But if you set
before the will, the Creator (or Chief Good) and the Creature (or sensual
pleasure) the Act in genere as a Volition is an Entity, or modus entis: But who
can prove that comparatively as it is terminated on the Creature, rather than
on the Creator, it has any Natural Entity, more than the act in genere; or any
modality which God is not able to give a Creature power to cause, or not cause,
without predetermination from God or any other?

713. Yea, Ariminensis seems to mean this himself, when ibid. d. 34, 35. a.
2. ad 5. he says [Deus ^potest solus actum illum causare, and act^^ odiendi,
id est, qui est odium Dei, and mendacium etiam potest causare* Non tamen potest
causare actum odiendi Deum, seu odium Dei: neq^^ potest Causare Mendacium vel
mentiri, neque potest causare actum ^^lum; Quare quemcunque actum causaret
solus, licet ille nunc sit Odi^^ Dei vel mendacium, vel aliquis actus malus, si
tamen Deus solus ill^^ causaret, sicut potest illum causare solus, non esset
actus, neque odi^m De^ vel mendacium.] But whatever he thought, I have before
answered this difficulty of the Entity of the acts of sin.

I mention Ariminensis judgment the rather, because the Learned Calvinists
commend him: And I remember when I once asked Archbishop Usher which of the
Schoolmen he most valued as the soundest, he said Greg. Ariminensis.

714. Is not all this doctrine from these men cited conformable to the doctrine
of the Synod of Dort? Who in the conclusion name many positions which they and
all the Reformed Churches with them do, toto pect^re detestari, abhor with all
their hearts: Among which one is, Deum n^^^ puroque Voluntatis arbitrio, absque
omni peccati ullius respectu vel intuit^, maximam mundi partem ad aeternam
damnationem praedestinasse and creasse. And another is, Eodem modo quo electio
fons est and causa fidei ac b^norum operum, reprobationem esse causam
infidelitatis and impietatu: Another is, Multos fidelium infantes ab uberibus
matrum innoxios abri^^ and tyrannice in Gehennam praecipitari, adeo ut iis nec
Baptismus, nec Ecclesiae in little baptismo preces, prodesse queant.

And it is much to be noted, that in conclusion they desire all men to judge of
the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, not by Calumnies, nor by the Private
sayings of some D^ctors, ant^ent or later, but by the public Confessions of
the Churches, ^^^ and by the Declaration of this Synod. Therefore not by the
extremes of Beza, Piscator, Spanh^m^^s, Twisse and Rutherford; but by what the
Articles of the Churches subscribed by the Pastors do contain. Otherwise we
shall be far more foolish than the Papists, who will not expose their Church to
obioquy or division by standing to the sayings of Alvarez or Molina, or any
private Doctor whosoever.

715. And it is notorious to any impartial-pe^user, that the whole fo^^ of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, in the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy,
Homilies, and all their public Writings, was drawn up by men of Augustines
judgment, who were for absolute Election, and Universal sufficient Redemption
and Grace ad posse, but for no Reprobation but on foresight of sin.

716. And it is greatly to be noted, with grief of heart, that among Good men,
it is partly General prejudice, but chiefly the Interest of their Reputation
with those among whom they live, which is the great impediment of the Churches
Concord. The name of a Calvinist is so hateful among the Papists, that even the
Predeterminant Dominicans who go higher than ever Calvin did, (and the
Jansenists, who go as high in the main cause, and higher than the Synod of
Dort,) do yet find it a matter of necessity to rail at Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin, etc. lest their party should think that they are turned Heretics. And
the Protestants that agree in some points with the Papists, are fain to rack
the Papists words, to a worse sense than is meant, lest their fierce opposers
should make men believe that they are half Papists, or err with them. And the
moderate Calvinists are fain to stretch hard, that they may seem to differ more
from the Arminians than they do, lest a self-conceited reviler should blot
their names with the suspicion of Arminianism. O doleful case of all the
Churches! But where Protestants are few and made odious by the Papists, as
differing from them further than they do, there Reputation is not so great a
temptation; And there they freely confess their concord, where they do not
differ. And so in Colloquia Torunensi c. 4. de great. depuls. Calum. sect. 5, 6.
all the Reformed Churches of Poland with Joh. Bergius the Duke of Brandenburgs
Chaplain, and others did profess, [Falso accusamur, quasi Mortis and Meriti
Christi pr^ omnibus sufficientiam negemus, aut virtutem imminuamus, cum potius
idem hic quod ipsa Synodus Tridentina ses. 6. cap. 3. doceamus, viz. Etsi
Christus pro omnibus mortuns sit, non omnes tamen mortis ejus beneficium
recipere, sed eos duntaxat quibus meritum passionis ejus communicatur. Causam
etiam seu culpam, cur non omnibus communicetur, nequaquam in merito and morte
Christi, sed in ipsis hominibus esse fatemur.] Here was no partial interest to
make them afraid of being suspected to comply with Papists.

717. I end with this request to all my Brethren who by their averseness to the
Doctrine of Common or Universal Grace, do keep open the Churches dangerous
wounds, 1. That they will give Scripture leave to rule their judgments, and
try whether it be possible to build special Grace, on any other foundation than
presupposed common Grace? and whether to deny this, be not to deny the very
tenor of the Gospel, and pull up the foundations of our Religion?

2. That they will but read over Davenants two dissertations, and the second
Tome (at least) of the Learned Dallaeus his Apology against Spa^hemius, that
is, The words of an hundred and twenty ancient Writers and Councils, beginning
at Clemens Romanus, and ending with Theophylact, and sixty three Protestant
Divines and Synods (to which I think I could add as many more, that speak more
plainly to the point, or near it.) And if after all this they have so great a
zeal to contract the Glory of Gods Mercy, and deny his Grace, as that they will
cast off the judgment of all the ancient Churches of Christ, and so many
later, rather than acknowledge it, I shall cease disputing with them, and seek
to quench the fire which they kindle in the Churches of Christ by Prayers and
Tears.

The End of the First Part.
THE Second Part OF GODS GOVERNMENT, AND MORAL WORKS. WHEREIN Of his Laws or
Covenants, of Redemption, of sufficient and effectual Grace, of Faith,
Justification, Works, Merits, Perseverance, certainty of Salvation, etc. so far
as the Church-troubling-Controversies do require.

LONDON: Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1675.

The CONTENTS of these THESES cannot be well given you, without reciting too
great a part of them: But rather than none, take this imperfect summary
following.
Sect. I. OF man's first State and the first Law, and its penalty. Whether Adam
had a promise of Life? and whether that Promise or Covenant be now ceased as to
all men? Page 27. Sect. II. Of the first Edition of the Law or Covenant of
Grace, that it was made with all Mankind in Adam and Noah: Of the Promise to
Abraham: Of the Terms of the first Edition of the Universal Covenant of Grace.
How far it is a Law of Nature. How far those without the Israelitish Church
were under it: Of the Israelites Covenant, page 31. Sect. III. Of Christ's
Incarnation and our Redemption. The Law of Mediation. What Christ undertook for
us: How far he represented us^ The true nature of his Satisfaction. Of his
Righteousness and Merits, page 37. Sect. IV. Of the Law of Grace or New
Covenant in the last Edition. The Nature Conditions, and yet free Donations of
it, page 42. Sect. V. Of the giving of the Holy Ghost: His common and special
Works: The extent of the New Covenant: Of the state of those that have not the
Gospel: And what Law they are under, page 45. Sect. VI. How far Christ died for
all, and how far not, page 51. Sect. VII. The antecedent and consequent Will of
God, explained. Of Justification by Faith. What faith it is; and what it does,
page 54. Sect. VIII. Of Justification by Christ's Righteousness imputed. The
false sense of Imputation opened and fully confuted. The true sense asserted.
Whether Christ paid our Idem or Tantundem? Whether he made his Satisfaction to
God only as to a Rector, or as Dominus, vel pars laesa, or how? page 59. Sect.
IX. Of the sorts of Justification: And first of constitutive Justification. Of
Righteousness: How far it is or is not in our own habits or acts. What Right
the Covenant gives the baptized to following helps and degrees of Grace.
Further, what must be in our selves. Man's holiness is no dishonor to Gods
Grace. How far Christ strippeth us of our own Righteousness. More against the
false sense of Imputation; Objections answered, page 69. Sect. X. Of Merit: The
case plainly and briefly decided. The Gospel-Condition or Merit, is but the
accepting a free Gift according to its nature. Whether we may trust to our own
Faith, Repentance, Holiness. The last Argument for the false sense of
Imputation, answered, page 79. Sect. XI. How Faith justifies? whether as an
Instrument? page 82. Sect. XII. How far Repentance is a Condition of the
Covenant: And what it is: Whether Faith or it be first: How Faith and Love
differ, page 83. Sect. XIII. Of the degrees of Pardon and Justification:
Whether losable: And whether future sins be pardoned, page 85. Sect. XIV. Of
Justification by Sentence of the Judge: What it is, ibid. Sect. XV. Of initial
executive Pardon or Justification, in Sanctificati^ How far necessary, yet
imperfect, page 86. Sect. XVI. Of assurance of Pardon: Of doubting: Whether it
be D^^^ Faith to believe ones own Justification or Salvation. The Sp^^
Testimony, page 88. Sect. XVII. Of love to God as the end of Faith; and
foretast of He^^^ page 91. Sect. XVIII. Of Perseverance, and its certainty in
order to the comfort^^ certainty of Salvation. Few certain of Justification,
and ^^^^ of Perseverance. The words of the Synod of Dort. The ^^ there is Judgment
about certainty of perseverance, page 93 Sect. XIX. Of mortal Sin, or such as
will not stand with the love of G^^ and a state of Justification, page 103.
Sect. XX. What Repentance for particular sins is necessary to par^^ page 106.
Sect. XXI. Some solution of all the former difficulties in twenty Prop^^ons,
108. Sect. XXII. Few certain of Salvation. The reconciling consequents of ^^^
page 112. Sect. XXIII. The case of Perseverance further opened and applied,
page 113. Sect. XXIV. The sum and scope of this Discourse of Certainty, page
116. Sect. XXV. Degrees of falling, and danger, page 118. Sect. XXVI. Of final
Justification at Judgment: More of the Agreem^^^ Paul and James about
Justification by Works, page 119. Sect. XXVII. Of the number of the glorified
and the damned, page 123.
A PREMONITION.
MY work at present is but to lay down so much of the Christian Doctrine
briefly, as is necessary to be understood for the reconciling of the
Controversies about Predestination, Providence, Grace and Free Will: And
therefore pass over ^any other weighty Points, and must not stand largely to
prove all ^s I go, which carries its own evidence: The true nature of the
first ^aw or Covenant deserves a more accurate discussion than I can here
^ake; and much passes as certain with some, which has but little ^roof.

And here I meet with these different Opinions: 1. Some say that the ^ondition
of the first Covenant was not Innocence, but sincerity: And ^at Innocence was
only a Duty, necessary necessitate praecepti, but not ^edii: or that it was ut
medium necessary ad melius esse, or to some cer^^in degrees of felicity,
whereof it was a condition, but not to felicity it ^^lf. And that the Covenant
of Grace does herein agree with it; both ^f them damning man only for mortal
sin, and punishing them tempo^^lly only for venial sin. And he seems to be of
this mind, who says ^^at, Do this and live, or Innocence or Works was the
Condition only ^f Moses Law, but that Adhere and Vanquish was the Condition of
the ^rst Covenant: But these are ambiguous unsatisfactory terms: If the ^eaning
be, [Adhere to God and his Law by perfect Innocence, and van^uish all
temptations to Sin,] this is the same with that Innocence which ^e say was the
Condition. But if he mean only, [Adhere to me sin^erely by love as thy Ultimate
End, and vanquish all temptations which ^ould draw thee from me, to another
Ultimate End or God,] this is ^he same with the first opinion; which many
Papists seem to hold.

2. But the more common Opinion is that which I assert, That Inno^ency was the
Condition, not only of Life eternal, but of all the be^efits of Gods Covenant,
and the least sin the forfeiture of all.

They that are for the first Opinion think, that if Adam had committed ^ut a
small or venial sin (as a sinful thought or desire after the forbidden ^ruit,
without the act or full consent) it had been against Gods natural Goodness and
Justice to have condemned him to Hell for it. And con^quently that Christ died
not to pardon the pains of Hell as due for such ^^ttle sins; but only temporal
smaller punishments.

But God best knows his own Nature; And nature tells us, That ^ll sin
deserves punishment: And he that sins, so far removes his ^eart from God,
and forfeiteth his Spirit or Grace: And he that has ^nce so turned from God in
the least degree, cannot of himself return ^or heal himself; and had no promise
of Gods Grace to do it: And therefore it is not to be supposed that he should
sin no more, but such a ^inute sin; for greater will come in presently at that
breach, unless God ^ecover him, which he was not in Justice bound to do: And no
one know^th so well as God how much malignity is in the smallest sin; And it
was as ^asie for sinless Adam to have continued sinless, as for carnal men now
^o forbear gross sin. And he that sins deserves not Heaven or Life; and
there are diverse degrees of punishment in Hell, according to the degrees of
Sin: And Christ died for all our sins: therefore they d^ every one deserve
death: which consisted not with a right to Life: therefore not with a right to
Heaven: And an immortal Soul was not naturally to be annihilated; therefore to
live in some punishment as separated: And Romans 3. 9. all were under Sin, yet
all had not gross S^^* Romans 6. 23. The wages of Sin is Death. Romans 5. 12. Death
passed on al^, for that all have sinned. Romans 2. 12. As many as have sinned
with^^^ Law, shall perish without Law. And we must pray for the pardon of a^^
Sin: And unpardoned Sin will damn men. These are the reasons ^^ this side.

They of the other Opinion say, That the Gospel Covenant shewe^^ Gods Nature as
well as the first Law: That God had not been unjust i^deed, if he had permitted
him to fall into great Sin, and so to peri^^ who committed the least: for he so
permitted Adam to commit the first that was before innocent: But the Justice of
God bound him not so it do: nor would have damned a Lover of God, for a small
Sin, no more than now: That we must not feign a Law which we cannot prove* That
God changes not his holy Nature, and therefore not that Law, which is the
expression of it: That Christ died for all Sin, and all needs pardon; but that
proves not that the least deserved death, much less Hell; but that by Christ's
Death the deserved punishment must be remitted; that all, even Infants, are
guilty of mortal Sin in Adam: The Death is the wages of that Sin which brought
it, but not of the least: That Adam's Law was not severer than that by Moses,
which says, D^ this and live, and yet condemned not men for smaller sins; That
God proclaims pardon of some Sin, in the very Law of Nature as from his
Nature, Exodus 34. and the Second Commandment, That Nature teaches all the
World to believe it: That God said not to Adam, [^^ the day that thou think
a vain thought,] but [That thou eatest,] etc. That mortal Sin is pardonable by
Christ which else could not by the first Law: but God could otherwise have
pardoned a vain thought, if he would: That no Text of Scripture says, that
every Sin deserves Hell, nor is threatened with Death.]

And as the condition of the Penalty, so the condition of the Promise to Adam
is here also controverted by Divines: 1. Some say that the condition of Life
was personal, perfect, perpetual Obedience till ^^^ change; which God would
make as he did by Henoch when it pleased him: (which seems to me the
probablest Opinion).

2. Others think that Adam was to have continued in Eden for ever under that
same conditional Law (which is less probable.)

3. Others think, that had he overcome the first temptation, but so far as to
adhere and vanquish, that is, to continue the love of God, and not to eat that
Fruit, or commit any other mortal Sin, which of its nature kills Love, he had
been confirmed, as the promised Reward.

4. I have lately met with an exceeding ingenious M. S. (written partly against
my self, after others) which asserteth, 1. That the Glory of Justice is the end
of Gods Government. 2. That Do this (perfectly) and live, or Sin (at all) and
die, are the constant terms of Justice under every Covenant. 3. That if Adam
had performed but one ^^ of Obedience, by that Law, he should have been
rewarded with confirmation, or the Holy Ghost (as the Angels) and with
everlasting life. 4. That now all our Reward is only the Act of Gods Justice,
giving ^^ life, as merited by us in Christ on the terms of the Law that says,
Do this and live, Sin and die; in whom we are perfectly innocent and
rewardable; and we have no rewardable Righteousness, nor any to justify us;
but perfect Innocence imputed; because as not to be a Sinner is no merit of a
Reward, so pardon of Sin is no Title to a Reward, etc.

It is not my present task to clear up all these Difficulties, (having done
more toward it in my Methodus Theologiae); but only so much as our present
conciliatory work requires: But yet because I and the matter in hand are
nearly concerned in the M. S. I shall briefly animadvert on all the substance
of it; having first said of the condition of the penalty but a few words.

I. I am loath to confound the certainties with the uncertainties, in this
matter. 1. It is certain, that Gods Law of Nature was man's first and principal
Law; to which the supernatural Revelations were added, and comparatively few.

2. It is certain that Gods Law was perfect, and that both as the impress and
expression of Gods perfect Wisdom and Holiness, and as the Rule of Perfection
to Adam: And therefore that it obliged him to perfection.

3. But this Perfection to which he was obliged, was not at first, all that his
nature would be capable of at last; It was not his duty the first hour of his
life, to Know or Do as much as after the longest time and experience, and as
much as in heavenly perfection: But he was bound to Know, and Love, and Do at
first, as much as at that time his nature was capable of, supposing necessary
Concauses and Objects.

4. This is summed up in, Loving God with all the Heart, Mind and Might. But
the All in maturity and after full experience, and in Glory, is more than the
All in unexperienced juniority. To know, love and obey God, to the utmost
intention of his present natural Power, supposing due Objects, media and
concauses, was Adam's duty and all defectiveness herein was culpable, or sin.

5. All sin of its own nature deserves punishment: Therefore so would the
least culpable thought or word in Adam, or the least culpable defect in the
extent or intention of any holy affection in him.

6. It is certain that Adam's eating the forbidden Fruit, or any one such sin
as consists not with the predominancy of his Love to God as God, in habit,
such as is now inconsistent with true Grace, and is called mortal, was to be
punished with death temporal and eternal, according to the Justice of that Law.

7. They are different questions, 1. What God might do. 2. What he would do,
(as decreed). 3. What he must do, (as necessary because of Justice or
Veracity), to the breaker of that Law. And it is clear that God might, as an
Act of Justice, punish the least culpable thought, or remissness of degree of
Love, with Annihilation, or with any pain-everlasting, which to the Sinner were
no worse than Annihilation. Because, 1. Antecedently to his Law, he might have
done that much as an affliction without sin. 2. And after he did no way (that I
know of) oblige himself to the contrary to a Sinner, before the Covenant of
Grace. 3. And having threatened punishment in general, he might choose what
punishment he saw fit.

8. What God would do as decreed, the prediction or the event only can tell us.

9. That God must (by necessity of Justice and Truth) punish the least sinful
thought or remissness, with some degree of punishment, according to that Law,
seems to me somewhat clear.

1. And yet it is more clear that it is various degrees of punishment which are
comprised in the word [Death] or [Filius mortis] in the threatening; And that we
cannot say, that Justice made it necessary to God to punish the least vain
thought or remissness with the greatest punishment, or damnation.

But (as to the uncertainties) 1. With what degree of punishment God in Justice
must, or would have punished a vain thought, or any sin consistent with his
habitual prevalent love? 2. Or whether a vain thought must needs have separated
Soul and Body, or caused that which we call Hell? 3. Or whether God could in
Justice have pardoned that vain thought, upon less satisfaction than the
sufferings of Christ? These with many others are questions too hard for me,
what ever they may be to wiser men.

But I am satisfied that God would never have damned in Hell any Soul that had
the habitual predominant love of God, though culpably remiss, and otherwise
sinful, while he remained such; yea that Hell and such love of God are
inconsistent: And therefore if any such sin would have damned Adam, it must be
by further quenching and expelling the Spirit of Grace, or forfeiting and
losing Divine assistance, and so first losing that habit of love. The rest I
leave to the more illuminated.

II. Now as to the M. S. (said to be written by a young man of New England,
deceased, M. W.) it has so much accurateness, that in reading it, I greatly
lament the Authors death, before maturity and converse had rectified some of
his notions, and he had longer improved his excellent understanding for the
Church. And because my Doctrine is particularly opposed in it, I shall stay to
animadvert on the substance of the Book.

And it may be reduced to these Propositions.

1. The great fundamental point of it is, That man was made to glorify Gods
Justice for ever.

Animad. This is a great truth, not well considered by many: But it is but a
part of the truth, which is, That man was made to glorify Gods Vit^^ Power,
Wisdom and Love, and is governed eminently by Wisdom, making ORDER, and justly
keeping it, together with mercy, because the glory of Holiness and Love also is
the end. Which I have more carefully opened hereafter.

. 2. M. S. The reason of special government is, That man is causa consilip;
Though as he desires and seeks good in general, he is but a natural Agent:
And therefore Twisse erreth in saying, that God ^iay punish an innocent man,
because he may afflict a beast.

Ans. 1. By causa consilio he means a rational free Agent, having an
Intellect and Free Will; This indeed makes and proves man a subject made to
be morally governed. But when he had laid all his stress on this Free Will
under the name of causa consilio, he went too far in seeming with Gibieuf (whom
he cites and follows as his great Light*) to confine the name of true
liberty to the Amplitude and Holiness of the Will, which is another kind of
Liberty: And (as Armatus truly says) Gibieuf was fitter for a scraphick pious
Discourse (in a Platonic strain) than for such Controversies. 2. As Rada and
other Scotists well prove, there is no Act of the Will, even to good in
general, which is not free, though some be necessary, and the inclination is
natural and not free. 3. Yea he proves, that there is no such thing as a
Volition of any good ingenere, saving as the generical nature of good is found
in some particular (in esse cognito.) 4. Twisse was not so weak as to call that
punishment which is not for sin, but calls it Affliction or Cruciatum only.
And he speaks not what God may do by his ordinate Will: But I think that you
are in the right, and he in the wrong, because the very making us men, and so
governed Subjects, is a declaration of Gods ordinate Will, not to make us
miserable but for sin.

3. M. S. Adam's whole man was sanctified, and so fitted to obey, and to
glorify Justice: His free will was not an indifferency, but (as Gib.) that
noble virtue of his Soul, by which he could go above all created good, so that
Liberty and Eupraxy or Obedience are all one: But we cannot stir an inch to
God, above the Creature. Liberty is to imitate God, whose Will closes with
himself, and rests in himself for ever: And mutability is but an adjunct of
our Liberty.

An. I have better opened and distinguished Liberty before, Lib. 1. Natural
Liberty is to be distinguished from moral, which you describe; and vehemently
assert the former under the name of causa consilio that cannot be forced: But
mere indifferency or mutability is no Liberty it self.

4. M. S. Adam was not made with notions in his Mind, no more than with colors
in his Eyes; but he was made able and fit to see God in the frame of Nature,
especially in his own Will, as inclined to universal good --.

An. Scaliger and others think, that Idea's are born in us, which makes the
Chicken fly at the shadow of the Kite, etc. But I rather say as you, that it is
but a Disposition; which will so easily act, that some call it an Idea, and it
is the same thing that they mean while they differ about the name.

. 5. M. S. Do this and live, is the way that Justice will be glorified in: And
that doing would merit life, Adam either knew by nature, or supernaturally, at
least was confirmed in it by supernatural revelation.

An. This is all true.

. 6. M. S. Do this and live, as the only terms of life are a Catholic and
Theological axiom: Not the words; but Energetick Wisdom printed on the frame.
And the meaning is, close with the last end; or with the true Universal God as
such, which is the sum of the Decalogue: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, etc. The Wills closing with God: And Obedience is in the
subordinate faculties executing the pleasure of the Will.]

An. 1. Obedience is first in the Will it self. 2. Tou do not intelligibly
acquaint us whether by [Do this] you mean any sincere closing with God as* God
and our End, above all Creatures, as the godly now do, though with culpable
remissness and imperfections; or only the most perfect Love and Obedience,
without any imperfection or remissness, or vain irregular thought that is
culpable. But by [Do this] I perceive you mean, Take God for thy God, and love,
adore, and trust him.

. 7. M. S. This was to be expressed by eating of the Tree of Life, and not of
that of Good and Evil, sacramentally, to acknowledge also the Sovereignty of
God.

An. 1. All Obedience formally respects Gods Sovereignty. 2. No doubt the
Trees were symbolical, and the remembrance of them should yet teach us to
prefer living to God, before a selfish, disturstful, needless knowledge; the
increase of which increases sorrow. 3. But that Adam was commanded to eat of
the Tree of Life, I cannot prove, unless the general obligation to choose the
best was as a Command.

. 8. M. S. To be naturally happy is proper to God: therefore Adam was to be led
to it freely by a Covenant.

An. To be happy necessarily, and independently, and primarily, is proper to
God: But you can never prove it any contradiction or impossible for God to make
a Creature naturally happy; nor that there are not such.

. 9. Here the M. S. cites some words of his Gibieuf, making our Being in God
initially, and finally to be our state of amplitude and liberty, and our going
out from God, to be our particularity and state of necessity; as if we were
pre-existent in God, and our individuation ceased upon o^^ return into him as
our End.

An. But these are Platonic Phantasms; And Gibieuf who was a devout Oratorian,
and talks too often of our Deification, as Benedict^^ de Benedictis, Barbanson,
Baker, and other Friars that talk phanatically, must be read with caution and
exception; and as the Soul need not fear too near a Union with God, as the loss
of its individuation, so neither must it desire or hope for such.

. 10. M. S. An unchangeable state of Happiness in the love of God, is called
Eternal Life.

An. No doubt but that is called Eternal Life in the fullest sense, which
actually endures to eternity as to that particular Subject: And so, 1. The
life of Glory perfectively. 2. And a confirmed state of Sanctity here
initially, are usually called Eternal Life. But 3. Whether the lossable state,
which the Angels fell from, and Adam fell from, or that measure of Grace, which
the ancient Fathers thought the justified may fall from, be never so called
also, I cannot prove.

. 11. M. S. Adam's promised Happiness, was, 1. Essential, in this perfect
holiness or love of God. 2. Complemental, in the enjoying God i^ all the
sanctified Creatures in that Paradise, but not to be translated to Heaven,
which Christ only procures us.

An. I inclined to that Opinion 26 years ago, when I wrote the Aphorisms which
you oppose: But I now incline more to the contrary, and rather think man should
have been translated to Heaven as Henoch and Elias were, upon many reasons,
which I now pass by: Though I take it yet to be scarce certain to us.

. 12. M. S. The Holiness of God, is his loving himself as his End; And the
third Person proceeding by a reflex act of the infinite Will and self-love of
God, is therefore called the Holy Spirit.

An. 1. This notion of Gods Holiness (that it is his Self-love) is not to be
contemned; It seems to be so, with this limitation, that you confine not his
Holiness to this, but take this only as the most eminent among the inadequate
conceptions of it: For his whole Transcendency, in Being, Life and Knowledge, as
being adoreable by the Creature, and its End, and the Fountain of all created
Goodness, and specially of Morality, is also Gods Holiness. 2. But the saying
that God is his own End, seems improper, though tolerable if spoken but
analogically: For God neither has nor is to himself a Cause nor an Effect, a
Beginning nor an End. 3. That the third Person proceeds by a reflex Act of
the infinite Will, many Schoolmen boldly say: And so some say, that he is Gods
actual self-love, which is ^he same that you call his Holiness: And some say,
that he is the Divine Will or Love considered in it self, as distinct from
Vital Power, and Intellect (or Wisdom.) But of this I have spoken more largely
elsewhere.

. 13. M. S. Adam's promised Reward was, to be fixed in an unchangeable state of
pleasing God, by this Holy Spirit: not by infusing any new quality which should
unchangeably fasten him to the Rule, (for no created thing can unchangeably
keep a man from falling.)

An. 1. The promise to Adam is very obscure: But Happiness it must needs be,
and everlasting: 2. But it is past my reach to conceive how the Spirit of God
can fix man in perfect holiness without any fixing quality (as it is called) on
his Soul. A constant Act the Soul must have: And 1. If that Act be caused by
any Divine Impulse, disposing the Soul so to act, then that disposition is a
quality. 2. And if there be not both disposition and habit, then the Soul will
not in Glory be habitually, or qualitatively holy, but only actually. 3. And a
habit-acting being perfecter than an act without a habit (or inclination) the
Soul will be more imperfect in Glory, than in this state of Grace. 4. Operari
sequitur esse: God fitteth all his Creatures to their works. And as when he
will give Immortality, he will give a Nature fit for Immortality, even
indissoluble and incorruptible; so when he gives perpetuity of Love, he gives
a nature or habits fit for perpetual Action. Christ says, A good Tree brings
forth good fruit, and an evil Tree evil fruit: Make the Tree good, and his
fruit good. 5. The Operations of Love in Glory, should be ex potentia aut
violentia, aut neutra, if there were no intrinsic disposition or inclination
to them. In a word, it is a contradiction, for a Soul to be perfectly holy, and
not have the perfection of inclination to its Acts.

3. But if the meaning were, that no holy quality alone suffices, without Gods
Influx, that were no more than what must be faid of every Creature: without
Divine Influx no Creature can be or operate a moment: No created thing of it
self, without God, can continue; How then should it keep a man from falling:
But if the Soul have any more goodness of nature or inclination in it than the
Devils have, it must be a created thing, or God himself: If only God, that
proves not a Saint to be himself better than a Devil, as to nature or
disposition, but only that God in him is better.

His reason why the Sun is naturally fixed to its Operations, but not a
glorified Soul, is (. 14. M. S.) that one is a natural, and the other a
voluntary Agent: One, as Gibieuf says, Non agit, sed agitur, the other does
agere and non tantum agitur.]

An. 1. Gibieuf and you were deceived, in thinking that such naturals non
agunt: Passive matter does not Act ex principio essentiali (unless Dr. Glissons
and Campanellas Doctrine hold true.) But the three Active Natures,
Intellectual, Sensitive and Vegetative (and so Fire and the Sun) do ex
principio Activo essentali agere: but nothing does Act, without an Antecedent
Influx to action from the first Cause, in which it is passive: For no Creature
is Independent. 2. Voluntas est quaedam Natura, quamvis libera: To move
naturally only and not freely is proper to Agents merely natural, distinct from
free: But to move freely, and yet from a fixed principle, which shall
infallibly determine the Soul to act freely, is not a contradiction; nor that
which Gibieuf should deny to the glorified.

. 15. M. S. Man, though a Creature, is the first Cause of his own action: He
moves and sets himself on work: else he were not causa consilio: But not
immutable: else he were no Creature.

An. You set up Free Will and Power more grossly in terms than I dare do,
though, I suppose, our meaning is the same. Had I said thus, what had I heard?
I only say, that man may be a causa prima secundum quid, of the moral
specification or modification of his own Actions: But he is simpliciter no
causa prima of the Action in genere actionis: else he were God. But a causa
principalis he may be called, though not prima. 2. You never proved that God
cannot make a Creature naturally immutable dependently on himself, that is,
such as will never change unless God change them; nor that Jesus Christ is not
such in his Humanity.

. 16. M. S. This confirmation is not by being in Heaven; but by the Holy Ghosts
special working on the Soul, revealing still Gods Perfections to it.

An. And does this Operation of the Holy Ghost make the Soul never the better,
in nature or disposition, but only in Act? Though it is true, that no habits
immutably fix without the Influct of the Holy Ghost.

. 17. M. S. Merit is the suitableness of the work to the wages.

An. Merit is manifold, and needs better explication: In the Comm^tative
Justice of mere Proprietors, merit is indeed the Comparative value of things,
and in works, their suitableness as you say to the wages, that is, their equal
worth. But in distributive governing Justice, there is no wages, but only
Reward: And merit is the moral aptitude for Reward: which is as various as the
Law is that one is governed by: There are five sorts of Law, that by five sorts
or ways of Justice, require five sorts of merit: 1. Gods Law of Innocence to
Adam: where Justice called nothing, but personal perfect Obedience, Merit: 2.
Gods Law to the Mediator, who was obliged perfectly to keep, 1. The whole Law
of Nature. 2. The Law of Moses. 3. A peculiar Law of Mediation (to die, rise,
do Miracles, etc.) The keeping of all this was Christ's Merit. 3. There is
Christ's Law of Grace to fallen man (in the first, and in the perfect
Editions,) where our keeping of it, is by Gospel-Justice called in Scripture
(...), our worthiness or merit, that is, in tantum, secundum quid, in relation
to that Law. That is to repent and believe, to love God and obey him sincerely.
4. There is the Law of Moses, peculiar to the Jews, which has its peculiar
required merit. 5. And there are the Laws of Men appointed and allowed of God,
which have their peculiar Justice and Merit. All these are not to be
confounded, much less all denied, as if there were no merit but between
Proprietors in Commutative Justice; In which sense no Creature can merit of God.

. 18. M. S. According to that Covenant, any one Act of Obedience in Adam would
have merited confirmation and eternal life; that is, one act of holy love.

An. I believe it not, because it is not written, nor naturally revealed, that
I know of. My reasons against it are, 1. It is dangerous to add to Gods Word.

2. The words [In the day that thou eatest thou shall die] seems to look
further than to one first act or day, and is as much as whenever thou eatest;
though he should obey till that time.

3. It is utterly improbable that Adam did not perform one Act of Love or
Obedience before his Fall. For, 1. We are uncertain how long he stood; However
confident some Rabbis, and Broughton and some others are, that it was the same
day in which he was created. 2. You confess he was made with powers sanctified
and fitted to obey. 3. Gods Law of Love was written in his heart, and as old as
himself; and could not but oblige a fit subject to the act. And he must sin all
that while that he loved not God as God. 4. He had many thoughts and affections
all that while; which were sinful if not animated by holy Love, and done in
Obedience to God. 5. He spent some time, which was sinfully spent, if not spent
in Love and Obedience. 6. God spoke to him, and so had sensible Communion with
him, which must needs oblige him to some love. 7. He had a Law given him to
dress and keep the Garden, which if he accepted not by consent in Obedience to
God, he sinned. 8. He gave names to all the Creatures upon Gods bringing them
to him; which must be done obediently or sinfully. 9. He had the Law of
Marriage given him, with the Woman; which if he received not in love and
obedience he sinned. 10. He had all the World before him to show him Gods
Perfections, and if yet he had not one act of love to God as God, he hainously
sinned. 11. He had the Law of Love and Obedience given him by way of Covenant,
that is, binding him presently to consent; And he could not delay a willing
consent one minute or hour without sin: And consent is Love and Obedience in
the first act. 12. He loved himself, and his Wife, and other Creatures before
his Fall: But if he loved not God before, then he all that while loved himself,
his Wife, and all the Creatures more than God, yea without God: And then they
were his Idols. 13. Else he never used one Creature holily before his Fall, and
therefore sinfully. 14. You make Adam to have had less actual good before his
Fall than the weakest Christian now; If not than many wicked men; who have some
moral good secundum quid, though not simpliciter.

4. I do not think that the Reward which Christ was to have for his fulfilling
the Law was immutability or confirmation: For I think he had that in his very
nature, by the Unity of the Divine and Humane in one Person. But I think that
the perfect Glory of his Humanity was part of his Reward, Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9.
Heb. 12. 23, etc. And therefore that Glory has much more in it, than
confirmation in Grace: But it is plain in the Gospel, that it was not only one
Act of Obedience, which was Christ's condition, in order to his receiving the
Fruits or full Reward of his Merits: But it was perfect Holiness of Nature and
Life to the end of his course on Earth. Else you must say that Christ's first
Act of Obedience was his performance of his Covenant-Condition, and all the
rest for some other purpose only; which is absurd.

5. One act of our Obedience now is not the fulfilling of all the Condition of
the Covenant of Grace, nor entitleth us alone to Glory, unless God cut off our
life as soon as that act is done: Perseverance to the end is part of our
Condition of Glory. And we know of no such difference between Adam's Covenant
or Case and ours, as will prove it otherwise with him.

6. Else it would make the Condition of the Covenant of Grace to be much harder
and severer than of the Law of Innocence; which is not likely: To perform one
act of Love and Obedience, is not so hard as to do it to the death, though we
lose our lives in the expressions of it.

Object. But our first Faith gives us Right to the Spirit of Confirmation and
Immutability, though more must be done for Perfection.

Answ. 1. It appears then that Perfection and Glory is more than
Confirmation. 2. It is certain, that the Regenerate are mutable as to the
degrees of Grace, and are far from Perfection at the first. 3. The generality
of the Fathers and ancient Churches thought that true Justification, and Right
to Heaven, and true Love to God, was lost by many: And Austin himself and his
Followers so thought. 4. And they that think otherwise yet know, that Glory is
still given us (quoad jus in the Promise) on condition of our perseverance: And
we should hardly find so many Threatenings against them that fall away, if all
might so easily know that the first act of Obedience does so fix us, and give
us in justice a Right to Immutability.

. 19. M. S. The Arguments to prove that any one Act had the promise of
Immutability and Glory are these, Argument 1. If God were to declare his
rewarding Justice, then he must reward one act. Thus Bradwardi^^ also chideth
his Master Lombard, as inclining to Pelagius, for holding that Adam could have
forborne Sin by his Free Will, without Gods sp^d^l Grace, that is, his Will that
so it should be: which he says was necess^ry before the Fall as well as since:
and that else Adam by once not s^^ning, when tempted, had merited Confirmation,
as he says the Angels did, being tempted by Leviathan, lib. 2. c. 10.

An. 1. God was not obliged to any Reward, but according to the tenor of his
Law. Prove that his Law promised Glory or Immutability for one act? 2. Bonum
est ex causis integris: one act is but a small pa^^ of a man's life. The Promise
was to the whole course only. 3. God did reward every act: His acceptance, and
the continuance of all ^he blessings of that Paradise, and the comfort of his
Love, was a gre^^ Reward.

. 20. M. S. If one act of Obedience deserved unchangeable Happines^ then God
must bestow it. But, etc.]

An. I deny the minor: One act deserved it not. No act deserved in Commutative
Justice: And no act deserved it of governing Justice, but such as the Law
antecedently made it due to.

. 21. M. S. Merit, it is a fuitableness of the work to the wages. ^^^ that
please God are under his good pleasure; the fruit of which must be ^^^ enjoying
of his Spirits infinite assistance. This Adam might have claimed ^^ Justice,
and gloried: for one act deserves a Reward.]

An. This is sufficiently answered; 1. Wages strictly taken is M^^^^ given by a
Proprietary commutatively: It Is blasphemy to say that God can owe any Creature
such, for he can receive nothing but his own. The word when used to us, is
improperly taken: But praemium a Reward we have; but no work deserves that,
but by the ordinate Justice of the Law. Some few Papists talk of a dignity ex
proportione oper^^, but the Scotists and the wisest of them deny any but, 1. Ex
congruitate. 2. Ex pacto. Your suitableness may signify either, 1. A congruity
ad fines regiminis; or else ad praemium qua promissum: And thus it is true* But
it is not proved that any one act was such. 2. Or it may ^ignifie a suitableness
in proportion ex simplici dignitate operis, obliging the Governor antecedently
to his Law. 2. Or obliging God as Proprietor to compensation; And so it is
untrue, that Merit is a suitableness of the work to the wages, here.

2. It Is unproved that Gods pleasedness must ever be showed by the Spirits
infinite assistance: or that one act deserved this. It Is unlike that the Angels
that kept not their first state, did never one act of Obedience, nor were never
under Gods approbation; Prove. 16. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he
makes his Enemies to be at peace with him: God says, This ^is a Reward: You
say less than eternal life is none; 1 King. 3. 10. The speech of Solomon
pleased the Lord: And yet one would think by his filthiness, and Idolatry, and
forsaking God, that he was not glorified, nor made immutable. With the
Sacrifice of Alms God is well pleased, Heb. 13. 16. Phil. 4. 18. and with
Relation-Duties, Col. 3. 20. And yet all that did them (even sincerely) were
not glorified then, nor absolutely immutable.

. 22. M. S. Arg. 2. Unchangeable misery would have been the reward of one sin:
Ergo, etc.]

An. I deny the consequen^e: Misery was threatened to one sin; Glory was not
promised to one act of Obedience. Obedience, during life, is certainly due from
Man to God: He that denies it him in one act, denies him his due: But he that
gives it him in one act, gives him but little of his due. Your Argument is
like these: The Soldier that is a Traitor in one act, deserves death:
Therefore he that watches or fights but once deserves all his wages and
honor. The Son that curses his Father once, deserves punishment* Therefore
he that obeys him once deserves the Inheritance. He that is bound to pay an
hundred pound forfeiteth his Bond if he leave a penny unpaid: Therefore he
forfeits it not if he pay but a penny: The Servant that is hired for a day or
year, does forfeit his wages if he be idle or rebel an hour or a day: Therefore
he deserves his wages, if he do Service but an hour or a day: The disease of
one part may kill a man: Therefore the health of one part only will keep a man
alive. He that is hired to build a House or a Ship well, forfeits his wages for
one hole, or gross defect: Therefore he deserves his wages if he lay but one
Brick or Board. But bonum est ex causts integris.

. 23. M. S. His Sin is more his own than his Obedience. Ans. The assistance of
the Spirit could not take place in the first act, because not deserved: And his
Obedience would have been as much his own as his Sin.

An. This is quite beyond the Jesuits: 1. It Is true that the rewarding gift or
help of the Spirit (for confirmation) was not given Adam to his first act: But
it is not true that he had no help of the Spirit: If you will not call Gods
necessary Grace, which you said did sanctify all his powers, by the name of
the Spirits help; you must say, It was the help of God the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit; without which he could have done nothing. 2. But can you think that God
did as much to his Sin, as to his Sanctification; and caused it as much as he
was ready to cause his first Obedience? Should he have been no more beholden to
God for his Holiness than for his Sin? This is too indifferent a Liberty, and
not Gibieufs Amplitude. It is not possible for a Creature to have any thing
that is good but of God, nor any good from God but by mere free Gift, as to the
Good or Value; though it be by rewarding Justice quoad ordinem conferendi, and
comparatively, why this man has it rather than that.

. 24. M. S. There is no stinting or determining, unless you stop here (at the
first act.)

An. I deny it: There are three Opinions more that are all more probable. The
first which supposes the Reward of life eternal due upon the over* coming of
the Devils first temptation, which would have drawn from the Love of God; And
so [Love and Conquer once] was the Condition. The second which supposes that
the Condition was the Conquest of this particular Temptation, to eat of the
forbidden Fruit, and the after eating of the Tree of Life. The third which
supposes the only Condition of life eternal to the personal, perfect,
perpetual Obedience, or perseverance, till God of his own pleasure should
translate Adam, and end his life of trial. I take this last to have far most
probability, for all the Reasons before given: I am sure that the tenor of the
Law of Nature made it Adam's Duty still to love God, and obey him, and resist
all that was against it: And I find no Promise that his Nature, or the Law of
Nature should be changed, for this or that act, or for conquering some one
temptation. I find that Christ's own Covenant-Condition was more than one act:
And the Condition of our Glory is overcoming, and being faithful to the death,
and continuing in Christ. And I will not add to the Covenant of God.

. 25. M. S. Arg. 4. From the nature of an obediental act: which includes the
approving of the whole Law.

An. 1. Approving the things that are excellent, is made consistent with
wickedness, Romans 2. But I will suppose you to mean a full consent to the
Covenant of Innocence. But 2. How prove you that such consent was the whole
condition of life, and that it might not be fallen from? and that Adam never
did consent before his Fall? and yet not sin* 3. All the godly approve of Gods
Law, and consent to it, and love it, and yet merit not as keepers of it; for
they break it, Romans 7. 4. Yea Covenant-keeping to the last, as well as
Covenant-consent the first moment, is now to us the condition of immutable
Glory.

. 26. M. S. Adam would not obey at first, but suspend while he looked about the
World, to see if there were any good sufficient for him below God: Therefore he
sinned not then.

An. This is before confuted: He could not in that Integrity, and after such
divine Revelation, be unresolved one hour whether he must first love and obey
his Maker, without sin.

. 27. God cannot freely give eternal life to a Creature without Reward for
doing, because the reasonable Creature was made for the Glory of Justice.

An. 1. You may say, that God will not to man, but not that he cannot, nor that
he does not to any Angel. For man was not made only for the Glory of Justice,
but of Power, and Love, or Goodness also. 2. It Is certain, that God as a free
Benefactor gives many good things freely, and ^^ as a Reward for doing: As 1.
He so freely made all things good in the Creation, and gave man all his
antecedent good: He so gave Ad^^ his primitive Holiness, and Helps, and
Paradise, and all the Creature^. 2. He so gave Christ to the World, without
desert: and so far pardoned the first sin, as that comes to. 3. He so far gave
man the Covenant of Grace. 4. He so gave all Christ's Miracles, Resurrection,
Doctrine, the Scripture, etc. 5. He so gave Apostles and Ministry to the World.
6. He so sends the Gospel to some Nations and Persons above others. 7. He so
gives to many the first special Grace, as he did to Paul. 8. He so gives to
many Kingdoms and Persons Wealth, and Health, and Strength, and such other
mercies above others. 9. He so gives greater measures of Grace to some than to
others. 10. And it seems that he so (in part) gives the same Glory to some
that came in but at the last hour of the day. It is certain, that all in
quantum tale, is from God only as a free Benefactor, or as the Amor primus: And
the order of distributing it is twofold: Some antecedent to man's merit or
acts, and independent on it: And this is no Reward, (though sometime it is an
antecedent act of Justice, such as is the making of a good Law or Promise.) And
some consequent juxta morman legis; And these are Rewards: And though God has
assured us now, that no man shall have Heaven but by rewarding Justice, yet
that may be, because he thought meet to place man first on Earth in a life of
trial, and undetermined Liberty: But that he has no Angel that was made
Immutable, or that Christ was not made immutably holy, let them say that can
prove it, for I cannot.

. 28. M. S. It Is like that the Angels that stood and they that fell had unequal
help: for unequal Effects are of an unequal Cause. But Adam and the Devils had
sufficient Grace, and God forsook them not till they forsook him.

An. 1. This last I accept as true, and more than some will grant. 2. The first
is above our reach: only we can say, both that God gives more Grace to some
than to others freely. 3. And yet he himself is simple and immutable in causing
of various and mutable Effects.

. 29. M. S. By Christ's passive Obedience imputed we are pardoned and ^ustified,
and by his active imputed we deserve the Reward, and are under Gods approving
Will.

An. 1. By the merit of his habitual, active and passive, that is, of his
performing all his mediatorial Covenant with the Father, we are pardoned, and
justified, and adopted to eternal life, principally as a Reward to Christ (not
to us as meriting by him) and subordinately, according to Gospel-Justice or
Order, as a Reward to Believers for their Faith and Obedience; by him who will
Reward every man according to his Works, and will be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in Believers, because they believed, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, to 12. We are
under Gods approving Will, principally as united to Christ, reconciled,
justified, adopted; and subordinately as sanctified and obedient. For the
Father loves us, because we have loved Christ and believed, Joh. 16. 27. And
it is life eternal to know the Father and the Son, Joh. 17. 3. And because we
do those things that are pleasing in his sight, whatever we ask we receive, 1 John 3. 22.

. 30. M. S. By Christ's imputed suffering we are but where we were: For the Law
to have nothing against us will not justify us, unless it have something for
us.

An. This great question needs distincter handling: Adam's Law does not
justify us, but condemn us, nor Moses's neither; nor any but the Law of Grace.
Your foundation is unsound. 2. The imputing of Christ's Suffering, is not Gods
Language, but your own, and may be well or ill understood. 3. If the Law have
nothing against us, it has no Sin of Omission against us: Therefore not our
omission of Love and Obedience. And then we are reputed such as had perfect
Love and Obedience. 4. But indeed it is not so. By the deeds of the Law no
Flesh can be justified: The Law still has this against us, that we have
sinned; which he that denies is called a Liar, 1 John 1. The Reatus Culpae in
se, or the Reality of this, that we have sinned, is impossible to be done away.
But the Reatus poenae, and culpae ut ad poenam is done away: But not by the
Law, but by the Redeemer and new Covenant. The Law does not say, We are
sinless, or deservers of life: But the Gospel says, We are pardoned, and
adopted, and sanctified, through Christ's perfect meritorious Righteousness.

. 31. M. S. Else Sin and Punishment should be the cause of life: for Sin is the
cause of Suffering, and that of Pardon.

An. This is the grossest passage in this Book; A palpable fallacy. You may as
well say that Lazarus's dying and being buried were the causes of his reviving;
because antecedent evils from which he was revived: Or that the Jews killing
Christ were the causes of his Resurrection; Or that Peter's cutting off Malchus
Ear was the cause that Christ cured him; Or that Peter's denying Christ was the
cause that Christ pardoned him. Sin deserves Punishment; but Punishment as
such deserves not Pardon or Life: They in Hell deserve not Heaven. If God had
threatened but a temporal Punishment; As a years sickness, etc. this had not
deserved the following impunity, or peace, but only interrupted peace, the Sin
deserving this and no more. A Malefactor's scourging deserves not his after
peace. And Christ's Suffering merited not our Pardon as reputed our suffering,
nor merely as suffering; For had we suffered, we had not been pardoned. But the
voluntary Suffering of so glorious and innocent a Person, to demonstrate
Justice, deserved our impunity and more, because God would have it so, and it
was a means most apt for this excellent end, to save lost man, and to vindicate
and glorify the Wisdom, Truth and Justice of the Universal King, and to
demonstrate the Goodness and Love of our great Benefactor. But sufferings as
such do mer^^ nothing; even Christ's own Sufferings merit but as they are the
fruits of Obedience and voluntary consent, on the foresaid accounts; much less
do the sufferings of the Sinner merit: For he is supposed involuntary in them;
and it is God the Judge that is the Author of them as such.

. 32. M. S. Else the Law should be laid by, and life given without it.

An. The root of all your Error is, That God gives us life by the Law of
Innocence or Works, and that we are justified by that Law^ which is not true.
God laid none of it by; but man by sin made the promissory part (which gave
life on condition of perfect Obedience and Innocence) to be impossible, or
null: It ceased cessante capacitate subditorum, by man's mutation, and not by
Gods: But the preceptive part remains still, as far as it reaches materially
the state of Sinners. But man having made it impossible to be justified by the
deeds of the Law, God made us a new Law or Covenant, according to which he
judges Sinners, and by which he first gives Righteousness, and then according
to it sentenceth men as Righteous.

. 33. M. S. Justification of the Posterity of Adam should have been the same
for substance as of Believers by Christ. Adam's one Act should have confirmed
all his Posterity in him as a public Person: The Covenant of Works and of
Grace agree in justifying by imputed Righteousness: but out of a Head by
Generation, the other by a divine Person.]

An. This is presumptuous adding to Gods Word, in the very substance of the
Covenants; yea and a flat contradiction of it 1. What Scripture tells us,
That all Adam's Posterity should have been confirmed in immutable Holiness, if
he had obeyed?

2. What Scripture says, That one Act should have done this?

3. What Scripture says, That his Righteousness should have been imputed to
all his Posterity? and they all accounted to have fulfilled the Law in him? The
Scripture tells us nothing of Gods purpose to make so sudden a change of his
Law, as if he made it but for one man, yea for o^^ Act, and then would make
another to Rule the World by ever after: The Law said (in sense) [Obey
perfectly and live; Sin and die]. Now if the Condition had been performed by
one Act, or one man, for all the World that ever should come of him to the
last, and they all be born in the fixed possession of the Reward, then the Law
which gives that Reward still but conditionally has no more place. As in
Hell, God does not say to the damned, Obey and live, so neither does he say to
them in immutable Glory, I give you immutable Glory if you will obey. The means
cease so far as the end is either attained, or desperately lost. He that says,
Run well, and you shall have the prize: Fight well, and you shall be crowned;
Overcome, and I will give you a Kingdom; will not say the same to them, when
after running, fighting, overcoming, they have received the Prize, the Crown,
the Kingdom; (though possibly they may have the continuance on condition still
if that continuance was not also promised on the first condition alone.) So
that you feign Gods Law to be incredibly mutable, if God said by it to Adam,
Obey in one Act (o^ obey thy self) and thou and all thy Posterity for that
shall have the Reward: For then he can never be supposed to say the same again
to Adam, or to any man: And yet you think you stand so much for the
^mmutability of that Law, as that we must all be justified by it to the and.

Nay it seems that after one Act of Obedience, all the World should have been
under no Covenant any more; or no promissory conditional Law, but only fixed by
necessitating Light and Love, as those in Glory ^re: For when this Condition
was fully performed, this Law or Covenant as conditional must needs cease: And
you imagine not, I suppose (at* least mention not) any other conditional
Covenant that should ^ucceed it. And necessitation is not a Moral Law, suited
to such as you call cause consilio in this life. You would make all the World
after one ^ct, to be if not lawless, yet Comprehensors and not Viators;
Professors of life eternal, and not seekers, in a life of trial.

But I find not but that all Adam's Posterity should have been born and ^ived
under the same Law that he was made under: And all of them should still have
heard, [Obey and live, or Sin and die]. And if Adam ^ad obeyed till his
translation to Glory, or confirmation in the Reward, I find not in Scripture
any Promise that this should have been im^uted to his Posterity, as the full
performance of the Condition of their Life or confirmed Happiness: but that
still their own sinning would have been a possible thing, and death would have
been the wages of their Sin.

You seem not to set Adam's Merits and imputed Righteousness any ^igher than
Christ's. And I am too sure that the justified Members of Christ do sin, and
must ask daily pardon; And whether or not they be confirmed against total
Apostasy, I am sure few if any of them are confirmed against the possibility,
or existence, or futurity of Sin, And if you say that Adam's Posterity, though
confirmed, should have sinned too, but should have been pardoned as we are; It
would be another presumptuous addition and contradiction of Scripture, to
assert Pardon without a Savior and a pardoning Covenant.

3. Adam's Obedience would have justified his next issue from this false
Accusation, [You are born of a sinful Parent, or not of a righteous Parent].
But it would have justified no man against this Accusation, [You are personally
a Sinner, or have not personally loved God and obeyed him]. Therefore it would
have justified any man against this Charge, [You are to be condemned for Adam's
sin]. But it would have justified no man against these Charges, [You are to be
condemned for your own personal Sin; or, you have no right to Glory by Gods
Promise to the adult, which makes their personal Obedience the Condition].

4. And (though I cannot again here have time to deal with Confounders, who
think that Imputation or Justification are words which have but one sense,) I
must say that even so, Christ's Righteousness is not so imputed to any man, as
to be to him in stead of his personal Obedience to the Law or Covenant of Grace
which he is under: But it will justify any. Believer from these Accusations,
[You must be cast into Hell for breaking the Law of Innocence, or you must be
shut out of Heaven, because you deserved it not by perfect Obedience; or you
have no perfect or sufficient Savior; or you are such as God cannot pardon
without wrong to his Truth* Wisdom or Justice.] It will justify no man from
any of these Charges, [You are Sinners: you deserve condemnation by the first
Law: you are Impenitent, or Unbelievers, or Hyp^crites; or have not performed
the conditions of life in the Law of Grace.] The two first we must confess, and
not justify our selves by a denial: And against the last we must be justified
by our own Repentance, Faith and sincere Obedience. He that will say to the
Accuser, that charge him with final Infidelity, Impenitency or Unholiness; I
am justified by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, will but add to his
sin.

5. There are all these differences between our Justification according to the
first Law (had we been capable of it) and that which we now have. 1. One would
have been by God as Creator and Legislator to the Innocent: The other by Christ
as Redeemer and Legislator to the sinful World. 2. One would have been for
personal, perfect, persevering Obedience: The other for Christ's Merits, as
purchasing a free Pardon and Grace to penitent Believers, and upon our own
Faith and Repentance, as the Conditions of the new Covenant. 3. One would have
been without pardon; and the other chiefly or much by pardon: In one, if our
Public Root had perfectly obeyed, we must also have perfectly obeyed, or die.
In the other, because our Public Root did perfectly obey, Faith and sinceere
Obedience to the end, is all that is required of us to ou^ Glory. 4. In one the
personal matter of worthiness or merit, must have been all that perfection
which God in justice could require of man: In the other, it is only, The
acceptance of a free Gift, according to its nature and use, and after the
thankful use and improvement of it: with other such differences.

. 34. M. S. What Christ did as surety is imputed to us; but not his Suretiship,
or being a public Person.]

Ans. This is true, if you understand Imputation in Scripture sense, or
soundly, and not in their sense who presumptuously say, That God reputeth us to
have done all by Christ, which he did for us in his Obedience to the Law.

. 35. M. S. Christ did not all that he did as Surety; but only that which
answered the Law.]

An. I suppose you mean, that which the Law requires of us: But the word
[Surety] is ambiguous, and after here explained, and whether you understood it
sano sensu I know not. He did all that he did as the Mediator and Sponsor, for
man's Redemption: And we are pardoned and justified by the merit of all his own
Covenant-keeping with the Father; even of such acts as the Law required not of
us: And some which the Law required of many, he did not, because it required
them not of him.

. 36. M. S. The Law said not, That Christ must be a holy Husband or Father,
etc. The Imputation of one Act of Christ's Obedience is sufficient (to our
Justification and Merit of life) though it need not be curiously set in this or
that part of his life.]

. Still more presumption; 1. Where says the Scripture so? 2. You must not
assert absurdities or presumptions, and then think to put off the detection of
them, by calling it curious? If this be true, doubtless it was Christ's first
act of Obedience which merited Glory for us. And so it is that first only that
must be imputed to us, to that end. And who ever thought so before you? The
Friars have some of them said, That minima guttula sanguinis Christi, One drop
of his blood was enough to redeem all the World: And our Divines say, Why then
was the rest shed? So I ask you, 1. Why did Christ do all the rest of his
Obedience after the first Act? Has none of it the same end and use? 2. How
shall we be sure that a Sinner must not plead or trust to any of Christ's
Righteousness, but the first act for his Justification and Reward? or must he
trust for it to that which was never by Christ intended for it? 3. This is
contrary to the Scripture, which lays our Justification on his whole
Righteousness as meritorious, and on his Obedience to the Death, and on his
rising again, and on other parts first, Romans 4. 24. and 5. throughout, etc. 4.
Sure they that are so curious, as to tell us which physical act of Faith
justifies (in specie and numero) (for some say only the first instantaneous
act does justify,) will not think it curiosity to enquire which one Act of
Christ's Obedience justifies us? when according to your Doctrine, it is evident
that it must be the first: And they that say, It is Justification by Works, to
be justified by any act of Faith in specie, besides the recumbency on his
Righteousness to be imputed to us, or by any numero besides the first, will
likely say that it is Justification by another Righteousness than that which
the Scripture says is imputed to us, to be justified by the Imputation of any
but the first Act of Christ's Obedience. Or else that (if all be imputed) we
have a redundancy of Righteousness, and deserve many Heavens, or one oftener
than needs. But when men have received some unsound Principles, all things must
be forced to comply with them.

. 37. M. S. Toward the end, the M. S. summeth up my Assertions, and sets
down some as contrary to them. In reckoning up mine, he shows candor and
ingenuity, and a good memory, having not the Book at hand: But I must advertise
his Readers, 1. That he takes all from my Aphorisms, the first Book I wrote,
in my youth, when my Conceptions of these things were less digested; wherefore
I have above twenty years ago retracted that Book, till I had leisure to
correct it, and have since more fully opened my judgment in my Confession, and
in my Disput. of Justification and other Writings, and most fully in my
Methodus Theologiae unpublished. 2. That he over-looketh my asserting our
Adoption to be by the Merits of Christ's Active Obedience, yea and our
Justification too, as well as by his Passive. 3. That reciting my words, that
it is by Gods Will in the form of his Donation or Covenant that Faith has that
use to Justification which is nearest it, viz. the formal Reason of a
Condition, he leaves out my other assertion, that Faiths material disposition
or aptitude to this form or office, is the very nature of it, as fitted to that
use about its Object, Christ, which Gods design and our case required.

His Assertions as against me are as follows.

. 28. M. S. 1. There is no way to Life but by Doing: It is not enough that the
Law be not dishonored, but it must be glorified.

An. Doing is a word of doubtful sense: It Is one thing to Do all that the Law
of Innocence required; and another thing to do all that the Law of Grace makes
necessary to life: It Is one thing to Do all our selves, and another thing for a
Mediator to merit Pardon and Life (to be given conditionally by a new Covenant)
by Doing all in kind (and much more than all that we should have done) for us
(though not in our persons). The way to Life now has many parts, 1. Christ's
perfect, habitual, active and passive Righteousness, (fulfilling the Law of
Innocence, and the Law of Moses, and the peculiar Law of the Mediator,) to
merit Pardon, Spirit, Adoption and Glory to be given by the New Covenant on its
terms. 2. The said New Covenant as the donative Instrument and Law of Life, and
Pardon, and Adoption by it. 3. Our doing or performing the Conditions of the
New Covenant by Grace. But our personal Doing all according to the Law of
Innocence really or reputatively, to be justified by that Law, is none of the
way of Life, which you think the only way. (And I hope we shall both meet
there).

. 39. M. S. It Is clear as the light of the Sun, that their fundamental
distinction is absurd, to make sinning and suffering equivalent to doing:
because he that has born the utmost penalty, has done no more toward living,
than he that never sinned or suffered: else Adam in Innocence should have been
sentenced worthy of life. If a Servant instead of his Service steal, and
restore it, he meriteth not his wages, etc.]

An. 1. It Is certain that you mistake and wrong us: I never put sinning among
the things that are equivalent to doing or meriting: Of this before. 2. I doubt
you noted not sufficiently that no Creature can merit commutatively as a
Proprietor of God, as a Servant does his wages; nor can have any thing of God
but what (in respect of such merit and the value of the thing) is an absolute
free Gift: free as to commutation: And that all Gods Laws of Life, are but a
prescription of the wise Order in which he will give his free benefits; As a
Father will give Lands to the Son that will behave himself decently and
thankfully, and not to the contemptuous Rebel: So that as to commutation no Man
or Angel has other merit, than not to commerit the contrary (perdition): God
is never the better for our Doing. If you dream of meriting commutatively from
a Proprietor by work for wages, I can soon tell you what we set up instead of
such merit: I hope you had no such thoughts, but want of due distinguishing.
But as to Doing and Merit in respect to Paternal Justice, that which I set
instead of fulfilling the first Law is a^ aforesaid, (not sinning and
suffering, but) 1. Christ's Satisfaction, and the Merit of his complete
Righteousness. 2. The Gift of Pardon and Life by a new conditional Covenant
merited and made by him. 3. Actual Pardon of all sin thereby. 4. Actual
Adoption. 5. Our fulfilling the Condition of that Covenant, that these may be
ours.

And thus the Law was dishonored by our Sin, but is glorified by Christ's
Obedience and Satisfaction; And Gospel-Justice, but specially Mercy, glorified
in our personal Obedience to the Gospel: without such Doing indeed (Christ's as
Principal in fulfilling the Law in the Person of a Mediator, and ours as
subordinate in obeying the Gospel,) there is no Glorification. And I think this
is plain truth.

But in your instance of a Servant deserving his wages, you seem to look at
Commutative Justice, when we have to do only with governing (Paternal) Justice:
And you should have remembered that if the Servant do not his Work, in order of
governing Justice, it is his crime: And if he have no fault, he has no fault
of Omission: And he that has no Sin of Omission has done all his Duty, and so
deserved the Reward. As for Adam. 1. In the first instant of his life he was
bound to no present Duty, before he could do a moral Act. 2. But afterward I
think he merited in tantum and pro tempore; and had not the Condition of the
Promise been of further extent than one act, he had merited life: But a Reward
for a years Duty is not merited by an hours.

. 40. M. S. There is a medium between just and unjust: He was nonjustus; He was
not actually just, though habitually: He had done nothing for which the Law
could justify him: else why did he not live for ever?

An. 1. Habitual holiness fits a Soul for Glory, where no more is due (as if
one die immediately.) And so it would have done Adam, had God translated him
instantly, and made him no Law of actual Duty. 2. But afterward that Adam in
Innocence did that for which the Law would justify him in tantum, for that
time, He fulfilled all the Law for so long: else he had sinned by Omission. 3.
But that Law giving life eternal only to Obedience to the end of his time of
trial, he merited not that life by initial Obedience. This was initial
imperfect Righteousness, wanting perseverance; but not a medium between Just
and Unjust, except as Just signifies the merit of Life by persevering
Righteousness to the last: And so I never denied but in a disobliged Subject
there is a medium: Adam was not bound to do a years work the first hour; and so
was neither just nor privatively unjust as to the future years work: but as to
what he was presently obliged to, he was either Righteous or a Sinner. Here you
come short of necessary accurateness. Perseverance is a part of our Condition
of Glorification: Yet he that is not dead is just, if he be a Believer and
obedient: And if God now call him by death, he shall be glorified: But he has
not now done all that is to be done till his death, if he live longer: So that
his Right to the present possession of Glory before death is not justifiable,
but his Right in case he now die, is.

. 41. M. S. Faith, (...) credere cannot be put in exchange for fac hoc; and
therefore justified only as it relates to him who has suffered and done for
all that will receive him.

An. 1. Exchange is an ambiguous word: Here is no proper exchange. Faith is not
a fulfilling of the Law of Innocence, nor so reputed by God: Christ did both
satisfy for our not-fulfilling it, and also by that and by fulfilling it
himself (not in our persons, but his own) did merit the free Gift of Life to us
to be ours, upon new Covenant terms, and Faith and Repentance are the
Conditions of that New Covenant, and so are that Duty which is laid on our
selves to do instead of perfect Obedience, supposing Christ's Satisfaction and
Merits, which are instead of it quoad precium or principally, as our said acts
are instead of it as to what is necessary in our selves: And the Apostle who so
often says, Faith is imputed to us for Righteousness, does neither by Faith,
mean Christ, nor mean that Faith is imputed as a fulfilling the Law of Works:
But that having no such merit of our own, (or Righteousness) our believing in
him that has satisfied and merited for us, is reckoned to us instead of a
Righteousness or Merit, as being all that now is necessary to our Justification
in our selves, (our persevering Obedience being afterward necessary to our
Glory.)

2. No doubt Faith relates to Christ, and here connoteth him as its Object: It
were not Christian Faith else: But it is also related to the New Covenant as
its Condition, and in that form has its place to our Justification, which
cannot be denied: Therefore you untruly say, [Only as relating to Christ,] and
your words confute your self: You say, [Who has suffered and done for all that
will receive him.] You speak either of secret Decree (and that gives no Right)
or of Covenant Donation: And to say, He and his benefits are given in Covenant
to all that will receive him,] is all one as to say, The Covenant gives them
on condition that we receive him]: which is true.

. 42. M. S. 5. It is impossible that the terms of the Covenant of Grace can be
any other than they are: because nothing but receiving him can make him mine.]

An. 1. That proves not that Faith is not the Condition, but that it needs
must be so. 2. It is impossible, now the Covenant is so made, viz. ex
necessitate existentiae: But that God could have made it no otherwise, is not a
thing for man to say. 3. Confound not passive Reception with active moral
Reception: Justificari is passively to receive Justification; and to be first
related to Christ as mine, or to be one that he is given to, is passively to
receive Christ: Active moral receiving is the Wills consenting thus to have him
on all his terms, and is the means of the other: It is this and not the other
that is Faith: And could not God possibly have made Christ ours, by any
alteration of the terms: sure they that confine Faith to the receiving of
Christ's imputable Righteousness, will grant that God could possibly have put
one act more of Faith into the Condition, or on^ act of Gratitude, Desire, Love
or Repentance? And Dr. Twisse thinks he could have given a man a Right to Life
without Christ's Satisfaction, and to Christ without Faith, and that so he does
to Infants.

. 43. M. S. There is no Righteousness in point of Justification, but only in
conformity to the Rule, Do this: that only brings a man under the approving
Will of God.

An. 1. But what is the Do this that you mean? Adam's Law said, Do this and
live: Moses Law said, Do this and live: The Law given to Christ said, Do and
suffer this, and I will give thee Power over all Flesh, to give eternal life to
as many as I give thee, and believe]. The Law of Christ to Sinners says, Do
this and live: This is the work of God that ye believe, etc. But all these
Doings are different, for all that; It Is an unknown Faith or Repentance which
is no Act or Duty. 2. There is no Righteousness but the conformity to the Rule
of Righteousness, if you speak only of that Righteousness which is of that
species: But there is another sort. He that is justifiable is just so far. If
Satan say, Thou art conde^nandus, to be damned to Hell, and shut out of Heaven,
for breaking the Law of Works: I must deny it: not by saying, I did not break
it, but keep it by another, or I did not deserve damnation; but by alleging,
He that is pardoned, is not to suffer any pain of sense or loss: I am pardoned
by the New covenant, through the Merit of the Satisfaction and perfect
Righteousness of Christ. Adam's Law will not justify you; nor Moses's Law
neither: The Law requires personal perfect Obedience: It never said, [Thou or
another for thee shall obey:] It knows no Surety: To give a Surety, and to
accept his suretiship, is the act of the Law. Giver as above his Law, not
fulfilling that Law, but securing the ends of Government (and of it) by another
way: To pardon a Sin and Penalty is not to fulfill the Law that threatened it,
but to dispense with it; which Justice can do upon a valuable consideration,
securing the ends of Government: And Veracity is not impeached by it. For 1.
The sense of silius mortis is, Death shall be thy due; and so it was. 2. And
death was actually inflicted on man himself, though not all that which he
deserved. If the Law of Innocence justify you, you need no Redeemer, you need
no Pardon, you need no New Covenant to justify you, nor can it do it.

3. We are justified by Doing, though not by our fulfilling the Law of Works,
by our selves or another. We are justified by two sort^ of Doing: Principally
by the Merit of Christ's perfect Righteousness; and subordinately by our
fulfilling the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, (which Baptism celebrateth.)

4. Gods Will approves of all that is good, so far as it is good: It approves
of habitual Holiness in Adam, and would have done in his Infants had he stood;
and does so in all Christians now: And I will believe that Christ, before he
actually obeyed, was under* Gods approving Will. But not as one that had
merited by Obedience: For God does not suppose any to do that which they do
not, nor oblige them to do to-morrows work today.

. 44. M. S. The issue in a word is, 1. Suffering for Sin is not doing, nor
equivalent in point of Justification, 2. Nor can God, having satisfaction for
what was done cross to his Law, lay aside that in order to the conveying of
Life, and substitute believing instead of it. Therefore Faith justifies
ratione objecti only. Now we [Do] in another, Christ, instead of doing in our
own persons.

An. I doubt this is another Gospel than the Apostles delivered us; though I
hope that practically we meet in one. 1. To the first I answer, It Is true; but
you do ill to intimate that we think otherwise. Suffering by the Sinner never
satisfies, because it must be everlasting: Suffering by Christ satisfies not
merely as suffering, but as the voluntary suffering of God-Man, aptly
glorifying Justice and Love, and securing the ends of Government. This
Satisfaction is not equivalent to doing in Justification: For Doing all
required, would have justified us against this Charge, [Thou art a Sinner, by
Omission and Commission, and thou have deserved Death, and have not deserved
Life, according to the Law of Works.] Against this Charge, I look for no
Justification, but confess it is all true. But Christ's Satisfaction justifies
us against this Charge, [God must damn thee (by pain of loss and sense) or
else he is not just, because thou have deserved it.] And Christ's perfect
Righteousness also justifies us against this Charge, [God must damn thee and
deny thee life, because thou did not merit it by perfect Obedience]. The
Justifier says, No: because Christ's Merit in Doing and Suffering has
glorified the Law and Justice of God instead of my Merit, and has procured us
Pardon and Life given by the New Covenant.

2. To the second I answer, 1. God did not lay aside his first Covenant, but
man by sin did lay it aside, by making the Condition impossible. 2. You
overturn the Gospel too much, by thinking that the Law is not laid aside as a
Covenant or Promise, (though I grant that the Precept as a Rule of Life
continues:) To say that the sense of Adam's Law was, [Thou or another (Christ)
for thee, shall obey.] And that we are justified by that Law, is to confound
Law and Gospel, and make a Gospel of that Law, and make the Covenant of Works
not to condemn us; or both to condemn and justify, and to feign man to live
and be judged by the Covenant that is ceased. God says now to no man living,
[Be innocent, and so merit life, that thou may live.] And God does not repute
us innocent at all.

3. To the third I answer, It is notoriously untrue, that Faith justifies only
ratione objecti, unless you mean that efficiently it justifies not at all,
which is true. For we are justified by it also ratione foederis, because that
which is materially Faith in Christ (a justifying Savior) and so connoteth its
Object as the meritorious Cause of the free Gift and Pardon, is (by reason of
this aptitude) made the Condition of that New Covenant or Gift, which is its
nearest interest or reason of our being justified by it. And it is the Law of
Grace by which we must be judged and justified. And at that Bar, the question
which Life or Death depends on, will be (supposing Christ's Merits) whether
we are penitent Believers, or impenitent Unbelievers, and so have part in
Christ or not: And if Satan accuse us as being impenitent Unbelievers, and the
question be whether we have true Faith or not? my Opinion is, that we cannot be
herein justified by pleading the Object, when the Act is questioned, and
saying, That Christ fulfilled that Law: unless you could prove that he
justifies impenitent Infidels, and (as Saltmarsh said) repented and believed
for us.

But the grand Case remains, Whether we are justified by the Law of
Innocence, by fulfilling it, and meriting in another, without any sort of doing
of our own by our selves?

Mr. Wotton, Mr. Gataker, and abundance more, have long ago said much to
confute your Error, besides Mr. Bradshaw, whom you name; But I add, I. I have
before proved that by the deeds or sentence of the Law of Adam or Moses, no man
can be justified: 1. He that has sinned against it cannot be justified as not
having sinned: For factum infectum fieri is impossible to God himself. 2. The
Law that condemns us does not justify us. 3. What Paul, Romans 3. and 4.
frequently says against Justification by the Law of Moses will hold here a
fortiori: And Christ keeping Moses Law (as far as he was capable of Obligation)
that also would else have been imputed, and so we should have been justified by
that Law also; which the Scripture copiously denies. He that says, He has no
sin, deceives himself, and is a liar, and the truth is not in him. And the Law
of Adam justifies no man that has sin.

II. We did not fulfill it and merit in Christ: But Christ did in the Person of
a Mediator, voluntarily undertaking it, on his Fathers terms, and not as our
Instrument, or in our Persons. I have elsewhere given abundance of Arguments
against that, which I must not here repeat. This Author took notice of my
Objection, that he that is reputed perfectly Innocent and Obedient, is
incapable of Pardon, and needs no satisfaction, or remitting, or rewarding
Covenant, besides that which he kept, but answers it not. This subverteth the
Gospel and Religion. Quer. If there be no Reward nor Life but of Justice, and
no Reward but for Christ's Merits, and all Believers equally merited in Christ,
as fulfilling all the Law; 1. Whence comes the inequality of Grace and Glory?
2. How come any Believers to be left long under sins and weakness of Grace, and
temporal punishments?

III. The Merits of Christ have procured us the New Covenant (sealed in
Baptism) by which we have a new Rule offiicii and judicii, (for such is every
Law) Christ is not the only Subject of God: He made us not lawless or Rebels.
God still rules the Church by a Law or Covenant: This is the Law or Covenant
of Grace: Deny this Covenant, and you deny the Gospel: This Covenant or Law
obliges us to Duty: And it promises and gives Pardon and Life in and with
Christ: This Covenant has Conditions; various conditions of various Benefits;
Our first true consent (which Baptism celebrateth) that is, our first believing
and repenting is the condition of our first Union with Christ, and our Pardon,
and Adoption, and the Spirit. Our sincere Love and Obedience to the end, and
overcoming, is the further condition of our final Justification at Judgment,
and our Glory. This Covenant we are now under, and by this we must be finally
judged, justified, or condemned. No man shall be saved, unless (if at age) he
personally perform the conditions of this Covenant: And every one shall be
saved that does. Faith, Repentance, Love to our Redeemer, Gratitude, Prayer,
sincere Obedience, are all such Doing, as by this Covenant are made the
necessary means of Glory: But not such Doing as Paul opposes to the Jews, as
makes the Reward not of Grace, but of Debt. The Author of this Law is just:
His Justice will give to the performers of the Condition all that he has
promised.

The Scripture often uses all these Titles; 1. That of Reward, as being the
state of the benefits retributed. 2. That of Justice, as being the principle of
Reward. 3. That of Works, as being the matter rewarded; even our personal Works
wrought by Grace, and not only those which Christ did. 4. That of worthiness or
merit, as being the relation of the Work and Person to the Reward. 5. That of
Righteousness, as being the state of the Person performing these Works, as
pronounced by the New Covenant. If I prove not all these by express Scripture,
believe your new Gospel.

I. It is Reward, Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God, must believe that God is,
and that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. It Is he second
Article of Faith, Prove. 13. 13. Mat. 6. 4. Himself shall Reward thee openly,
and verse. 6. 18. Prove. 25. 22. Mat. 16. 27. Then shall ^e reward every man
according to his Works; even Christ when he comes ^n Glory with his Angels: If
you say, He means his Works done by Christ, read Mat. 25. and believe it if
you can. So Rev. 22. 12. 2 John 8. Heb. 11. 26. Col. 3. 24. Ye shall receive
the Reward of the Inhe^itance. Col. 2. 18. 1 Cor. 9. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 3. 8, 14.
Luke 6. 35. Mat. ^. 12, 46. and 10. 41, 42. Prove. 11. 18. Psalm. 19. 11. and 58.
11. Heb. 10. ^5.

II. Gospel paternal Justice rewards men (supposing Christ's Merits) ^ Tim.
4. 8. A Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me, and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing. Romans 2. 5. The
righteous Judgment of God, who shall give to every man according to his Works.
To them that by patient continuance in well-doing, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11. Psalm. 67. 4. and 46. 10. Psalm. 11. 7. Genesis 18. 23, 24, etc. And
multitudes of other places, Heb. 6. 10. God is not unrighteous to forget your
work and labor of love. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive our sins, etc. Isa. 45. 22.

III. The thing rewarded is called Works done by man (not legally ^ustifiable,
but evangelically) Mat. 16. 27. Rev. 2. 26. Rev. 14. 13. and 20. 12, 13. Jam.
2. 21, 24, 25, 26. Rev. 2. 2, 9, 13, 19. and 3. 1, 2, 8, 15. Heb. 6. 10. Rev.
22. 12. 1 Cor. 15. last. And it is called Doing, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13. and Gal. 6. 9.
Romans 2. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 10. 36. Mat. 25. 21, ^3. and 12. 50. and 7. 22,
23. and 6. 1, 2. Luke 8. 21. Joh. 13. 17. Col. 3. 23, 24. Heb. 13. 21. Rev. 22.
14. And keeping his Word or Commandments, 1 John 3. 22. and 1 John 2. 3. and
Joh. 15. 10. and 14, 15, 16. Dan. 9. 4. Eccles. 12. 13. Prove. 4. 4. Exodus 20.
6. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Ezez. 18. 21, etc. And Obeying, Heb. 5. 9. He is the Author of
eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Acts 5. 22. Romans 6. 16. Obedience
unto Righteousness, etc.

IV. The Relative aptitude of the Work for the Reward is called Wor^hiness, or
Merit, and the performer Worthy (evangelically not legally). And (...)
primarily signifies that which preponderateth in the balance; but cannot note
here any worth or merit by commutation, but that aptitude which resulteth from
the goodness of the action as related to the Promise, Rev. 3. 4. A few -- which
have not defiled their Garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they
are worthy. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6. The righteous Judgment of God, that ye may be
counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which you suffer. Seeing it is a
righteous thing with God to recompense -- to you that are troubled, rest with
us --. 11. That God would count you worthy of this calling. Luke 20. 35. They
which be counted worthy to obtain that World --. 21, 36. That ye may be
accounted worthy to escape -- and stand before the Son of Man. So Ephesians. 4. 1.
Col. 1. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. Mat. 10. 37, 38.

V. The title of Relation given to the Works and Persons evangelically is
Righteousness, or Justice, 1 John 3. 7. He that does Righteousness is
righteous. Matthew. 25. 46. The righteous into life eternal: 21. Well done good
and faithful Servant; v. 35. For I was hungered, and ye, etc. Mat. 13. 43. Mat.
10. 41. Ezekiel. 18. 20, 24. and 33. 12, 13, 18. Romans 6. 16. and 8. 10. 1 Cor. 15.
21. Ephesians. 5. 9. and 6. 14. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Heb. 11. 33. 2 Cor. 9. 9. And the godly
are called Righteous, in relation to their Hearts and Doings near an hundred
times (if not much more) in Scripture, though but in subordination to Christ's
meritorious Righteousness, and but secund^^ quid, and not simpliciter.

See the Texts further recited in my Confession of Faith.

And now he that (considering all this) believes, 1. That Christ is no King, 2.
Or we no Subjects, 3. Or that he has no Law of Grace or Covenant, which we are
under, 4. Or that this Law, or Covenant, will not justify them that perform
that Condition, (from legal-executive damnation, by giving them Pardon, and
Right to Life, for the Merits of Christ): 5. And that Faith, Repentance, and
persevering holy Obedience, will not materially justify any man that has the^
from the charge of having no part in Christ, because of Infidelity,
Impenitency, Unholiness or Apostasy; 6. Or that he that performs the
Gospel-Conditions shall not be judged rewardable, or evangelically worthy of
the promised Reward; 7. Or that the same thing which as Good and a Benefit is a
Gift absolutely free against commutative Merit, is not yet quoad ordinem
conferendi and recipi^ndi a true Reward. 8. And so that we have no Reward for
any Works but what Christ did in his own Person. 9. And that the Judgment-Day
will be to try whether Christ did his part or not, and so to judge him, and not
to try whether we have part in him, and did our parts or not, by repenting,
believing, loving, obeying and overcoming, and so to justify us, primarily by
his Merits and Covenant, and subordinately by our performance of the
Conditions; And 10. He that believes that instead of all this, we our selves
did by Christ as our legal Person both keep all the Law of Works from first to
last, and merit Life, and also satisfy Gods Justice for not keeping the Law,
and so redeem our selves, or suffer in Christ for our own Sins, and purchase
Pardon and Salvation for our selves: 11. Or that God accounts us so to have
done, what we did not: 12. And so that it is the Law of Works and Innocence by
which we our selves are justified: 13. And that for meriting in Christ we are
fixed presently in the immutable state of eternal life, which is the Reward:
14. And that this is not a Reward to Christ only, but to us as Meriters in him;
He that can believe all this, with abundance more of the Libertine new
Gospel-Doctrine (commonly called Antinomian) which depends on it; does quite
differ from my Faith, who believe that Christ suffered, satisfied, fulfilled
the Law, and merited in the Person of a free Mediator only; fulfilling all his
own mediatorial Law or Covenant, and receiving his Reward, and freely upon
these Merits, and his Power received, making a Deed of Gift of Himself and Life
(Pardon, Adoption, Spirit and Glory) to all that truly consent to his Covenant,
and overcoming do persevere therein, and perform sincere Obedience to the last:
by which Law or Covenant he will judge men at last, that is, will justify or
condemn them: And this short and plain Doctrine of Faith is it, which I am
constrained by the full and plain testimony of the Scriptures to embrace: And I
never yet saw any thing against it, which is not easily confuted, though my
life is not like to be long enough, nor am I idle enough, to write against all
that have written against me.

In conclusion, I must give notice to the Reader, that there are many great and
weighty Points of great difficulty concerning our LOVE to GOD, and the order of
it in respect to Faith, Repentance, the love of our selves and our felicity;
and our love to Creatures, etc. which I pass by in this Treatise, as having
spoken with some care of them in my Christian Directory, in the Appendix to the
Chap. Of loving God, in Tom. 1. And if that seem too intricate to any, as being
too long; in brief, I suppose that the Thomists grossly err in placing beatitude
chiefly in the Intellect, and their Reasons (especially as Medina uses them)
are very weak; and the Scotists are more sound, who place it in the Will, and
those other most sound who place it in the perfection of the whole man
actively; but objectively in God: And most plainly that very plain judicious
School-man Aegidius Romanus Quodlib. 3. Qu. 18. p. 187, 188. who says in
short, 1. That God is the final Object simply; 2. That the love of God (or
velle) is the final act; or beatitude formaliter: 3. That beatitude (or rather
the ratio finis) is principally in the Object, and next in the Act: 4. That
subserviently or quodam genere the visio Dei is the Object, and the velle
videre Deum the Act. See also Aegidius, Quodl. 4. qu. 11. clearly proving three
ways that we must love God above our selves, yea and not (properly) for our
selves, but for himself, and our selves and all things for him.

But 1. I think he mistaketh in saying that the Act of the Will is not the
Object of the Will, and so that Visio and not Amor are felicity objective: For
as Amesius says, Dicimus omnium gentium consensu volo velle; and one Act may
be the Volition of the next; and a complacency in that past: And what does a
Believer will more than perfectly to love God, next to God himself? And Amo
Amore is an Act that we have full experience of. 2. And I am past all doubt;
that Beatitudo nostra qua talis is not the principal end of man, but God, 1. In
his own Perfection or Godhead; 2. The fulfilling or pleasing of the Divine
Will; 3. The Glory of Gods Image or Perfections as shining, 1. In the Universe,
2. And therein most eminently in the glorified Society, 3. And therein most
eminently in the Person of Christ, 4. And next in all those that are most
excellent in their Order, 5. And among them in our selves, our holiness and
felicity: And this but in our own rank and place: For our Perfection and Unity
with Christ and the glorified, will end all that narrow corrupt selfishness,
which now makes men dream that they are chiefly their own ends, (that is,
their own gods) and that their Beatitude is the highest final notion, as if God
were to be loved chiefly for our selves, as the means of our Beatitude: It
being worth the considering, whether it be not a wrong to God to love him at
all sub ratione medii to our selves as an end, though we must love him as the
first Efficient of all our Good, and our Great Benefactor, our selves and
benefits being but means to Him, though yet (not He, but) many of his Gifts,
may be loved as means to our Happiness, and that and all things for God himself.

Among the Scotists, Rada well opens this Case; and the worst of them all (in
4. Sent. de Beatitud.) is far better than Dr. Stern, the Dublin Physician, in
his Medela Animae, and too many more novel immature Disputers, who would make
our Happiness the chiefest end both of our selves and God, merely because that
God can have no addition of Felicity: A reason vainly excluding such other
respects, as men that write of such Subjects should not be ignorant of:
especially when they reproach the Schoolmen, and save themselves the labor of
understanding them; (when though they are too presumptuous and curious, yet)
one Rada, one Aegid. Column. Romans one Joseph Angles, etc. has more clear
explication of such Difficulties as they presumptuously tamper with, than an
hundred of our late Oratorical Novelists, who are proud of their undigested new
Philosophy, and their unripe daring Wits.

THE Second Part. OF GODS GOVERNMENT, AND MORAL WORKS.
SECT. I. The first Law.
1. GOd the free Creator, Lord and Benefactor of the world, was pleased to make
his Creatures of various ranks; and among the Rational to make Man a free
undetermined self-determining Agent, not fixed by Necessity in Love and
Obedience, but left with a Power of Loving and Obeying, which he could use or
not use; that so he might be a fit subject of Gods Moral Government by Laws,
and persuasions in this world, in order to a more fixed state of holiness. Not
but that Angelical Confirmation had been better for us; But it pleased not God
to compose the universe of Creatures only of the noblest order.

2. When God exercises only a Moral not-determining operation upon this world
of Free Agents, it is not any dishonor to his Will or Power as if he could do
no more; But it is his Delight thus to govern the creature according to the
nature and rank which he has made it in; and his non-volitions and
non-operations of a higher sort, are agreeable to his Perfection, Wisdom and
Liberty* Higher action being used on higher creatures.

3. Yet has God placed and kept these free Agents, not only under his Moral
Government, but also under his Dominion and disposal; so that he will do with
them as his own, what he lift, and none shall frustrate his disposing Will.

4. It pleased him first to make man perfect under a Law of Perfection, making
innocence or perfection the only condition of Life, and the contrary of Death.

5. When Man had sufficient Grace to have kept this Law (not sufficient to
ascertain the event, but sufficient Power to have stood, that is* as much Grace
as was necessary to his standing, sine qua non esse potuit* and cum qua esse
potuit) he broke it, and sinned against that sufficient, Grace, before God
either denied him any thing necessary, or withdrew any from him.

6. From whence it is clear that the Nature of Man's Will is such, as that it
is made to use a Power which does not necessitate, or determine it self, or is
determined necessarily, but freely: And that it is no Deifying of the Will, nor
extolling it above its Nature, to say that it can act or determine it self,
without Gods pre-determinating premotion; or by that same measure of help which
at another time does not determine it. Though its Nature, and its Act as such
be of God, yet so is its Liberty too; and therefore by the Power and Liberty
given by God, the Will can act or not act, or turn it self to this object or to
that, without more help than the said natural support and Concurse: And this
Power and Liberty is its Nature, and Gods Image.

7. From hence also it is evident that there is such a thing (or operation of
God) as Grace Necessary called sufficient, which is not effectual. For God took
no Grace away from Adam before he sinned, nor let out any temptation upon him
which he was not able to resist; nor did he sin for want of necessary Grace;
but by that same degree of help might have overcome.

8. God passing Sentence on fallen Man for sin, would not forgive him the
temporal death, nor common calamities of this life, but cursed the creatures
which he was to use, as part of his penalty.

9. But the Great evil which sin brought on man, was the loss of Gods
approbation and complacency, and of his Spirits saving Communion and help, and
of Gods Image on man's Soul, and of Communion with God herein; and also his
right to life eternal. All which man's own sin cast away, and man was both the
Deserver and Executioner* without any change in God.

10. Yet was all this privation penal, in that God made Man such a creature, as
that his own sin should become his punishment or ruin if he committed it, so
that all Punishment is not determinatively of God, though Gods Antecedent Will
did make that which by man is made a Cause. As in argument, God says
antecedently [If thou sin, thy own sin shall be thy torment and misery] and man
says [I will sin] Therefore it is Man that is the determining Cause of the
Conclusion [My own s^^, shall be my torment and misery]: So it is in Causation,
God antecedently to man's sin, does resolve [I will make Man such a Creature,
with such a Mind, Conscience and Will, as that his Holiness shall be his
Health, and Joy, and his immediate Receptive capacity of my favor and of his
Communion with me, and of his title to my spirit and Glory: And that if he
forsake me and his Holiness, in the very Nature of the thing, he shall lose all
this Life, Light, and Love, Joy and Communion, and title to my Grace, and shall
feel the torments of his own Conscience telling him of his sin and loss.] This
is Gods Antecedent Law: Nay, this is Gods Antecedent Creation, to make man such
a Creature. Now if man sin, his ow^ sin does ipso facto become his misery, and
yet is not caused at all by Gods But yet that his Nature was made such as sin
should prove a misery to* was Gods Work. And from that Antecedent Creation or
Constitution the Relative form of a Punishment resulteth to the Sinner. Even as
God says [If thou Murder it shall be thy sin] or [Thou shall not Murder] And
man does Murder: Here the Act that is sin is of man; but that the Relation of
sin belongs to that act, resulteth partly from the Law which forbids it;
and yet God is not the Cause of sin; though he Antecedently decreed, [Murder
shall be sin if thou commit it.] So is it also with this sort of Punishment
which is either sin it self, or the effect or result o^ sin immediately.

By which we see that when sin and punishment are found in one thing, God is
the Cause (Antecedently) of the formal Relation of a Punishment, without being
a Cause of the sin: yea, antecedently is some cause of the formal relation of
the sin, by his Law, without causing any of the sin it self, as the author of
it.

As if God make man of such a temper, as that surfeiting, drunkenness, lust,
will make him sick, and hazard his life; Here God did no otherwise punish him
than by making him such a man; which he turned to his own destruction by his
sin. If a man make a thorn Hedge about his Garden, that men may not steal his
fruit, and those that will shall ^rick themselves, it is they that prick and
punish themselves. If God say, He that will leap into the fire shall be burnt,
or into the water shall be drowned; it is they that do it that cause the evil;
and yet some formal relation of penalty may result to it from Gods conditional
antecedent Law. I say not that God executes no other kind of punishment: But
these are the most common.

11. Man having thus cast away Gods Image and his Innocence, could beget a
Child no purer, holier or better than himself: For he could not communicate
that which he had lost. So that our Nature is vitiated with Original sin, and
unhappy in the miserable effects. Bradwardine has a shift which serves them
that say man could do no good in Innocence without supernatural Help, viz.
Making that Help to be Gods Will that it shall be done: But is not Gods Will
called our natural Help when it is the foundation of Nature, working by natural
means? It Is true that free will without Gods Will could do nothing.

12. The promisory part of the Covenant or Law of Innocence became null or
ceased with man's first sin, cessante subditorum capacitate; and so the
Condition which is its modus. So that no man ever since was under the
Obligation of that Law as a Covenant of life, saying [Be Perfect or Innocent
and Live], nor obliged to perfect personal perpetual obedience as the condition
of Life; for it was become naturally impossible. And God makes not Promises
and Covenants upon Natural impossibilities, whatever we say of Moral ones. If
the Devils before their fall were under this Covenant [Be Perfect and Live.]
Yet now they are not under it.

Here some worthy Divines go into both extremes: Some say that all the Law of
Innocence is ceased, Precept, Promise, and Threatening. Others say that all
still are in force or being. The Truth I think is between them as follows.

1. God still commands perfect obedience, so far as that the least violation
of his Law is sin.

2. This Law binds us as the Creator's Law: but not as mere Creator: But as
put with Nature into the hand and power of the Redeemer, to whom all Power or
Government is committed, and so all Laws are now both the Creators and
Redeemers.

3. These Precepts bind us not now in so full a sort as they did Adam, even to
obedience; Though the Law be as perfect: Because there is some Dispositio
Recipientis necessary to the effecting an Obligation upon us: And where any
Natural Impossibility has befaln us, though by sin, it will make some
alteration in the obligation.

4. The Commination of the said Law is so far still in force, as to make
Punishment (even perpetual) to be our desert for every sin, and so far to
oblige us to Punishment, that if we are not pardoned, we shall not escape; for
it is natural for sin to deserve Punishment.

5. This obligation is not only Remediable or pardonable, but conditionally (as
well as by the Fundamental Merit of Christ) Remedyed and pardoned to all men
immediately; and actually pardoned to penitent Believers.

6. The Promissory Covenanting part was not (properly) Abrogatedly God: For he
was not the Changer.

7. The Promissory part is now really ceased, and is No Promise, no^ ^^
Covenant of God: And this was done by Man's ceasing to be a capable subject;
which because some few worthy Divines deny, I prove.

1. If it be yet a Promise, it is Absolute (which none says) or Conditional:
And if so, either the Condition is quid praeteritum, quid praesen^, vel quid
futurum: But none of these; 1. A Past and Present Condition are not proper
Conditions of the thing, but forms of speech: And either that Condition already
is, or is not; If it be; the Promise is absolute in sense: If it be not; the
Promise is No Promise i^ sense, but equivalent to a Negation, as common reason
as well as the civil Law confesses. If it be quid Ignotum, the notice may be
Conditional still, but not the proper Donation. But here it is quid notissimu^,
and God is feigned to say, If Adam and his Posterity have no sin, I will
justify and bless them; which is equivalent to [I will not]. If the Condition
be supposed Future, e. g. [If Adam and his seed sin no more, they are just] it
is false, because they are already guilty.

2. The essence of a Condition is to suspend the effect, till performed. But
here the effect is not suspended: Ergo there is no conditional promise, Total
loss is no suspension.

3. When the Condition is once totally violated and become impossible, all
sense and civil Law says, Res transit in judicatum, and Lex in Sententiam; and
the Promise cease Cessante capacitate Promissarit: And so it is here.

4. That which is a Promise is also a Law, and is essentially the Expression of
Gods Will for the Government of his Subjects, and for a conditional Rule of
Right to the thing promised: This is its very definition* But it is unworthy of
God, to say that he does ever since the fall, tell the world, [If you are not
fallen or Sinners, you shall be justified] or [on condition that you be such as
never did sin, you shall live]. This were to threaten or condemn us ironically
or with derision, under the name of a Promise, or Covenant, or Law.

Yet the change as I said is made by man, who has made himself incapable to be
the object of such a Promise, or subject to such a Law.

And I know that it is a Question of no small Difficulty, whether any proper
promise of life was made to Adam himself, and so whether this was properly a
Promising Covenant? But I can presume to say no more than I can prove; which
is, 1. That as Natural there seemed to be in it an intimation of the Will of
God, to give Adam perpetual felicity if he obeyed, 1. In that God made his Soul
Immortal: Not such as could ^^t cease to be; but such as in its Nature was
fitted to perpetuity. And a perpetual Soul must be perpetually happy or
unhappy: And God would not subvert the Nature of Spirits, nor make Souls
unhappy for nothing. 2. Because Holiness it self would be and infer Happiness
to a perpetuated Soul. To love God perfectly is to be perfectly happy. And God
would not have taken away man's holiness from him. 3. Because God having
voluntarily become man's Rector, that Justice which consists in doing as a
Rector ob fines regiminis, secundum mores subditorum, seems to be a virtual
Promise, that it shall go well with the obedient. 4. Because God put into man's
Soul a natural inclination to its own perpetual felicity. 5. And also a holy
Inclination perpetually to Love his God, and to know him. 6. And God commanded
Man in the very Law of Nature (and positively) certain means to be used, no
doubt in order to such felicity as the end which man by nature was obliged to
intend. And doubtless God would not do all this in vain; His command to seek
Life, is a kind of Promise, that faithful seekers shall obtain it. 7. And as
Nature made Punishment due to the sinner; so it seems employed in that very
threatening of Nature, that the obedient shall speed better.

Whoever is angry with me for it, I must say, that these Natural Evidences are
no inconsiderable perswaders of my judgment, and directors of it about the
certainty and nature of the Promise to Adam.

2. But besides these, though the Scripture be very silent here, yet the same
seems employed, 1. In the threatening of death to Adam. 2. In the titles of
[Redemption Reconciliation Remission,] etc. given in the Gospel to the acts of
our Salvation by Jesus Christ: which seem to import that they restore us into
that state of Heavenly hope, which we fell from in Adam; when we all sinned and
came short of the Glory of God, Romans 3.

SECT. II. The first Edition of the Law of Grace.
13. When God judged man for sin, at once he promised him a Savior, and
through him as promised, made a new Law of Grace with man.

14. This Law gives pardon of the Spiritual and Eternal Punishment, and of all
save what was excepted in the Sentence foregoing: But pardon, not to be
absolutely and immediately received, but by degrees and upon certain terms: And
with pardon a free gift of Life Spiritual and Eternal, and so of the Spirit and
Communion with God, on the said conditions.

15. The Promise Genesis 3. 15. is plain as to Mercy and Salvation, and darker as
to the promised seed, and his mediation; and dark as to the Condition on man's
part: But (by Sacrifices, etc.) it is like that Adam had it more explained to
him, than those short words make it to us: But this is clear that by this new
Covenant God becomes man's Merciful Redeemer and Pardoner, and Ruler on terms
of Grace in order to recovery and Salvation; And that man was to Believe in God
as such, and accor^ingly to devote himself in Covenant to him.

16. This Law or Covenant was made with all Mankind in Adam: For all were in
his loins; and God has given us no more proof that the first Covenant was made
with Adam as the Father of Mankind, than that the second was so made.

17. Gods dealings with Mankind are a certain confirmation of this truth, and
an exposition and promulgation of this Law and Covenant of Grace as extended to
all Mankind. For God does not use them according to the rigor of the violated
Law of Innocence, but gives them abundant mer^ies and means which tend to
their Repentance and recovery, and obliges them all to Believe that he is
merciful and their case is not desperate, and to Repent and use his means and
mercies in order to their return to God and their Salvation. There are no
Nations in the world that even to this day are not under such mercies, means,
and ob^^gations; and therefore none that are left as the Devils in Despair,
under the unremedyed Covenant of Innocence alone.

18. But though the Law of Grace made to Adam be it which the world was then
put under, and to be Ruled by, and the tenor of it extended to all Mankind; yet
those that would partake of the Blessing^ of it, were to consent to it as
Covenanters with God, and to Belie^^ in and obey God their Redeemer pardoner
and restorer, in the thankful sense of all this mercy; which because the
ungodly did not, they and their posterity fell under a double guilt and curse,
both as violate^^s of the Law of Innocence and of Grace: and therefore incurred
a spec^^^ penalty: Cain and his offspring being first thrust out further from
the believing obedient people of God, and at last the whole world except eight
persons perishing in the deluge.

19. Noah with his house being saved to be the Root of all Mankind that should
succeed him, God renewed with him and Mankind in him, the same Law or Covenant
of Grace which he had made with us in Adam, with some additionals: To show us
that though the wicked and their seed had forfeited the benefits, yet the
Covenant was not altered, but stood in its first sense in force to all, and
would pardon and save all true Consenters.

20. Cham for his transgression brought a new Curse on himself and his
posterity, besides the mere fruit of Adam's Sin. So that thoug^ God altered not
his Law of Grace, yet they became a cursed Generation.

21. By multiplied transgressions, the Sons of men did still more degenerate
and revolt from God, till Nimrod and others by wickedne^^ and presumptions
brought down the new and grievous penalty of confounded tongues, (the great
hinderance of the propagation of the truth to th^^ day) And at last, the most
fell to odious Idolatry, not knowing the true God, but given up to sensuality
and wickedness.

22. Abraham being faithful and escaping the Idolatry and wickednest of the
world, was eminently favored and beloved of God, and be^^^ving Abraham's
Promise.
and trusting God in his promises and in the great trial of his S^^, is
honored with the name of the Father of the Faithful: And God renewed with him
the Covenant of Grace which he had made to all men in Adam and Noah, with
special application to his comfort; and added^ special peculiar Promise to him,
that his Seed should be a holy Nation chosen out of all the world to God, and
that of him the Messiah should come, of both which Promises (the common and the
special) Circumcision was a Seal.

23. Yet this was no repealing of the Law of Grace which had been made to all
the world, nor was it an excommunicating or rejecting of all others, or a
confining of Gods Grace and Church to him and his posterity alone; but only an
exalting them above all others in these peculiar dignities and privileges. For
at that time holy Sem was living, and long after, who in all likelihood was a
King, and its like that the Posterity of him and Japhet were not all fallen away
from God; and Melc^^zedek was such a King of Righteousness and Peace and Priest
of the most high God as was a great type of Christ's own Heavenly Priesthood;
and therefore it is like had some Subjects that feared and worshipped God The
Scripture giving us the History of the Jewish Nation, and affairs ^^ the
principal, and of the rest of the world but a little on the by, we cannot know
by it the full state of all other Nations, nor what Religion and Worshippers of
God were there. But the History of Job and his Friends, the probability that
all the Children of Ismael, of Keturah, of Esau, forsook not God (for they were
circumcised and therefore were Covenanters) with the Case of Nineve after; and
Abraham's thoughts that even a Sodom had at least had fifty righteous persons
in it, etc. assures us that the Jews were not God's only Church, but a
peculiar people, and a Nation holy above the rest. And as the Covenant of Grace
was still the Governing Law to the rest of the world, (though most rejected it
by rebellion) so it is not to be thought that none consonted to it and were
faithful.

24. The special promise to Abraham of the Messiah to be his seed, which was
more than was made to Adam and Noah, as it belonged not to Mankind in general,
so was it not promulgate or known to them, but only to the Jews, and the few
that conversed with them. Therefore the rest of the world, were not obliged to
know and believe it, who never heard of it.

25. What Conditions of pardon and life were necessary to all Mankind The terms
of the Universal Covenant.
then in general, is most probably gathered out of these Texts of Scripture.
Exodus 34. 6, 7. And the Lord-proclaimed the Name of the Lord --.The Lord, the
Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, long suffering and abundant in Goodness and
Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin,
and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, and to the Childrens Children unto the third and to
the fourth Generation. This is the description of God given by his own mouth,
as he is to be Believed in, and as they were to be subject and devoted to him:
And what mouth can surelier reveal him. And Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is
impossible to please God; for he that comes to God must believe that God is,
and that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Act. 10. 34, 35.
Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation
he that fears him and works righteousness is accepted with him. And John's
and Christ's Preaching were, Repent; And Except ye Repent ye shall all perish:
And Christ was a Prince, and a Savior to give Repentance to Israel and
Remission of Sins.

26. The belief of the pardoning Mercy of God to the penitent, and the
recoverable state of Souls, and the duty of Repenting, and seeking pardon and
mercy of God, in order to Salvation, in opposition to despair and neglect of
all endeavors for recovery, is so common to all Mankind, that (though
self-love may make them hope inordinately for that which they would have to be
true; yet) it is most apparent that it proceeds from some Natural notion of
God, and is to be numbered with the Notitiae Communes; which are past
controversy with all Mankind.

27. Therefore though the Law of Innocence was the Law of Nature in the first
and eminent sense, yet this Common notice of Gods pardoning Mercy, and man's
duty to Repent, hope and seek Salvation may well be called, The Law of lapsed
Nature, as the other is the Law of Innocent Nature. For the Nature of God, and
the nature of Man, with all circumstant Natures, and the course of natural
Providence running so much in the way of great restoring mercy, do certify
mankind of the foresaid hopes and duties.

28. For it is not (as some have said) an absurdity, but a certain Truth, that
the Law of Nature is as far mutable as Nature it self is mutable. For the Law
of Nature (commonly mis-described) is nothing else but the Nature of Man and
all other Creatures of God, so far as per modum sign^ they notify to us Gods
Will appointing what shall be Due from us and To us, as the instrument of Gods
Government of Mankind. Now this Notification is most by the Resultancy of duty
from the Nature of Man compared with God and all the Creatures that he has to
do with. And the very variety of circumstances (as in the case of Adam's
Childrens Marriages and ours, etc.) may alter Nature's signification,
obligation and Law.

29. That which is called the Covenant of Nature or Innocence, was in the Main
the very Law of Innocent Nature in all the parts of it. 1. Nature being
perfect, revealed Man's Duty perfectly to obey. 2. Nature declared Punishment
to be due to sin; yea to all sin. And this punishment to be suitable to the
nature of the Offender compared with the God offended, and the injury done.
Especially that if men will undo themselves, by forsaking Life and Love and
Joy, and casting themselves into darkness, diseasedness and misery, when it is
foreshewn them, God is not bound to hinder or recover them. 3. Nature tells
man that God who made his Soul a simple Intellectual spirit, and Life it self
(though created and dependant) intended not to annihilate it; and that its
noble faculties, fitted to know God, and Love him, and Live to him perfectly in
Immortality, were made for this employment in Immortality, and not in vain. And
that he that Naturally makes it man's duty to hope and seek for Immortal
happiness, has not made this hope or duty in vain: Nor will fail or frustrate
or destroy them that forfeit not their hopes. So that the Covenant depends not
alone upon supernatural Revelation.

30. But that which Nature reveals about the penalty, is 1. Not that God of
necessity must punish the loss of Innocence as highly as he may do. 2. But that
he may justly punish the Sinner in rigor, by temporal, spiritual and eternal
miseries. 3. And that the Ends of Government (the honor of his Wisdom,
Goodness, Power, Truth and Justice, and the order of the humane world) do
require that sin escape not free, but some exemplary punishment be a Vindication
of God, and a warning to Man: which our death, afflictions, and spiritual
sufferings manifest in part, and the sufferings of Christ more fully. So that
pardon, and dispensing in part with his Right to punish us according to the Law
first broken, is no falsehood in God, nor any injustice, nor any violation of
his Law of Nature.

31. The Law which God put all mankind under after the fall, and the world
without the Church is under still, is the Preceptive part of the Law of
Innocent Nature as de futuro, the promise of it being ceased, and the penalty
not totally nullifyed, but made remedyable by an act of oblivion or Conditional
Covenant of Grace. q. d. [Thou shall perfectly obey me, for the time to come;
and every sin shall deserve everlasting punishment, so far as that I might
justly inflict it, and will do it if it be not remitted: But all thy sin shall
be forgiven thee, and thou shall have the free gift of pardon and salvation, if
thou Believe in me thy merciful Savior, and repent and give up thy self to me
to be saved, and to be Mine by sincere obedience and Love.]

32. The deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt by Moses, and their imbodying
into a new Commonwealth, with a Theocratical Government in a peculiar manner,
and a new body of Divine Laws, were all done in performance of Gods Covenant
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, separating their seed as Holy from all the
world. Not as if no other were Holy in the world; but as the Priests and
Levites were sanctified to stand nearer to God than the people, and so
specially Holy; even so Israel was a Holy Nation, as being nearer God by
separation than the rest of the Nations of the world.

33. The entire Law of God which the Israelitish Nation was under had all these
parts. 1. The remaining preceptive and directive part of the Law of Nature. 2.
The Universal Covenant of Grace made with all mankind in Adam and Noah, and
personally renewed to Abraham for himself and his posterity. 3. The special
promise to Abraham and his seed as a peculiar people of whom the Messiah should
come. 4. The body of the Law of Moses as a Law for that Commonwealth or
Polity (which was not so given to any other Commonwealth or Nation.) L^g.
Suarez de L^g. l. 9. who c. 6. distinguishes of the Law strictly taken, and so
it has not (says he) promises of eternal felicity; and the Law as including
the promise to the Fathers; and so it had such promises. But those promises
being the Soul of the Law should not by the Jews have ever been separated from
the rest, in their conceits of it.


1. The first of these undoubtedly is still in force.

2. The second is turned into the perfect edition of the Covenant of Grace, to
those that have the Gospel: And it continues to the rest of the world
unrepealed, as to the substance of the mercies of it, (further than men deprive
themselves of them by forfeitures, as wicked men here do as to the mercies of
the Gospel) But as it is a promise of Christ's future incarnation, it ceased by
his coming.

3. The third is ceased by performance and by the Jews apostasy: Though some
think still that it is in force, and that a national conversion shall perform
that promise to the full. But Mr. Calvert (a Learned young man) has lately
written to prove that no such national conversion is to be expected, but only
such additions of particular men's conversion to the Catholic Christian Church,
as are of that kind which has been more fully done on the Jews already.

4. As to the rest, it has troubled Divines how far Moses's Law is abrogated
or ceased; partly as to the Judicials, and chiefly as to the Decalogue. And
that we may not be too forward to call one another Legatists or Antinomians for
this difference (those now called Antinomians being rather Libertine denyers of
the Law of Christ) I will notify to those that know it not, that it is as much
a difference among the Papists greatest Doctors, who yet bear with one another
in it, and the Pope decideth it not. Some say that the Decalogue now obliges
not as the Law of Moses, but only as the Law of Nature, and of Christ: So Soto
de Instit. li. 2. q. 5. ar. 4. concl. 2. Medina 1. 2. q. 103. ar. 3. quem
aliqui moderni sequntur, says Suarez, de Leg. l. 9. c. 11. p. 761. and Tolet.
in Romans 3. Anot. 15. Salmer. ad Romans 7. disp. 6. Victor. Relict. de Matrim. 2.
p. n. 3. Barrad. To. 1. li. 2. c. 21. Valent. To. 2. disp. 7. q. 7. punc. 7. To
whom Suarez joyneth himself; confessing (page 764, 765.) that if (as some hold)
Moses Law had been only a Declaration of the Law of Nature, and not de novo
preceptive, it could not be said to cease. But he truly holds it to be
constitutive or preceptive also to those that it was by Moses delivered to: And
of this opinion I profess my self (notwithstanding all that on other points I
have written against the Antinomians) Believing that Christ now is the
Universal Lawgiver; and that the very Law of nature (as Nature it self) is now
His Law, and that he has taken it in to his Gospel administration, and so the
Decalogue is materially in force, but not formally as part of the proper
Mosaical Law, save only that as Declarative and ex paritate rationis, we may
collect that God who for such reasons so bound them, does bind us to the same
things by the same natural Reasons.

But there are other Papist Doctors that hold that as to the Morals Moses Law
as preceptive is still in force, even as then by him delivered, and that to all
Christians, so Bellarm. de Justif. li. 4. c. 6. Lorin. in Act. 15. Vasquez who
with Durandus Paludan. Paul. Burgens. And Suarez says that Alph. a Castro and
most so speak: And Vasquez denies the Law of Nature as such, to have properly
a Divine Obligation, says Suarez, which he confuteth de Leg. l. 9. c. 11. p.
764, 765. But this controversy when examined, contains not much more than
verbal disagreement, and so their mutual forbearance does confess.

34. The Jews instead of excelling in Holiness proportionably to their
privileges, did grow carnal and proud, and 1. Much neglected the Law of
Nature. 2. Much over-looked the spiritual Covenant of Grace, made with them and
all the world. 3. And misunderstood the chief part of the special Promise made
to Abraham, not understanding commonly the high, spiritual or universal Office
and Kingdom of the Messiah, but dreaming that he was but to be their Monarch,
to make them great, and to subject the world to them. 4. And they misunderstood
the Law of Moses or Covenant on Mount Sinai; as if the design of it had been
but by its special holy excellency to justify the doers of it, by and for the
doing, and to pardon all the spiritual and perpetual punishment of Sin, upon
those terms which it appointed for a Political pardon, and to give life
spiritual and eternal, upon those bare conditions on which their Law gave them
Political benefits. Over-looking the great causes of Justification and life in
the Messiah, and the common Covenant of Grace, and Promise of the Messiah made
to Abraham. And this is the error which Christ and his Apostles found them in.
Yet proudly boasting of their Law and Political privileges, and despising all
the rest of the world, as outcasts in comparison of them.

35. Though the behavior of all the rest of the world, till Christ's coming be
little notifyed to us, yet this much is sure, that they were commonly more
Ignorant and Idolatrous than the Jews, that yet they retained the common
notices of nature; that they remembered by Tradition those intimations of the
necessity of propitiatory Sacrifice, so as to keep up the custom of Sacrificing
among them: That many of them with exceeding diligence sought to find God, or
know him in the works of Nature and Providence, and attained to great and
excellent understanding, especially in Greece and Rome: And many of them lived
very strict austere and laborious lives, in great Justice and Love, and in the
practice of many excellent Precepts toward God: For the Heavens declared the
Glory of God, and the firmament showed his handiwork: Day unto day uttered
speech, and night unto night showed knowledge; There was no speech or language
where their voice was not heard: Their li^e went through the earth, and their
words to the worlds end, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. For all Gods works do praise
him, and the Lord is good to all, his tender mercies are over all his works:
Psalm. 145. 9, 10, 17. He is King in all the earth. He was not the God of the
Jews only, but of the Gentiles also. Romans 3. 29. Because that which may be
known of God was manifest in (or to) them, for God had showed it to them. For
the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made: his Eternal power and Godhead, so
that they are without excuse, because that when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful, Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. God left not himself
without witness, in that he did good and gave men rain from heaven and fruitful
seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness, Act. 14. 15, 16. Seeing
he gives to all life and breath and all things, and has made of one blood all
Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has determined
the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation, that they
should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him and find him: though
he be not far from every one of us: For in him we live and move and have our
being; For we are also his offspring, Act. 17. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. For there
is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; For the same Lord over all is
rich unto all that call upon him. For whoever shall call on the name of the
Lord shall be saved: But have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into
all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world -- Romans 10. 12, 13,
18. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and long
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? Who
will render to every man according to his deeds. To them who by patient
continuance in well doing seek for Glory and Honor and Immortality, Eternal
life -- Glory, honor and peace, and to every man that works Good, to the Jew
first and also to the Greek; For there is no respect of persons with God -- For
not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall
be justified. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law do by Nature the
things contained in the Law, these having not the Law are a Law unto
themselves; which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
Consciences also bearing witness; and their thoughts in the mean while accusing
or else excusing one another. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel -- If the uncircumcision keeps the
righteousness of the Law, shall not his uncircumcision, be counted for
circumcision? He is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of
the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter whose praise is not of men but
of God, Romans 2.

SECT. III. Of Christ's Incarnation and our Redemption.
36. In the fullness of time God sent his Son made of a Woman, made under the
Law, to redeem them that were under the Law. Romans 4. 4. But not them only; for
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Joh. 3. 16. He
was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. He redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us. For he is the Savior of the world, and the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world. He is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but for the sins of the whole world: 1 John 2. 2. For he tasted Death for
every man, Heb. 2. being the Savior of all men, but especially of those that
believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. For if one dyed for all, then were all dead; And he dyed
for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him that dyed for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.

37. As the eternal Word and Wisdom of the Father in his Divine nature only,
was the interposing Redeemer by undertaking, before his Incarnation, and
governed the fallen world by the fore-described Law of Grace; so upon his
Incarnation initially, and upon his performance plenarily all things are
delivered into his hands; even all the world so far as it was defiled and
cursed by Man's sin; Man as the Redeemed, the Creatures as his utensils, and
goods, (and Devils as his and our Enemies:) All Power in Heaven and Earth was
given him, Matthew. 26. 19. Joh. 13. 1, 3. and 17. 2, 3. All judgment was
committed to him; and the Father judges no man (but by him): But has given
him to have life in himself, and to raise the dead, Joh. 5. 22, 23, 24, 25. For
he has made him Head over all things to his Church, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. And for
this end he dyed, rose and revived that he might be the Lord of the dead and
the living, Romans 14. 9, 10. For God has exalted him and given him a name above
every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should ^ow, Phil. 2. 7, 8. And
as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22.

38. Christ upon his Incarnation performed but what God had Decreed, before the
foundations of the world, and had obscurely and generally promised after the
fall, at the first making of the Covenant of Grace. Which Decree of God, is
after the manner of men called by some a Covenant between the Father and the
Son; especially because the Prophets have sometimes (as Isa. 53.) described it
by way of prediction as a Covenant between the Father and Christ incarnate. If
we conceive of it properly under the notion of a Decree first, and a Promise
after unto the world, so the Will and Mercy of God the Father and Son (with the
Holy Spirit) are the cause of man's Redemption, Pardon and Salvation, even the
fundamental Principal total Cause: And the Promise was man's security; and
Christ as promised was the primary great mean^, which was to procure us the
rest, by doing that, upon the foresight and fore-decree whereof, God did
beforehand pardon and save Sinners. But if you had rather mention it as in the
form of a Covenant, (which before the Incarnation, must be improperly taken,
being only of God to himself, or a promise of and to Christ as to be incarnate)
then the undertaking of the Father, and the Son herein must be carefully
distinguished and described. The Father gives up to Christ as Redeemer the
whole lapsed cursed reparable world, (the several parts to several uses) and
especially his chosen to be eventually and infallibly saved, and promises to
accept his Sacrifice and performance, and to make him Head over all things to
his Church, and by him to establish the Law of Grace (in its perfect Edition)
and to give him the Government respectively of the Church and world, and to
Glorify him for this work with himself for ever. And the second person
undertaketh to assume man's Nature, to do and suffer all that he did, in
perfect obedience to his Fathers Will, and Law of Redemption, to fulfill all
Righteousness, conquer Satan and the world, to suffer in the flesh, and be a
Sacrifice for sin, and to conquer Death, and teach, and rule, and purify, and
raise, and justify and glorify all true believers.

39. Before the Incarnation, Christ's future death and obedience being Eadem
suit sides in antiquis patribus and modernis qui alio modo credebant in
specialia and alia credibilia quam nos. Immo aliquid eredebant quod nunc est
salsum. Alliaco in 3. q. 1.
not existent, were no real existent Causes in themselves of men's
Justification: But that Wisdom which foresaw them, and that Will of God which
Decreed them, as such (and not they without that foresight and Decree as
existent) were the cause.

40. Nor were they either before or after the performance a proper Cause of
Gods Will which pardoned us; For Gods Will in it self can have no cause. But
they were Causes, 1. Of the Thing willed, and 2. Also of the extrinsecal
denomination of Gods Will from the object and effect (of which anon).

41. Christ did not take upon him strictly and properly, the Natural or Civil
person of any Sinner, much less of all the Elect, or all Sinners: But the
person of a Mediator between God and Sinners: (Of which more afterward).

42. Christ was not our Delegate, Deputy, Minister or Instrument to do what he
did in our names, by representing our persons; as a man's Servant pays his
Masters debt by his command, or does some work which he was to do by himself or
by another. Nor did God or his own consent put him into any such Instrumental
Relation, in our Civil persons.

43. Yet did he in the person of a Mediator, not only merit and suffer ^ro
nobis and nostro bono, but also voluntarily as part of his Mediato^ial work,
suffer the penalty, nostro loco, in our stead: Not by a full ^epresentation of
our persons; nor as if we could hence truly say, that we ^id (in sensu Legis
vel Civili). Suffer in Christ, or satisfy Gods Justice our selves by Christ,
nor that God or the Redeemer do reckon it to us, or ever will, to be a thing
done by us in our own Civil person, though ^y Christ's Natural person; nor will
ever give us all the fruits of it, on that reason and account, as supposing us
so by Christ to have satisfied for, or Redeemed our selves. But he suffered in
the stead and place of Sinners, to satisfy Gods Wisdom, Truth, and Justice,
and to procure pardon and life for Sinners, to be given out by himself, on his
terms, and in his way.

44. Much less did Christ in our persons, and we in and by him, in a civil
sense, become habitually holy, and perfectly fulfill all righteousness: Nor
does God ever repute us to have our selves in our own civil persons, thus
fulfilled the Law, and been holy in and by Christ, or will justify us on such
a supposition.

45. Christ is said to be made sin for us, in that he was made a Sacrifice for
sin: But never was a Sinner indeed, or in Gods esteem: For God judges not
falsely: Nor did he ever take to himself the Guilt of fact, or fault in it self,
but the punishment and the guilt only in relation to punishment; the Reatum
poenae, non culpae qua talis. But if any will call the Reatum poenae by the
name of Reatum eulpae quoad poenam tantum, because of the relation and
connotation, I strive not against the Name, so we agree of the thing: But
safest words are best; especially seeing that obligatio ad poenam is it that is
most usually and eminently called guilt: But Christ never undertook to be
reputed of God one that was truly and formally wicked or a sinner; but only one
that was a sponsor who consented to suffer for Sinners, that they might be
delivered. And they are ill words of them that say, Christ was by imputation
the most wicked man, the greatest Thief, Adulterer, Murderer, or Sinner in the
world; Though such men may mean well, it were better speak in the Scripture
phrase, and not so far overgoe it.

Had God imputed our sins so to him as to have esteemed him a Sinner or guilty
of our habitual and actual sin as sin (even our hatred of God, and all our
wickedness) God must necessarily from the perfection of his Nature, have hated
him as a wicked enemy; yea, more than he hated any other man, as being guilty
of a world of wickedness. Whereas God was still well pleased with him, and
never hated him.

46. The satisfaction which Christ made to the justice of God was full and
perfect; and so was his merit by his perfect Righteousness.

47. The perfection of Christ's satisfaction consists not in its being in
stead of All the sufferings due to all for whom be dyed, so that none should
therefore be ever due to the persons themselves. For death, afflictions, and
the want of Grace, and withholding of the Spirits further help, etc. must be
suffered even by the Elect: But it consists in its full sufficiency to those
Ends for which it was designed by the Father and the Son.

48. The very Nature and Reason of the satisfactoriness of Christ's ^^^ferings,
was not in Being the very same either in Kind or in Degree, which were due to
all for whom he suffered: For they were not such: Of which more afterward.

49. They could not be the same which was due by the Law: For the Law made it
due to the Sinner himself. And another suffering for him* fulfilleth not the
Law (which never said, Either thou or another for the shall dye) But only
satisfied the Lawgiver as he is above his own Law, and could dispense with it,
his Justice being satisfied and saved. D^^alius solvit, aliud solvitur. 2. And
sin it self (though not as sin) as ^^ before opened, was the greatest part of
the Sinners punishment (To ^^ alienated from God, and not to love him and
delight in him, but to be corrupted and deluded and tormented by
concupiscence). 3. And the immediate unavoidable consequents resulting from sin
it self, we^^ punishments which Christ did never undergo. (As to be Hateful or
^^ pleasing to God, as contrary to his Holy nature; to be related as Criminal,
to lose all Right to Gods favor and Kingdom, etc.) 4. And no^^ of the further
punishments which supposed real faultiness could fall ^^ Christ; as the torment
of an accusing Conscience for rejecting and offending God, for casting away our
own felicity, and running into hell, etc. the sense of Gods hatred of us as
real Sinners. 5. Much less the de^^tions of the Spirit of Holiness, to be left
without goodness, in a state of sin, and to hate God for his justice and
holiness, which will be the damneds case. The blind zeal of them that think
they wrong the sufferings of Christ, if they make them not thus of the some
ki^^ with all that we deserved, does lead them to the intolerable Blasph^ming
of our Savior; which if understood, they would themselves abhor.

50. Nor could Christ's sufferings be equal in Degree, intensively and
extensively, to all that was deserved by the world: As is easily dis^^^nible by
perusing what is now said, seeing our deserved suffering lay i^ things of such
a Nature, as to be left in sin it self, destitute of God^ Image, and Love and
Communion, under his hatred, tormented in C^^science; besides the everlasting
torments of hell, which are more th^^ these, upon all the millions of Sinners
which were redeemed.

51. Yet did Christ suffer more in Soul than in Body, being at the present
deprived of that kind of sense of Gods Love, and Joy therein, which was no part
of his holiness or perfection, (but no other) and having o^ If in any of these
points men of less accurateness use not the same words, take not therefore the
old way of proclaiming them Heretics, till you have tried how far they err
indeed. Most of our lower Divines of all parties would be made Heretics for
want of Skill in the denominations allowable or not allowable by the
Communication of idioms, if the Schoolmens accurateness must be the test. e. g.
If the question were whether the Humanity be part of Christ, or Christ be
compounded of a Divine Nature and Humane, etc. ^^^^ would affirm it, that mean
well. But says Alliac. Camerar. 3. q. [Neque persona neque natura divina est
composita; nec ^^^^ est compositus ex duabus na^^^is, divina scilicet and
humana; sive ex tribus rebus, Corpore scilicet, anima and divinitate: sed ^^^^
ex duabus, secundum humanitatem, scilicet corpore and anima essentialiter, and
ex infinitis partibus quantitativis integraliter. ^^ non est concedendum quod
humanitas sit Pars Christ^. Nam ficut homo non est compositus ex albidine, and
substantia, (...) est Compositus ex humanitate and persona divina. How many
have gone for Heretics for want of the Language of ^^^^ and the Schoolmen?
his Soul the deep sense of Gods displeasure with Sinners and of his ^^^^ of
sin, though no sense of Gods hatred to himself. For it is conceiveable how
Christ being the Lover and surety or Sponsor for Sinners, and undertaking to
suffer as a Sacrifice for their sins, and in their stead, might have on his own
Soul the sorrowful sense of Gods hatred of sin and wrath against Sinners,
though not properly terminated on himself; and so he bore the sorrow of our
transgressions, and was so far forsaken of God for that time, and not further.

52. The true Reason of the satisfactoriness of Christ's sufferings was that
they were a most apt means for the demonstration of the Governing Justice,
Holiness, Wisdom and Mercy of God, by which God could attain the ends of the
Law and Government, better than by executing the Law on the world in its
destruction, (as in general was before intimated.)

53. The measure of the satisfaction made by Christ was, that it was a full
salvo to Gods Justice, and demonstration of it, that he might give Pardon and
Life to Sinners, upon the new terms of the Covenant of Grace, and give what he
after gave.

54. The matter of Christ's meritorious Righteousness, was his perfect
fulfilling the Law given him as Mediator, or the performance of the Conditions
of his mediatorial Covenant: From which resulted the Merit, so the Dueness of
all the Benefits which God had promised in that Covenant as to Christ, though
mostly for men. This was the Righteousness of Christ for man, and hence arose
his Merit for us.

55. The matter of his Law of Redemption required of him was threefold, 1. That
he should by habitual and actual perfect Holiness fulfill the first Law of
Nature or Innocence which Adam broke; not just as it obliged Adam, in every
point, but as it was common to man, and belonged to Christ as Man. 2. That he
should fulfill all the Law of Moses given only to the Jews. 3. That he should
perform the great things peculiar to himself as Mediator; which were to be a
Sacrifice for Sin, to do his Miracles, to teach the Church as its Head: to Rule
it, and to appoint Orders and Officers for it, to rise again, to conquer Satan,
Death and Sin, etc.

56. That Christ did not fulfill all the Law in our persons, so as that we did
it in and by himself, and are thereby justified, is further evident, in that he
did not all the Duties which the Law bound us to perform, and for not doing of
which we are truly Sinners. He did not do any of the proper Offices of a
Husband to a Wife, or of a Wife to a Husband; of a Father to Children; of a
Servant, or a hired day-labourer to a Master; of a Magistrate (King, Judge,
etc.) to Subjects: of a Captain to Soldiers, or Soldiers to their Captain; of
a Landlord to Tenants; of such as have great riches toward the poor: of the
sick, the imprisoned, and abundance such like. Besides the personal Laws given
to Adam in the Garden, to Noah, to Abraham, to David, ^^^^ ^olomon, the
Prophets, and such others. Christ did not these same ^^^^ for us; nor we
fulfilled not these particular Laws in him.

57. The Disputes whether it be Christ's Divine, his habitual, his active, or
his passive Righteousness, that is made ours to our Justification, seems to
be but the Offspring of the error of the undue sense of Christ's personating
or representing us in his Righteousness: And the parcelling out the uses and
effects, (that one is imputed to us instead of habitual Righteousness, another
instead of actual, and the third pardons our Sins,) is from the same false
supposition. (It Is well that they suppose not that his Divine Righteousness is
imputed to our deification.) But the case is plain, 1. That Christ's whole
Humane Righteousness, habitual, active and passive, are meritorious for us,
(not as being the very same things, all which we should have done, and
suffered, and had; as if we had, did and suffered them our selves by one that
had, did and suffered them in our persons (in a Law-sense.) But as being the
parts of that one Righteousness of Christ as Mediator, which consists in the
full performance of the Law of Redemption, or of his own Covenant with his
Father, undertaken for our sakes. Having been, and done, and suffered what he
promised, he is Righteous.

2. And his Divine Righteousness, by virtue of the hypostatical Union,
dignifieth his Humane to its meritorious value.

58. By his Satisfaction or Sacrifice, and this Merit, Christ did procure all
that Pardon, Life and Benefits, whatsoever that consequently are given us of
God: And so is the true meritorious cause of all.

59. That Sacrifice and Obedience, Righteousness and Merit, which was directly
given to God, for man, by performance of Christ's undertaking, may yet be
consequently said to be given unto man; In that it was given to God for man,
and in that the Benefits merited are given to man; and so relatively as to
those Benefits, the Sacrifice, Obedience, Righteousness and Merit, may be said
to be given us. As the Ransom is given to the Captive which is given for him,
because the liberty purchased by it is given him. (Of which more after.)

SECT. IV. Of the New Covenant, or the Law of Grace in the Second Edition.
60. The New Covenant is Christ's Law of Grace; his Instrument by which he
gives Title or Right to the Benefits promised, and conveyeth Right to the
Fruits of his Sacrifice and Merits; And his Law by which he governs the
Church as a Savior, in order to Recovery and Salvation.

It has greatly scandalized the Papists against us to find some old
Pr^testants deny Christ to be a Lawgiver, and in his Gospel to have a Law. The
case is sad, that any in opposition to others should run into such an
Antinomian extreme: They are unlike to be good Preachers of Christ's Law, who
maintain that he has no Law: And there can be no sin against it, nor
expectation of being judged by it, if he have none. And he is no King and
Ruler, if he have no Law. But yet let the Papists forbear i^ ^^ing, and
remember that the true meaning of most of them is no more, than to assert what
Suarez himself propugneth, viz. that besides Revelations, and the Duties thence
naturally resulting, (by natural Law) and the Sacraments, Christ has no other
Laws. And both Suarez and they are here to blame (for the Papists that are by
some accused for calling the Gospel a Law, do also give too little honor to
Christ's Laws); It beseems none of them to use such ill Language, whatever
they mean. If they should say that the King is no Lawgiver, and has no Laws,
they would wrong him by that Language (as denying his Royalty) how well soever
they should interpret it. For the Legislative-Power is the principal essential
part of Sovereignty. But if any really deny Christ to be a Lawgiver, and when
he has done reproacheth the Papists and Arminians for contradicting it; it is
but as the blind reproaching the purblind for seeing; when they that give most
to the Laws of Christ (among these Contenders) do give too little.

The Baptismal-Covenant, is a Law as imposed, and as imposing the
Covenant-Duties, and as determining the conditions of Life and Death, according
to which men must live and shall be judged: yea it is the most famous Law,
which Conscience has to do with; Though it be a Covenant as consented to, in
the contract. That Sinners have terms of Life and Death, and offered Remedies
against all their Guilt and greatest Punishments, and Means prescribed, and
Duties commanded in order to their recovery, when the Law of Innocence
condemns them; especially the obeying of the Ministry, and Word, and Holy
Spirit of Christ, prescribing them his way of cure as their Physician, all this
is a Law of Grace; even the Law of Liberty, and the Law of the Spirit of Life,
which freeth us from the Law of Sin and Death. Christ's Law consists of two
parts: (as is said) 1. The Law of Nature (called by many moral) as commanding
the love of God and its attendent Duties, not now to an innocent man, but to a
condemned-recovering Sinner, as the health to which his Physician does restore
him. 2. And the remedying Law which is more proper to the Redeemer called the
Law of Faith; which appoints us the terms and means of our recovery: which
is, 1. Supernatural as to the Revelation of the matter and reasons of it, and
the foundation of all in Christ's Work of Redemption and his Legislation: 2.
But as to the obligation or efficiency of man's duty, it is both natural and
supernatural at once: that is, when it is presupposed that Christ has done,
suffered and offered to our acceptance, all that is so asserted of him in the
Gospel; 1. Nature obliges us to believe it (upon evidence of credibility) and
to accept it, and thankfully improve it: 2. Christ as the Fathers
Administrator, and our King, has positively commanded us the same.

Were it not for wearying the Reader, and my self, I would here answer all that
Suarez says, (de Legib. li. 10. c. 2.) to prove that no praeceptum positivum
morale is added by Christ: And I would easily prove that as some parts of
Nature are unalterable, and accordingly natural Duty, so some things of Nature
are mutable, and so is that natural Duty which is founded on them: And Christ
has by supernatural Performances and Revelations made such changes in the
nature of things, as infers new natural Obligations. Were the Devils
redeemed, and Grace now offered them, nature would make it their duty to accept
it.

In sum, it is a sufficient confutation of all Suarez's Reasons, to say, that
they run upon this false supposition, that Nature and supernatural Precept may
not both oblige man to the same duty, and that God cannot lay two Obligations
on us to the same action. For all that he labors, is to prove that supposing
the Revelation, Nature binds us to believe all the Christian Articles, to
preach, and hear, and pray to God by Christ, to love our Redeemer, and be
thankful, etc. and that the Gospel is thus fitted to lapsed Nature, as the
first Law was to innocent Nature. All which I like very well, and take it for a
great honor to Christ and the Gospel, that it is so suited to the natural
necessity and state of fallen and miserable man, and may be called the Law of
sinful Nature. But Suarez himself had before proved that Moses's Decalogue was
both a Declaration of what Nature bound men to, and yet also the matter of a
new Precept of God: And why could he not see the same of the Gospel, it being
so evident, that it contains Christ's Commands? And the very sum of our
Ministry is, 1. To disciple and baptize all Nations, etc. 2. And then to teach
them to observe all that Christ commanded. And indeed Suarez confesses (p.
816.) That Christ did by new commanding add new Obligations to the duties of
Nature, though he deny that Christ added any positive Precept as to the moral
matter commanded by the Law of Nature --.

And by this instance you may see how near some men agree, that seem much to
differ. But as to them that insist on it, that the Gospel and New Covenant are
no Laws, and that we have none from Christ but the Decalogue and Old Testament;
were I to write against them to purpose, I would plentifully prove them
Subverters of Christianity it self, and give full evidence against them, to any
that believe the holy Scriptures. And contrarily I would prove, that there are
no Divine Laws but what are truly the Laws of our Redeemer, now in the world,
and that all Infidels are ruled, and shall be judged by a Law of Grace, though
not of the last evangelical Edition; and that he that fears not breaking the
Laws of Christ, shall hear at last; Those mine Enemies that would not that I
should Reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me, Luke 19. 27.
That Christ is truly a King, and so a Lawgiver, and has proper Laws, and not
only Doctrine; (and how great an injury some Protestants have do^e the Church
by denying (besides the Antinomians) See Suar^z, de Leg. l. 10. c. 1. whose
proofs of the thing are unanswerable; And I have long ago proved it in other
Writings.

But Suar^z asserting that Christ's Law is only Moral and Ceremonial, (in the
Sacraments) and not judicial, does plainly confess that God never instituted
the Papacy and their Discipline: Yea he says, (c. 2. p. 812. [Christus in sua
l^ge nihil de praec^ptis judicialibus statuit: etiam si in Ecclesia Christi ut
talis est, aliquae leges judiciales si^t necessariae ad politicum regimen
Ecclesiasticum, quod suo modo spirituale est; nihilominus noluit Christus
dominus per se ipsum illas leges far, sed id Vicariis suis commisit,
potestatem ad illas ferendas eis tribuendo: Et ideo illae Leges non sub Lege
Divina, sed sub canonica computantur: Pr^prie igitur loquendo de Lege divina
nova, in illa non inveniuntur praecepta judicialia.] So that Christ never made
the Papacy, nor any of its Laws. But indeed he appointed Baptism as our
Church-entrance, and more than a Ceremony: and the state of C^u^ch Officers,
and their work and discipline, Mat. 18. And what his Spirit did in the
Apostles, he did in another sort than he does by any ordinary Ministers that
have but the Spirits ordinary help.




Aquinas and many other Papists ^oyn with some late Sec^a^ies, and say that
it is the Spirits Operation on the Heart, that is the Lex nova, and that it is
not written: But he could not deny but that yet the Gospel is Lex nova Scripta:
But falsely de nomine takes this but for the secondary sense of the l^x: which
is the first, and that the obliging Law* and the other the effects of it as
various as persons are that have it, and not the Rule of Obligation: And
elsewhere I have showed also de Lege natura.


As to the question, Whether Christ's Law be exterior insignis (vocal and
written) or in the Heart by the Spirit, Suarez truly says, That lex imperans
is in signis (in Scripture words) but lex impellens is the Spirit; which though
here the chief, yet is not properly but metaphorically called a Law, (page 819.
and li. 1. in principio.) Though he add, that it was eight years before the
Gospel was written by Matthew, and longer by the rest, and that all that time
and since it is written in the Heart. But memory may retain a vocal Law, before
the Heart (by love and subjection) do receive it.

61. In this Law or Covenant is made a free universal Deed of Gift of Christ
first, and of Pardon, Spirit and Glory in and by him to all Mankind without
exception, who will believingly accept it in its true nature, as it is offered
therein; Or [If they will so accept it as Believers.]

62. This Covenant is to be preached by Christ's Ministers, and men invited to
believe and consent: And all that so do, are to profess that consent by a
solemn Covenant in their Baptism, and so to give up themselves devotedly to God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; renouncing the Devil, Flesh and World.

63. For Faith in God the Father is as essential a part of that Faith which we
must profess in Baptism, and is called commonly justifying, as Faith in Christ
is: And so is Faith in the Holy Ghost in its place. For it is not possible to
believe in Christ, without believing first in God, to whom he is the way, and
with whom he is our Mediator; nor to believe in him fully as Christ, unless we
believe in him, as giving us the sanctifying Spirit.

64. This Covenant is nevertheless free (as to the donation of the Gifts,) for
being conditional: For the Condition is not the purchase, procurement by
efficient causality, or any way a proper cause of the Gift as given, but only a
dispositive cause of our reception of it, and of the Gift as received: It is a
removens prohibens. The Condition as imposed, and as the mode of the Promise,
is only a suspension of the Donation and Right till it be performed: The
Condition as performed is a removing the suspension: And so it is a receiving
cause; which is but dispositio materiae receptivae (of which more in due place.)

65. And the Gift is nevertheless free, because the Condition is but such as is
morally-antecedently -necessary to the reception of free Gifts. For though
physical Donation often make its own way, and pre-require not such Conditions as
these at least; yet moral Donation by Deed of Gift, supposes that the person
will receive it, and despising, or unthankful refusal, or turning it against
the Donor, nullifieth such a Donation in the Civil Laws of men.

66. And the Benefits are nevertheless conditionally given, though the Spirit
of Christ cause us to perform the Condition: For they are called conditional
from the mode or form of the Covenant, which gives men Right to Christ and
Life expressly on condition of believing.

67. Though this believing be sometimes described as the assent of the
Intellect, and sometimes as the consent of the Will, and sometime as a
practical affiance, trusting Christ as a Savior, to save us, with Soul and
Body, to the renouncing and letting go all other trust; Yet when ever
Justification and Life is promised to Faith, all these three are the essential
parts of it.

68. The clearest discovery of the true nature of Gods Covenant with man, and
of that Faith by which we partake of the benefits of it, is in Baptism it self,
which has ever been the entrance of men into Gods Covenant as consented to,
and mutual, and so into a visible state of Christianity and membership of
Christ and the Catholic Church. And therefore it is happy for us, that Christ
so expressly delivered the form of the Baptismal Covenant, and the Universal
Church has so safely in her practice kept it.

69. This Baptismal Covenant which is conditional, and the consent to which
does make us Christians, must be still distinguished from the Covenant between
the Father and Christ, or his Law of Redemption: And God promises not to us,
all that he promises to Christ for us; nor gives all to us which he gives to
him.

70. And it must be distinguished from Gods mere Predictions concerning his
Elect (that he will call them, renew them, and save them,) or if those
Predictions run in the form of a Promise, either as they are promises to Christ
concerning the Elect, or as promises to the Church in general, how God will
perfect it, still they give no man a Law-Title or Right to any of the Benefits,
till he is a Believer: They justify and pardon no man: And so they must not be
confounded with the Baptismal Covenant, which is Gods stated Instrument of
Justification and of Government, and the Law by which he will Judge us at the
last.

71. This Baptismal Covenant is the character and test, by which we must judge
who are Christians, and members of the Catholic Church of Christ, and not by
their Subjection to a pretended vicarious universal Monarch. And this is the
character (with consent to his relation there) by which every man's fitness for
membership in a particular Church must be judged of; And not by other Covenants
(besides that consent) and proofs of Conversion, not here included. And this
contains the true Characters, by which every man may know himself whether he
be a true Christian, and must judge of his sincerity and right to Christ,
Justification and Salvation, as he is or is not a sincere consenter to it truly
understood in the essential parts.

SECT. V. Of the Gift and Works of the Holy Ghost.
72. There are three sorts of Operations of the Holy Ghost, one common, and two
proper to them that shall have, or already have Justification.

1. The first is preparing common Grace, which makes men fitter for special
Grace, which yet they may have that perish.

2. The second is that Grace of the Spirit by which we perform the The Thomists
make the act of contrition and chari^y to be the ulti^ate disposition to
Justification, which is with them the habit: And yet they say, that it flows
from that habit; And if the distinction of Alva^ez Disp. de Aux 59. p. 264. and
possim be not contradiction, I understand it not, [Eadem contritio quae est
ultima dispositio ad gratiam, and in genere causae materialis antecedit illam,
in genere tamen causae formalis and efficientis, est effectus ejusdem gratiae.]
Though that which is the effect of one act of Gods Love, be the Object of
another act.
first Act of special Faith and Repentance, called commonly by Divine^
Vocation, which goes before any special habit; but not before any holy seed;
Because the very influx of the Spirit on the Soul is as a seed, which exciteth
the first act before a habit, though not ordinarily before some preparations.
This Faith is commanded us as our duty first, and made necessary to us, as the
Condition of the Covenant; And when we know it to be thus required of us, and
hear in the Gospel the Reasons which should perfwade us, then the Holy Spirit
moves us by his Influx to believe and consent, where God and man are conjunct
Agents; but man subordinate to God.

3. The third sort is the Spirits Operation of the habit of Divine Love, and
all other Graces in the Soul, which is called his In-dwelling, and
Sanctification; This is that Gift of the Spirit (besides Miracles of old) which
is promised to Believers: To this, Faith is the Condition: To this, upon
believing it is that we have Right given us by Gods Covenant; and thus it is
that by Baptism our right to the Spirit, as an in-dwelling Sanctifier and
Comforter is given us.

73. This third Gift or Work of the Spirit eminently so called, is in the same
instant of time given us as the second, (but not of nature) or at least
immediately thereupon when we believe: But yet they are not to be confounded on
many accounts.

74. But yet though some degree of the Spirit be presently given to every
Believer, it is usually but a spark at first; And there are further means and
conditions appointed us for the increase, and actual helps from day to day: And
he that will not wait on the Spirit in the use of those means, does forfeit his
help according to his neglect.

75. Hence it is that most, if not all Christians have lower measures of the
Spirit than otherwise they might have, and that judicially as a punishment for
Sin; However God is free herein, and if he please may give more even to them
that forfeit it.

76. This Covenant of Grace, being a conditional pardon of all the world, The
extent of the New Covenant.
is universal in the tenor or sense of it; It is of all Mankind without
exception that Christ says, If thou confess with thy mouth, and believe i^ thy
heart, thou shall be saved: No person antecedently is excluded in the world.

77. And as to the promulgation of it, Christ has commissioned his Ministers
to preach this Gospel to all the world, and to every Creature: So Matthew. 28.
19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 16.
that to the utmost of their power they are to offer and publish it to the
whole world. And Princes and people are all bound in their several places to
assist them, and to help to propagate the Gospel throughout all the Earth: So
that the restraint of it is not by the tenor of the Law.

78. Those Nations which despise and refuse the Gospel are justly deprived of
it, penally for that rejection.

79. Those Nations that live inhuma^ely and wickedly against the means and
mercies which they have, do forfeit their hopes of more.

80. As God in all Ages has visited the sins of the Fathers on the Children,
as the instances of Cain, Cham, Nimrod, and others commonly show, and has
proclaimed it as his Name, Exodus 34. and put it in Tables of Stone in the
Second Commandment (and not only of Adam's sin); so may he justly deal by the
Posterity of the Despisers of the Gos^el, in denying it them. Though he may
freely give it the unworthy when he pleases.

81. All the rest of the world who have not the Gospel, and the Covenant The
state of those that have not the Gospel.
of Grace in the last Edition, are left by Christ in as good a state ^at least,
if not better) than he found them at his Incarnation. He took ^way no mercy
from them, which they had.

82. Therefore, as it is before proved that before Christ's time, none Of
Zuingliu's Opinion of the Salvation of Heathens by name, Hercules, Theseus,
Socrates, Aristides, Antigonus, Numa, Camilli, Caton^s, Scipiones, etc. Vid.
Monta^ut. exercit. Eccles. 1. Sect. 4. and Twissum contra Corvinum, page 371.
col. 1.

Omnium temporum una est fides; Deum esse, eundemque and Justum, and Bonum, and
Remuneratorem sperantium in se; omnium plene meritis respondentem, ante legem,
sub lege, sub gratia: Nemini rectum sapienti venit istud in dubium: sine ista
nemo unquam ingressus est ad salutem. Rob. Sarisberiens. Polycrat. de nugis
curial. Pol. Peucer Hist. Carcerum against the Lutherans Concord says, p. 715.
Etsi nec ad Ethnicos ante natum Christum nec ad Judaeos post natum Christum
misit singulares ministros: sonuit tamen v^x doctrinae de Deo patefactae
utroque tempore: Hoc modo and adhuc sonat, ut exaudiatur nunc etiam a Turcis
and Judaeis: Nec fuerunt unquam exclusi prorsus a gratia and miserecordia Dei
ante Christum Ethnici: E quibus innumeri ex omnibus gentibus fuerunt ad Deum
conversi: Post Christum natum Judaei: Panciores ex his tamen.


of the world were left desperate, under the mere violated Covenant of
^nnocency, but that the tenor of that New Covenant, as made to Adam and Noah,
extended to them all, so are they still under all the Grace of that Edition of
the Covenant, further than they are penally deprived of ^^ for violating it.
The Law of Grace in that first Edition is still in force, and the Law by which
the world shall be governed and judged; They ^re all Possessors of Mercy which
leads to Repentance, and bound to use ^he means afforded them in order to
Repentance and Salvation, and it is their sin that they do not: For which it is
ultimately that they are con^emned. Though wickedness harden men against the
Law of Grace, that changes not Gods Law to them, but brings them under the
penalty. Not that any are bound to expect a Christ to come, but to perform the
^ommon Conditions of that Covenant before described.

83. Therefore no man is now condemned for Original Sin alone; Though it is
pardoned to no man, till he perform the condition of it, in ^he pardoning
Covenant. For God having brought all men under terms ^f mercy tending to
recovery, they shall be judged as they use that reco^ering mercy, according to
that Law of Grace which they are under, ^hether of the first or last Edition.

84. The exception which some make of Infants is vain: Because as ^ar as God
has revealed his mind about them to us, he esteems them and uses them as
parts of their Parents and Owners, and if he condemn them, it is not for Adam's
sin only, but also ultimately for their Parents ^ejection of recovering Grace,
and not devoting them to God in his Covenant. And though God will not condemn
the Children for the Parents ^in; that is, when they themselves repent and turn
to God. But the Scripture is most plain and frequent in expressing our guilt of
our nearer Pa^ents sins against Grace, which is a part of our Original Sin: and
ought ^ot to be so slighted as usually it is. However, 1. It is an incredible
^pinion, That God should rule and judge all the rest of the world by a ^aw of
Grace, and leave only poor Infants without any mercy, under the ^eer Law of
Innocence, and judge them only by another Law, than he ^oth all the world. 2.
And it is the trick of a Deceiver to argue ab ^gnotiore, and carry his Cause
into the dark. And Infants Case is left to ^s in Scripture much darker than
that of the adult.

85. Therefore it seems plain to me, that though Christ's Church be ^ow
incomparably happier than the Jewish Church was, (in magnitude, ^ight, and
grace, and excellency of privileges,) far above all the rest of the world, and
so excels the state of Heathens far more than the Jewish Church excelled
them; Yet the rest of the world stand now in much like relation to God and the
Christian Church, as before Christ's ^ncarnation they did to God and the Jewish
Church, who were his pecu^iar (but not his only) people; the foedus
peculiaritatis was theirs only; but not foedus gratiae: So are we much more, as
a holy Nation, a royal Priest^ood to stand nearer God than the rest of the
world: But whether the Jews were all Gods people on Earth I have before
discussed, and proved ^he negative.

85. But certainly in no Nation under Heaven, there is no coming ^^ God, or
pleasing him without Faith; nor seeing him without Holiness* nor any Name given
under Heaven by which men can be saved, but by Christ; Heb. 11. 5, 6. Heb. 12.
14. Act. 4. 1^. Romans 8. 9. Joh. 14. 6. 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12.
nor any Sanctification but by Christ's Spirit; nor any coming to the Fath^^
but by the Son; nor any Pardon and Life but by a Covenant of Grace, ^^^ by the
Merits and Purchase of Christ. But how far he gives this S^^^ and Grace where
he is not known himself as Incarnate, is all the difficulty: (As to Infants and
Adult).

86. Though God has said less to us of their case that hear not the Gospel,
than of Believers and Unbelievers (privative, I desire the Reader to peruse
Ga^aker's Preface to Antoninus of the Stoics.
that hear it) because it less concerns us to know it, and to be busy in
judging the Servants of another, yet in this point are men's confide^^^ and
opposition most vehement. On one side some say, [Before I would believe that
God has shut all the millions of the Earth, from Adam's days till now, save a
few Jews and Christians, out of all possibility of Salvation, so that they are
left as the Devils without he^^ hope or means, and perish Infants and all
merely because God wi^^ have it so, and that in everlasting fire; I will
easilier believe that the Gospel is not true, as having less of Natures light
to condemn me, th^^ for receiving such thoughts of the infinitely Good and
merci^^^ God.]

On the other side, if I do but open the undeniable Mercies of God to all,
which all the world has experience that they possess, and that Covenant of
Grace which the whole current of Scripture proves the^ under, some men that
are so very wise in their own eyes, as hardly to suspect any thing to be an
error which they have long held, and that build much of their Religion and
Theological Reputation, in adhering to the Opinions of those whose communion
they think most honors them, and out of a blind zeal for that which they
account Orthodo^, will presently without impartial consideration, or friendly
debate, ^^gisterially pass their judgment among those that reverence them, and
backbite those that they cannot confute, and say, [Such a man holds dangerous
Opinions, that Infidels may be saved,] and it is like falsely represent my words.
When yet the same men perhaps will maintain that all the Elect are justified
before they believe, and so that Infidels, even privative, are justified, so
they be but elect: And this seems to them no injury to Christ: so powerful is
prejudice, and pride, a^^ partiality.

87. The question whether any besides Christians are put into a possib^lity of
Salvation is easily and certainly resolved in the affirmative from Subit me
certe subinde (ita ista dum lego, affectum me sentio, and ingenue agnosco) non
stupor duntaxat, sed horror etiam, cum arcani Divini admiratione v^hementissima
conjunctus, serio apud me reputantem, quam long in multis ab ^o absim quod de
se vir iste, very ad salutem perduc^ntis tramitis ignarus, de se profitetur,
nec quin vere and ingenuem, ambigi posse videtur: ut proinde and Marco and
Epict^^^^ tin^ assurgens Hymnum illius vel maxi^o majorem and prastantiorem
decantare jugiter debeam -- Gataker Proloq. ^ Antoninum.

Read the multitude of Testimonies of the Virtues of Antonine, collected by
Gataker post opera.

Fuit Marcus Antoninus, vir omnium ^irtutum and sanctitate vitae praecipuus,
coelestisque ingenii. S^ bast. Munster. Cosmogr. li ^.

Bonitatis ac sapientiae numine ab omnibus dum viveret in ea aestimatione
bonoreque habitus, qua nemo unquam vel a^te ips^^, ^^ quod n^vi^us post i^sum
fuerit. -- Nunquam ita conspirarunt scriptores, in tribuendo cuiquam quaecunque
p^terant bo^itatis, inte^^^^ it is, innocentiae, cujusvis den^que tituli apud
^thnicos speciosiss^mi testimonia: Celebrant illum non tantum ut principe^
opti^^^, ^^ simpliciter and absolute ut ^ominem optimum and philosophum optimum
omnium qui u^quam extiterunt. Estque hoc ips^us peculia^e e^co^^^ quod ita
pr^dicetur, citra exceptionem ^llam praedicatur. Mer. Causabon. Praef. in Verse.
Angl. ut citat. per Gataker.


what is said: But the question whether any or how many are actua^^y saved,
does depend on the resolution of the question, whether any of them are truly
sanctified, that is, [do truly love God and Holiness, ab^^^ the Pleasures,
Profits and Honors of this world.] For nothing is mo^^ certain in Gods Word,
than that all that do so shall be saved: For a ^^^ to live in Hell with the
predominant love of God, is as great a contradiction, as for a man to be sick
in health, and both in the greater degree. God cannot damn or forsake a Soul
that loves him and is holy, (in sensu composito.)

88. And whether any or how many without the Christian Church, do truly love
God, is a question which depends as to probability upon the foresaid grounds,
but as to the certainty of the fact, upon that heartknowledge of other men)
which belongs to God only. 1. How can I that live in an obscure corner of
England, know whether any love God in Siam, China, Japon, or Persia, or at the
Antipodes. 2. If I were with them all, and acquainted with every person in the
world, I could have but a probability of the affirmative of any one, because I
am not acquainted with the heart. But when the Scripture assures us that it is
the Law of Grace, and not only that of Innocence, which all the world is
governed by, and shall be judged by, and so that their Sanctification and
Salvation is possible; there is so great a probability, that this Covenant, and
the mercies of it, are not in vain to all of them that are under it alone, and
that the thing that is possible to so many millions, does come to pass with
some, that an impartial considerer of Gods Nature and Government, may easily
see what to think most probable.

89. Those therefore that teach the Church, that it is a certain truth, that no
one in the world (Infant or Aged) is saved from Hell fire, but Christians only,
and that this is not only certain to such great understandings as their own,
but must be so to all true Christians, do but discover that they overvalue
their own understandings, and that siding has contracted their thoughts and
charity into a sinful narrowness, and that the Opinions of men, counted
Orthodox, prevails more with them than the evidence of truth, and I think
that they are to be numbered with those that by over-doing, do dangerously
undermine the Christian Faith.

90. The Texts urged by them for this pretended certainty, are all abused some
of these ways: 1. Either some one difficult Text is expounded contrary to the
current of the whole Scripture. 2. Or the words that are spoken only of
privative Unbelievers who hear the Gospel, are expounded of negative
not-Believers who never heard it, nor could do. 3. Or that which is said
against Unbelievers in general, is ex^pounded as against the non-Believers of
the Articles of the Christian Faith which are superadded since Christ's
Incarnation in special; As if all the Apostles before they believed Christ's
Sacrifice, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. were Infidels in a state of damnation.
4. Or else they suppose (without proof) that the Spirit and Grace of Christ can
extend it self to none that know him not as incarnate, crucified, risen,
glorified, etc. (and so that the Apostles had no Grace till the Resurrection).
Some such fallacy is in all these particular textual arguments, easily
discernable.

91. Were it not evident in Scripture, that the world is under the Law of Grace
as the norma officii and judicii, (as it is) yet could no man truly say that he
is certain, that no one of them should be saved. For if they were all under the
Law of Innocence, yet there is this great difference between it, and the Law of
Grace, that whereas the sentence of the latter is peremptory, excluding all
hope of Dispensation and Pardon, to the final Rejecters of its Grace, for ever;
yet the former was a Law whose penalty was remissible, and it did not pass a
peremptory sentence of despair. Though it gave no hope of Pardon, yet it took
not away the hopes of it: that is, It had a threatening-dispensable: (as Dr.
Twisse and many other say, Without a Savior had God so pleased; And as others
say, Through the virtue of Christ's Sacrifice even to them that know him not.)
For the commination of that Law (which threatened not the death of a Surety,
but of the Sinner,) was actually dispensed with in our Justification. And what
God can do, they ought not to say, that they are certain that he never will do
it, unless he had first said so himself.

92. If in all Humane Judgments Nature dictateth that in doubtful cases, the
Judge should rather propend to the better interpretation, and favorable
Judgment; why should it not be so in our judgment of God and man? The Nature of
God is infinitely good; He has proclaimed his Name, as aforesaid, even in the
terrors of Mount Sinai, to be a God gracious, merciful, long-suffering,
pardoning, etc. He has protested or sworn, that he has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, ^^^^ rather that he repent and live: and so that he first
seeks the Glory of his Mercy; and exercises justice in man's destruction, but
as his second work: He that saved no man (but Christ himself glorified) upon
the terms of Innocence, but all by Grace, and never else took one Soul to
Heaven, who had not first deserved Hell, does surely first seek the Glory of
his Grace. And we know that 1. All Judea was a small Country, like England; An
inconsiderable point or spot of the Earth, as to its magnitude. 2. That most of
the worlds duration in likelihood was over (as Bishop Usher reckons, 4000
years) before Christ's death, and the second Edition of the Covenant. So that
if none but Jews were
saved all that while, the number was comparatively next to none. 3. That no
man that I know of has presumed to say, that before Moses time, none but the
Seed of Abraham were saved. 4. That the Covenant made by Moses at Mount Sinai,
and the enclosure of the Jews, was no casting off the rest of the world into a
worse condition than they were before. 5. That none yet have presumed to say,
they are certain that all the Seed of Keturah, of Ishmael, of Esau were damned:
much less that Sem and all his Subjects, Japheth and all his Subjects (and
Posterity till then) or that Job and his Friends, and Melchizedec and all his
Subjects, were certainly damned. 6. That the Jews themselves were for the most
part so wicked, that seeing few even of that little Country were saved, if you
are sure that no others were saved, they were but a few in the world indeed. 7.
That the Apostles (as is said) were in a state of Salvation, when under
Christ's own teaching, they believed not many great Articles, now essential to
the Christian Faith. So that all set together, will tell us, that the
conclusion of the certain damnation of all without the Jewish and the Christian
Church, seems not very desirable either as to the Glory of the good and
gracious God, nor as to the good of Mankind; And therefore we should not
propend that way in a case of doubtful arguing. And I desire the Reader
impartially to consider, though Abraham knew not till God told him how bad
Sodom was, yet when he asks of God to spare it if there were but fifty
Righteous in it* whether he do not imply that he thought most other Cities of
that bigness had at least fifty righteous, if not more? For when God told him*
that he would destroy it for the cry of their sins, he must needs judge it
worse than ordinary? And was Abraham more ignorant than we? the Father of the
Faithful? a Prophet that saw Christ's day and rejoy^ed?

93. It is a certain truth, that as God the Creator, so Christ the Redeemer
does extend his mercy farther than he himself is known: And as the S^^ sends
some light to the world before it rises and is seen it self, so does Christ
send many excellent Gifts of his Grace, to those that know him not as
Incarnate. And when all the world is delivered into his hand, we have reason to
believe that the mercies which Philosophers, and all others in the world had,
were communicated by him, (as the second Person, or Wisdom and Word undertaking
man's Redemption, first, and as the Word Incarnate after.)

94. Those ancient Fathers of the Church, who lived near the Apostles times,
(as Clem, Alex. etc.) who believed that some without the Church were saved,
were never condemned for it as Heretics, no not by the busy condemning Ages.

SECT. VI. Of Universal Redemption.
95. By what has been said, it appears how far Christ may be said to have
died for all. Certainly (de re) all that Christ gives to all, which is the
fruits of his Death, he procured for all by his death: whatever we say of
conditional Intentions, he certainly intended to give all that he gives. But
all these following particulars are given by Christ, either to all, or to more
than the Elect.

1. The Humane Nature, common to all, is advanced and brought nigh to God, in
Christ's Incarnation. 2. Christ's Sacrifice for Sin, and his perfect Holiness,
are so far satisfactory and meritorious for all men, as that they render Christ
a meet Object for that Faith in him which is commanded men, and no man shall be
damned for want of the satisfactoriness of Christ's Sacrifice, or for want of a
Savior to die for him, and fulfill all Righteousness, but only for the abusing
or refusing of his Mercy. 3. Christ's conquest of the Devil and the World, has
made man's conquests of them the more easy or possible. And his Victory over
Death and his Resurrection, has procured a Resurrection to all the World. 4.
All men are his Subjects by Obligation, as he is the Redeemer, and so are under
his healing, saving kind of Government. 5. A clearer revelation of Life and
Immortality, is made by him, even to those that perish. And they have far
greater helps than else they would have had, to set their hearts on a better
World. 6. Especially a Law of Grace is made by Christ for all the world; (In
the last Edition to all Joh. 1. 11, 12. and 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. 1 John 5. 10, 11.
that hear the Gospel, and in the first to all the rest.) By the Promise of
which, as by an Act of Oblivion, or Instrument of Donation, God has Enacted
and Given a full Pardon of all Sin to all Mankind, with Reconciliation,
Adoption, and Right to Christ and Heaven, on condition of their acceptance of
it, as offered them. So that men are pardoned and justified by that Instrument
or Gift, if they will believe, and will not unthankfully reject their Mercies.
7. Apostles and ordinary Ministers were appointed to preach this Gospel to all
the World, and make the Offer of Christ and Life to all men without exception.
8. The Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16.
execution of the violated Law of Innocence is forborne to all men, in the
greatest part; Judgments kept off; and they kept out of Hell, while they have
time and means to prepare for their Salvation. 9. Many and great Mercies which
signify Gods goodness, and lead toward Repentance, are given to all the
world; even mercies forfeited by sins against the Law of Innocence, and given
by the Grace of our Redeemer. 10. It is made all men's duty, to believe (the
Revelation made to the^) to repent, to accept more mercy, and to seek their own
Salvation. And such duty is not the smallest mercy. 11. He has recorded his
Word and Grace in the holy Scriptures, which all are allowed to use for their
good. He has filled his Doctrine or Gospel with such powerful convincing
Reasons and Persuasions, which have a tendency to convince men, and convert
them. 12. He secondeth his Word by many such Providence (in his Works, his
Mercies, his Afflictions,) as greatly Act. 14. 17. and 17. 27, 28. Romans 1. 19,
21. Romans 2.
tend to win men's Souls. 13. He has left his excellent Example to the world,
which greatly tends to men's Conviction and Salvation. 14. He has appointed
several Church-Ordinances, which are mercies to more than the Elect; as is the
visible communion also which they have with the Upright, and their examples,
prayers, etc. 15. To all these he adds an obligation on all Christians, to do
their best to convert and save all others. 16. And the Office of Magistrates
under Christ, is appointed for these saving uses, to promote the Salvation of
the people. 17. Death it self is now turned into a medicinal means, by the
prospect of it to convert and save men. 18. Usually Gods patitience allows
men time of Repentance, and takes them not at the first denial, that they may
consider and correct their former error. 19. Remedies are offered men fetched
from Satan and Sin it self. The Tempter (by the malice of his temptations) often
detecteth his ow^ fraud and men's danger. A natural enmity against Devils, and
all that is known to be of them, is put into all Mankind: And Sin has a sting
to the Flesh it self, and is mad^ such a misery to Sinners even in this life,
as may much tend to alienate and deter them from it. And the world it self is
made such a palpable vanity, and smart vexation, as tends to drive men to
look out for a better, and not to love it above God. 20. Lastly, To all these
means, there are certain internal motions, and strivings of the Spirit of
Christ, which he commonly vouchsafes m^^ in some degree, and which irritate
Conscience to do its office; and which if men will but so far yield to as they
can, have a tendency to th^^^ recovery. All these twenty sorts of means and
mercies Christ gives to all, or to more than the Elect.

96. It being certain de re that Christ so far died for all, as to procure them
all such Benefits as he gives them, the question remaining i^ de nomine,
whether it be a fit phrase to say that Christ died for all? And this is put out
of question by the Scripture, which frequently uses it, as is proved by the
forecited Texts. We may well speak as God ordinarily there speaks.

97. There are certain fruits of Christ's death which are proper to the Elect,
(or those that are in a state of Salvation). As 1. Grace eventually Romans 8. 30,
31. Act. 26. 18. 1 John 5. 11, 12. Joh. 15. 1, 2, 6. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Col. 1.
19. Ephesians. 3. 17. Act. 5. 31. and 13. 38, 39. Col. 1. 13, 14. Romans 5. 1, etc.
Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Psalm. 50. 15. and 46. 1. Rev. 22. 9. Heb. 1.
14.
effectual working them to true Faith, Repentance and Conver^^on. 2. Union with
Christ the Head, as his true living members. 3. The actual forgiveness of sin,
as to the grand spiritual and the eternal punishment, Romans 4. 1. 7. and 8. 1.
33, 34. 4. Our actual Reconciliation with God, so as to be beloved as his
peculiar people. 5. Our Adoption and Right to the heavenly Inheritance, Psalm.
4. 6. and 8. 16, 17, 18. 6. The Spirit of Christ to dwell in us, and sanctify
us, by a habit of Divine Love, Romans 8. 9, 13. Gal. 4. 6. Col. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1.
16. and 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 John 4. 15. Joh. 3. 5, 6. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Gal. 5. 17, 18,
22. 2 Cor. 6. 1. 7. Employment in sincere holy acceptable Service, where they
and their duties are pleasing to God, Heb. 11. 5, 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. 8. Access
in prayer, with a promise of being heard in all that is good for us (in Gods
measure, time and way,) through Christ, Joh. 14. 13, 14. Heb. 10. 19, 20, 22.
9. Well-grounded hopes of Salvation and peace of Conscience thereupon, Romans 5.
1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 10. Spiritual communion with the Church-mystical in Heaven and
Earth, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21, 22. 1 Cor. 3. 22. 11. A special
interest in Christ's Intercession with the Father* Romans 8. 32, 33, etc. 12.
Resur^ection unto Life, and Justification in Judgment; Glorification of the
Soul at Death, and of the Body at the Resurrection, Phil. 3. 20, 21. ^ Cor. 5.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Romans 8. 17, 18, 30, 32, 35, 36, 37, etc.

All these Benefits Christ has made a conditional Deed of Gift to all the
world: But only the Elect accept them, and possess them. From whence we
certainly infer, that Christ never absolutely intended or decreed that his
death should eventually put all men in possession of these Benefits: And yet
that he did intend and de^ree that by his death all men should have a
conditional Gift of them. (As Dr. Twisse does frequently assert.)

98. Christ therefore died for all, but not for all equally, or with the same
intent, design or purpose: So that the case of difference in the matter of
Redemption, is resolved into that of Predestination; and is but Gods different
Decrees about the effects of Redemption.

99. The particle [For] when we question whether Christ died [For*] All is
ambiguous: 1. It may mean [In the strict representation of the ^ersons of all
as several, so that they may be said to have died or satisfied ^n and by him,
as civilly in their own persons, though not naturally]. And thus Christ died
not for all, or for any man: which yet is in some men's conceits, who thence say
that Christ died not for all, because he did not so personate all. 2. It may
signify [to die by the procurement of all ^ens sins, as the assumed
promeritorious cause.] And thus Par^^^ himself in his Irenicon says, That the
sins of all men lay on Christ; and so he died for all, that is, for all men's
sins as the cause of his death: And you may tell any wi^ked man, Thy sins
killed Christ (whatever the deniers say to excuse them). 3. Or it means,
that Christ died fin^lly for the good of all men. And that is true, as before
explained. He died for the good of all; but not equally; that is, not with the
same absolute Will, Decree or Intention of attaining their Salvation.

100. But the conditional New Covenant, without any difference in the tenor of
it, does equally give Christ, Pardon and Life to all Mankind (antecedently to
men's rejecting the offer) on condition of acceptance. And Christ equally
satisfied Gods Justice for all the lapsed Race of Adam, so far as to procure
them this Gift or Covenant, and the other foresaid common mercies: But not
equally as to his Decree of the success: For there Election differenceth.

101. It is a thing so contrary to the nature of Christianity, and the Spirit
of Christ in his Saints, to extenuate Christ's Merits, Purchase, Interest or
Honor, or rob him of his due, that doubtless so many sincere Christians would
never be guilty of such injurious extenuations, and narrowing of Christ's
successes, but that they cannot reconcile special Grace with universal, and
mistakingly judge them inconsistent: Nor durst opprobriously reproach his
universal Grace, as they do, by calling it vain, lame, imperfect, a mockery,
etc. if the conceit of their defending some truth by it did not quiet and
deceive their Consciences. Whereas indeed universal Grace and special, do as
perfectly and harmoniously consist, as Nature and Grace do, and as the
foundation and the building, and as any generical and specific Natures: And so
does a general Decree, that [All who will believe shall be saved, and that this
Promise shall be made to the world] with a special Decree that [Paul shall
believe and be saved.]

But on two accounts I pass by all the rest about the extent of Redemption, 1.
Because I must give you a special Disputation or Tractate on that subject. 2.
Because the most Judicious of English Divines (so far as I can know them by
their works) Bishop Davenant has said so much in his two Posthumous
Dissertation de Redempt. and Praedestinat. (Published out of the hands of
Bishop Usher) as might suffice to reconcile contenders on these two points,
were not men slothful in studying them or partial or incapable in judging of
these matters.

SECT. VII. The Antecedent and consequent Will of God, etc.
102. The distinction of Gods Antecedent and Consequent Will, used by
Damascene, is by many applied to this controversy, but by none that I have
read sufficiently explained, which is the cause that so many good men reject
it, because they misunderstand it. It Is truly said, that by his Antecedent
Will, God would have all men to believe, repent and be saved, but by his
Consequent Will, he will have all condemned whom he does condemn. But then it
must be understood, that this distinction i^ not applied to the Will of God, as
he is merely an Absolute Proprietary, or Benefactor, but as he is the King or
Rector of the world; and so his Legislation is his Antecedent Will, and his
Judgment is his Consequent Will. And no man of Religion can deny, either that
Gods Law is the signification of his Will, or his Will signified, or that his
Judgment and ^^cution is his Will declared; or that Gods Law of Grace does
conditionally give pardon and salvation to all, antecedently to man's
performance or rejection of the condition, or that God condemns Infidels
consequently to their Infidelity. The Law Antecedently to Man's part acted,
says, He that believes shall be saved; and the Sentence consequently to his
fact, says, Judas an unbeliever or impenitent, shall perish. And thus the
distinction has no doubt or difficulty.

103. God by commanding faith and repentance, and making the^ necessary
conditions of Justification, and by commanding perseverance, and threatening the
Justified and Sanctified with damnation if they f^^ away; and making
perseverance a condition of Salvation, does thereby provide a convenient means
for the performance of his own Decree, of giving Faith and Repentance and
perseverance to his Elect; For he effects his ends by suitable moral means;
and such is this Law and Covenant, to provoke man to due fear, and care and
obedience, that he may be wrought on as a man.

104. To be justified by Faith in general, agrees to the ages before Of
Justification by Faith, etc.
Christ's Incarnation, and those since: But so does not the special kind of
faith by which they are justified. For much more is Essential to that faith
which we must be justified by to them that are under the last edition of the
Covenant of Grace, than was (or is) to them that were under the first alone.
Abraham believed not all our essential Articles of faith.

105. To be justified by faith in Paul's sense, is all one as to be justified
What that Faith is.
by becoming Christians. To be a Believer, a Disciple, and a Christian are all
one in the Gospel sense.

106. The faith by which we are justified, as is aforesaid, is best understood
The Controversy between the Papists and us about Justification is agitated i^
vain till we agree of the sense of the words [Justification and Remission]. As
I said elsewhere they take not only Justification for a qualitative change
(such as we call Sanctification) but Remission of Sin) for, they know not what
themselves: most of them talk as if it were a putting away the Sin in its
essence, which can be meant of nothing but the Habit; for the fact cannot be
infectum: Others seem to take it for remitting the punishment also with that
change. Malderus most plainly in 1. 2. q. 113. a. 1. and p. 567. says that
Remission of Sin is, Ablatio Reatus culpae; At esse long aliud quam Nolle
illud punire; non enim tantum facit Hominem non puniri, sed etiam non esse
Poena dignum. Minus tamen est quam in amicitiam recipi, though yet no man is in
a middle state, neque D^i amicus neque inimicus, yet cogitations possunt
seterari, and Peccata Remittere idem est quod non imputare si hoc non accipias
pro dissimulare, sed pro desinere esse offensum cum per Remissionem, Deo non
imputante est quasi non fuerit. By this you may see that these Papists hold the
same with those Protestants whom they seem most to resist and cannot hide it:
But, 1. It will be true to eternity that Peter sinned. 2. To say so, is to
blame him. 3 His sin deserved death. 4. The Law and the nature of sin past are
the same after pardon as before. 5. God does not change his mind of sin. 6.
Gods offense or displeasure is not a passion or mutable, but his essence as
denomina ed from the object, to be [his Velle punire, and Justice that must
punish] 7. For God to be appeased and no more offended, is but his Nolle punire
peccatorem, and not to be obliged in Justice to punish him, but by his Covenant
related to him as one that will not punish. 8. This change is in the sinner
becoming not punishable; 9. That is, not worthy of it in the Gospel-sence,
though worthy by the Law of Innocence. 10. All this is but that the Reatus p^na
and culpae quantum ad poenam is remitted, but not the Reatus culpae simpliciter
in se -- And thus we are all agreed.
by the Baptismal Covenant, and is essentially a Believing Fiducial consent to
our Covenant relation to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as our Reconciled
Creator and Father, our Savior and our Sanctifyer, connoting the forsaking of
all inconsistents. For it must needs be the same faith by which we have right
to the benefits of that Covenant, and by which we are justified; because we
have our remission and justification by the Instrumental donation of the
Covenant, it being one of the benefits given by it: But Practical Faith, or
Believing-consent is our condition of receiving our Covenant right to all the
benefits in general; therefore to Justification in particular.

107. The Phrases of [Justifying faith] and [Faith justifying us] are humane
and not Scriptural at all: And though they may be well used with explicatory
caution, as being well meant, yet they are more liable to mislead men, than the
Scripture phrase, that [we are justified by Faith]; Because the former phrases
are apter to insinuate an Efficiency, than the other; whereas faith is no
efficient cause of our Justification nor any other act of Man: And the
Scripture that speaks of Justification by Faith sometime uses the phrase
(...) which no more signifies any Instrumental efficiency of Justification,
than (...) ex operibus: And though sometime (...) be used, it is to signify no
more than that God has appointed it to be the Medium of our Justification as a
condition, but not as any efficient cause.

108. The Faith by which we are justified (as I touched before) has God the
Father for its object as essentially as Christ the Savior; as the said
Baptismal Covenant shows; and that not only secondarily as Christ being the
Mediator and way to the Father, our faith in Christ connoteth the final object;
but also directly and primarily as the Father is the first in Trinity, and as
Creator first related to us, and as the end is first in our intention: Joh. 17.
3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou bast sent. Joh. 13. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled, you believe in
God, believe also in me.

109. And as essential is it to this Faith to believe in Christ as the
Purchaser of Holiness and Heaven, as to believe in him as the purchaser of
pardon; and to believe in him as the Teacher and Ruler of the Church, as to
believe in him as the justifyer of believers. The inseparableness of these acts
is commonly confessed.

110. Indeed it is essential to this faith, 1. To be the act of the three
essential faculties of man's Soul, the Vital Power, the Intellect and the Will,
2. And to have for its object God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and that in
Christ, all that is essential to him as a Savior be its object: And therefore,
1. That it be an Assent, Consent and practical Affiance, 2. That it be a
believing in Christ as God and Man, and as the Teacher, Priest and King of the
Church, revealing the Gospel, reconciling us to God, and Ruling us in order* to
Salvation.

111. To say that some one only of these parts of Christ's office, as they are
Concept us inadaequati of a Savior is the only object of justifying faith, and
to say, that justifying faith is only one Act of the Soul, or many acts of one
only faculty, or to say that we are justified only by such a one, and that to
expect to be justified by Assent, Consent and Affiance, or by believing in
Christ as our Teacher and Ruler as well as Priest, and as a justifying Judge, as
well as a Justifying Sacrifice, and as a fulfiller of the Law, is to expect
justification by Works, as Paul denies it; This is a vain distinguishing, a
falsifying the Doctrine of faith and justification, a departing from the
Scripture simplicity by corrupting seeming subtility, and one of those humane
inventions which have wronged the Church. And it is no wiser than to say, that
when we speak of taking or receiving a Man to be a Husband, a Physician, a
King, it is but one physical a^ of the Soul, that is meant, or about one only
physical conception in the object, which is inadequate. Whereas all such Moral
or Civil acts co^tain many physical acts, and are suited to all things in the
object which are essential to it in its moral or civil nature or relation.

112. And it is but the same deluding subtility, and vain curiosity, ^^ a
playing with deceitful words, to say that we are justified by faith, Quatenus
recipit Christi Justitiam, As it believes in Christ's Sacrifice and perfect
obedience only, and not, As it believes in him as Teacher, Ruler, Sanctifier,
Judge, or as he intercedeth for us in Heaven, etc. when the Scripture says no
such thing at all, but simply makes faith in Christ (supposing Faith in God
the Father) to be that by which we must be justified*

113. This distinction is founded in another falsehood supposed, which is that
the effects of all Christ's saving works are as distinctly to be ascribed to
several Receiving Acts of faith, as they are to the several procuri^ acts of
Christ, the object of faith, which is another corrupting addition to God's
Word. One part of the work of our Salvation was done by Christ's humiliation,
and another by him in his exaltation: one by his overcoming the Devil, and
another by his overcoming the World; one by his Cross, another by his Grave,
another by his Resurrection, another by his ascension, another by his making
the new Covenant, another by his sending the Spirit, another by his sending the
Apostles, another by his intercession in Heaven, another will be done by our
Resurrection, and another by his last Judgment, and our Glorification; one by
hi^ as an obeying-subject, another as a Sacrifice for sin, many by him as a
Pr^phet, many as a Priest and many as a King and Judge: But to say therefore
that our acts of faith as Receptive have as various respects to the effects or
benefits, and that we are justified by him only as we believe i^ him as
Righteous, or a Justifyer, and that we are adopted as we believe in him in
another respect, and sanctified as we believe in hi^ in another respect, etc.
these are the dreams of corrupting curiosity. For that Christ who by all these
several works, has done all the office of a Redeemer to procure these several
effects, is preached and offered to us to be entirely as such a Redeemer,
believed in and received, and upon the condition of such an entire faith only,
Christ and all these benefits conjunctly are by one Covenant given us, and no
otherwise. And believing in Christ as Christ, who by all those acts has
himself procured us this Covenant, and these gifts, is that by which we are
justified as it is one undivided faith; And the quatenus here as to Christ's
own procurement of the effects has its place, but as to the Act of our faith,
and Christ as the object constituting that faith, there is no such diversity or
order to be feigned, as if the several effects were accordingly to be ascribed
to our several Believings or Receiving acts.

114. The ambiguity of the very word [Receiving] has drawn many into this
error: Receiving signifies sometimes a Physical reception, which is merely
Passive, or the Relation of the Patient as such to the Act and Agent. And this
is twofold, 1. The Reception of a real being; and so to be sanctified is to
Receive Sanctification. 2. The Reception of a Relation, such as all Jus, Right
to a thing is; and so to be pardoned, justified and adopted, and to Receive
pardon, justification and adoption, is all one.

2. Sometimes it signifies Moral or Civil receiving, which is nothing but 1.
The consent of the mind, called Acceptance. 2. And as to corporeal objects,
sometime, the voluntary act of the body; as the Hand, taking that which is
offered. Now if the Receiving in question were physical, (either rei vel juris
ad rem) then indeed it would be so nearly related to the thing received, (which
as received is no object, because Receiving so is no act) as that this quatenus
in question might be applied to it. For it may well be said I receive
Justification quatenus Justificatus sum, as I By this you see the answer to
what Mr. Lawson in his excellent Theopolitica has said against me on this
point. Of which see fullyer my answer to Mr. Warner in my Disputes of
Justification.
am justified, and I receive Sanctification as I am sanctified, and vice versa,
for they are but various words signifying the same thing. But of Moral
Receiving the case is otherwise: For this is not physical Reception, but only a
Moral Act, which is made a necessary medium, or Condition to Physical
Reception, and thence is called Receiving; so Accepting or Consenting is a
moral means or condition of that Having or Possessing which is consequential.
And this Acceptance has relation immediately to the thing as Given only, to be
made ours, according to the Will of the Giver, and not made ours according to
the order of the things given: That is, 1. The Ratio proprietatis, the Reason
that they are ours is the will of the Donor, and the Collation is according to
the order of his Will; though the Things Given have their intrinsic difference.

115. All men confess, that this Moral Reception, is an Act, and therefore has
an object (which Physical Reception is not). And that thus to Receive does
suppose a Moral Gift, which Gift makes not the thing ours necessarily, as
physical operation does, but on supposition of our voluntary Reception or
Consent. And all confess that Gods Donation is by his Covenant, Testament or
Promise; and this Covenant has its proper nature and mode, that is, the
Condition as imposed, antecedent to our Receiving. Therefore as the thing Given
is made ours by the Donation, so according to the order appointed by it: and
our Consent no otherwise makes it ours than as the Condition of the Gift
performed. But Gods Covenant does Give us Christ and Life; that is,
Justification, Sanctification and Glorification in tithe or right, in one Gift,
to be Accepted by one entire faith as the Condition, not making at all the
order of the Gifts and faiths respect to them in that order, to be any of the
Ratio proprietatis.

116. This will be plainer by humane instances. A Servants Relation is founded
in his consent to be a Servant; a Wifes Relation is founded in her
Marriage-consent to be a Wife, and to take that man for her Husband simply
without any more ado. Now if the Master of that Servant, or the Husband of
that Wife, be a noble man, a rich man, a wise man, a good man, and they knew
all this, and by knowing it were induced to consent, and are to have their
proportionable benefits by his Nobility, Riches, Wisdom, Goodness, yet their
title to these benefits arises not from the act of their consent as it
respected these benefits severally and distinctly, but merely by consent to
their Relation, as being his Condition of Collation. The Wife is made Noble by
her Husbands Nobility, she is made Rich by his Riches, she is instructed by his
Wisdom, etc. But she has no more Right to his Riches for marrying him in the
notion of Rich, or for consenting to him for Riches, than for marrying him in
the notion or thought of his wisdom or goodness. On her part, it was not
consent to be Rich by him that gave her right to his Riches, and consent to be
Noble by him that gave her right to Nobility; but consent simply to be his Wife
that gave her right to all.

117. This is yet fullyer evident in that most usually men make consent to one
thing to be the condition of their Receiving or Right to another. And usually
that which one is most backward to, is made the condition of their Right to
that which they are most forward or willing to have. The Master does not say,
If thou will have thy wages, thou shall have right to it: But if thou will do
my work, thou shall have thy wages. The condition of Marriage is conjugal Love
and fidelity: q. d. I will be thy Husband, and give thee right to all that I
have, if thou will be and do what is essential to a Wife] and not [if thou will
have my Riches, etc.] If a Father give a Child a free gift on any condition, it
will likely be [If thou will be a thankful and obedient Child] and not [If thou will have it.] Or if mere consent to have it, be put, it is usually when it is
some gift which it is supposed that the person is not very willing to have: [As
if a Sick man will have Physic, if an ungodly man will have Teaching, Books or
Godliness it self.] But to this usually they are induced by the Promise of
somewhat else which they are willing of: As to the Sick [If thou will take this
Physic, thou shall have health.] To the ungodly [If thou will have Christ and
holiness, thou shall have pardon and happiness.] Now in the sense of Physical
Receiving [He that receives Physic, has Physick] and [He that receives
health, has health] etc. But in the moral sense of Receiving, which is
Accepting as it is the condition of a gift, so [He that receives the Physic
shall have the health] and [He that receives Christ and his sanctifying
Spirit, shall have Pardon, Justification, and Salvation] Not that his
willingness to have [pardon and happiness] is the chief or only condition of
his [pardon and happiness.] But his Accepting Christ and his Spirit which men
are naturally unwilling of, is the condition of that [pardon and happiness]
which men would have.

By all which it appears that to say, [Faith justifyeth me as it is the
Receiving of Christ's Righteousness, and not as it is the Receiving of Christ as
a Teacher, Ruler, etc.] is a confounding or seducing saying. For, 1. If it
intimate that Faith Justifyeth us as an efficient cause [principal o^
Instrumental] it is false. Unless by Justifying they mean the acts of Love,
Hope, Obedience called H^^iness.
2. If it mean that [Faith is the Condition of Justification quatenus, as it
receives Christ's Righteousness only,] it has either one or two falsehoods. 1.
If it mean that Faiths receiving act, is the formalis ratio Conditionis, or
that it justifyeth not qua conditio d^^ationis, but quae Receptio Justitiae
Christi, it is false. Therefore qua here can signify nothing but the Aptitude
of faith to be made the condition, and so Qua and Quae here are all one: 2. And
then that [only the Accepting of Righteousness justifyeth us, that is, Is the
condition of our Justification] is a falsehood.

118. Therefore our consent to be a Holy and obedient people, or to take Christ
for our Teacher, Exemplar, Ruler, Sanctifier by his Word and Spirit, and Judge,
has at least as great a hand in our justification, (being principally the
Condition of the Promise) as our belief in our acceptance of Christ's
Righteousness has.

SECT. VIII. Of Justification by Christ's Righteousness, imputed.
119. Christ's personal Righteousness, Divine or Humane, habitual, active How
little the Papists differ from the Imputation which they quarrel with. See in
Bellarm. words cited and approved by Davenant de Justit. And Pet. a S. Joseph.
Theol. Speculat. l. 4. c. 10. says, [Obj. P^ccatum remitti non potest quamdiu
homo manet conversus ad creaturam and aversus a Deo: At semper aversus erit a
Deo nisi mutatur. Resp. Sufficere* mutationem moralem, quae per solam Dei
condonationem fieri potest, ut jam homo non dicatur aversus a Deo. (This is
Antinomianism, and false; As if God called not him averse who is really
averse.) Obj. 2. Si peccatum remitti potest sine actu aut habitu -- per solam
imputationem erit quae est ^aereticorum sententia. Resp. Haereticos loqui de
facto and non de imputatione peccati remanentis and vere non remissi: nos de
possibili and de ver^ remissione qua peccatum tollatur.] See how the case is
turned and wranglers deceive themselves. We hold it neither de facto nor de
possibili: and they hold it de possibili and not de facto, viz* that bare
pardon and non* imputation may put away the very being of sin, and may save
men. Of which more afterward. But many others deny that sin can be remitted by
extrinsick condonation: See Cacer's Sum. The. 22. c. 2. They ordinarily take
Remission for destroying the sin it self.
or passive (as it is called) is not given us or made ours, truly and properly
in the thing it self, but in the effects (as was aforesaid) for neither the
same matter; nor the same form is strictly ours. 1. That neither of them is
ours in a physical sense is undeniable. If the Divine Righteousness were so
ours, we were Gods. And a Habit, an Act, and a Passion (materially) cannot be
removed from one subject to another, nor the same be in diverse subjects: These
are as palpable contradictions as Transubstantiation is. And the Relative form
is founded in the matter or subject, and can no more be removed. The paternity
of a Generator, and the paternity of an Adopter, are not the same, but two. And
a Relation is an accident, also which perishes when removed from the subject;
and in another is another. 2. If it be said that both are ours Morally or
Imputatively, I answer, It is true: But that phrase is of large and doubtful
signification. 1. If the meaning be that [The Covenant of Grace does as
certainly pardon or justify us (in the way and degree promised by it) for the
merit of Christ's Righteousness (in performing his Mediatorial Covenant with the
Father) as our own merit (had it been possible) would have done; or our
Innocence would have Justified us by the Covenant of Innocency] this is true.

2. But if the meaning be that [Christs merit and satisfaction, by perfect
holiness, and obedience, and suffering, are supposed or Reputed by God to have
been inherent in us, or done by us in our civil person in Christ; or that in a
sense natural or Legal we did all those things our selves, or that God judges
us so to have done, by Judging Christ and us to be the same civil person; or
else that all the Benefits of Christ's Righteousness shall as fully and
immediately be ours, as if we had been, and done, and suffered, merited and
satisfied in and by Christ; All this is false.

120. For if this were so, we could need no pardon; for he that is reputed to
be Innocent, by fulfilling all the Law, is reputed never to have sinned, by
omission or commission: And he can have no pardon of sin, who has no sin to be
pardoned. Therefore such an Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, would
make his satisfaction null or vain, or certainly neither imputable to us, nor
useful for us.

121. Some to avoid this do divide the Time of our Lives, and suppose Christ's
sufferings to have satisfied and purchased pardon of our sins, for all the Time
before our Believing, and his Righteousness to be imputed to us for the Time
since our Believing: But this is a humane fiction: For our sins after believing
must have pardon too, by Christ's satisfaction.

And some distinguish of our Time and State under the two Covenants, and say
that Christ's satisfaction was for the pardon of our sins under the first
Covenant, which continued but till the promise made to Adam, Genesis 3. 15. And so
was for none but Adam's sin imputed to us; and that after that all being under
the new Covenant, it condemns none but the finally impenitent (who escape not)
and so that Gods pardoning men since the new Covenant is but his preventing
their need of pardon, or else pardoning temporal punishments only: But this is
contrary to the Gospel, which tells us that Christ dyed for our sins, even all
that ever are forgiven, and that all are forgiven to believers, (and not the
necessity of forgiveness prevented) and not only Adam's sin as ours: Nor only
the temporal, but the perpetual punishment. And even temporal punishment is not
due to the innocent.

122. Some distinguish only of Actions, and not of Time, and say Christ's
Sacrifice satisfied for all our sins, that they may be forgiven, and his
righteousness is imputed to us, that we may be also accounted just; But this is
but either ambiguity, or the fore-detected gross contradiction. For if by
Justice they mean Reputed sinlessness, or perfecti^^, then these two cannot
stand together: For he that is supposed a Sinner, is supposed not sinless or
perfect; And he that is supposed sinless cannot be supposed pardonable.

123. Some think to avoid the contradiction, by distinguishing only the moments
of Nature, and double respect of the same man's actions: They say that we are
first in order of Nature supposed to be Sinners, and pardoned, and then to be
such as moreover need the reputation of Innocence or Righteousness which is
added to pardon. But, 1. He that is pardoned all sins of omission and
commission, is accounted Innocent and Righteous as to any Guilt of punishment,
either of sense or Loss. 2. And he that is after accounted Innocent and Just
from his first being to that hour, is judged never to have needed pardon: And
so they make God come with an after act, and condemn his own foregoing act of
error and injury; or at least to contradict it, and in the first instant to say
[I pardon this Sinner] and in the second to say [I now repute him one that
never sinned or needed pardon.]

124. But the commonest way of such Divines is, to say that Christ's
Righteousness is first imputed; that is, we are reputed to have perfectly
obeyed and been habitually holy in Christ, and then sin is next pardoned as a
fruit of the merits of this. But this is still but the often detected
contradiction, that we are first accounted sinless, and therefore our sins are
forgiven us.

125. Some say that the Law since the fall obliges us both to obey and to
suffer, and not to one only; else a Sinner bound to suffer, should not be bound
to obey. Therefore Christ must do both for us: But this is too gross for any
man to utter that ever knew what Law and Government is. Do they mean that as to
the same Act and time, the Law binds us to obey and suffer? or for diverse
acts and instants of time? Do they mean that the Law bound man both to
perfection and suffering for perfection, or to suffering for sin? No man doubts
but when one sin is committed, and punishment deserved, the Law is still the
Law, and binds men still to obey or suffer more the next moment, and again to
obey or suffer more the next moment. But this concerns not our question. Did
the Law bind Adam to obey and to suffer before he sinned? Did it bind him both
to obey and suffer for his new sin the next instant? It Is true it bound him to
suffer for his old sin? but not for the next before it is committed. And the
obligation to duty goes before the obligation to punishment for that same
action; because the action comes between; and the first is an act of Gods
antecedent Will, and the second of his consequent Will, that is, of the
Retributive, and not the Preceptive part of the Law.

And they note not that the question is not, what obedience a man is bound to,
but what he performs or must be reputed to have performed. If they will speak
so unaptly as to say that the Law commands Lapsed man, not to have sin, or
imperfect man to have been perfect; that is, that the Command to day binds
Adam ad praeteritum not to have sinned yesterday, or binds to Impossibility
in nature, that existent sin should not be existent, (in all which I leave them
to their ^iberty of words) yet it is certain that no man has perfectly obeyed
for one year or day. And therefore if Christ's perfect obedience and ^oliness
be imputed to them from their first being, then they are re^uted not-lapsed,
nor-sinners from the beginning and, so not pardona^le. But if it be only for
the time after sin that Christ's perfection is ^theirs, after what sin must it
be? If after Adam's, then we need no pardon of any but Adam's sin. If after
conversion, then we need no pardon for sins after Conversion. If after our last
sin, then Christ's per^ection is not imputed to us till after death.

126. Others would come nearer the matter, and say that we are ^eputed
Righteous as fulfillers of the Law, and yet reputed Sinners as Breakers of the
Law: and that though there be no medium in naturals between light and darkness,
life and death, yet there is between a ^reaker of the Law, and a fulfiller of
it, viz. a non-fulfiller; and be^ween just and unjust, that is not-just: But
this is a mere darkness: There ^s a medium negative, in a person as not
obliged; but none between Posi^ive and Privative in one obliged as such. A
stone is neither just nor ^rivatively unjust: Nor a man about a thing never
commanded or for^idden him: But what is this to the matter? God's Law is
pre-supposed: we talk of nothing but Moral acts: The Law forbids Omissions
and Commissions: both are sin. Do these men think that he is not reputed
Positively just, (and not only not-unjust) who is reputed never to have
committed a sin, nor left undone a duty in his life. Can ^he Law be fulfilled
more than so? What is Righteousness if that be not?

Obj. Adam was neither just nor unjust in his first moment; no nor till he
sinned say some, because till then he was not obliged to obey, or at least to
any meritorious act, that is, to love God.

Ans. 1. Adam was in his first instant but Habitually just, and not by Act,
because not obliged to impossibilities any more than an Infant or a stone: But
we speak only of obliged persons. 2. It is not true that Adam was not obliged
to obey and Love God before he sinned, or that he never Loved God as God.

Obj. At least Adam merited not the Reward, though he sinned not till then.

Ans. 1. He merited what Reward he had, viz. the continuance o his blessings
first freely given: but not an immutable state. 2. It is yet unresolved what
that was by which Adam must merit Immutability and Glory? whether, 1. Once
obeying or consent to his full Covenant. 2. Or once loving God. 3. Or
conquering once. 4. Or eating of the tree of Life. 5. Or presevering in perfect
obedience to the end; that is, till God should translate him, which is most
likely. His not Meriting Immutability before the time, was no sin, we confess.
3. And we maintain as well as you, that Christ has not only satisfied for sin,
and merited pardon, but also Merited Imm^table Glory. But consider, 1. That
Adam's not doing that which was to merit Glory, was his sin of omission, and to
pardon that omission, is to take him as a meriter of Glory. 2. Therefore it
must be somewhat more than he forfeited by that omission and his commission,
which comes in by Christ's merit above forgiveness. 3. That Christ merited all
this, both by his active, passive and habitual Righteousness, by which he
merited pardon. 4. That it was not we that merited it in him, but he, to give
it us only on the terms of a Law of Grace.

127. Yet some come nearer, and say that, To punish and not-Reward are not all
one: And so the respect that Sin has to the deserved punishment needed pardon
and satisfaction: But our deserving the Reward needed Christ's perfect
Obedience to be imputed. In this there is somewhat of truth. But you must avoid
the errors that lie in the way, and a^^ by most supposed truths. 1. Remember
that man can have nothing from God, but what is a mere Gift as to the matter,
though it be a Reward as to the order and ends of collation. And in this case,
punishment is damni as well as sensus; And so the loss of the Reward is the
principal part of Hell or Punishment. So that if Christ's death has pardon^
our sins of Omission, we are reputed to have done all our duty; And if so, we
are reputed to have merited the Reward: And if he pardon our ^^^^ as to all
punishment of sense and loss, he pardons them as to th^^ forfeiture of Heaven
as a Gift, if not as a Reward.

128. But, say they, remission of sin is but part of Justification, because a
man may be forgiven, and yet not reputed never to have broken the Law. To put
away guilt, and to make one righteous are two thing. Ans. Still confusion.
Guilt is either of the fault as such, or of the punishment, and of the fault
only as the cause of punishment. If all g^^ both culpae and poenae were done
away, that person were reputed po^^ righteous; that is, never to have omitted a
Duty, or committed a ^^ But indeed when only the Reatus poenae (and culpae
quoad poenam) is do^ away, the Reatus culpae in se remains. And this Christ
himself never takes away, no not in Heaven, where for ever we shall be judged,
once to have sinned, and not to be such as never sinned.

129. And this seems the very core of their error, that they th^^ Of this see
wotton de Reconcil. at large.
we must be justified in Christ by the Law of Innocence, which justified Christ
himself; and that we are quit or washed simply from all guilt of fault, as well
as obligation to punishment: which is a great untruth, contrary to all the
scope of the Gospel, which assures us, that we are justified by the Law of
Grace or Faith, and not by the Law of Works: That Christ freeth us from the
curse and penalty of the Law: which he could not do, if we were reputed never
to have deserved it, as never being Sinners. If we are reputed such as
fulfilled the Law of Innocence (by another in our civil person, or as fully
representing us,) all the Gospel is over-turned: There is no room for
Repentance, none for the satisfaction of Christ, none for Faith in his blood,
nor for Pardon, or prayer for Pardon, or any Grace, Act, Duty or Ordinance,
Sacraments, Confession, or any thing which supposes Sin.

To say that Adam's Law meant, [Do this, by thy self or by Christ, and thou
shall live,] is a Humane fiction, not found in Scripture, confounding the Law
of Innocence with the Gospel: And to say that the New Covenant makes us one
Person with Christ, and then the Law of Ad^^ does justify us, is a double
error. We are not reputed one Person with Christ; nor does the first Covenant
justify any but the Person that performs it. But we maintain as well as
they, that the same Righteousness of God in himself, is manifested in both
Covenants, and the same holy love of perfect Obedience, and the ends of the
first Covenant are secured by the second. But the tenor and terms are not the
same, nor the Righteousness of the subject as denominated from those terms. It
is not the same Law which condemns us and justifies us, nor that justifies
Christ and us; nor is it the same Habits, or Acts, which are the immedi^^e
fundamentum of the Relation of righteous in Christ and in us, ^ough his
Righteousness be the meritorious cause of ours. And there^^re not the same with
the thing merited.

130. The Truth which they grope after, and must reconcile them ^^^^, is as
follows. Christ in his Sufferings did stand in the room of ^^ners as their
Sponsor, and satisfied Justice as was said before: And ^^d had other ends yet
to accomplish: It was meet that the perfection ^his Law should be glorified by
a perfect fulfilling of it by Christ, ^en we had failed. Satan was hereby
confounded: God pleased and ^noured: Man showed what he should have been, and
yet should do: ^ns nature in Christ was thus actively and habitually perfected:
By all ^s Christ performed his Obedience to the mediatorial Law, and his
Herveus Natal. quodlib. 4. q. 14. could speak thus much better than many
Protestants. [Sicut meritum Christi quantum ad actum quem exercuit, non transit
in alios; transit tamen in alios quantum ad effectum illius meriti illis qui
applicantur ad Christum mediantibus Sacramentis vel mediante fide propria; Qui
quidem effectus est Gratia quae est c^ntraria, culpae, and quae reddit hominem
dignum vita aeterna: Ita etiam demeritum Adae, licet non transeat in alios
quantum ad actum quem exercuit, tamen transit quoad effectum culpae originalis,
quae est contraria gratiae, and reddit dignum poenae aeterna, and indignum vita
aeterna. How does this differ from the soundest Protestants as to the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, or Adam's sin.
^venant of Redemption; and so acquired a right first to himself of giving ^t
the purchased Benefits to Sinners, by a new Law or Covenant of Grace ^^d
according to it; By which Covenant, only as his Instrument, the ^her and Son
give us Right to them, in an Order there established. ^^^^ that is there given
to us, Christ purchased for us, by performing his ^n Covenant first with the
Father, by perfect Holiness, and Obedience, ^en in his Sacrifice on the Cross,
and by all that he undertook to do as Redeemer, antecedently. The Purchase was
made for this Donation ^ its end, and is commensurate to it: just so much as
Christ has given ^^^^ as to matter, manner, terms, degree, time, etc. he did
purchase and ^rit for us, and no more. Had he antecedently done all that he did
^^^^ our person, and we in him, in Law sense, the thing it self, with its
separable consequents and effects, had been all ours ipso facto, before and
^thout the donation or conveyance of a new Law or Covenant; nor ^d they been
ever given us upon terms and conditions, when they were ^^^^ own before,
without those terms. But now what is given us by the ^ew Covenant, we have
title to on this account, because it was pur^ased by the perfect Merit and
Saerifice of Christ, and so given us by ^m, and by the Father. So that it is
ours as sure as if we had merited it ^r selves, but not ours in the same order,
and measure, and time, and ^ms, as if we had merited it our selves (in our
natural or legal per^ns). For then it would have been all ours at once ipso
facto, even ^e merit it self, and the foresaid effects. We deserved
punishment, and Christ was punished in our stead, that we might be forgiven;
not ^mediately, but on Covenant-terms: we had forfeited Life by sin; And christ
merited Life for us by his Perfection, (not in our persons, but in ^e person of
a Mediator,) which Life was to be given to us by the said ^ovenant: The
antecedent benefits (such as the Covenant it self) he ^veth absolutely, and
antecedently to any act of ours. God reputeth all his Satisfaction and Merit of
Christ to be as meet and effectual to pro^ure us all these Benefits, to be thus
given, as if we our selves had done and ^ffered: And in this sense Christ's
Righteousness is given us, and made ours, ^^^^ that it is given for us, and we
have the said benefits of it: Not that God does give us the very habits of
Holiness which were in Christ, nor ^he transient acts which he performed, nor
the very Sufferings which he ^nderwent, nor the Relation of righteous
satisfactory and meritorious, as ^^^^ was that numerical Relation which
immediately resulted from Christ's ^wn Habits, Acts and Sufferings; For such a
translation of accidents is ^^^^ contradiction. But God giving us all the
effects, or Salvation merited, ^n it self properly, is said also not unfitly to
give us the Merit or Righteousness which procured them; that is, as it was paid
to God for us, to procure them; even as he is said to give Christ himself
(antecedently ^^ our Faith) to the World as a Savior. And thus Christ's
Righteousness, Merit and satisfaction may be said to be imputed to us, in that
it ^^ thus given us, and thus truly reputed ours.

131. But when the Text says, Romans 4. 24. Righteousness is imputed ^^ us, the
meaning is no more, but that God reputeth or judges us righte^^^ though we
have not the Righteousness of Innocence, or of the Law ^^ Works; which indeed
is done for Christ's meritorious Righteous^^^^ procuring it: But the Text
speaks not of Christ's personal Righteous^^^^ in matter or form, imputed to
us as being it self our own. Impu^^^^ Righteousness to us, is a consequent Act
(after Faith) of God as Jud^^ and not an antecedent donation.

132. And it is true that formaliter, non-punire and praemiari, ^^^punish, and
to Reward are not all one: And in some cases a man may ^^ freed from
punishment, who is not rewarded: But it is as true as is a^^^ said, 1. That
Gods Salvation, and all his Benefits, are ever free Gifts ^^ to the matter and
value first, and then the relation of a Reward is b^ secondary as to the Order
of collation, and the reason comparative, wh^ one man has them rather than
another (as a thankful Child has the Gift which the Contemner goes without).
2. And that here, Not to have this Gift (forfeited by our sin) is to be
punished: And so h^^^ non-donari, is puniri materially though the relations
differ. 3. And that it is the same Righteousness of Christ which meriteth our
Impunity quoad damnum and sensum, and which meriteth our Right to the Gift of
Life, both sub ratione doni as a Gift, and sub ratione condonationis as a
forgiveness of the forfeiture, and of the poena damni: So that here ^^ no room
for the conceit, that Christ's death was only to purchase Pardon, and his
Righteousness to merit Life. That which confounds men here is, their taking
the diverse Respects, and Connotations, and Co^ceptions of one and the same
thing, to be diverse separable things: The same Law has the Preceptive part (to
do and not do) and the Retributing part (penal and rewarding). The same
Obedience of Adam was ^^ doing what was commanded, and a deserving what was
promised. ^^^^ more was promised to persevering Perfection than to the first
act of Obedience. One Sin deserved death; but one act of Obedience desern^^ not
immutable Glory. And as the same Act is formally Obedience related to the
Command, and formally meritorious or praemiandus, ^^ related to the Promise.
And the same Act is sin and punishable, as related to the Precept (or
Prohibition) and Threatening; so the same Glory is a free Gift in one respect
(as related ut bonum to God as Benefactor) and a Reward in another (as related
quoad ordinem conferendi to God ^^ Rector.) And the same loss of Glory is poena
related to the Threatening and it is the loss of a Reward as related to the
Promise. And so the s^^^ Merits of Christ's active, and passive, and habitual
Righteousness, because our Glory, both by giving us pardon of our forfeiture,
and by Covenant-Donation, and as a Reward to Christ, and to us when ^^ perform
the conditions of his Gift.

133. And it is certain, that Christ's Sufferings are first satisfactory and
then meritorious, being a part of his Active, that is, voluntary O^dience. And
Christ's Holiness and Obedience are meritorious of pardon ^^ Sin, as well as of
Salvation.

134. If there be (as there is) any thing which is given us throug^^ Christ,
more than our own Innocence or Obedience would have m^^^ted, the Gift of that
is more than remission of Sin; And is to be ascribe^ accordingly to the
Purchase of Christ's Merits. But yet both his Holiness and Sufferings (though
not as sufferings) did merit it: And that was not a fulfilling of the Law in
our stead.

135. This superadded Gift (whatever it is) seems in Scripture to be
included in Adoption, and not in Justification: But yet it may in this sense be
called Justification, in that when our Right to that Gift is questioned, that
Right must be justified by the Covenant-Donation, and by Christ's meritorious
Purchase of it. But this is only de nomine: We are agreed of the thing.

136. It is greatly to be noted, that as a Reward is in the formal notion more
than not punishing (where materially they are the same) so Christ has not at
all merited that eternal Life should be ours, by way of Reward for our
fulfilling the Law in him, but that it should ours by his free Gift, as a
Reward to Christ for his own Merits. So that the Relation of a Reward for
Perfection, belongs only formally to Christ, (who takes it as his benefit
that we are saved through his love to Souls) but not at all to us. And to say
(as too many hold) that Heaven is our Reward for our perfection of Holiness and
Obedience in and by Christ, is a Humane Invention, subverting Christ's Gospel;
or unfit speech, if better meant.

137. Yet a Reward it is to us, to be glorified; but that is not for our
fulfilling the Law of Innocence by Christ, but for our believing in Christ, and
performing the conditions of the Covenant of Grace: which gives us Life as a
free Gift; but yet in the order of the condition it has the relation, and name
of a Reward to us, in the Scripture.

138. So that here are three rewarding Covenants before us: 1. The Covenant or
Law of Innocence rewarding man for perfection to the end; And this rewarded
none but Christ: And it is false that we are rewarded by that Covenant, or
justified by it, for Christ's fulfilling it. But it All the stir of the Papists
is to prove that we have inherent Righteousness as well as pardon, which
Protestants are as much for as they. The rest is de nomine justificationis,
Malder. 1. 2. q. 113. a. 2. p. 572. Apostolus, 2 Cor. 5. non aliud vult quam
Christum cui nullum debebatur supplicium, factum fuisse hostiam pro nostro
peccato, ut nos qui apud Deum nihil merebamur, praeter. supplicium, justitia
Dei fieremus in ipso; id est, gratis sine nostris operibus consequeremur per
ipsius merita justitiam coram Deo.] What does this differ from the Doctrine of
the Reformed Churches.

Idem ibid* Quando Apostolus dicit multos constitui justos per unius
obedienti^^ significatur causa meritoria, non autem formalis: And so say we:
But some call Christ's Righteousness the causa material^s, meaning no more but
that it is the matter of that Merit, for which we are justified; As if Adam had
perfectly fulfilled the Law, his fulfilling it, had been meritorious of his
sentential Justification, and yet the matter of his constitutive Justification;
that is, of his Righteousness. And some u^^ptly call it the formal cause: But
an unapt logical notion is not an error in Faith or Theology.

Idem ib. p. 573. Quamvis ^x omnino rigida justitia solus Christus Dominus
satisfactat; de condigno tamen, ita ut merces operi ^ono debeatur post Dei
promissionem, meretur justus coronam justisi^ quam reddet in illa die justus
judex: Est nostra justitia tota, totum meritum, tota satisfactio dependens a
me^ito and satisfactione Christi. Still here is a wordy Controversy.


justified Christ. 2. The Law or Covenant made only to and with Christ the
Mediator: And this Covenant further rewarded Christ as Mediator, giving him all
that it promised to himself and us, for his performing the mediatorial
conditions. And so our Life is Christ's Reward. 3. The Covenant or Law of Grace
(for it is the same thing in several respects that is called the Law and the
Covenant), which giving Life on the condition of Faith, does justify and
reward Believers. And we are justified and rewarded by no other Law.

139. When Romans 4. often says (and other Texts) that we are justified by Faith,
it connoteth and includes that we are justified by Christ and his Sacrifice,
Merits and Covenant respectively, believed in: But yet it is not Christ, nor
his Sacrifice, or Merits, or Promise that is meant by the word [Faith.] It was
a gross abuse of the Text so to expound it: Faith connoteth the Object, but it
is not Christ that is called Faith.

140. But the meaning is, that man having forfeited Life, Christ's
Righteousness (habitual, active and passive,) has merited, that it shall be
given us as a free Gift, but yet regularly under a Law: But the Law makes
nothing but believing acceptance the condition of our Right, and he that does
that much, shall, without perfection, be esteemed and used as righteous for the
sake of the said Righteousness of Christ. So that in point of Merit, as to the
value of the thing, Christ's Righteousnes^ is instead of our Innocence: But as
to the order of collation, something being still to be required of us as a
condition of Right, so our Faith now is instead of our Innocence, as being all
that is laid on us instead of ^^, that we may have right to Justification. And
to assign this condition o^ our part, Paul says, That Faith is imputed to us
for righteousness. To deny this sense, is to use violence with the Text.

141. Christ's Righteousness is made ours, as our Sins were made his: which is
not in themselves, as is aforesaid: God forbid we should think that Christ was
ever reputed by God to be a Sinner, a Blasphemer, a Murderer, an Enemy to God
and Goodness, one that had Satan's Image, and was his Servant, a Persecutor of
himself, etc. But only our sin was imputed to him as to the punishment
deserved: that is, he assumed the Reatum poenae, the punishment, and a dueness
occasioned by our sin; but made his own by his voluntary sponsion; But never
had he the rea^um culpae in its self, but merely as aforesaid respectively to
the punishment. Even so we have the Righteousness of Christ, not in its self,
as Proprietors of it, but in relation to the effects; that is, we have the
effects, even our Justification, and other benefits as purchased by it, and for
its sake: And as our guilt, or obligation to punishment, was not Christ's, till
his voluntary sponsion or consent did make it so; Even so his Righteousness is
not ours in the effects, till our voluntary consent accept it: Because i^ is
not a natural, but a contracted Relation that is between Christ and us. And as
it is not a strict propriety in Christ's Righteousness that we have, so it is
much less a plenary and absolute propriety: nor have we it in the Relation of a
meritorious cause to all uses, as if it had been fully our own, but only
limitedly to those uses which God accepted it for, and has assigned to it in
the Gospel; that is, it is but a certain sort and measure of mercies that are
given us from it in Gods time and way.

142. To the asserting of the rigid sense of Imputation, they are necessitated
to say that, which supposes Gods repute of the matter to be false; that is,
that he reputeth us to have done that in and by Christ, which we never did by
him: But God judges nothing to be otherwise than it is? that he judges Christ
to have been the Sponsor and Mediator, and in that person to have done and
suffered as he did, is because it is true: But he judges him not to have been
the legal Person of the Sinner, and as many persons as there be redeemed
Sinners in the world, because that is not true.

143. They say that what the Surety does, the Debtor does in Law-sense, and to
judge so is not to err. But there are several sorts of Sureties, much more of
Instruments in paying a Debt. 1. There be free Sureties, who are not obliged to
the Debtor as his Dependents; and these either by counter-security, or by right
of the thing, may recover all of the Debtor again. And therefore the Law
supposes not the Debtor to have paid the Debt by them; but that the Creditor
made them both Joynt-Debtors for his own security. 2. There are Sureties
antecedently, and Sureties consequently: One that before the Debt does
conditionally make himself a Joynt-Debtor, in case the Principal pay it not;
And there is a Surety more properly called an undertaking-Friend, who after
pays the Debt, being disobliged before. Christ was not a Surety of the first
sort, in Law-sense; And if you call Gods Decrees, which are his Essence,
Suretiship, your liberty of words changes not the case. 3. There is a Surety
who pays the Debt in the name and person of the principal Debtor; (And he is
not properly called a Surety, but an Agent or Substitute:) And Christ was none
such; nor is any proper Surety such. And there is a Surety which, by the
Creditors consent, does pay the Debt in his own name, agreeing that the chief
Debtor shall have no benefit by it but from him, as he shall give it, on
certain terms: And this was Christ's case. 4. There is a Surety that pays the
same debt that was due from the Principal: And there is a Surety or Friend that
undertaketh only to make the Creditor satisfaction, because the Debtor cannot
pay. And this is the case. 5. Lastly, There is a play master that is the Debtors
Instrument, whether Servant, Delegate, or whoever at his command or request
does pay it in his name and person: And this is not the case. And there is a
proper Surety, who is a third person and no Instrument, and pays it in his
own name though for another. This, as I said, is the case; and therefore it is
not we that paid it.

Therefore to the Objection I say, that to judge Christ such an Instrument or
Delegate of ours, or Surety that did all in our legal person; is to misjudge
and err, as is proved, which God cannot do.

144. Christ did and suffered in the common nature of man, though not in the
person of each Sinner. And man's nature is so far redeemed by him, that for the
mere Original Sin of nature alone, no man shall perish, unless he add the
rejection of Grace; (of which somewhat is said before.) But yet as Nature
existeth only in persons, so it is all persons, who have this much benefit and
more. But that he merited and satisfied in our Nature, is a proper speech, and
truer than that he did it in our persons.

145. But all this similitude of a Creditor and Debtor, is to be limited in the
application, according to the great difference of Sin and Debt, which will
infer a great diversity in the consequents; which may easily be collected by
the Reader.

146. As to the great and weighty question, whether Christ died for How far
Christ died for sins against the Law of Grace.
sins against the New Covenant, or only for those against the old: I answer,
Distinction is here notoriously necessary. 1. If by the old Covenant, or first
Covenant, you mean the conditional Promise, [Be perfect and live] no sin since
Adam's is against that conditional Promise, because it ceased through man's
incapacity, upon the Fall; And Christ died not only for the first sin.

2. If by the first Covenant you mean, the bare command of perfect perpetual
Obedience, Christ died for sins against that command which is still in force,
but not as a Covenant of Life given on that condition.

3. If by the first Covenant, you mean the punitive part of the Law of
Innocence, saying, [Thou shall die if thou obey not perfectly.] So Christ died
for all our Sins in the strictest sense, even as we are condemnable for them by
that Law. And that part also of the Law continues to make punishment our due
in primo instanti, though with an adjoined remedy.

4. If by the New Covenant, you mean the mere preceptive part of Christ's
supernaturally-revealed Law, or of the foresaid Law of Nature, as in the hands
of Christ, so Christ died for sins against the Law of Christ. 2. If by the New
Covenant or Law you mean, the Promise and Threatening of Christ's Law, or
either; so Sin may be said to be against them in two senses: 1. Objectively, as
they are neglected by us: And so that Sin formally is only against the Precept,
and Christ died for it. 2. Or as the Sin has punishment threatened by the
Sanction, and no pardon given by the Promise: And so Sin is in two senses also
against the said Sanction: that is, 1. When it is such a Sin as the Promise
gives no pardon to conditionally, And such as the commination peremptority
condemns the Sinner for to remediless misery. And this Sin is the final
non-perf^rmance of the Gospel-Condition (Faith and Repentance). And such only
are fully obliged to suffer Hell by the commination of the Law of Grace: And
for such Sin Christ never died: not because he never died for the person as to
any other sin, or for any benefit, as some teach: But because, 1. He resolved
never to die for that sin it self, (of final Unbelief, Impenitence and
Unholiness.) 2. And because he never died to satisfy his own Law of Grace, and
to take off its proper full obligation to final punishment; but only to
satisfy God instead of man's suffering what the Law of Works obliged him to.

2. But there is also a mediate or conditional dueness of punishment, according
to the Law of Grace: which is when a man by not believing and not-repenting at
the present, and by neglecting and resisting Grace, does so far forfeit all
Grace and Salvation, as that God may cut him off, and cast him into Hell if he
will; not having peremptorily said, that he will do it; nor given men any
assurance that he will not. This man is not immediately and fully under the
dueness of Hell fire, but on supposition that God should first cut him off; and
then his Impenitence would be final, which is the first case: But this person
is under all this guilt. 1. Guilty of punishment not forgiven against the Law
of Works. 2. He is so far guilty of punishment, according to the Law of Grace,
as 1. That no pardon is given him, or due to him. 2. And God may justly take
away his Spirit and forsake him. 3. And God may justly cut him ^^^^. 4. And if
God should cut him off, Hell will be his full immediate due.

147. By this it further appears, that we cannot be justified as personally
Christ not capable of our kind of Obedience.
fulfilling all Righteousness in Christ: Because we are all our life time
principally under those great Duties of the Law of Grace, which Christ neither
did nor could do for us. We are bound all our days to accept a Savior, to
accept pardon of Sin, and mortifying Grace, to confess our Sins, to repent of
them, and sorrow for them; to labor in the use of all Means and Ordinances to
mortify them; To do all our duties as Sinners, in that manner as those must do
that are in a Physicians hands for Cure; To receive and apply Christ's Merits
to that end; to beg his Intercession and daily pardon; To labor that imperfect
Grace may be strengthened: In a word, Sin, and a desire of healing, so affect
all that the Gospel commands us, that Christ was not capable of any of this.
And if all this was undone till our Conversion, and much of it undone after our
Conversion, and yet Christ never did it for us, not we in him; How can it be
said that we are justified by fulfilling all the Law in and by Christ? yea the
Law of Nature still commands us, to obey the Law of Grace, supposing it made
and revealed to us.

148. The question whether Christ paid the Idem or the tantundem, is hence
also more fully resolved: By payment is meant, either Holiness or The Idem or
Tantundem.
Suffering. And 1. This shows that Christ's Obedience was not materially the
same with ours (as aforesaid). 2. And I before proved that a great, and the far
greatest part of our punishment was such as Christ could never suffer; either
permitted Sin it self, or desertion by the Spirit of Holiness, or divine
displeasure and hatred, or accusations of Conscience, etc. 3. And the Law
binding only the Sinner, and not any Surety to suffer, and every man personally
to obey, most clearly it is not Idem qu^d debetur, were it but merely because
it is not ejusdem or per eundem.

149. Indeed solution of the Debt, and satisfaction strictly taken thus ^iffer,
that satisfaction is solutio tantidem, vel aequivalentis alias indebi^i. And if
Christ be said to have paid the very same duty and punishment which the Law
required, he is denied to have satisfied for our non-pay^ent: For a Law that is
fully performed can require no more, nor the Lawgiver neither: And therefore
both Satisfaction and Pardon are shut ^ut.

150. It is not properly the Law which is satisfied, but the Lawgiver ^s above
Law as is said: But yet improperly the Law may be said to be ^^tisfied in that
the ends of the Lawgiver in it are obtained.

151. Though I owe much thanks to God for what, near thirty years go, I learned
from Grotius de satisfact. yet I must say that in this great ^uestion, whether
Christ satisfied God for Sin as Domino absoluto, vel ^^ parti laesae, vel ut
Rectori, which he asserteth alone, I take him to come ^^ort of accurateness and
soundness; And that this is the truth.

God is to man, 1. Dominus absolutus, that is, our Owner. 2. Rector ^premus. 3.
Amicus, Benefactor: vel Pater and finis. Sin is against God in all these three
Relations: 1. As our Owner, it is a denying him and ^lienating his own quoad
usum. 2. As Rector, it breaks his Law. 3. As ^^r Lover and End, it is a
departing from him. For 1. As our Owner, we we him total resignation and use as
such. 2. As our Ruler, we owe him ^ubjection and Obedience as such. 3. As our
Friend (Benefactor and Ama^^lissimus) we owe him Gratitude and Love as such
(which yet is part ^f Obedience too.) Now Sin being the privation of all this,
God is to ^e satisfied for it as such, in all these three Relations; And is
pars laesa ^^ all these three Relations, that is, he is injured, though not
hurt. It is ^^ue, that Government and punishing Justice, formally as such,
belong to God only as Rector. And satisfaction is made him eminently in that
Re^ation; yet also to compensate the injury done by sin to him in the other ^wo
Relations also.

SECT. IX. Of the nature and distinctions of Justification.
152. Justification is a word of many significations, the Scheme whereof And 1.
Of constitutive Justification.
should I give them all, would seem to most Readers a troublesome
di^tinguishing. Therefore I take up with these three most notable senses. ^.
Justification constitutive: 2. Sentential: 3. Executive.

The first is to make a man righteous; The second is to judge him righte^us;
The third is to use him as righteous. 1. By Impunity; 2. Reward. The Papists
are confounded in the point of Justification, by sticking to confounding words:
They talk of Justification and remission of sin, but cannot tell men
intelligibly what they mean. They say that Remission is a putting away the sin
it self, and not only the Reatum poenae, and yet say (many) that it may be done
without any physical change of the Sinner. 1. By sin they mean, not the Habit;
for that cannot be removed without a physical change. 2. Nor the act* For that
is past as soon as done. 3. When they say it is macula moralis habitualiter
remanens; they talk gibberish and play with a metaphor, and the word
[habitualiter;] A true habit is quid physicum, and what macula is they can tell
no man besides a habit, disposition, privation ^r relation: If they mean that
it is the Reatus culpae, or culpability that is done away, and not only the
Reatus poenae, they hold ^he same thing which they oppose in those Protestants
that go too far from them. And it is not sound: For the pardoned Sin^er will be
culpable, though not punishable for ever; that is, will be really the man that
sinned; and it will be an ever^asting truth, This man sinned, though he be
pardoned: See Pet. a S. Joseph. Theol. Speculat. l. 4. c. 10. page 509, 510,
511.

The Papists say, Homo est formaliter justus per formam gratiae ipst
ex^ri^secam, and non tantum per justitiam Christi illi imputatam: And yet
[Nullus actus quantumvis perfectus sive sit* contritio, sive Amor Dei super
omnia, est caus^ formalis justificationis: Patres di^entes charitatem esse
perfectam justitiam, intelligendi sunt dispositive, non autem formaliter.
Because it is in the Habit, and not in the Act, ^r rather as others of them say
in some internal inclination antecedent to the habits of Faith, Hope and Love,
that they place Justification, or as we call it, Sanctification, Pet. a S.
Joseph. These. Univers. de great. Hab. page 88, 89.




153 God never judges a man righteous (either by secret esteem or open
sentence) till he have made him such.

154. To be made righteous, is to be justified in Law-sense; which is, To be
justifiable (or justificandus) by sentence.

155. A man is righteous, 1. Particularly, secundum quid, as to some particular
cause that he is accusable of. 2. Or universally as to all causes* 3. Or
eminently, as to all those causes that Heaven or Hell depend upon.

156. 1. No man is universally righteous, really or reputatively. God judges
no Saint in Heaven to be one that never sinned: And he that has once sinned,
is unavoidably under the Relation of ^^^^ that sinned, to eternity, ex
necessitate existentiae: which Relation is the very Reatus ipsius peccati;
though all the ill effects be remitted.

157. 2. Every man has some particular righteousness. For the worst man may be
falsely accused, and be righteous as to that false accusation But this will not
save him.

158. 3. That eminent Righteousness necessary to our Salvation, though it be
not universal or perfect (else we should never be afficted by chasti^^ments or
denials of Grace, or permissions to sin); yet is it at least perfect as to its
proper use, and to our glorious perfection; And may be called our universal
Righteousness, because it is all that we have. And ^^ consists not of any one
or two Causes, but of many: Of which no o^^ must be excluded or set against the
rest. As there are several Allegatio^^ or Accusations against us, so there must
be several parts of the matter of our Justification.

159. Not only an actual Accusation, but a possible or a virtual o^^, which we
are liable to, suffices to denominate Justification as its contrary, in the
first Law-sense of Justification.

160. It is our Right to Impunity, and to the heavenly Glory, which is to be
justified finally in Judgment; and our persons as the Subjects of that Right:
And our Actions but mediately in order to that end.

161. It is only at the Bar of Christ as Redeemer, that we are to be judged and
justified, and not by God only as a Creator. Therefore it is by the Law of
Grace that we must be judged to life or death, finally, and not by the sole Law
of Innocence.

162. Therefore no man is justified by the Law of Innocence, either by the
preceptive or retributive part: But we are justified only by the L^^ or
Covenant of Grace, against the Accusation which may be brought against us from
the Law of Innocence: Against it; not by it.

163. We are liable to all these following Accusations, which will open to us
the correlate Justifications, and the matter of each part.

1. It may be said by the Accuser of the Brethren, [Thou art a Si^^^^, against
the Precepts of Nature and Grace.] He that denies this is a Liar* Against this
Charge there is no Justification for ever. But we must ^^ Heaven confess that
we have sinned: but Glory be to him that washed ^s from our sins in his blood
(by Pardon and Sanctifiation.)

164. 2. Next it may be said, that [We did deserve Hell by our Sin.] This also
is to be confessed for ever.

165. 3. It may be said, that by Gods Law of Innocence Hell is ou^ due, and
therefore we are to be condemned to it. To this, we deny the consequence;
because we have right to Impunity and to Glory, freely given us by God our
Redeemer by a Covenant of Grace, merited for us, by the Obedience and
Satisfaction given for us by Christ our Savior. Where note, that here in this
first part of our Justification, there are all these conjunct necessary Causes.
1. Gods Love and Mercy giving: 2. Christ's Righteousness and Satisfaction
meriting. 3. The Covenant instrumentally giving. 4. Right to Impunity and Glory
(by Justification and Adoption conjunct) the thing given: which Right is our
very Righteousness against ^his Accusation; that is, a relation, whence the
other relation of just and ^ustifiable resulteth: (For if you will not here see
relations resulting from ^elations, pretend not to true accurateness in your
search.)

166. These four Causes now were enough to constitute, and so prove ^s
righteous against the Charge of being damnandi, if we were questiona^le no
further. But the turning point of the day is yet behind; 1. Our ^llegation of
Justification by Christ and the Covenant may be denied. ^t may be said by the
Accuser, that the Covenant justifies none but ^enitent Believers, and gives
plenary Right to Glory to none but saints and persevering Conquerors, and that
we are none such. Against this Ac^usation we must be justified or perish; else
all the rest will be un^ffectual. And here to say, that it is true, I died an
impeninent Person, ^n Insidel, Hypocrite, or Ungodly, but Christ was a penitent
Believer for Of our own personal performance, or righteousness, how far
necessary to our Justification.
^e, or sincere and holy for me, or that he died to pardon this,] all this will
^e false and vain. Christ's Merits and Satisfaction is not the Righteousness it
self which must justify us against this Accusation; But our own ^ersonal
Faith, Repentance, sincere Holiness and Perseverance,] purchased ^y Christ, and
wrought by the Spirit in us, but thence, our own acts. Mr. W. Thomas of Ubley,
in his Book against Speed the Quaker, says, page 42. part. 2. [This is an old
Popish trick to make much of the Doctrine of the St. James in a mistaken
interpretation, and to lay aside the Doctrine of St. Paul, Romans 3. 28. when
they should join both together, and ascribe to Faith the justification of men
as sinners, and to work their justification as Believers.] This is sound, and
needs but fuller explication.
^e that cannot truly say, The Accusation is false. I am a true Penitent,
^anctified persevering Believer must be condemned and perish. Thus ^aith and
Repentance are our Righteousness by which we must thus far ^e justified.

167. But this is but a particular mediate subservient Righteousness, and part
of our Justification, subordinate to Christ's Merits.

168. Yet this being the Condition on our part for our Participation ^n all the
free Gifts of the Covenant; Scripture uses to describe Gods ^udgment as
enquiring after this. The great thing to be glorified in ^udgment is Gods Love,
Wisdom, Justice and Truth, and Christ's great Merits and performance in our
Redemption; But the great thing questio^ed, accused, tried and judged will be
our performance of the Covenant of Grace as to our conditions. The day is not
to try God whether he be ^ust, or Christ, whether his Merits and Satisfaction
were sufficient; and whether he have done his part: But to try man whether, 1.
He have ^rue Right to Impunity and Glory. 2. Whether he have performed the
Condition on which the Covenant gives that Right, and be indeed the ^rue
Receiver of it. The Devils hope cannot lie at all, in proving Christ or the
Covenant faulty, or defective on their part; but in proving ^s to be none of
the persons that have Right. This therefore is the Righteousness mentioned,
Matthew. 25. and of Faith imputed, Romans 4, etc. and elsewhere.

169. But if we will speak of Righteousness and Justification entirely, ^s that
which contains all its Causes, we must set all the five forementioned
together, giving each one its proper place, and no one the ^lace or office of
the rest. And give leave to the self-conceited, pievish, ^gnorant, blindly to
revile you, for saying that you join your Faith and Holiness to make one
Righteousness with that of Christ, as if it were not sufficient. And tell him,
that Christ's Righteousness is not ours absolutely in it self, but to and in
the proper effects: And that it is perfect as to its ^roper ends; And that he
never intended it to this end, to be instead of Faith and Holiness in us, nor
to make them needless to our Salvation.

170. No man must ascribe any thing to his own Faith or Holiness i^ the least
degree, which is proper to, 1. Gods Mercy or Grace. 2. To Christ, or his
Righteousness or Merits. 3. Or to the Covenant: not any thing but its proper
part: And that must be granted it.

171. It is a vain Fiction in them that think our Right to Justificatio^ or
Impunity, and our Right to Salvation, have not the same causes and conditions,
but that our own Repentance and Obedience is a condition of our Right to
Salvation, but not to Impunity or forgiveness. Whereas ou^ very Justification
is a justifying of our Right to Salvation, and the same Covenant gives them
conjunctly on the same conditions.

172. But our Right to both as begun, has less for the condition th^^ our
Right to them as continued and perfected. For our believing* consent to the
Baptismal-Covenant puts us into immediate Right to all the benefits of the
Covenant which we are then capable of, but not to all that we shall be made
further capable of hereafter; we are pardoned, and should be glorified, if we
presently died: But as we have more Grace to receive, so we have more Duty to
perform as a means, yea a condition, of obtaining it.

173. This (over-lookt by many) is much to be considered, both as to the case
of Infants baptized, and the Adult. Many wonder that the What right the
Covenant gives to the afterhelps and degrees of Grace.
Children of godly Parents prove often so bad, as if by the Baptismal-Covenant
they had received nothing from God. But the Synod of Dort, Art. 1.. 17. well
concludes that godly Parents have no cause to doubt of the Election or
Salvation of their Children dying in Infancy, they being holy and in the same
Covenant with their Parents. But the continuance of Gods Grace has a continued
condition and means to be used on our part. The condition which the Covenant
requires to an Infants first Justification, is, [that he be the Child of a
true Believer, by him dedicated to God]. And as the first Condition is to be
found in the Parent (or Owner) so must the Condition of continued Grace as long
as the Child continues an Infant. And that is the continuance of the Parents
Faith, and his faithful performance of his promise made to educate his Child in
the way of God: But if the Parents should presently both turn Infidels, and so
educate their Child, and give him up as the J^^izaries are, to an Infidel to
educate, I know God may nevertheless give him Grace above his Promise if he
please (for a Benefactor as such is free): but I know of no assurance of it by
Promise. For in Baptism both Parties were obliged for the future, and not one
only. And if when the Child comes to the use of Reason he wilfully reject and
resist Gods Grace, and break his Covenant, he forfeiteth Gods further Grace.
And I have noted, 1. That most Children which I have seen very early wicked,
have been such whose Parents grossly neglected their Duty and Covenant as to a
holy prudent careful Education of them; as if God must needs save their
Children, because they were the Children of Believers, who thus betrayed them.
2. And those that were well educated by their Parents, usually show hopeful
signs at first, till their own lusts grow up, and deceive, and overthrow them.
The nature of the mutual Covenant, and the sad experience of the case of many
baptized Children, makes me incline to this Opinion; which I do not
peremptorily assert, but humbly propose to better judgments with submission:
^ut whatever we say of the Parents, I doubt not but to the person at age,
future benefits have future conditions.

174. Though Gods Decree is that his Elect shall persevere, yet I conceive
(with submission to better information) that the Baptismal-Covenant as such
does not absolutely promise or give right to so much Grace as shall certainly
cause the baptized to persevere; that is, all that are rightfully baptized
(even coram Deo as well as coram Ecclesia) have not perseverance secured to
them by baptism. But only the Holy Ghost is given to them by Covenant to be
their Sanctifier, and carry on his work to their Salvation, if they will use
those means which God has appointed, and does enable them to use, in
attendance on his Spirit.

Though Election infer the certainty of perseverance, I never saw their
assertions proved, who say, 1. That if Adam had once obeyed (say some) or
overcome that one Temptation (say others) God promised confirmation to him and
all his Posterity* 2. That the Baptismal-Covenant promises confirmation and
certain perseverance to all the baptized, regenerate or justified. What God
does, I am not now questioning; but what in that Covenant he promises to do.

175. It is plain in the Scripture, that when men are converted and baptized,
the particular helps of Grace are promised them upon further particular
conditions: And that the continuance of Pardon and Right to Life, is promised
them upon the continuance of their Faith, and use of means; And that actual
Glorification is promised them on condition of overcoming and persevering: And
therefore that we must use and take all these as conditions.

176. It is ordinary with some Writers and Preachers to tell men, What must be
in our selves.
that no part of their Righteousness is in themselves; and with others, that at
least none which they are justified by in any part is in them; and that it is
all in Christ only: And that nature is loath to yield to this, but thinks it a
fine thing to have some little part of the honor to it self: And as to the
honor of a good Action, if it be but 999 parts that it ascribes to God, and
takes one part of a thousand to our selves, it is a dangerous arrogation: we
must have none.] This well explained, may be made sound: But thus grossly
delivered, it is but a popular cheat under the taking pretense of
self-abasement and giving Christ all. The Devil is as willing as any one, that
you should have nothing honorable or praiseworthy in you: and be as vile as
he can make you. It is God who honors those that honor him, and praises
his Saints as the excellent on Earth, and his Jewels and peculiar Treasure,
adorned with his own lovely Image, and partakers of the Divine Nature, and
members of Christ, as his own Flesh: And it is Satan and wicked men that
vilify and dishonor them. And I have often lamented it, that these very men
that hold this kind of Doctrine of self-abasement, as having no part of
Righteousness, nor share at all in any good work, are yet too often so proudly
conceited of their own goodness (even for holding that they have none for which
they are praiseworthy) as that their pride is no small trouble to the Churches
and all about them.

177. Whatever is of God is good: and whatever is good is laudable or
praiseworthy, and meriteth to be esteemed as it is.

178. All the sanctified are inherently righteous: But with an imperfect
righteousness, which will no further justify them in Judgment, save only
against this Accusation, that they are unholy.

179. There is no Righteousness which will not justify him that has it, in
tantum, so far as he is righteous: For the contrary is a contradiction. For to
be just is to be justifiable: He that gave but six pence to the poor is
justifiable against this Accusation, that he did not give it.

181. All the Righteousness which formally justifies us, is our own or on our
selves where it justifyeth us: For to be made just or justified in the I would
here cite the words of B^za, Paraeus, Dr. Field, Bonhaus, B^llinger, Alberius,
Zanchy, Aepinus, Spang^^bergius, Brentius, Co^fess. Augustan. etc. Asserting
that [Justification] is often used as Sanctification in Scripture, and that
plenary Justification has three parts, 1. Pardon. 2. Accepting us into favor
and life. 3. The gift of the Holy Ghost, or inherent righteousness] but that
Guil. Forbes has largely done it. Consid. Pacific. 2 These. 1. 9, 10.
first sense constitutively, is nothing else but to be made such as are
personally themselves just. Pardon of sin is made our own; Right to Christ and
Glory is made our own; Though Christ's Righteousness was the only meritorious
cause of all this; which therefore is and may be called our Material
Righteousness, as that which meriteth it is the matter.

182. He that is no cause of any good work, is no Christian, but a damnable
wretch, and worse than any wicked man I know in the world: And he that is a
Cause of it, must not be denied falsely to be a cause of it: Nor a Saint denied
to be a Saint, upon a false pretense of sel^denyal.

183. As God is seen here in the Glass of his works, so he is to be loved and
praised as so appearing: Therefore he that dishonors his work dishonors
God, and hinders his due love and praise; And his most lovely and honorable
work on earth, is his holy Image on his Saints* And as Christ will come to be
admired and glorified in them at last, so God must be seen and glorified in
them here in some degree. And to deny the Glory of his Image is the malignants
way of injuring him, and that in which the worst will serve you. He that will
praise God as Creator and Redeemer must praise his works of Creation and
Redemption: And is it the way of praising him as our Sanctifyer to dispraise
his work of Sanctification?

184. Those poor Sinners of my acquaintance who lived in the grosse^^ sins
against Conscience (as Drunkenness, Whoredom, etc.) have been glad enough of
such doctrine, and forward enough to believe, that there is nothing in man that
in any part can justify him, or that i^ any part of righteousness, but it is
all out of us in Christ, and therefore they are as justifiable as any: But
Conscience will not let them believe it as they desire.

185. It is arrogant folly to divide the praise of any good act between God and
Man, and to say God is to have so many parts, and Man so many: For the whole is
due to God, and yet some is due to Man: For man holds his honor only in
subordination to God, and not dividedly in co-ordination: And therefore all is
due to God: For that which is Man's is Gods, because we have nothing but what we
have received. But he that arrogateth any of the honor due to God or Christ,
offends.

186. If all had been taken from Gods honor which had been given to the
Creature, God would have made nothing, or made nothing Good;- Heaven and Earth,
and all the World would derrogate from his honor; and none of his Works should
be praised: And the better any man is, the more he would dishonor God; and the
wickeder the les^. But he made all Good, and is Glorious in the Glory, and
honorable in the honor of all: And to justify the holiness of his Servants
is to justify him.

187. If these Teachers mean that no man has any power freely to specify the
Acts of his own will, by any other help of God, besides necessitating
predetermining premotion, and so that every man does all that he can do, and no
man can do more than he does; They dishonor God by denying him to be the
Creator of that Free-power, which is essential to man, and which God himself
accounts it his honor to create. And they feign God to damn and blame all
that are damned and blamed, for as great Impossibilities, as if they were
damned and blamed for not making a world, or for not being Angels.

188. Thus also such men, teach that Christ strippeth a Christian of two
things, His Sins, and his Righteousness: Or that Two things must be That all
that are saved have inherent Righteousness or Holiness, none of us all deny:
nor yet that in tantum we are Righteous by it: Nor that a man accused as being
an Infidel, Atheist, Impenitent, ungodly, an Hypocrite, etc. must be justified
by pleading all the contraries in himself, or else perish: And all agree that
this inherent Righteousness is imperfect, and in us found with sin: and
therefore that no man can be justified by it without pardon of sin; nor at all
against the charge of being a sinner, and condemnable by the Law of Innocence.
And what remains then, but to trouble the world with contending de nomine,
whether this imperfect Righteousness shall be called Righteousness: and the
giving of it called Justifying or making us righteous so far?
cast away, for Christ; Sins and Righteousness: But they should speak better,
if they would not deceive; nothing is to be cast away as evil but Sin.
Righteousness, truly such, is Good, and never to be cast away. If it be no
Righteousness, why do they falsely say that we must cast away our Righteousness.
To cast away a false conceit of Righteousness, is not to cast away
Righteousness, but Sin only. Indeed besides Sin, we are said justly to cast
away that which would be the Object and Matter of Sin: And the phrase is
fitlyer applied to a thing Indifferent, than to a thing necessary, least it
seduce. There is nothing so Good, which may not be made the object of Sin, not
Christ or his Righteousness, or God himself excepted; But we must not therefore
say that we must cast away God or Christ, because we must not thus objectively
abuse them: So Holiness and true Righteousness (Inherent or imputed) may be
objects of sinful pride and boasting; But it is not edifying Doctrine therefore
to say that we must cast away Inherent and Imputed Righteousness: But yet true
self-denial requires that we deny our Righteousness (Inherent or Imputed) to
be that which indeed it is not. And so when men accounted the Jewish
observations to be a Justifying Righteousness in competition with, and in
opposition to Christ, Paul counts it as loss, and dung, and nothing in that
respect: when yet elsewhere he says, I have lived in all good Conscience to
this day. And Christ himself fulfilled that Law and Righteousness. So if a man
will conceit, that his common Grace will justify him without Holiness, or his
Holiness, without Pardon and the Righteousness of Christ, he must deny this
Righteousness; that is, he must deny it to be what it is not, and must cast
away (not it, but) the false conceits of it: And so if any Libertine will say
that Christ's Righteousness imputed to him, will justify him, without faith, or
be instead of Holiness to him, he must deny Imputed Righteousness thus, to be
what indeed it is not.

189. When we tell them, that, If we had fulfilled all the Law reputatively
More against the wrong sense of Imputation; confuting many Sophisms.
by Christ as our Legal person, we could not be bound to further obedience to
it, They answer, that we are not bound to obey to the same ends as Chhist, that
is for Righteousness, or Justification or merit, but in Gratitude. But this is
but to give us the cause, and ignorantly to destroy At quis unquam e nostris
nos per justitiam Christi imputatam formaliter justificari, asseruit? Prideaux
Lect. 5 de Just. cap. 4.
their own. For, 1. This is but to say, that when a man is reputed to have
fulfilled all the Law, yet it is to be reputed unfulfilled as to certain ends.
As if he fulfilled all the Law that fulfilled it not to all due ends: 2. Or as
if the Law obliged one man to fulfill it twice over for the same life's time;
once simply and in all its obligations, and another time for other ends. 3. Or
as if the Law required any more than absolute perfection. 4. Or that absolute
perfection had not been in Christ's holy The Papists concur with them that
feign a middle state between Just and privatively unjust, viz. not just
negatively, so Brianson in 4. q. 8. Cor. 3. fol. 145. at large: But they can
give us no instance but in a stone or other incapable creature, that is not
obliged: And we confess that if a man can be found that is not obliged to be
Just, he is neither just nor (Privatively, but Negatively) unjust: But what is
this to our case? And the Papists commonly join with them, that say that God
remitteth not only the Reatum vel Obligationem ad poenam, but also the Reatum
culpae in se; But when they come to open it, they mean but that God is not
displeased with, or has not a punishing Will against the Sinner: As if they
knew not that as Gods Love is our chief reward, so his displeasure is our chief
punishment; And that Remission does make no change in God, but by taking away
Guilt of Gods hatred and other punishment, God then is reconciled because they
are not objects of his hatred: And to take away the Reatum poenae and the
Reatum culpae, non in se, sed quoad poenam is all one, and all that both sides
mean if they understand what they say. But to all eternity it will be true,
that we once sinned, which none deny.
obedience. 5. Or as if there were any obedience whose end is not Righteousness
and Justification, against the change of the contrary disobedience. Do not
these men obey that they may be so far righteous? Or is not every man so far
Righteous as he does Righteousness? Is not every man that loves God
justifiable as a Lover of him for so far as he loves him? 6. And is not
Gratitude an end, and a thing commanded by the Law? If we obeyed perfectly in
Christ, we were perfectly thankful in Christ. 7. But if they say that Christ
fulfilled only the Law made to Adam for us, and not his own Law of Grace, and
therefore that he obeyed for us, only to the ends of that Law; I answer, 1. If
the ends and matter of that Law be fulfilled by us in him, our obedience to any
other must be needless: For he that is supposed never to have sinned, need not
use any means for pardon or remedy. 2. By this rule Christ only fulfilled the
Law for Adam, and Eve, and for us only as we were in them, which is only
Virtually and not Actually at all; but not at all for us according to any
obligation that ever fell upon our persons. For, 1. We were never personally
bound to perfect personal perpetual obedience as the Condition of life; For
that Covenant as to the promise and condition ceased before any man was born.
2. And all the duty in the world which ^^ are bound to, is to be done for
Evangelical ends; for recovering Grace, and unto Gratitude, etc. To say
therefore that we are perfectly Righteous, as having perfectly obeyed all Gods
Law in Christ, and yet that we are bound to obey all that Law that ever we were
under to another end; and that Christ obeyed for us only as to that which we
were never under personally but virtually in Adam, this is to say and unsay. 8.
Lastly, they see not that their own answer implies the truth of what we
assert; and is the same that we give; which their cause is incapable of: ^^ We
say, that Christ did indeed most perfectly obey the Law of Innocence, so far
for us and in our stead (though not in our persons) as that he has vindicated
the truth and glory of God and his Law, by doing that which we should have done
and did not: And has merited for us a better Covenant, which obliges us not
at all to obey for the ends of the first Covenant, viz. that our perfection
might be our Righteousness, or the condition of life; but only to obey for the
ends of the new Covenant, for the obtaining and improving of Recovering Grace,
and Salvation by Christ freely given us: which we our selves must do or perish.

190. And whereas they tell us that [We may as well say that man must not dye
because Christ dyed for us, as not obey because Christ obeyed for us,] They
strangely use our reason against themselves and know it not. For we say that we
must dye because we did not perfectly either obey the Law or suffer all its
penalty by Christ as our legal person: But he suffered only to satisfy Justice
in tantum^ to this end, that man himself suffering death and temporal
afflictions, and obeying the Law of Grace, might be saved from all the rest of
the punishment. But if we had so fulfilled the Law as aforesaid, by Doing or
suffering, we could not have dyed nor suffered the least affliction as a
penalty. For all punishment in the essence of the ^elation is for sin.

191. And when they say that [It is no more inconvenient to say that Christ was
perfect in our person, than that he satisfied in our person and we by him.] I
answer, 1. Both are false and subvert the Gospel, as aforesaid. 2. But yet we
may fitly say that Christ suffered in the person of a Sinner; but mark the
sense. 1. Suffering as penal belongs to a Sinner as such: But Satisfaction is
an Effect of Christ's suffering, which resulteth not from the mere suffering,
nor from the person of a Sinner: but from the Will and Covenant of God made to
that excellent person who was God and perfect Man. So that it is not so aptly
said, He satisfied, as it is that he suffered, in the person of a Sinner. 2.
Note that it is not any other man's person that we mean that Christ suffered
in, but his own. And we mean that he took upon him the person of a Sinner
himself* in as much as he consented to suffer for Sin. And so personating here
is not meant becoming any other man's person in Law sense, so as that other
legally suffered what he did; But it is only his own persons becoming a
sufferer in the stead of Sinners for their Sins: As the Apostle says, He was
made sin for us, so he might as truly have said, He was made a sinner for us;
that is, so far by Imputation, as that he undertook to suffer as Sinners
suffer, and for their sins.

But because wordy controversies seeming real, are the great trouble^s of the
world, lest any should think that we differ more than indeed we do, I would
fain bring the matter as far from under the ambiguity of words as possibly I
can. To which end I further add, 1. That as we hold that Adam was the Natural
Root or Parent of Mankind; so also that Christ was the Foederal Root of all the
saved, and in several respects (though not all) a second Adam.

2. Adam was but one single Natural person, nor did God (by error or arbitrary
reputation) esteem or account him to be any other than he was. None of our
persons were distinct persons in Adam, nor those persons that now they are:
Therefore we were not so personally in him at his fall: But all our persons are
in time and mediately by our Progenitors derived lineally from him (yet we deny
not all Souls to be from God, and all Bodies an accretion of the common
Elements); not as having been Persons existent in him, but being Persons caused
remotely by him. Our present Persons were seminally or virtually in him; which
is as much as to say, that not the Person, but the Semen Personae vel virtus
causalis was in him: To be only Virtually, or Causally or Seminally in Adam, is
in proper speech for that Person not really to have been in him: For Causa non
est effectus, and Virtus generativa non est Persona generata: To be only
Virtually in Adam is terminius diminuens as to personal inexistence, and
denies it. And as Dr. Twisse has often well asserted, It is our natural
relation to Adam supposed in Gods Law, which is the reason of our participation
in his Sin, and not any Will or Judgment of God, without or beyond our Natural
interest: For else it should be God most properly who by his arbitrary
imputation should either make us Sinners, or repute us such when we are none.
But yet when we become Persons, it is by Derivation from Adam, and so the
effect can be no better than the cause, and as soon as we are Persons we are
Guilty persons, having Guilt with personality from him, though we were not
persons in him.

3. So Christ is, though not the Natural, yet the Federal Adam or Root of
Believers: when he satisfied and merited, we were not in him either as in Adam
seminally, as in a natural Generator, nor as existent Persons, nor did God
falsely so repute us to be: But he was then the Cause (materially) or had that
Virtus effectiva, which would Justify, and Sanctify, and Glorify us in due
time. It was the Nature of Sinners, though not a sinful Nature which he
assumed; But that Nature which he undertook was existent in his Individual
person: and no other Individual person was existent in his existent personal
Nature: So that when we say it was the common Nature of Man, we mean only
specifice, that Nature which is of the same Species with all other men's, but
not that which existed individually in any but himself; and a Species extra
individuum is nothing but an ens rationis, or a notion. But it was individual
Persons in whose stead or place Christ suffered, and whom he undertook to
Justify, Sanctify, and Save, and gather into a holy Society to that end; and
to that end he undertook and performed his office, and merited all this by his
perfect righteousness: So that hereby he made Himself a Federal Head and Root
of a holy Society (his Church): And whenever any person does Believe and is
united federally to him, he then receives the effects of that which was before
in Christ as a Virtus effectiva.

The Law made to Adam or to us, did not assign Christ to this office, nor
oblige him to suffer or merit for sinners according to it: Therefore by so
doing he fulfilled not the Law as it obliged us; that is, by that obligation,
nor suffered by that obligation which bound us to suffer; But by the obligation
of his own Consent, and that Law which was peculiar to himself as to the formal
obligation, though materially he was bound by it to fulfill the Law of Nature
and of Moses.

The Law of Innocence then or Works, took not Christ for the Civil or Legal
Person of such Sinner, or Believer, no more than it made him such.

4. As Gods Law to the Mediator made him this office, so Christ's Law of Grace
does quod jus and Relationem give to every true believing Covenanter, first,
Christ himself in union to be their federal Head, and with him title to his
Grace, Spirit and Glory. And now they are Personally and actually his federal
Subjects, Friends, and Members; and have right to all his conferred gifts.

5. But this right flows not immediately to them, from what Christ did or
suffered for them; but from his Law or Covenant of Grace, by which as his
Donative and Ruling Instrument he conveyeth that title to them.

6. And therefore they have no right before the Time, nor any but on the
Conditions and Measure specified in that Covenant or Law; so that Righteousness
is not theirs because it is Christ's, nor in the manner or measure and to the
ends of the donation.

7. This much contains the matter of this Doctrine of the Collation and
Imputation of Christ's righteousness, still remembering that as no one till he
was a Person, could be a person-guilty of Adam's sin; not when he was a person,
any sooner than he was also guilty of his own inherent pravity, and none that
had the use of Reason was guilty of either or both these only, without the
guilt of his own Actual Sin, and all three together, (1. Adam's sin justly
imputed to us, 2. And our innate Pravity, 3. And our actual Sin) are the parts
which constitute our plenary guilt; even so no one till he is a Believer is
related as a Member of a Perfectly Righteous Savior; and that is done no
sooner (in time) that he has the Inherent Righteousness of his personal faith
and federal consent; and that obliges him to the further active righteousness
of a holy life, and all these three conjunct (though not coordinate) make up
the total Righteousness of a Saint, viz. 1. Our Relation to Christ in Union as
to a perfectly Righteous Head, who fulfilled all righteousness for us to mer^^
our Justification (which is called Christ's Righteousness Imputed to us, as
being thus far reputed ours). 2. And our penitent believing consent to his
Covenant, which is the condition of the foresaid Relation to Christ. 3. And our
after Sanctification and obedience to Christ's Law.

8. And when we are commonly thus far agreed of the Matter, if any will contend
for their self-coyned phrases and words, and not being content to call Christ
our Redeemer, Savior, Teacher, King, Priest, Head, Lord, Te^^ator, Sponsor or
Surety, Ransom, Price, Sacrifice, etc. as the Scripture does, will needs plead
that he is or was our Person, or was holy, obedient, suffered in our Persons,
Legal or Civil, or was our Substitute, Delegate, Instrument, etc. his
contention will be both corrupting and dividing: And yet I will acknowledge
that among Lawyers the word [Person] has so many senses, that in some of them
(were they our way of speech here) it might be said that Christ did in some
things personate each Sinner, or each believer, limitedly, in tantum and ad
hoc, and non simpliciter, aut ad omnia: And all verbal quarrel I would shun
even with them that speak ineptly, and dangerously, and injuriously to ^he
truth and Church, so they will but by a sound and necessary explication
vouchsafe us an Antidote against the hurtful tendency of their ^hrases.

9. Obj. If Christ's person be given us, then his personal Righteousness is
given us with it. Ans. Yes, as his Person is: He is not given us as Proprietors
and Lords to become our Own at our dispose: Nor is his Person made one Person
with each or any of us: His Person is not turned unto ours, nor ours into his:
As the Husband is not the person of the Wife, nor the King of each Subject; But
as one that has a Great, Wise, Learned, Bountiful, Holy King or Husband, has
also his Greatness, Wisdom, Learning, Bounty and Holiness, as they have him;
that is, As his perfections for their good as far as his Relation binds him,
but not as ^f his endowments, were removed from him to them, or falsely reputed
to ^e in them, or his person to be their persons; so here, as we have a Christ,
^o we have a perfect Righteous Christ given us to be our federal Head when we
believe; and the Righteousness which is not in us but in him is ^urs, so far as
to be for our Good, as far as his Office and Covenant do ob^ige him: So that a
Righteous Christ, and therefore the Righteousness of Christ are ours,
Relatively themselves, quoad jus beneficis, so as that we have right to these
Benefits by them, which we shall possess: and for the merits of his
Righteousness we are conditionally justified and saved before we believe, and
actually after: But are not accounted to be Christ, nor the Legal Actors of
what he did, nor Christ ^ccounted to be each of us.

SECT. V. Merit.
192. The great Controversy about humane Merits, which has made ^o great a
noise in the world, is of so easy solution, that I can scarce Confess. August.
Art. 6. Semper sentiendum est, nos consequt remissionem peccatorum and personam
pran^nciari Iustam id est acceptari, gratis propter Christum per fidem; postea
vero placere etiam obedientiam erga legem, and reputari quandam Justiciam, and
mereri praemia.

Et Art. de Bon. operib. [Quanquam hac nova obedientia procul abest a
perfectione legis, tamen est ^us^i^ia and meretur praemia, ideo quia personae
reconciliatae s^nt.

It a d^ operibus judicandum est quae ampliss^^i^ la^dibu^ or^anda sunt quod
sint necessaria, quod sint cultus Dei, and Sacrificia spiri^^alia and mereantur
praemia.

Ib. Ex^recitatio nostra and conservat ea. and meretur incrementum uxta illud
Habenti dabitur: and Augustinus praeclare dixit, Dilectio ^er^ur incrementum
dilectionis, cum viz* exercetur. Habent enim bon^ apera Praemia cum in hac
vita, tum post hanc vitam in vita aterna^


^hink but almost all sober understanding Christians in the world are ^greed in
sense, while they abhor each others opinions as ill expressed or misunderstood.
Distinguish but, 1. Of Commutative Justice, and Distributive Governing Justice.
2. And of Governing Justice according ^o Gods several Laws, of Innocence,
Mosaical Works, and of Grace. ^. And of Justifying and Meriting simply, and
comparatively; And the case is so plain, that few things are more plain to us,
that Christians con^rovert, Viz.

1. To dream of meriting from God by any Creature, Man, or Angel, in point of
Commutative Justice, is blasphemy and madness; that is, That we can give him
any thing that shall profit him, or which is not absolutely his own, as a
compensation for what he gives us. He makes himself a God that asserteth this
of himself. 2. To say that any since Ad^^ save Christ, does merit of God in
point of Governing Justice, according to the Law of Innocence, is a falsehood:
And he that says, He b^^^ no sin, is a liar. 3. To say that we can merit
pardon, or Justification, o^ Salvation merely by observing Moses Law, was the
Jews pernicious erro^. 4. To say that our faith and performance of the
conditions of the new Covenant, does merit by the retributive Sentence of the
old Covenan^; or that it is in whole or part any meritorious Cause that God
gave the world a Savior, or that Christ freely pardons and justifies us all
conditionally by the new Covenant, or that it supposes not Christ's
Righ^^ousness to be the total sole meritorious Cause of that pardoning
Covenant, and all the benefits as thereby conditionally given; All this is
gross contradiction. 5. To deny subordinate Comparative Merit, or
Rewardabl^ness, as from Gods Governing distributive paternal Justice according
to the Covenant of Grace, consisting in the performance of the condition of
that Covenant, and presupposing Christ's total merits as aforesaid, i^ to
subvert all Religion and true Morality, and to deny the scope of all the
Scriptures, and the express assertion of an Evangelical worthiness, which is
all that this [Merit] signifies: To say nothing of contradicting Catholic
antiquity, and hardening the Papists against the truth.

193. This Comparative Merit, is but such, as a thankful Child has toward his
Father who gives him a purse of Gold on condition th^^ he put off his hat, and
say, I thank you, who deserves it in Comparison of his Brother, who
disdainfully or neglectfully refuses it. This last being absolutely said to
Deserve to be without it; but the former only comparatively said to deserve to
have it as a free gift.

194. And those that reject the saying of some Papists who in thi^ sense, say
that Christ merited that we might merit, placing our Evangelical merit in a
mere subordination to Christ's, do but show what prejudice and partiality can
do, and harden those who perceive their errors.

195. Some man may think that the high things required in the Gospel,
self-denial, forsaking all, running, striving, working, loving, overcoming,
Whether faith be not the mere Acceptance of a free gift according to its
Nature? Against Merit, read of Papists Waldens. de Sacram. tit. 1. Gregor.
Armin. 1. d. 17. q. 1. a. 2. Durand. 1. d. 27. q. 2. Marsil. 2. d. 27. Brugers.
in Psalm. 35. Eckins in Centur. de Praedest. Et inquit Fr. a Sancta Clara Deus,
Not. Great. p. 138. tribuitur etiam Cusano, nec long differt Stapletonus
nostras Leg. and Suarez in 3. p. Tho. Disp. 10. Sect. 7. q. 3. See the Thomists
sense of Merit, in Lud. Carbo Tho. Compend. 1. 2. q. 23. art. 4. p. 240.
etc. are more than the mere Receiving of a free Gift. But, 1. If it were so,
yet our first faith would be no more, by which we are Justified from all the
sins of our unregeneracy. 2. But upon consideration, it will all appear to be
no more materially: For, 1. When we say that it is the Receiving of the free
Gift, we must mean According to the Nature and to the use of that Gift. As if
you be required to take food, the meaning is, to Eat it, and not to throw it
away: If you be required to take such a man to be your King, your Master, your
Tutor, your Husband, your Physician, etc. the meaning is, As such, to the use
of his proper office. And so Accept of God as God, that is, our Absolute Owner,
Ruler, and End, and Christ as our Savior, Prophet, Priest and King, and the
Holy Ghost as our Sanctifyer to Illuminate, quicken and renew us, is the su^ of
all the Positives of the Gospel. 2. For this very Acceptance of them in this
Nature, and to this Use, includes the using of them after accordingly: And if
we do not so use them, we thereby reject them, and lose our own benefit of
them; as he that eats not his meat, refuses and loses it; and he that
wears not his Clothes; and he that learneth not of his Teacher. 3. And then
Self-denial, and forsaking contraries, and resisting impediments, is but the
same motus ut a termino a quo; And he that refuses to come out of his Prison
and Chains, refuses his Liberty; and he refuses the Gold, that will not cast
away his handful of dirt to take it. So that really all is but a Thankful
Accepting of the mercy of the new Covenant according to its nature and use as
it is offered.

196. It is a great question whether a man may Trust to his own Faith, Of
Trusting in our own faith, repentance, holiness, etc.
Repentance or Holiness. But some men still trouble the world with unexplained
words, where no sober men differ. No wise man can dream that we may Trust to
these for more than their proper part; as that we may Trust them to do any
thing proper to God, to Christ, to the Spirit, to the Promise, etc. And to use
the phrase of Trusting to our own faith or Holiness when it sounds
absolutely, or may tempt the hearers to think that they may Trust them for Gods
part, or Christ's part, and Of which see more in my Life of Faith.

Tollit gratia Meri^um: non quod omnino nihil agamus, sed quia non satisfacimus
legi, and procul absumus a perfectione. Melancth. in Loc. Com. de lib. arb. c.
7.


not only for their own, is a dangerous deceiving course. But that really they
may be Trusted for their own part, and must be so, no sober person will deny:
For so to believe, obey, pray to God, etc. and not to Trust to them in their
place; that is, not to think that we shall be ever the better for them, is
unbelief and indeed distrusting God, and saying, It is in vain to serve him,
and what profit is it that we call upon him? And such diffidence and despair
will end all endeavors: Let every man prove Gal. 6.
his own work, and so shall he have rejoicing in himself and not in another.
This is our Rejoicing the testimony of our Consciences that in simplicity 2
Cor. 1. 12.
and Godly sincerity we have had our Conversation in the world. If we are
Justified by faith, we may Trust to be Justified by it. But the rare use of
such a phrase in Scripture, and the danger of it, must make us never use it
without need. (As if we were disputing whether the Popish or Protestant
Religion be that which a man may trust for his Salvation) or the like. And when
ever it is used, it implies our Trust in God and our Savior only for their
part.

197. To conclude this great point of Imputed and Inherent Righteousness, The
last objection of the mistakers of Imputation.

To save me that much labor of citations, I desire the Reader to see in Guil.
Forbes. Consider. Pacific. the Concessions of Vega, Pighius, Stapleton, and
other Papists about Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as granting us all
that Protestants mean (as Bellarmine expressly does) as Davenant, Nigrinus, Joh.
Crocius, and many others have observed.


it may be objected, that The same man may well be judged a Sinner deserving
hell, never fulfilling the Law, nor satisfying Justice, nor deserving Heaven,
in himself; that is, in his Natural person, and yet be Judged one that never
sinned, but fulfilled the Law, is perfectly holy and righteous, and merited
Heaven in his Legal or Civil person, in and by Christ; To which I answer, One
man is but one, and has but one person. But if you take the word [Person]
equivocally, as signifying another that is made like him in some respects, or
that has his Nature, or does somewhat in his stead and for his benefit, as a
second person, say so, and we will strive with no man about words: If you will
say we are now on earth in our Natural persons, and are in Heaven in Christ; or
that we are Redeemed in our Natural persons, but Redeemed our selves in Christ;
or that you are sick in your Natural person, and well in your person in Christ,
etc. I like not your language; but there are scarce any words so bad, which a
man may not put a good sense on. But we would be understood, and plainly ask,
whether Christ was properly every sinners or believers person in Law-sence, so
that ipso facto God accounts us to have been habitually and actively perfect
in Him, and to have merited and satisfied in him? If so, the Law can look on
one man but as one: And he that paid a debt by his Servant or any other as his
Legal person, cannot be required to do it again in his Natural person, unless
you will say that God loves our Legal person, and will save it, and may hate
our Natural person and damn it. The Scripture uses no such contradictory
subtleties as these.

SECT. XI. How faith Justifies.
198. The common saying that faith justifies as an Instrument might pass as
tolerable, if too many did not strain it to a wrong sense, and raise Note, that
when we call faith an Accepting it relates to the Donation of the Covenant and
the Donatum, which is a Jus ad beneficia: Renovation is effected by faith as a
second cause, but Pardon is Accepted by it: And we fully grant the Papists that
Renovation and pardon go together, whatever they call them. And some of
themselves do speak just as we de Remissione and Macula, which others are
confounded about. Vid. Wotton's citations out of the Schoolmen de Macula: de
Reconcil. pec. And Brianson says (in 4. q. 8. fol. 116. that sin as ^emitted
or guilt, is [Tantum quaedam Relatio rationis, in quantum est objectum
intellectus and Voluntatis divinae: Quia postquam commissit peccatum Dei
voluntas ordinat ipsum ad poenum correspondentem peccato, and Intellectus
praevidet pro omni tempore donec poena debita sit soluta. Videre peceata Dei,
est ad ^oenam imput^re: Avertere faciem est, ad poenam non reservare: August.
-- Ergo ni^ aliud est post actum c^ssantem p^^catis off^nsa, Macula, reatus,
nisi ista relatio rationis: S^d hujus Ordinatio ad ^oenam ut est disconveniens
ipsi animae, dicitur ejus Macula: ut autem est obligatio formaliter ad istam
poenam dicitur R^atus: Et ut est divinae voluntatis, etc. dic^tur Offensa: Nil
[n] aliud est Offendi vel Irasci in Deo, quam v^lle Vindicare ista poena]: But
he after owneth that the culpa is another thing.
unwarrantable Doctrines from it, and harden the Papists by unwarantable
Answers. A Justifying Instrument properly is an efficient Instr^mental cause of
Justification, which I have elsewhere too largely proved that faith is not,
either Gods Instrument or ours, Physical or Moral, no^ any way efficiently
justifies us. But justifying, is one thing; to Receive justification is
another thing, and to be justified is a third. Faith i^ no justifying act: But
faith is in its Essence the Acceptance of an offered God, Christ, Spirit, for
Life: This Acceptance is by the Covenant made the condition of our passive true
Reception and Possession of Right (before opened): To be such a Condition
performed, is to be a removens prohibe^s of the said Reception: which is
strictly to be Dispositio materiae recipienti^* And so it may be called, 1. A
Receiving Cause. 2. And a medi^^ or dispositive Cause of the effect,
Justification as Received, but not as Given: (As I said Dr. Twisse chooses to
call it) But this causa Dispositiva is p^^ of the causa Materialis, viz. Qua
disposita: A cause, or more properly a condition why I receive Justification,
and by receiving it am Justified; which is their meaning who call it A Passive
Instrument, that is, A ^^ceiving Instrument.

199. The plain easy truth is, that Faiths Nature which is to be [^^lieving
Acceptance of Christ, and Life offered on that Condition] being ^^ very essence
is but its Aptitude to the office it has to our Justification* by which the
Question is answered, why did God promise us Christ and Life ^^ the Condition
of faith rather than another? Because of the congruity of its Nature to that
office. But the formal Reason of its office as to our Justification is Its
Being the performed Condition of the Covenant. And if God had chosen another
condition, a condition it would have been. Now the true notion in Law being a
Condition, Logicians would call this improperly a Receiving cause, and more
properly A Receptive Disposition of the matter, reducing it to Physical
notions. But the most proper term is the plainest, [We are justified by that
faith, which is the Believing Practical Acceptance of God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, as Given us on that condition in the Baptismal Covenant, because
(or as) it is made by God the condition of his Gift thereby]. Understand this
plain doctrine, and you have the plain truth.

200. They that say contrarily that Faith justifies proximately as it is an
Instrument, or a Receiving Accepting act, and not as a Condition of the
Covenant, do evidently choose that which they vehemently oppose* viz. that the
(...) credere justifies: For the very (...) credere or the ^^^^ of Faith, is
to be an Acceptance of Christ given. But if they will to avoid this, say that
By Faith they mean [Christ believed in,] then they say that by Receiving Christ
they mean not the receiving of him, but Christ himself: And why then do they
not say so, but trouble the world with such unintelligible phrases: But to open
the senselessness and co^sequents of that Doctrine would but offend. All know
that Christ ^^ the object is connoted as essential to the act of Faith.

SECT. XII. How Repentance is joined with Faith.
201. Repentance is a Dispositio materiae recipientis too, and a part of the
condition of the Covenant: And so far a Material or dispositive Receiving
Cause: But not an Acceptance of the Gift formally, in its averting act.

202. Faith and Repentance are words used in Scripture in diverse
significations. Says Malderus, Gu. Amesius a part recedit ab antiquo
Calvinismo, quiae requirit ad justitiam bonae oper^ tanquam conditionem
praerequisitam, quod ^tiam extendit ad ipsam ^lectionem.] See here how little
the Papists understand us.
As Faith is sometimes taken for bare Assent, as Jam. 2. and usually for
Affiance or Trust, and always when it denominateth a Christian or Justified
Believer as such, it essentially includes all the three parts, Assent,
Consent, and Affiance, but yet denominateth the whole by a word which
principally signifies One act (which commonly is Affiance as including the
other two); so Repentance is sometime taken comprehensively for the whole
Conversion of a Sinner to God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and so it
includes Faith in the narrower sense, and is the same thing as Faith in the
larger sense, but expressed under another formal notion. Sometimes it is taken
more narrowly, and that 1. As to the Act. 2. As to the Object.

1. As to the Act; and so the word Repentance signifies only the Aversion of
the Soul from evil, by sorrow and change of mind: And this is the strict formal
notion of the word, though usually it be taken more largely, as including also
the Conversion of the Soul to Good; which is the usual Scripture and
Theological sense; though the word it self do chiefly signify the Averting act.

2. As to the Object, 1. Repentance sometime signifies the Turning of the Soul
from Sin and Idols to God as God; And so Repentance toward God, is
distinguished from Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. And sometimes it
signifies only the turning of the Soul and life from some particular Sin.

203. Repentance as it is the turning of the Soul from sin and Idols * The
Papists take Repentance it self to be part of the Remission of Sins: And let
the Reader note, for the fuller opening of what I have said of their darkness
thereabouts, that Jansenius Aug. To. 1. li. 5. c. 22. p. 126. makes four
things to be inseparably contained in Remission, though distinguishable. 1. The
Conversion of the Soul to God. 2. The abstersion of the Macula or filth. 3.
Reconciliation or the remission of Gods offense. 4. The relaxation of the
aeternal punishment: That all these are then at once given us, we are all
agreed: But whether the name Remission or Pardon of sin ^e meet for them all we
disagree. Is it not visible then how unhappily we strive about words, when we
talk like men of several Languages. But all is but removation and remitting the
penalty of which Gods offense is the first part. And Macula is either the sin
it self, or the relative consequents.
to God, is the same with Faith in God in the large Covenant-sence, and
includes Faith in God in the narrower sense. Repentance as it is our Turning
from Infidelity to Christianity is the same with Faith in Christ in the large
Covenant-saving-sence, and includes Faith in Christ in the narrower sense (as
it is mere Assent). Repentance as it is a Turning from the Flesh to the Holy
Ghost as our Sanctifyer, is the same thing as our Faith in the Holy Ghost in
the large Covenant sense, and includes Faith in the Holy Ghost in the narrower
sense. But when they are the same thing, the ratio nominis or formal notion is
not the same. As man's mind is not so happy as to conceive of all things that
are one by one entire single Conception; so we are not so happy in our
language, as to have words enough to express things entirely by one name; but
we must have several words to express our inadequate conceptions by. And so
that is called Repentance as the Souls motion from the Terminus a quo, which is
called sometimes Faith or Affiance, and sometimes Love, from the motion of the
Soul to the Terminus ad quem, though the Motus be the same. But when Faith and
Repentance are distinguished as several parts of the Condition of the new
Covenant, the common sense is, that Repentance signifies the Conversion of the
Soul from Sin and Idols to God as God, which is, or includes Faith in God: And
Faith signifies specially Faith in Christ as the Mediator and way to God; And
so Faith is below Repentance, as a means of it.

204. By this the question whether Faith or Repentance be first, may partly be
resolved, and partly cast out as founded in confusion. As they are both one
thing, neither can be first, any otherwise than the same Motus ut a termino a
quo, and ut ad terminum ad quem. But as they signify diverse things, they have
each of them div^r^ acts, and in respect of each, are before each other. The
Assenting act of Faith in general must needs be always before Repentance, as it
is an Act of the Will. But the consenting Act of faith is also part of
Repentance, and must follow that part of Repentance which is a change of the
understanding. But whether the Repentance as toward God, or Faith in Christ be
first, or Love to God, and Faith in Christ, I have discussed as accurately as I
can, in my Christian Directory, Par, 1. cap. 3. page 182. and therefore thither
refer the Reader.

205. And how Faith and Love differ I have there also opened, and therefore
shall now only say, that Faith as it signifies meet How Faith and Love differ.
Assent, differs from Love, as the act of the Intellect, from Volition: And
Love formally taken presupposes the Assent, and does not contain it. But Faith
taken largely in the sense of the Baptismal Covenant, contains in it Consent,
which is the Wills Volition, and therefore must needs have some initial Love in
it as it acts i^ Desire. This Faith in God has some Desire and Volition of
God, and Faith in Christ, which is the Souls Practical Affiance in him, has
some Love to Christ in it. But the denomination is not from the same ratio
formalis in each. It is eminently called Faith, when giving up our Souls to
Christ to be saved in practical Affiance is the great work of the Soul, though
it have something of Love essential to it. And it is eminently called Love
(morally) when the Complacency of the Soul in Christ thus trusted, and in God
our end, is the great work or business of the Soul.

206. This Holy Love as a fixed habit and employment of the Soul, and our
Relation to the Holy Ghost to work it in us, is it that is promised and Given
quoad jus in the Baptismal Covenant, of which Faith, though it have somewhat of
actual Love or Volition in it, is the antecedent condition, which also I have
so fully opened as before cited, that I refer the Reader to it for this also.
And somewhat was said of it before.

SECT. XIII. Of the degrees of Pardon or Justification.
207. Some men lest they should yield that Justification is not one perfect
finished act done but once, do feign that it is only the first act of Faith by
which a man is justified. Indeed it is only the first act by which he ^s
changed from an unrighteous to a righteous state: But to think that therefore
we are never after justified by Faith, and so have no actually justifying Faith
all our lives, but for one instant only, is fitter for a Dreamer than a
theological Discourser.

208. Our first constitutive Justification, being in its nature a right to
^mpunity, and to Life or Glory, ^^^^ tells us, that (...) which (...) by
Rege^^ra ^^ and Just ^^^^ on: ^u^ what they mean by R^^nission they cannot tell
themselves, as a ^oresaid: Pardon of the gu^^ they mean not, or else they mean
several things in one word.
is a Relation which must be continued to the end, and therefore must have the
true causes and condition continued, and would cease if any of them ceased.

209. As to the question therefore whether Justification be lossable, and
^ardon reversible, I answer, that the grant of them in the Covenant is
unalterable; But man's will in it self is mutable, and if he should cease
believing by Apostasy, and the condition fail, he would lose his Right, and be
unjustified and unpardoned, without any change in God. But that a man does not
so de facto is to be ascribed to Election and special Grace, of which afterward.

210. Though all our past sins are pardoned at our first Faith or Conversion
(or as the Ancients speak in Baptism) yet it is most certain that Pardon or
Justification is not perfect at first, no nor on this side death: And the
saying of many that Justification is perfect at first, and Sanctification only
by degrees, is a palpable error, as I have elsewhere often showed. For that is
not perfect, 1. Which is not continued and brought on to its end, but upon
continued conditions, and diligent use of means to the ^ast. Neque enim peccati
sui veniam impetravit Adam, ut a morte temporali, immunis esset. Twiss. contr.
Corvin. page 343. col. 2.
2. Which leaves many penalties unremoved, which have further means to be used
for their removal, and further Right to it to be obtained: To have more and
more Grace, and less and less Sin; and to have ^earer communion with God, are
blessings as to the degrees, which we must by degrees attain a further Right
to, and the privation of them are ^ore penalties to be removed. 3. We have new
sins to be pardoned every day. 4. Our remaining Corruption is such as needs a
continued Pardon, till it be perfectly done away. 5. The Day of Judgment is not
come, for which the most perfect Justification is reserved.

SECT. XIV. Of Justification by Sentence of the Judge.
211. The second sort of Justification, which is by Sentence, is done by Christ
as Judge, and so is an act of his Kingly Office.

212. Therefore were it true (as it is not) that justifying Faith were only the
receiving or believing in Christ as a Justifier of us, it would not be a
believing in him in his Priestly Office only but in act: For he merited our
Justification as a humbled Servant, and a Sacrifice: He gives it us in Right
by his Covenant or Law of Grace as King and Benefactor: He promulgateth it as
Prophet; He passes the Sentences as King and Judge; He executively takes off
the penalty, and glorifieth us as King and Benefactor. There is no
Justification by a partial Faith.

213. Though the estimation of a man as just, called the Sententi^ judicis
concepta, as distinct from the sententia prolata, be said to be ^^ immanet act
of God, and therefore from eternity, yet it is a mistake: For though it be not
transient effective and do nihil efficere ad extra, ye^ it is transient
objective, and does presuppose the existence of the qualified Object: For
though Gods Knowledge and Will in genere, or as such, are his eternal Essence,
yet Gods Knowledge and Love of John or Peter ^^ Believers, are terms which
signify not his Essence as such, but as trans^^ and terminated on those
existent persons relatively: So that the extrin^^cal denomination from the
existent Object is temporary as it is.

214. As the Angels rejoice at a Sinners Conversion, and therefo^^ know it, so
the notifying of Gods acceptance and pardon to the Angel^, may be called some
sort of sentential Justification.

215. And the notifying our constitutive Righteousness to our Consciences, is
some kind of sentential Justification.

216. But this Justification called in foro conscientiae is not the
Justification by Faith so much spoken of in Scripture: For that ever goe^^
before this. A man is ever made just, before he can be esteemed, judged, or
known to be so. And this in conscience is an uncertain m^^^ble thing, according
to the weakness of the man: And often he that ^^ just before God, does most doubt
of it, and condemn himself: This justification may cease when we sleep or think
of other things; and may rise and fall daily, if not be often lost. And it is
not of that grand importance to our Salvation, as justification by Faith is. 1
Cor. 4. 4.


SECT. XV. Of initial executive Pardon or Justification.
217. But the most notable justification by way of sentence is, 1. By Gods
initial Executions here. 2. By the public Sentence and Executi^^ at the Day of
Judgment.

218. God speaking not by Voice, that is called his Sentence which d^cisively
declares his Judgment. But the Execution most notably declares that:
Therefore though they be two things with men, and sometimes with God, yet
Sentence being often passed principally by Execution, they are then both one.

219. In this sense to sanctify a man, is to justify him executively, and so
sententially. For executive Justification and Pardon is the actual Imp^^ity,
removing of deserved Punishment, and actual giving possession of Life and
Salvation, which constitutive Justification gave us Right to. And as our
privation of the Spirit and Holiness, and to be left in sin, is a great
punishment; so to have the Spirit and Holiness given us, is executive See my
Epist. before Mr. Hotch^^ Book Of Forgiveness, and his Book.
Pardon and Justification; And so will Glorification much more.

220. Executive Pardon and Justification therefore, though the last of three
sorts is the noblest, as supposing both the other, and being their end and the
perfecting of the whole work.

221. Non-punire is not always Pardon, because it may respect an inno^ent and
incapable Object. But the Rulers non-punire sontem is pardon, ^ what degree
soever. But a non-punire as the execution of an Act of ^blivion, or Gift of
Right to Impunity, is the fullest executive ^^rdon.

222. The same must be said of nolle punire; which is no pardon as ^^ the
Innocent, nor to a foreseen Guilt not yet existent; no more than ^^ a stone:
But when the person becomes guilty and obliged to suffer, ^^en Gods nolle
punire becomes de novo a pardon denominatione extrin^ca, without any change in
God.

223. For God perfectly to forgive sin, while any sin remains in the More of
that imperfection of Pardon against Ockam and others.
^oul (epecially habitual) is a contradiction: For sin it self, though not ^^
sin, nor as effected, yet as permitted and not healed, is the greatest
^unishment as was said. And there is no perfect pardon of the punish^ent, while
such punishment is continued. And Ockam's great sub^lty failed, when Quodlib.
4. q. 1. he determined that per potentiam ab^^lutam Deus potest salvare hominem
sine charitate creata, unless he meant that he can charitatem dare aliter quam
creando: For to save a man without Grace or Love is a contradiction.

His first Argument is, [God can do that immediately which he can do by ^^y
second Cause efficient or final: Can they tell us intelligibly how the sin of
Unbelief and not-loving God, and other privations can be really put away,
without the contrary quality or act? Scotus, with Rada and other Scotists go
the same way upon the same false suppositions. And to confute one of them, is
to confute all.

And so the Papists that say Original Sin is forgiven in Baptism, as to the
whole calpability and penalty (as Petavins in Elench. Theriac. Vincent-Lenis
(i. e. Fromondi) p. 111. c. 2^.) do grossly err: For 1. It cannot be that the
pravity of man's will should not be culpable? 2. And the remaining of that
pravity is it self a great punishment of the sin which procured it. The truth
is (which should satisfy them) that to the truly baptized* or ^^eartconsenters
to Gods Covenant, Original Sin and all sin is pardoned at to the great eternal
pernicious punishment; But not absolutely and perfectly pardoned yet, as to all
degrees of punishment: Nor is all the ^^^pability ceased.


But Love or Grace given is an effici^t or final second Cause: Therefore God
can save a man without it.]

Ans. The minor is your mistake: Love here is Salvation it self, begun ^^ this
life and perfected in the next: And to give it, and not to give it ^re
contradictions. All the rest of his arguments go upon the same ^istake, as if
Love were but a meritorious cause of Salvation, and not ^e thing it self.

And as erroneously, Q. 4. he determines that per potentiam absolu^m, God can
remittere peccanti culpam and poenam sine infusione gratiae ^eatae, unless he
had put the question only de modo conferendi gratiam, ^n alio modo sine
infusione Deus illam potest efficere? But who knows that infusion is distinct
from other Divine efficience. Or unless he had ^poken only of Gods giving the
jus ad rem, and non rem ipsam, viz. Ipsam ^mpunitatem. For undoubtedly the
poena damni (properly poena) is ^he privation of the Souls rectitude, health
and happiness, which all ^onsist in the love of God: And to pardon a man's
forfeiture of Happiness executively, without giving him the happiness which he
forfeited, ^r to give man happiness without giving him love to God, are both
gross contradictions; unless equivocally you meant, making a man some other
thing, and giving him the happiness of that other thing.

His first argument here is, [Whomsoever God can by his absolute power ^ccept
as worthy of life eternal without infused Grace, to him he can forgive ^all sin
without infused Grace: But, etc. For proof he refers us to that which I now
confuted, adding, That God could accept a man in his pure naturals to life
eternal. I answer, It is a fiction that ever man had such naturals made by God,
as were not endued with the principle and disposition of holy love, the same
thing which infused Grace first restores; much more that Adam lived without
the acting of this love. But if it were so, yet to accept man to life eternal,
is to accept him to the love of God; so that if he did prove that a graceless
man might be predestined to Glory, he did but prove that he is predestined
to perfect holiness and the love of God; And though without this he may be
predestined, or might have had a promise, and right by promise, yet without
it he could never have the thing promised, for that were to have God and not to
have him; nor yet his necessary disposition for fruition; for without holiness
he is not a capable disposed recipient of Salvation. The rest of his arguments
run all upon this error, as i^ love and holiness were only the means, and not
the end and Salvation given.

SECT. XVI. Of assurance of Pardon, Justification and Salvation And whether it
be Faith.
224. The Faith by which we are justified is not a believing that ^^ ^^
justified, but a believing that we may be justified: Not a believing t^^ Christ
is ours more than other men's, or that we shall be saved; but ^ believing in
Christ that he may be ours, and we may be saved by him.

225. There is assurance in this Faith; not assurance that we are s^cere, or
shall be saved: But assurance that Gods Promises and all ^^ Words are true, and
that he will perform them; and that Christ ^^ the Savior of the world, and
that the love of God is our End ^^^^ Happiness, and that all this is offered to
us in Christ, even Pardon ^^^ Life, as well as others; which offer Faith
accepts truly; But the Believer is often uncertain of the sincerity of his own
belief, and so of ^^ Salvation.

226. How much certainty we have of Divine Revelation and Scripture verity, I
have so fully opened in many Tractates, and lastly in o^^ I know that the
learned Conciliator Guiliel. Forbes does confidently charge them as guilty of
confusion, who place Faith in more faculties than one, and that call it
Fiducia. But I doubt not but the error is his own, which tends to confusion,
by not distinguishing a mere physical act from a moral or political, which is
made up of many physical acts: And if he (or Bishop Gror. Downame, Camero, or
any that go that way) had been put to tell what one physical act they will
confine Christian justifying Faith to, they would have ^ound themselves in
confusion: To say, It is assent, denies not but that it must be an assent to
many verities: And this assent signifies at once a belief that God is true,
and that this is his word, and that this word is true. He that says, It is a
belief of the assertion for the oredibility of the As^ertor, can scarce prove
that he names but one Act: And I know no such assent which ^^^^ bit
essentially contain a trusting to the word of the Assertor or Testifier, called
Fiduc^a. Can you believe a ^a^^, ^o^^ ^^ be true, because he is credible, and
not trust his credibility so far as believing him imports: It is a
contradiction? F^^^ eredentis is nothing but a trusting to the Fides dicentis,
and they are Relatives, as Act and Object. Though I grant that ^^^^ is also a
quietting applicatory Trust or Fiducia, which is but the exercise of Faith as
supposing me to see my (...) Promise, which comes after our first believing,
in which we see but our receptive capacity that the Promise (...) with the rest
of Mankind, and the thing promised is offered to me.
called [The certainty of Christianity without Popery] that I will not here
repeat it, further than to say, that it is not a perfect apprehension which we
call our certainty, nor yet an uneffectual doubtful one; But such ^ ^^ as will
carry a man on confidence of Gods Word to a holy life, and ^^ the forsaking of
all other hopes, even life it self, for the hopes which ^^ given us by Christ:
which yet may have several degrees in several persons. But objective certainty,
which is the evidence of verity, is m^^^ full than our subjective certainty
(for want of our due receptivity ^^ us) and is still the same in it self,
though not equally brought or revea^^ to all.

227. Even doubting of the truth of the Scripture and Christianity may stand
with saving Faith and Salvation, when it is not predominant, nor so great as to
keep us from the said forsaking all for Christ and Heaven.

228. Doubting of man's own Salvation, is not always from weakness of Faith
directly, much less is it the want of Faith it self. ^o^ sometime a man may
doubt, merely as doubting of the sincerity of ^^ own Faith, and not at all
doubting of the truth of the Word of God* But when it is the doubting whether
the promises be sure, which make^ a man doubt whether he shall be saved, this
doubting is the debility ^^ Faith.

229. The same may be said of despair: That despair is from the weakness or
want of Faith, which comes from an unbelief of the truth of the Promise: And
that also is pernicious despair which (from what Cause soever) is so great as
to take men off the use of necessary means, to attain Salvation. But that
despair which comes from overmuch self-condemning, and a conceit that a man's
heart is false, and not that Gods Promise is false, may stand with true Faith
and Salvation, if it be not so great, as to take him off the use of necessary
means.

230. No man ordinarily can be assured of his Salvation or Justification
without extraordinary Revelation, but by being assured first of the truth of
Gods Promise, and of his own sincerity in believing: For his assurance is of
the conclusion of this argument, [Whosoever sincerely believes and repents
is justified: But I sincerely believe and repent; therefore I am justified.]
And the weakness of the apprehension of either of the premises is ever in the
conclusion, which always follows partem debiliorem.

231. There are therefore but two sorts of men who can believe that they are
justified by a Faith properly called Divine, that is, which is a belief of Gods
Word herein; 1. Those that God reveals it to by pro^hetical or extraordinary
Revelation (if there be any such.) 2. Those who are more certain of their own
sincere Faith, than they are that Gods Word it self is true (if any such there
be in the world.) For with all others the certainty of the sincerity of their
own Faith being weakest, ^he conclusion follows it.

232. If any man can possibly doubt more of the truth of Gods Word, ^han of the
soundness of his own Faith; though that man's Faith may be called Divine, it is
no honor to it, because it has so much doubting of Gods Word mixed with
belief: And it is like his greater assurance of his belief of it, is but his
error, or infirmity.

233. Ordinarily therefore no Christians can believe fide Divina, that they are
justified and shall be saved; that is, this is no Word of God, but a
conclusion, of which one of the premises only, and that the stronger is Gods
Word.

234. To say that he that believes shall be saved, is equivalent to this, [I
shall be saved] is not true nor reasonable, seeing [I believe] is not Gods
Word, nor so certain as Gods Word: And one of the premises is not equal to both.

245. When they say, That it is all one, when I am sure that I believe.] I grant
it, if 1. This be in it self as evident. 2. And as certain to me as Gods Word
is; otherwise I deny it.

236. Obj. A man cannot believe, and not know that he believes. Ans. But a man
may sincerely believe, and yet through ignorance either of the Scripture or
himself, be uncertain that indeed his Faith is sincere, and not such as is
common to the justified.

237. Some Protestants by erring in this point, and saying that justifying
Faith is a certain persuasion or belief that we are justified, and that it is
Gods own Word that I or you are actually justified, or are sincere Believers,
and that the believing it is properly fides Divina, have greatly scandalized
and hardened the Papists, to our disgrace.

238. And so have those that say that in the Creed, the meaning of [I believe
the Remission of Sin] is, [I believe that my sins are remitted actually.] And
that all must thus believe.

239. Some say that the Spirit within them says, that they are sincere
Believers, and the Word of the Spirit is the Word of God, and to believ^ it is
to believe God. Ans. This is the Enth^s^asts conceit: which if true, all such
have prophetical Inspiration: For the Spirit to bring any new word from God is
one thing, and to give us the Understanding, Love and Obedience to such a Word
is another thing. The Spirit does indeed assure us of our sincerity, but not by
a new Word from God to tell us so; but 1. By giving us that sincere Faith it
self. 2. By acting it and increasing it. 3. By helping us to know it. 4. By
giving us the love of God, and other Graces. 5. By giving us the comfort of
all. But the reception and perception of these internal Operations, is not
properly called a Belief of the Word of God. Else when we make Gods Word the
adequate Object of Faith, we shall be still at an uncertainty what that Word is.

240. Yet this persuasion, that we are sincere and justified is divine, where
the Spirit causes it; but not a divine Faith. Yea it is participatively of
divine Faith, because Gods Word is one of the premises, though the weaker must
denominate the conclusion. Of this see Albertinus's Disp. at large.


241. Obj. A Reprobate or Devil may believe all the Articles of Faith without
application: but justifying Faith applies Christ and his benefits to our
selves. Ans. It Is true: But this application is not a certainty, nor a
persuasion, nor a believing that I am justified, no more than that I am
glorified, no nor that I shall be so neither: But it is an accepting of Christ
offered that I may be justified and saved. So that here are all these applying
acts in it. 1. I believe that Christ as the Savior of the World, is my Savior
as he is all other men's, and is not the Devils; that is, that he has done that
for me which he has done for all mankind. 2. I believe that he is offered to
me personally in the Promise or Covenant of Grace, on condition of
believing-acceptance; and that with and for all his purchased benefits, and so
for my Justification. 3. I believe that if I so accept him, I shall be
justified. 4. By true consent I do accordingly accept him to justify,
sanctify and save me. But when all this is done, 1. I do not believe that God
has said in his word that I am justified, nor that my Faith is sincere. 2. And
my Faith is so weak, that I may long doubt of that sincerity which I have, and
so of my Justification. 3. And when I come to be certain of my Faith, it is not
by believing God, as saying, that I do certainly believe; but by experience of
its sincerity, upon just trial, by the Spirits help.

242. No man can be sure that his Faith is sincere and saving, who is not
assured that it will help him to love God as God above all (yea already does
so) and that it mortifieth selfishness, and will prevail with him to deny even
life it self, and all the world, for Christ and Salvation. So far as a man
doubts of any of this, he must needs doubt of his own sincerity.

243. So weak is Faith in most that are sincere, and so little kept in
exercise, and so strong is sense, and self, and flesh, and worldly b^its and
interest, and Satan's temptations, that in my experience (who have conversed
with as many that are careful of their Souls as most have done I think) it is a
very small number that I could ever hear say, I am certain of my Justification
and Salvation; But a great number who have lived in holy confidence, hope and
peace, and some in great joy, but most in tolerable fears and doubting, and
some few oppressed by those doubts. So that certainty of Salvation is very rare.

244. When Bellarmine says, that our assurance more belongs to Hope than
Faith, and that it is but moral certainty by signs that we have of our
Justification, Sincerity and Salvation, he so little differs from the sense
of almost all godly Protestants, that were it not through other distances, and
partiality, we had never read in Luther's days, that for this one point alone,
we have cause enough of our alienation from the Romanists.

245. They err on one extreme, who say, that all are commanded to believe that
they are justified; (or any as if it were Gods Word): And they err on the other
hand, who command doubting or commend it, as if it were a duty or a benefit.
And they speak the truth who say, that our doubting of our own Sincerity and
Justification if we are sincere, is a sin of Infirmity, and a Calamity,
proceeding from weakness of Faith, Hope, Love and Self-acquaintance, which we
should use all possible diligence to overcome. But they that are not sincere
are bound to know it; And first to seek and get sincerity, and then discern it.

246. It is by the Spirit that all Christians must come to their assurance: But
not by the Spirit as speaking this in us as a word from God, [Thou art
justified or shall be saved, or art sincere]. But by the aforesaid Acts: The
Spirit in us is first Christ's Agent, Advocate and Witness, to assure us that
he is the Savior of the World: And next he is our Witness to assure us that we
are Gods adopted Children; which he does by being in us Gods Mark, and the
Pledge, First Fruits, and earnest of our heavenly Inheritance, by effectual
habituating our Souls to the predominant love of God, and Holiness and Heaven.
Wherever this Sanctification is, there is the Evidence and Witness of our
Adoption. He that finds by the Fruits that he has the Spirit, finds the
certain proof of his Justification, and earnest of Glory.

SECT. XVII. Of Love as the end of Faith.
247. This predominant Love of God and Holiness, is so proper a Cui non unus
idemque vit^ scopus est, hic unus idemque per vitam totam esse non potest. Non
est satis quod dixi, nisi illud etiam adjeceris, qualis scopus hic esse debeat.
M. Antoninus li. 11. sect. 21. p. 113.
fruit of the Spirit, that it is the very heart of the New Creature, the sum of
Sanctification, as love is the sum of the Law. So that to give the Spirit of
Adoption, to cry Abba, Father, and to sanctify, and to work in us the love of
God and holiness, are three phrases of the same signification in the Word of
God.

248. As Christ as Mediator is the summary means and way to the Father, to
bring man home to his Creator; so Faith in Christ is a mediating Grace, to work
in us the love of God: And as elsewhere I have often said, The bellows of Faith
kindling Love, and Love working by holy Obedience, Patience, Mortification,
Gratitude and Praise, is the substance of all true Religion.

249. Love being the final Grace, and Faith in Christ, but a means to 1 Cor.
12. last. and 13. 1. 2. 2. Whether the habit of Love in patria be better than
that of Faith and Vision in genere moris only, or also in genere rei, the
Schoolmen are utterly disagreed. Cacere's sum. Theol. 22. q. 5. a. 1. Utrum in
sola charitate supernaturali sit amicitia hominis ad Deum? Affirm. Quia D^us ut
a^^hor natura non ea communicate, quae sunt propria ejus, sed solum esse
natural and potentias quae, etc. The Reason is not so good as the Assertion.
Vid. Bradward. li. 1. c. 1. cor. 30. Contra indoctos artis amandi, n^scientes
Deum esse propter seipsum amandum, and c^tera propter Deum, omnesque actus
humanos ad ipsum propter se finaliter ordinandos, ipsumque esse super omnia
diligendum: and his following proof that God is not to be sinned against in the
smallest of his Precepts, or in the smallest thing, to avoid the greatest pain,
o^ obtain the greatest good imaginable.
it, the end must needs be more excellent than the means as such. And thus Paul
gives the pre-eminence to Love.

250. And no wonder if he prefer it also for duration; For Love is Heaven or
felicity it self, yea somewhat higher than felicity as such. For as God is our
End for and in himself, above the ratio foelicitatis, so God is our End as he
is to be loved: And God the Ultimate Object, and Love the Ultimate Act, and
Gods Love communicated perfectly to us, and Gods Will pleased in all this, are
the inadequate Conceptions which make up the Ultimate End, supposing the
perfection of Nature, and of the Intellect in the sight of God, as subservient
hereunto.

251. Man therefore has a degree of fruition, or attainment of his Ultimate
End in this life, so far as he has a delightful love of God: Though this be
but the foretast and First Fruits.

252. Therefore it is not by Faith only that we know what Heaven is, and are
drawn to seek it and hope for it: but also by this earnest and foretast of
love; which works by a spiritual gust and sweet inward experience. The
Intellect first has Faith, and the Will has Love; And a promise and earnest
is more a promise alone.

253. When Faith has wrought this holy Love in the Soul, it does as much if
not more to keep us from Apostasy than Faith it self. Therefore many unlearned
Christians, by the power of holy Love, stand fast, when subtle disputing
Doctors may cleave to the world, and fall away.

254. Though it be an ill expression of those Schoolmen that say, Love is the
form of every Grace, that which I suppose they mean is true: that love being
the final Grace, the rest as they are means to it, or the effects and
expressions of it, are what they are partly in that Relation: The means is a
means only by its Aptitude to the end; And is never loved (as such) for it
self, but for the end: And what the effect has, it has from its efficient
Cause. And it is true, that no Faith, no Fear, no Obedience, no Praise, no
Suffering is further accepted of God, and a part of true Holiness, nor will
prove our Salvation, than it participateth of predominant love to God. But this
predominant Love is always an evidence of Life.

255. Qu. What if a man should by Faith in Christ be brought to the love of
God, and after fall away from Faith in Christ, and yet retain his love to God,
would that love save him? Ans. When you can prove that ever there was such a
man, I will answer you. Till then such false suppositions are no otherwise to
be answered, than by telling you, that if God should permit a man to fall from
Christ, that man would lose the Spirit of Christ, and the sight and sense of
all Gods Love and Goodness manifested in Christ, and in all the Work of
Redemption; And therefore he would lose the love of God.

256. How far Holiness is the design of Christianity, I have opened in a small
Tractate on that Question; And how far Sanctification is to be preferred before
Pardon as such, and yet Christ's Glory in pardoning us, I have showed there and
in my Confession, and therefore will not here repeat it.

SECT. XVIII. Of Perseverance, and the certainty of it, in order to certainty
of Salvation, and true Comfort.
257. No man can be further certain of his final Salvation, than he is certain
of his perseverance in Faith and Love.

258. Therefore it is a small number of Christians comparatively that ever were
certain of their Salvation. For 1. No one that is uncertain of his sincerity is
certain of his Salvation. 2. No one that holds this Doctrine [That the Saints
that are justified may fall away, and that we cannot be sure of perseverance,]
can be sure of his own Salvation. It Is hard to conceive how he can be certain,
who holds that no man can be certain: Now those that hold this Doctrine are,
almost all the Papists, the Arminians, the Lutherans, and as far as I can learn
by their Writings, all the ancient Writers for a thousand years after Christ.
And the Semipelagians and Pelagians no man will put in as an exception, except
Jovinian alone; against whom Jerome writing his second Book charge him as
holding that a man truly baptized by the Spirit, could not sin: No doubt he
meant, [to damnation or mortally]: But it is doubtful what his Opinion was.
Augustine's report of him is of no great moment, who as Erasmus notes (in his
Argum. in Hier. adv. Jovin.) neither had seen Jovinians Book or Hieorm's but
spoke by report.

And Austin, Prosper and Fulgentius thought that all the Elect persevered as
Elect, being chosen to perseverance; but that more were truly sanctified,
justified, and in a state of Salvation had they so died than were elect: That
all these fell away and perished. That no man could be certain whether or no he
were elect, and should persevere. So that they denied all certainty of
Salvation by ordinary means. And that none of all the Greek or Latin Fathers,
then, or long after, went further from the Pelagians than Augustine did, I
think I need not persuade any, that has read them.

259. This historical Truth is useful to be known: From whence I infer, that it
is possible for Christians to live in settled peace and comfort, in respect to
their heavenly Felicity, without a certainty of perseverance and Salvation. For
to think that no Papists, no Greeks, no Arminians, no Protestant Lutherans, nor
any of the ancient holy Doctors, nor any of all the Martyrs or other Christians
of their judgment, did attain to such holy peace and comfort, is unreasonable,
and contrary to all Church History, and to experience.

260. And though it were a far more joyful state to have proper certainty, yet
reason and experience in other cases tell us, that without certainty a man may
live a joyful and peaceable life, where probability is strong enough to remove
all reasonable cause of fearfulness, though there be a possibility of the
worst. As we see that men in youth and health, though they may possibly die, or
fall into torments the next hour, yet do not therefore cast off comfort, and
live in such trouble as they would do if they had probable cause to expect it.
There is no wife living is certain that her own Husband will not murder her the
next night; nor no Child certain that the Parents will not cast them off or
kill them; nor no Friend certain that his dearest Friend will not do so; And
yet few but melancholy people will therefore take up sorrow, and cast away all
their comfort in life and peace, and in these Friends: Even these persons are
their trust and joy. There is no man sure but he may be executed among
Malefactors: And yet while there is no reason to expect it, a man may live a
comfortable life. There is no man certain that he himself shall not fall into a
particular crime of Murder, Theft, Perjury, or the like; And yet we live not
therefore uncomfortably. For men's affections follow the powerfullest cause.

261. Hence also I conclude, that certainly the denial of certainty of
persevering, and Salvation is not a thing that should break the love, peace or
concord of the Christian Churches, or for which they should cast off or revile
each other. For what sober man could do so by all those that I have instanced
in.

262. It is a shameful self-delusion of some Disputers, who think when they
have once believed that certainty of Salvation may be had, that they are then
certain themselves, or next to certain of their own Salvation. But he that has
no more certainty to be rich, or healthful, tha^ to believe that Health and
Riches may be got, is far from having them.

263. Who was more full of confidence and joy than Luther, who speaks more
against the Papists, commanding men to doubt of the pardon of sin? who speaks
of a higher Faith than he on Galat. Yet he with Melancthon and all the first
Protestants in the August. Confess. Art. 11. says; [They damn the Anabaptists,
who deny that those that are once justified can again lose the Holy Ghost.]

264. If Adam in Innocence had neither solid comfort, or cause of such, the
state that we fell from was not so good as we commonly believe. But Adam had no
assurance of his perseverance in that state: For he fell from it.

265. No man (as is said) is certain that he shall not fall into such a Vid.
Judic. Theol. Palate. de persever. in Synod. Dord. p. 1. page 208. pr. 3.
heinous sin, as Peter, David, etc. did.

266. The Synod of Dort says, [By such enormous sins, they greatly offend God,
they incur the guilt of death, they grieve the Holy Ghost, they interrupt the
exercise of Faith, they most grievously wound Conscience, sometimes they lose
the sense of Grace for a time; till by serious Repentance returning into the
way, Gods fatherly countenance again shine upon them.

And the British Divines in their Synodic. Explic. say, [They contract
damnable guilt, and lose their present aptitude to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Adding, [So that while they remain in that state of Impenitence, they
neither ought nor can persuade themselves otherwise, than that they art
obnoxious to death. Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die. For
they are bound in a capital Crime, by the desert whereof, according to Gods
Ordination, they are subject to death, though they be not yet delivered to
death, nor shall be, if we respect Gods fatherly love, but shall be plucked out
of this sin, that so they may be plucked out of the guilt of death. Lastly, For
their present condition, they lose their aptitude to enter into Heaven, etc.
And These. 4. p. 193. [Gods unmovable ordination requires that a Believer thus
exorbitant, do first return into the way by renovation of Faith and the act of
Repentance, before he can be brought to the ways end, which is the heavenly
Kingdom. By the Decree of Election, the faithful are so predestined to the
end, that they can no otherwise be brought to it, than by Gods instituted
means, as by the Kings high way. And Gods Decrees of the means, and of the end
and order of events, are as firm and certain, as those of the end, and of the
events themselves. If any man therefore go on in a way contrary to Gods
Ordination, as the broad way of uncleanness and impenitence, which directly
leads to Hell; he can never come that way to Heaven. Yea if death surprise
him wandering in Luke 13. 3, 5. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Heb. 12. 14. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Act.
27. 31.
that out-way, he cannot but fall into everlasting death. This is the constant
and clear voice of the Scripture. -- As Paul said of those in the Ship, etc.
Act. 27. 31. -- It is certain that David and Peter, Gods Elect Servants, were
to come to Heaven; But it is as certain that if one had remained impenitent in
his Adultery and Murder, and the other in his denial of Christ and perjury,
neither of them could have been saved. Providence and Mercy unty this knot, by
providing that no elect person die in that state, in which, according to any
Ordination of Gods Will, he should have been shut out of Heaven.

And These. 5. [In that interspace which is between the guilt of sin contracted
by a grievous sin, and the renewed act of Faith and Repentance, such a Sinner
stands a person to be damned by his own desert, but by Christ's Merit and
Gods firm purpose a person to be saved; but not before by excited Faith and
Repentance, he has obtained pardon, is he actually absolved. -- But in such
guilt the condition of the Faithful and of the Wicked is not the same. -- To
the Unbelievers is wanting the inward principle of Faith, without which the
remedy is as far off, and cannot be made their own and applied. -- If any would
know the very moment in which a man that had contracted guilt by a heinous sin,
is actually absolved, Cyprian seems to have determined it clearly in these
words, [When I see thee sighing before the Lord, I doubt not but the Holy Ghost
is breathing on thee: when I see thee weeping, I perceive him pardoning.]

The like you have, Judic. Theol. Bremens. de persever. ib. page 233. n. 9, 10,
11. vid. and rejecta, page 237.

267. The British Divines in that Synod, Judic. de perseverant. p. 188. begin
with this explication, that it is only the perseverance of the Adult Vid.
Davenant and Ward de Great. Baptismati.
that are actually Believers, (and not of Infants) which is intended: For some
of them (as Bishop Davenant and Dr. Ward) have written that an Infant state of
Grace and title to Salvation may be fallen from and lost.

268. They add, ibid. p. 108. These. 3. [This persuasion of perseverance has
not that degree of certainty, which always excludes all fear of the contrary:
but is sometime lively, sometime languid, sometime, as in greatest Temptations,
none -- The first debility arises from the fundamental dependence of this
personal affiance, which seems to come below the certainty of dogmatical
Faith. For the Articles of Faith do affect our assent as immediate and first
principles. But the truth of special Faith is not thence deduced as a necessary
consequent, but is only subjoyned by way of assumption. Ergo the firmness of
that conclusion which makes this persuasion, cannot be greater, than that
which is in the weaker of the premises. But that sumption rests on
experimental signs, weighed by man's private Conscience: which being sometime
doubted of, whether they are true signs, and sometimes hid by temptations, that
they cannot shine out to our comfort, what wonder if Believers persuasion of
their eternal Salvation be not always vegete and valide. Besides that the very
Principles of the Catholick-Faith, though by revealed light clear in
themselves, yet being not known to us, by certainty of evidence, but only of
Adhesion, Here I leave them with the Schoolmen. Adhesion (as Durand:
confesses) supposes, or is strongest, where there is evidence: and such we
have, though not sensible ipsius rei, yet veritatis testim^^ii.
they beget not in us so firm an assent, as mathematical demonstrations, and
common notions. But in beholding them, from the relicts of carnal diffidence,
some vapors, as it were, sometime arise, by which the light of divine immutable
verity, seems to us to be resringed, and to waver. How much greater and daily
is the error of every Believer in the beholding of their own personal affiance.

269. It is too certain, by sad experience, that a true Believer may lose much
of the Grace which he once had, and may die in a worse and weaker state.

270. It is certain by Gods Word, that the justified have need of warnings,
that they fall not away, and of threatenings if they fall; and Luke 12. 4, 5.
H^b 4. 1. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Heb. 12. 28, 29.
that they are obliged to fear it, by a cautelous preventing fear that they may
escape it.

271. It is certain therefore that if the thing be denominated possible in
relation to our own power, it is not only possible that we should fall away,
but too certain that we should.

272. But if the event be denominated possible or impossible in relation to
Gods mere Decree or Foreknowledge, which as such do nihil They that are too
favorable to the Dominicant predeterminants, should remember how far their
Doctrine of supernaturality of Grace has carried them against all possibility
of knowing not only our perseverance and Salvation, but our present state of
Grace: For they say that nothing but Divine Revelation can assure any man that
his acts are from a supernatural principle: yea that only by the beatifical
Vision which is by uncreated Species, can the true difference between the acts
of acquired and infused habits be known. So Alvarez, li. 6. disp. 51. p. 232.
Habitus virtutum Theologicalium solum divina revelatione cognoscuntur, certo
and infallibiliter. Immo Bannes addit quod non possunt ^videnter cognosci
secundam suam ultimam differentiam per speciem aliquam creatam propter
similitudinem quam habent actus charitatis infusae and acquisitae, non potest
quis, secusa divina revelatione, cognoscere infallibiliter actum charitatis
quem habet in via esse supernaturalem, nec discernere certo utrum procedat
effective ab habitu infuso vel acquisito, aut a nuda potentia ^ Besides Bannes,
he cites as his Consenters, D. Toom. p. 1. q. 62. a. 1. c. and 1. d. 17. q. 1.
a. 4. and Sotus de Great. li. 1. c. 22. corol. 3. Cajet. 22. q. 6. a. 1. And by
this it appears that their very Doctrine of Infusion and Supernaturality in
excess is the very ground of their denying all certainty of Justification and
Salvation.
efficere ad extra, without respect to his operative power, so the Apostasy of
the Elect is impossible logically, or their perseverance necessary necessitate
consequentiae in ordine probandi, it being impossible that both these should be
true, [Paul will apostatize] and [God decrees the Paul shall not, or
fore-knoweth that he will not apostatize]. But posita nulla operatione divina
ad extra, it would be nevertheless possible in re and in causis, that such a
one should fall away. For all possibles are not futures: Therefore as God may
both foreknow and decree the nonfurity of a thing, (if a Negative needed a
Decree) and yet decree that it shall be possible. So God may decree the
futurity of a man's perseverance, and yet decree that it shall be possible, as
to all Causes, that ^e persevere not. For he is supposed to decree only the
determination of an undetermined Power, but not antecedently to take it away,
and make it no free power.

273. But if the Relation of possibility be denominated from Gods operative
Grace effecting perseverance, then God has various Operations: He can give his
Grace by such an Omnipotent insuperable force, as shall predetermine the
faculty so far as antecedently to take away the moral power (though not the
natural) ad contrarium: And he can work in such a compliance with the liberty
of the Will as shall only determine the power (natural or moral) to act, and
not antecedently take it away; (unless as determining it, is a taking it away
as to the contrary act at the same instant, as every man takes away his own
power by acting) when God operateth the first way (antecedently taking away the
power a^ contrarium) then the apostasy of a man is properly called Impossible,
in relation to the impotency of all other Causes to overcome God, the cause of
perseverance. But when God only works the latter way (not taking away the
moral power ad contrarium, but determining it and the natural) then it is no
proper expression to say that such a man's falling away was impossible
antecedently; but only that 1. It is non futurum. 2. And logically impossible
in order of arguing, that it should be so. And it is ordinary with high
Antiarminians to say, That Gods Decree and his Grace too, are such as only
determine man's power, and that neither of them ordinarily make our Fall
impossible, but only non-futurum. But when God works by a greater force of
Omnipotency, taking away the moral power ad contrarium, and how often, what man
dare say that he can tell? the difference being in the effect, and not in God.

274. Therefore though the dispute of the event as future or not future have
its place, yet the dispute de possibilitate is usually but vain, and darkening:
especially as managed by those Confounders, who only say, It is impossible that
Gods decree or foreknowledge be frustrate, and necessary that it be fulfilled,
not distinguishing the necessity of a consequence in a syllogism from the
premises, and the necessity of an effect as from its necessitating cause. God
can cause without necessitating the second cause; much more decree and
foreknow.

275. He that has saving Grace in the least degree, cannot lose that degree,
without losing all the species, or all saving Grace. But it is otherwise with
him that has a higher degree.

276. There have many of our acquaintance gone so far in a life of
mortification, and diligence of suffering like Christians of the highest rank,
who yet have fallen (to the death) to the denial of the very essentials of the
Christian Faith, that from the very Doctrine of certain perseverance has
become a cause of doubting and trouble to some: who have said, [If a man could
fall away from true Grace, I should not doubt but such and such a man did so,
and I should hope that yet my heart may at the present be sincere: But seeing
no man ever had true Grace who apostatizeth, these men had none, who in all
proboble judgment of reason, were once far better than I now am: And I can
never be sure that I have true Grace, till I go further than ever they did,
which I almost despair of ever doing, having intimately known them to be no
dissemblers.] Thus both ways of this controverted Doctrine have their troubling
difficulties.

277. If none censured the deniers of certainty herein, but only those who
themselves ever attain to a certainty of their sincerity, perseverance and
salvation, they would not be enough to make any great division or breach about
it. And could we but be impartial, and bear with the dissent of Brethren
herein, as well as we do of the ancient Doctors and Churches, our peace and
concord would be less disturbed by this Controversy than it is. I have
elsewhere cited some; Tertullian is too harsh in conceding a mutability in
God, Contr. Marc. li. 2. cap. 23, 24. [Si vero etiam circa personas levem
vultis intelligi quum reprobat aliquando probatos, aut improvidum quum probat
quandoque reprobandos, quasi judicia sna aut damnet praeterita, aut ignoret
futura: Atqui nihil tam bono and judici convenit, quam pro praesentibus meritis
and rejicere and adlegere, etc.] Yet this may have a good interpretation.

Eusebius Praeparat. Evangel. li. 6. page 289, 290. [Yea these would fight (or
be a contradiction) that the same man should both become honest (or good) and
certainly foreknow that he shall be honest.] But I am not of his mind.

But among those before Augustine, such passages are not so strange as these
are in himself. De corrept. and Great. cap. 13. page 539. [Quis enim ex
multitudine fidelium quamdiu in hac mortalitate vivitur, in numero
praedestinatorum se esse praesumat? Quia id occultari opus est in hoc loco: ubi
sic cavenda est elatio, ut etiam per Satanae Angelum ne extolleretur tantus
colophizaretur Apostolus -- Nam propter hujus utilitatem secreti, ne forte quis
extollatur, sed omnes etiam qui been currunt timeant dum occultum est qui
perveniant. Propter hujus ergo utilitatem secreti credendum est quosdam de
filiis perditionis, non accepto dono perseverantiae usque in finem, in fide
quae per dilectionem operatur incipere vivere, ac aliquandiu fideliter ac just
vivere, and postea cadere, neque de hac vita priusquam hoc eis contingat
auferri. Quorum si nemini contigisset, tamdiu haberent omnes istum saluberrimum
timorem, quo vitium elationis opprimitur donec ad Christi gratiam, qua pie
vivitur, pervenirent; deinceps jam securi nunquam se ab illo esse casuros. Quae
praesumptio in isto tentationum loco non expedit, ubi tanta est infirmitas, ut
superbiam possit generare securitas.

Et Epist. 101. ad Vitalem [Utile est quippe omnibus, vel pene omnibus propter
humilitatem saluberrimam, ut quales futuri sint scire non possint --.]

Et lib. 11. de Civit. Dei cap. 12. page 67. [Quis enim primos illo^ homines in
Paradiso negare audeat beatos fuisse ante peccatum? quam^^s de sua beatitudine
quam diuturna, vel utrum aeterna esset incertos? esse^ ante^ aeterna nisi
peccassent. Cum hodie non impudenter beatos vocemus quos videmus just ac pie
cum spe immortalitatis hanc vitam ducere, sine crimine vastante conscientiam,
facile impetrantes peccatis hujus infirmitatis divinum misericordiam? Qui licet
de suae perseverantia praemio certi sint, de ips^ tamen perseverantia sua
reperiantur incerti? Quis enim hominum se in action profectuque justitiae
perseveraturum usque in finem sciat, nisi aliqua revelatione ab illo stat
certus qui de hac re justo latentique judicio, non omnes instruit, sed neminem
fallit.

So Prosper Resp! ad Gallor. cap. sent. ad secundam. [Qui dic^^ quod ab his qui
non sunt praedestinati ad vitam, non auserat percepta baptismi gratia Originale
peccatum non est catholicus. Sacrament^^ enim baptismi quo omnia prorsus
peccata delentur, etiam in eis verum est, qui non sunt in veritate mansuri, and
ab hoc ad vitam aeternam non sunt praedestinati.

Et sent. ad septimum. [Qui dicit quod Deus quibusdam filiis suis quos
regeneravit in Christo, quibus fidem, spem, dilectionem dedit, ob hoc
perseverantiam non dederit, quia a massa perditionis praescientia Dei and
praedestinatione non sint disereti, etc. Vid. caetera and sent. sup. 12.

Et Resp. ad object. Vincent. 12. [Praedestinatio Dei and si apud nos dum in
praesentis vitae periculis versamur incerta est, apud illum tame^, qui fecit
quae futura sunt immutabilis permanet.

I need not tell the learned that Fulgentius is of the same mind with Augustine
and Prosper.

If this had not been Augustine's Doctrine, the predeterminant Dominicans had
never maintained it as his against the Jesuits, which you may see in Alvarez
Disput. 107. and many others.

Much less would Jansenius Yea and Bradwardine who speaks more harshly than
Alvarez, and yet asserteth falling away from true Grace, though not
Predestination^, or Gods Will to save. And Jansenius^, To. 1. li. 5. c. 22, 23.
p. 126, 127, 128. proves that the difference between Augustine and Pelagius
lay not about free Pardon, or infused habits of Grace, which Pelagius confessed
(though many charge him with the contrary, who understand him not.) But that
Pelagius confessed not the necessity of that actual Adjutorium Gratiae
specialis to keep us from future sin, and to do our duty, besides pardon of
former Sin and infused habitual Grace. By which it appears that Aug^sti^^ and
he agreed, that Remission of Sin and infused habits may be lost; and that
Augustine said perseverance upon Gods Will or Election, and his actual help or
adjutorium conservans.
the zealous Follower of Augustine (so perfectly acquainted with his Works)
have so thought and said, and so propugned it. See him at large in his
Augustine. de Great. Christi, lib. 9. cap. 7. page 392, 393, etc. and lib. 3. c.
20. page 163, 164.

Though I make no doubt but our Divines at Dort knew this to be Augustine's
professed judgment, yet in their Judic. de Persever. I find three Sentences
cited by them out of Augustine, as making for the contrary, by which I suppose
they intended to prove him doubtful or wavering. But 1. Three doubtful passages
as to the sense, are not to be set against a man's open frequently professed
judgment, thus expounded and followed by all his Disciples. 2. Let us examine
the Texts. 1. The last of the three is de Correp. and Great. cap. 9. But though
Davenant be that Divine whom I honor for judgment above all, or almost all
since the Apostles days; yet I must say that in this they all dealt very
negligently or partially: For in that place Augustine professedly
distinguishes of Sons of God, predestinate and not predestinate: and says,
[Nec nos moveat quod filiis suis quibusdam Deus not dat istam perseverantiam.
Absit enim ut i^a esset si de illis praedestinatis essent, and secundum
propositum vocatis, qui vere sunt filii promissionis. Nam isti cum pie vivunt
dicuntur filii Dei: sed quoniam victuri sunt impie and in eadem impietate
morituri, non eos dicit filios Dei praescientia Dei. And expounding ex nobis
exierunt sed non erant ex nobis, etc. ait, [Quid aliud dicunt, nisi non erant
filii etiam quando erant in professione and nomine filiorum? Non quia justitiam
simulaverunt; sed quia in ea non permanserunt. Neque enim ait, nam si fuissent
ex nobis, veram non fictam justitiam tenuissent, utique nobiscum: sed si
fuissent ex nobis, permanissent utique nobiscum. In bono illos volebat
proculdubio manner: Erant itaque in bono, sed quia in eo non permanserunt --
non erant ex nobis -- non erant ex numero filiorum. -- Nam non perit filius
promissionis, sed filius perditionis. -- Filiis suis non praedestinatis Deus
perseverantiam non dedit. -- Et rursus quos dicimus inimicos ejus, vel parvulos
filios inimicorum ejus, quoscunque eorum sic regeneraturus est, ut in ea side
quae per dilectionem operatur, hanc vitam finiant, jam and antequam hoc fiat,
in illa praedestinatione sunt filii ejus, and dati sunt Christo filio ejus, ut
non pereant, sed habeant vitam aeternam. -- Quia ergo non habuerunt
perseverantiam, sicut non vere Discipuli Christi, ita non vere filii Dei
fuerunt, etiam quando esse videbantur and ita vocabantur. -- Apud cum hoc non
sunt, cui notum est quod futuri sunt, id est, ex bonis mali. Propter hoc
Apostolus cum dixisset, scimus quoniam diligentibus Deum omnia co-operantur in
bonum, sciens nonnullos diligere Deum and in eo bono usque in finem non
permanere, mox addit, His qui secundum propositum vocati sunt, etc, vid.
reliqua.

Now the words which our Divines cite are these afore-cited, which say, They
were not the Sons of God that fell away. When nothing can be plainlier uttered
by the pen of man, I think, than that Augustine affirms them to be Sons as to
their sincerity of Faith which works by love, but not to be Sons by
predestination; And that not all that are sincere in Faith and Love are Sons in
the most eminent sense, but that part of them who are predestined to
perseverance and the inheritance; and that nothing but predestination and
perseverance was wanting to their Salvation. He that doubts whether this was
Augustine's sense, when he has read him, may doubt of almost any thing which
he is unwilling to believe.

The next Text is cited as Cont. Adult; (I suppose they mean Adversarios, and
it is false printed,) Legis et Prophet. l. 2. c. 2. But I can there find nothing
of any such Subject, much less sense.

The only Text therefore of all cited by them out of Augustine remains, which
gives any show of favor to their Theses, and that is cited contra Julian.
Pelag. l. 5. c. 3. In cap. 4. I find the words, viz. [Istorum (reproborum)
neminem adducit Deus ad poenitentiam salubrem et spiritualem qua homo in
Christo reconciliatur Deo.] This is all that I find dubious in him. Now whether
these few words better declare his judgment than whole Chapters and Discourses,
you may judge? And whether the constant tenor of his Doctrine do not direct us
to conclude that this is here his sense, viz. that he calls that poenitentiam
salubrem, which effectually brings men to Salvation, and which endures to
the end (as such.) And by [a man in Christ] means not as aforesaid [a man given
to Christ with a decree to save him]; and by [reconciliatur Deo] he mean not
one that is so reconciled as to be a predestinate Son, decreed to Glory.
Historical Truth must not be denied, nor does doctrinal Truth need historical
falsehood for its defense, nor can agree with it.

This undoubtedly was Augustin's mind.

Only one more Text they cite out of Ambrose de Jacob and vil^ beata, li. 1.
cap. 6.

But Ambrose is of his Disciple (Augustine's) mind: The words are, Quis audeat
accusare quos electos divino cernis judicio? Nunquid Deus Pater ipse qui
contulit, potest dona sua rescindere, and quos adoptione suscepit, eos a
paterni affectus gratia relegare. But 1. There Ambrose expressly speaks of the
Elect only. 2. And if he had not, such words as these are usualy spoken by the
Fathers, who assert falling away; meaning that God will not reverse or rescind
his Grace; if you cast it not away: As Prosper says, God forsakes none that
do not first forsake him.

If any man would see more of Augustine's judgment, the many Sentences cited by
me in my Tract. Of Perseverance, page 5, 6. 7. and all those cited by Vossius
Histor. Pelag. li. 5. page 559, 560, 561, etc. may easily put him past all
doubt. See also VOSSIUS, ibid. page 563, 564. citing more of PROSPER to the
same sense.

That all the Fathers before Augustine were for uncertainty of Salvation, and
falling away (de facto) of some that were in a state of true Grace and
Justification, in which had they died they had been saved, this great Historian
thoroughly versed in the Fathers, ibid. page 565, 566, 567. and pluribus
sequent. shows. For brevity, if you doubt, turn to these cited places,
Irenaeus, li. 4. cap. 72. Justin. Martyr. Dial. cum Tryphon. page 206, 207.
Clemen^ Alex. Strom. li. 2. page 162, 166. Basil. Homil. in Psalm. 114. and and
homil. in Princip. Prove. Origin. (...) li. 1. cap. 3. 13. ad Romans li. 7. cap.
8. Macarius Homil. 14. 15. 24. 26. 28. Athanas. Contr. Arian. Orat. 4. Greg.
Nazian. Orat. 40. de Baptis. Crysost. in Joh. 1. Hom. 1. and Epist. 5. and
Homil. 77. ad Antioch. (ut vulgo). Et ex Latinis Tertullian. li. advers.
haeres. cap. 3. and li. de poenit. cap. 6. Cyprian. de unitate Eccles. cap. 12.
and li. 1. Epist. 7. ad Rogat. and li. 4. Epist. 7. ad Mag. Ambros. (ut vulgo)
in Romans cap. 9. Chronat. in Mat. 5. Besides those after Pelagius, cited by
Vossius, ibid. page 567, etc. Among whom Bernard is large and earnest against
possibility and convenience of PERSEVERANCE and SALVATION.

Vossius in his These. 12. says thus of those that will deny this to be the
ancients Opinion, [Quid quod Antiquitas tota indefectibilitati adversatur, nec
quemquam quantum meminisse valemus, veterum invenire est qui sideles omnes
omnimodam de perseverantia sui certitudinem habere arbitraretur. Fatentur
quidem animos filiorum Dei dubitationis auxietate cruciari non debere cum spei
fiduciam habeant, quae sufficienti consolatione, et lapsuros sustinet et lapsos
levet; At nihilominus negant posse quemvis exinde quod impraesentiarum fidelium
se in numero esse sciat, tantum sibi de reliquo vitae tempore favorem Dei certo
polliceri, etc. -- vid. caetera. Et addit [Communem fuisse antiquitatis
sententiam quam diximus, soli hodie negare possunt, qui caetera fortasse viri
sunt non ineruditi, sed in antiquitat^ tamen plane sunt hospites: vel animum
habent unius et alterius sententiis it a mancipatum, ut eorum oculis videre
malint quam suis cumque iis errare praeoptent quam cum aliis been sentire.

278. As I have cited this unanimous consent of the Ancients only to prove that
all that have the profession of Christianity and Charity should be far from
thinking this an intolerable error which may not stand with brotherly love and
peace, so to the same end only I shall tell you, that not only Calvinists have
born herein with Lutherans, but also among the Roformed some have been of
Augustine's mind in this, whom yet the rest very highly honored. I will now
instance only in Musculus, than whom few have been esteemed more sincere,
impartial and sound in judgment. In his Loc. Commun. (for their great esteem
translated into English) C. de Remiss. peccat.. 6. page (mihi) 621, 622, 623.
he says [Discernendum est inter eam gratiam Dei quae nullas habet adjectas
conditiones: qualis est quod solemn suum producit super bonos and malos,
pluitque super gratos and ingratos: and eam quae conditionaliter confertur; ad
quem modum Peccatorum remissio nobis contingit. Posterior haec licet in Deo
sit*constans and firma (non enim ille mutatur ut homo) nostro tamen vitio
irrita redditur, dum conditionibus illius non stamus -- Siquis igitur
praeterritorum peccatorum condonationem per gratiam Divinae Clementiae
consequutus, usque adeo ingratus, and salutis suae negligens evaserit, ut
instar canis ad vomitum reversus, caeptam resipiscentiam rumpat palamque
ostendat Deum se contemnere magis quam timere; plane dignum se esse declarat a
quo praeterritorum peccatorum a quibus fuerat absolutus, poenae exigantur. --
Hactenus igitur fieri potest, and merito accidit, ut semel accepta gratia
reddatur irrita: Verum non debetur hoc Divinae Clementiae instabilitatis quae
locum in Deo non habet; sed nostrae pravitati -- Posset mihi objici hoc loco,
relapsum ejusmodi per quem peccata semel remissa reddantur irrita, locum in
electis habere non posse; immo ne in reprobis quidem; quod illi remissionis
peccatorum, capaces esse nequeant, eo quod vera and viva fide per quam illa
acquiritur, praediti non sint; ideoque neminem esse prorsus, in quo peccata
semel remissa irrita fieri possint. Verum eos qui hoc argumento ducuntur moneo,
ut de reprobis quod dicunt diligentius perpendant; De Electis consentio: De
reprobis vero nulla ne illis unquam peccatorum remissio contingat, disputari
posse intelligo. Dantur illis in Ep. ad Hebr. 6. illuminatio per Christum,
gustus doni coelestis, participatio Spiritus Sancti, gustus item boni Dei
verbi, ac virtutum futuri saeculi; and cap. 10. Sanctificatio quae est per
sanguinem Testamenti, and Spiritus gratiae. Et 2 Pet. 2. Comparantur sui, quae
ubi lota fuit, rursus in caeno volutatur. Quomodo haec illis sine omni
peccatorum remissione contingere possint, non immerito quaeri potest in hac
causa.]

279. But Alvarez tells us (l. 10. de Auxil. Disp. 104. page 419.. 1.) of
some who hold that there is a Grace of Confirmation distinguished only by the
degree of the same helps, which none can fall away from; and that a confirmed
state is never lost, is ordinarily held by the Dominicans, though they agree
not what this confirming Grace is: And many of the Jesuits confess such a
state of Confirmation, making men impeccable as to Mortal sin. So that some are
in statu and not only in decreto, secured from Apostasy, most confess.

280. And Vossius ubi supra copiously labors to prove that the Ancients held
three degrees of true Grace: One which men might fall from easily, and often did,
though if they had dyed in it they had been saved: Another which men may lose
as to the act at least, but scarcely as to all seeds and habits. And another
state next to perfection, which none shall lose. I refer the Reader to his
Collections, though I do not clearly perceive by them, that many had such
distinctions of Believers: But the weak and the strong or confirmed all
distinguish.

281. But the other side had need as much to be persuaded to pacifick
moderation in their censures: And first, They say, that it is an intolerable
opinion which is confessedly contrary to all the ancientest Churches of Christ:
And by Vincent. Lerinens. rule, (quod ab omnibus, ubique and s^mper) such
singularity or novelty must be heresy, or certain error at the least. I
answer, 1. They that assert this certain perseverance of all the justified, do
believe that the Churches planted by the Apostles, were of their mind; which
they gather from the Scripture. 2. The foresaid Rule holds indeed in things
so universally received as Essentials of Religion, and Necessary Articles of
Faith and Practice, without which men cannot be saved; But Universality of
Consent in a doubtful or unnecessary opinion, or practice, may possibly be
erroneous, and may often lawfully be deserted. It was once (and beyond the
investigation of its original) the practice of the Universal Church, that there
should be no Adoration by Genuflexion on any Lords Day, or on any Week day
between Easter and Whitsunday: And this commanded in the Great Council of Nice,
and the Canons of Trull: And yet the Papists themselves have now forsaken it.
To distinguish as is usual, between such Canons of Practice, and points of mere
doctrine, and to make consent of Antiquity more obligatory in the latter, is
but vanity. For where a point of Practice is founded in an oportet or
supposition of Divine or Apostolical authority, it must needs be at least as
obligatory as a mere Doctrinal so founded. For all Precepts include Doctrines,
and all Obedience includes Faith; Though all Doctrine be not Preceptive, nor
all Belief for immediate practice. For every Divine Precept includes this
assertion [This God commandeth]. And that God commands it, is de fide; and
then it must be obeyed for Gods Authority, as it is first believed for his
Veracity. All therefore that can be said is, that this practice was not taken
to be by a Divine universal Law, unchangeable; but by universal Custom of the
Church: And so may there be a consent in unnecessary and questionable
Doctrinals (as there has been for the peripatetick Philosophy almost). The
opinions of the Souls corporeity, of the Millennium, of the lust of Demons,
that there were no Antipodes, (to say nothing of some that Augustin^ opposed)
were little less than universally owned of some ages: And I doubt many Texts of
Scripture, for want of perfect Translations, and skill in the original Tongues,
were universally misinterpreted.

282. And the common objection which makes the greatest noise is a mere
injurious pievish cavil or slander; viz. when they say [You lead men to all
wickedness, by teaching, that let them commit never such heinous Sin, they are
sure that they cannot fall from Grace, nor lose their Justification.] For it is
commonly acknowledged, that if any man should fall into a state of Sin
inconsistent, with the love of God, he would lose his justification and right
to Heaven, and that without any change in God. And they constantly hold that
Gods decree de fine and mediis is one, and that he decrees of his Elect, that
[They shall persevere in love and holiness, and be saved;] and not that they
shall be saved whether they persevere in holiness or not: And that they are no
surer to be saved, than they are to persevere in holiness.

SECT. XIX. Of Mortal Sin, or what Sin will not stand with Saving Grace.
283. But as to the question, How great the Sin must be which is inconsistent
with true love to God, or holiness? that belongs to the Controversy about
Mortal and Venial Sin: where the difficulty is as great to one side as another:
so great, that not only Pious Gerson, but many another have confessed it too
hard for them well to solve.

284. In general, It is certain that all Sin is so far Mortal as to deserve
Vid. Le Blank de Piece. Mort. and Ven. and 2 Disp.
Death according to the Law of Nature and Innocence, and so far as to make us
need a pardon: Though not so far as to be inconsistent with spiritual life and
justification, and right to Glory, and to make damnation due to us according to
the Law of Grace. And Pr^testants confess Vid. Rob. Baronim de Peccat Mort. and
Ven. The best I know on the Subject.
the distinction of Mortal and Venial Sin, under the name of Wickedness, or
Reigning Sin, and Sin of Infirmity in this sense; that Mortal Sin is that which
is inconsistent with true Faith, Repentance, Love, Justification and right to
life, and is never pardoned till the person be changed by true conversion: But
Venial Sin or Infirmity is that which consists Vid. Episcopii Resp. ad Qu^st.
64. q. 18. page 19.
with all these aforesaid, and is presently pardoned by the Covenant of Grace,
upon the actual or habitual Repentance or hatred of it in the Sinners.

285. It is certain that the interruption of the Act of Divine Love, will not
prove a Sin to be Mortal. For though I detest such conclusions as the Jansenist
gathers from the Jesuits Morals, that loving God once or Davenant de Justit*
Actuali, cap. 35. Says that Sin may be called Mortal in three degrees. 1.
Because it is never pardoned, as the Blasphemy of the Holy Ghost. 2. Those
which bring novum reatum mortis sed remissibilem upon repentance. And such he
makes all such gross Sin acted as is mentioned, 1 Cor. 6. and Gal. 5. which be
they that the Papists call Mortal Sin. 3. The daily infirmities of the
faithful, which in rigor of Justice deserve death, but are pardoned by Grace.
twice in a man's life, or once a month, may save him, yet it is certain that
the love of God is not always notably acted by any: It is interrupted in our
sleep, and in common studies and businesses which take up the whole man; And
therefore if a Sin (as sinful study) interrupt it, that will not prove it a
Mortal sin.

286. And it is certain that a sin is not therefore Mortal because it
diminishes the Habit of Love. For that may be in those that still are the
justified Children of God.

287. There are two Degrees of Mortality in Sin, as our Divines at Dort do more
than intimate (and those of Breme there): The one is, when sin puts a man
into the same state, as to the Love of God, which he or any other was in, in
the next degree before true Justification, or Sanctification or Conversion:
which is when the Habit of Divine Love, and all other saving Grace is so far
lost, as that Habitually the Creature* is more loved than the Creator: If any
do fall thus far (which is the controversy) then it is granted that their
Justification, Adoption and right to Heaven, is lost. But while God is
habitually dearest to the Soul, and Sin is habitually more hated than loved,
there sin is habitually repented of; And for my part I do not think that person
is unjustified, or should be damned if he so dyed.

288. And I believe that this was the case of David and Peter: And its very
improbable that they lost the very habits of love to God, and hatred of Sin.

289. The other degree of Mortality, the said Divines take to be some heinous
Act of Sin like David's or Peter's, which destroys not the habit, but is so
great, that the person, though he lose not his fundamental Right, yet is put
into an immediate ineptitude and incapacity of Heaven, and his Right so
suspended, as that he cannot have possession That Grace and Mortal Sin
oppon^ntar privative sic^t l^x and t^n^brae, etc. ^id. Careres Sum. Theol. 2.
^. page 23, etc.
till that obex be removed by true repentance.

290. If you ask them whether that man shall go to Heaven or Hell if he so die;
they tell you that it is not to be supposed; for God has decreed that he shall
not so die, but shall repent (which Austin will say of all the Elect) and
sometime he half dreamed of Purgatory for some such.)

291. The true reason why such a heinous sin must be actually Repented of
before full pardon and capacity for Heaven, and the true note to know what sins
must have such actual Repentance (and so are thus f^^ Mortal) is this; there
are some Sins so easily known to be Sins, and so notoriously calling the
Conscience to Repent, that to lie in them unrepented of long (when the sudden
violent temptation and passion's over, and a man has opportunity to act
according to his settled habits) will not consist with the truth of such a Habit
of love and holiness, and of hatred of Si^: So that though necessitate
praecepti the Act of Repentance be as necessary as the Habit, yet necessitate
medii ad salutem it is the Habit that is absolutely necessary in se, and the
act so far as the absence of it cannot stand with such a habit. This is my
judgment of this difficult case: He that can open it better, deserves all our
thanks.

But here the difficulty is exceeding great, what love to God that is which
mortal Sin or ungodliness is inconsistent with: or by which a man may know that
he has saving Grace. I have contented my self hither-to with saying that It is
a loving God above all: But that is still dark and short of satisfaction:
Adrian (after Pope 6.) Quolib. 7. q. 3. 4. fol. 45, 46. has called me to
distincter thoughts. He concludes, 1. A man that loves a friend less than
himself, may yet Sin mortally for that friend. (But that is no wonder, because,
1. He loves his friend and self more tha^ God. 2. And thinks that he hurts
not himself so much as he profits his friend by Sin) 2. He infers that a
Mortal Sinner does not always love the Creature more than God; because he that
loves himself more may Sin mortally in love to his friend: For as a man may
love himself more than the sole end for which he sins: So he may love God
more.

Ans. I suppose it is mis-printed, for the sense should be [He may love God
more]. But, 1. I doubt of the antecedent: That Sinner loves himself as the End
of his sinning for his friend: For it is to gratify that proud or selfish
humor by which he loves his friend for the Likeness, Love or Usefulness of
that friend to himself; and so his love is finally for or to himself. 2. When
he sins he does not practically think that the hurt to himself or the wrong
to God is so great an evil, as the pleasure of Sin is good.

But his instance more poseth me; viz. that a mortal Sinner (or ungodly man)
may choose rather to be annihilated, and his friend too, than Christ should be
blasphemed by all the world, or than God (per impossible) should perish, or
lose his Omnipotency, etc. (for some Romans dyed for their Countries): Therefore
he concludes, that Thus to love God above our selves or all, is not enough to
Salvation; but we must also love God above all ut sinem ultimum and qui sit
ratio and mensura diligendi caetera; Ita, viz. quod omnia refer at homo in
Deum, nolitque am are nisi quantum Deo placuerit, and eadem velit abdicare and
perdere ut satisfaciat divino beneplacito and Sanctae ejus voluntati, ut sit ei
quantum ad amorem liberum attinet Deus omnis in omnibus, and dicat, vivo jam;
non ego, sed Christus vivet in me; against it, He must not only so love God as
that he would die rather than God should die or suffer (were it possible); but
so as to love him as the end of all our lives, and to love the pleasing of his
blessed Will in the glorifying of him, better than all things that can stand in
any competition:] And I think this to be a necessary truth: I dare not say that
every man is Godly that had rather die than God, or the Sun, or the Earth, or
his Country should perish. God's Being is not, as such, our End: But his Will
(or his Essence as it is his Will) is the Beginning, Governor, and End of all;
And it is the Pleasing of this Will of God (in the Glory of our holiness and
obedience, in which his holiness and other perfections are resplendent) which
must be loved above all. As a man may choose to die, or at least lose all that
he has, rather than his Father should die or be for ever tormented; and yet
will not forbear fornication and drunkenness to please his Father's will;
because he practically thinks that the bare displeasing of his Father does
not so much hurt him, as his sinful pleasure does himself good; so is it in the
present case. (And I may add that, God is not loved as God, that is, as
perfectly holy and just in governing the world and him, by any bad man: But as
he is the God and Preserver of Nature, Nature may love him; but not as he is a
most holy Governor) which is essential to the Relative notion of our God.

He concludes therefore truly [That this true sort of Love to God does put us
in a state of Salvation, and Mortal Sin consists not with it.]

But I agree not with him of the Impossibility of being certain that we have
this Love, though I think his words worth the reciting to prove the difficulty
of it: fol. 47. N. O. P. [Dico quod licet possit probabilem conjecturam habere,
quod act us ille dilectionis insit; non tamen potest evidenter cognoscere and
pro certo: Quomodo enim scire poterit, quod it a Deo se totum infundit propter
se, i. e. bonitatem and Sanctitatem ejus, ^t nec Vitam aeternam nisi in Deo and
propter Deum diligat? animo paratus, and efficaciter volens, omnia and seipsum
and alia, quum Deo placcbit perdere, ut impleatur Sancta voluntas Dei? Quod
etiam nulli creaturae nec ips^sibi libero aliquo amore adhaeret in se in Deo
and propter Deum; Quae volunt as multo est purior and laudabilior quam volunt
as perferendi pro Christo Martyrium pro spe assequendi vitam aeternam. Et certe
long aliud est optare aut Velle, quam sic Deum amare, and de facto sic
affectum esse, and sic efficaciter velle, sicut opto and desidero efficax Velle
Scientiae, seu ad scientiam: Sed ubi efficaciter id vellem, manum ad aratrum
mittens, labori, vigiliis and id genus operis non parcerem -- Si ponatur per
Revelationem certiorari, non nego sic certum fieri posse -- Nec expedit hominem
nisi valde sciens and doct us fuerit de his multum se tentare, quoniam
difficilimum est proprias affectiones metiri.

But sure these fruits grow not on any common stock, and the Heirs of Heaven
and Hell are not so like as to be undiscernable, nor Gods promises such as no
man can be sure that he has a right to them. It is enough that these things do
prove assurance difficult and rare.

SECT. XX. What Repentance for particular Sins is necessary to pardon.
292. But the very Act of Repentance has such various degrees, that those also
here deserve our consideration. For he that has the habit of holiness no doubt
has some degree of Repentance secretly stirring in him before it comes to
deep repentance, and open confession; I do not think that David was without all
remorse and repentance till Nathan spoke to him, though his Repentance was not
such as the quality of his sin required. And it is not every remorse nor every
degree of Repentance which is sufficient to prove a Soul sanctified, that is,
habitually possessed with that love of God, and the hatred of Sin. And such at
least the act must be.

293. In gross known Sin, Repentance is not true unless it contain a Resolution
presently to forsake it. He that is unresolved, though he have much remorse and
trouble of mind, is not truly penitent: Nor he that is resolved only to forsake
it sometime hereafter, or when he has sinned once more, but not at the present.

294. And as this is true of actual Repentance, so a true Habit must be such as
is the Habit of such acts: even a habitual love to present holiness, and a
habitual hatred to present Sin; which in the course of our lives does actually
resolve us and preserve us, however a violent temptation do interrupt that
course.

295. But whether every known Sin of the smallest sort in it self, have always
such Resolutions of present forsaking it in all that are truly penitent, is a
harder question. Many a godly man is frequently angry sinfully, and sluggish
sinfully, and daily uses some idle words, and ungoverned and idle thoughts,
and is sinfully remiss in the degrees of every duty, and knows all this to be
Sin: And if he resolved presently to do so no more, he would not do so again so
frequently as he does. In such a case it is exceeding hard to judge of a man's
repentance: And yet When Petavius out of Aquin. Elench. There. Vincent. c. 29.
p. 109, etc. Distinguishes Peccatum a Culpa, and says that all Sin, is not
Culpa, it is but a trifling with an equivocal or analogical sense of Peccatum:
And his citation of Augustine there is upon a misinterpretation; which the
Reader may easily perceive.
alas, whose case is it not? we have a dislike of the Sin, and a wish that we
were delivered from it: But that is but a desire that we loved it less, and
hated it more; and proves not that our hatred is sufficient. For many a man
that lives in gross Sin, does wish that his heart were turned from it, and did
not love it, when it is not so turned. And why will the same wish then serve
about lesser Sins? And yet if present Resolution against every small Sin be
necessary to pardon (even of known Sins) alas, who is pardoned?

296. And if the case must be resolved by the material magnitude or smallness
of the Sin, what bounds shall we ever be able to assign, and what understanding
is able to distinguish between the Sin so great which must be presently
resolved against ex necessitate medii to pardon, and the Sin so small as may be
pardoned without such Resolution? whether in speech every idle word be such? If
not, whether every idle jest, or every lascivious word? or passionate word? or
backbiting word (the ordinary Sin of many strict Professors) or every sinful
Oath, or Curse, or Slander? who can say, it is this, and not that? And so in
all commissions and omissions?

297. And it will still remain exceeding difficult what Resolutions against Sin
will prove true Repentance: For as many a child under correction, so many an
adult Sinner on his Sick bed, or under a terrifying Sermon, or conviction, not
only seems, but doubtless is, as passionately resolved at the present to
forsake his Sin, as a Godly man is, if not more: and yet quickly loses all
that Resolution, and lives in the Sin which he resolved to forsake.

298. By this it would seem that it is not true Resolution which causes not
the ordinary forsaking of the Sin. For to Resolve to day, and Sin to morrow, is
but to play with Sin, and not to repent or mortify it. And yet if actual
forsaking be necessary (of All Sin) who then is penitent or can be saved. For
there is no man that does good, and sins Jam. 3. 2.
not: And in many things we offend all. Who leaves all the idle thoughts, and
words, and negligence, etc. which he knows to be Sin? And the most
understanding men then would be very hardly saved, who know almost all Sin, in
comparison of the ignorant, who know it not?

299. And yet no doubt, those Sins which are materially small, may have such
circumstances, as may make them more malignant than some greater in the matter:
As when they are committed through malignant contrivances and ends, or in gross
contempt, or negligence. So that this also makes the decision of the case more
difficult.

300. And it will be hard, not only to know which and how great the Sins must
be which are unpardoned if lived in without forsaking, or without resolving to
forsake them presently if known; but also how great, and what Sins unknown may
stand with saving Grace. For surely if men should ignorantly reproach or reject
God, or Christ, or the Holy Ghost, or live in Murder, Adultery, Perjury, etc.
not knowing them to be Sins, this would not stand with saving Grace: And yet to
live in some unknown Sin may.

301. And it is as hard to know how often a gross Sin may be committed in
consistence with true habitual Grace? And how often the Resolution of the will
may change, without the loss of holy habits. The te^^pter will say to David or
Peter, If once, why not twice? If twice why not thrice? And who but God can
say, just how often? And yet to set no bounds confounds the just and unjust,
good and bad, and makes Sanctification but a name. And to say that Peter's
Faith did totally fail, or that he was holy deprived of wholly love, or saving
Grace, is rash and an unlikely thing.

302. And it must be remembered that the Will is always in the time of sinning,
more for the committing the Sin, than against it, actually, or else it would
not be committed; And in omissions, it is not prevalently for the Duty; else it
would be done. And if it were Habitually so too, as to a holy or a sinful life,
the person were unholy. And when the will (known by the practice) is sometime
actually more for a gross Sin than against it, and daily actually more for some
small Sins than against them, it is wondrous hard here to discern certainly
that the contrary habit is our state.

303. And it adds to the difficulty, that it is hard to be sure whether the
Habit of Love and Holiness may not be predominant, and yet the very Habit of
some one Sin (as well as the act) be stronger than the contrary habit: For a
daily use of the acts seems to prove a prevalent Habit. As a Habit of Anger,
of vain jeasting, etc. And if a very Habit of one Sin may be prevalent, though
not of all others, it will be hard to say either how great that Sin may be (and
so whether a Habit of Lust, of Pride, of Covetousness, may stand with Grace, in
that prevalency) or yet, how many Sins may be so habitually prevalent, in a
sanctified man. But if no one, what shall those think of themselves that live
in the daily act of smaller Sins beforementioned? And that they err who tell
us that all Sin is equally mortified in the Habit, common experience fully
proves. But such men use not to distinguish between the General habit of Love
to Good and Hatred to evil (which is as the trunk of the Tree to the branches
(which may have their particular Cankers and Diseases) and is indeed Virtually
a Habit of all Good, and against all Evil); and the particular Habits of Good
and Evil which are also found in every Soul.

304. Yea the difficulty is yet greater, by our ignorance of the very nature of
a Habit of the will, or of that Inclination of it to Good or Evil which is
antecedent to the Act: which, he that has read the Schoolmen and Metaphysics,
or ever well studied it himself, will discern to be tantum non out of the reach
of our understandings. That it is a Dispositive promptitude to Act, we feel:
But whether that Disposition be it self a secret unobserved Immanent Act,
disposing to the more open perceptible Act; (for the Soul is never out of
Action, and certainly has at one instant several Acts, of which that de fine
is often unobserved, and yet most powerful? As a Traveller that is taken up with
other thoughts and talk would never hold on his way if the end were not
actually intended, though he feel it not); or whether it be the Natural
Inclination of the Will corroborated? and what that Inclination is? whether it
lie much in a Receptive disposition of the acted faculties, by which they are
still ready to receive the Active motion of the Agent power; as the Receptivity
of the fuel causes the greatness and constancy of a flame; or the opening of
the window, the shining in of the Sun, or the composition of the adapted
wheels, causes the Clock or Watch to be easily and truly moved by the poise or
spring; or what else it is that we call a Habit, is not so easily known as
unstudied confident Disputers think: So that judicious Mr. Truman (Tract. of
Impaten. Not. and Mor.) seemed to despair of clear understanding it.

And whether an Infants Principle of Holiness, be Quid morale, which never came
from any act, nor is the particular Habit of any act, any more than the
Inclinatio naturalis ad bonum qua bonum? with abundance of other difficulties
about Habits; These all make our case the harder to be resolved.

SECT. XXI. The solution of all the former difficulties, in part.
305. Of all these difficulties, I have no better solution (besides what is
aforesaid) than as follows. 1. That a Dispositive Inclination of the Will to
God and actual Holiness, is like to the Inclinatio naturalis ad bonum and
foelicitatem, saving that it is not ours ab origin in our lapsed state, and
that it is more moveable and separable from the Soul; And so is quiddam naturae
though not quaedam natura, called, The Divine and new nature in us; and is to
the Soul what Health is to the man; And is the great Moral Principle within us;
and is acceptable to God as being the Rectitude of his noble creature, As to
the Papists continual calumnies, that we call men just, whose continued
wickedness is but hid and not imputed, and without inherent justice, we abhor
both their confusion and their calumny, and distinctly give them this short
account. 1. We hold a conditional universal pardon of all. 2. But no actual
pardon of the destructive punishment, nor non-impuration of Sin, till men are
truly converted from a wicked heart and life to the love of God, by Faith and
Repentance. 3. And then all Sin inconsistent with the prevalent love of God,
and a holy, just, and sober life is mortified and cease. 4. But such
infirmities as you call Venial Sins continue, and all our Goodness is culpably
imperfect. 5. Though the destructive punishment be pardoned, the Reatus culpae
in se continues for ever: that is, It is an everlasting truth that we once
sinned. 6. Our pardon and our Renovation are freely given us by Grace for the
sake of the satisfaction, merits, and intercession of Christ, whose perfect
Righteousness fulfilled that Law that man had broken. 7. In which sense his
perfect Righteousness is said by Protestants to be Imputed to us because he did
it and suffered for us, in the person of a Mediator; and so it was the
Meritorious cause of all our Justification, Grace and Glory. And what has any
Papist or other wrangler against any of this? Ye^, we reject their loose
Doctrine that say as Pot. as. Joseph. Theol. Spec. l. 4. c. 10. p. 511. [De
potentia absoluta Gratia habitualis potest simul esse i^ eode^ subjecto
(meaning in a predominant degree) cum peccato mortali sive actuali sive
habituali: For as I said before against Okam and Scotus on that point, they are
incon^istent contraries, as life and not-living, light and darkness; and their
proofs of the contrary are frivolous. See Scot. in 4. d. 16. Aliac. in 1. 99.
Greg. Armin. in 1. d. 17. q. 1. ^. 2. Gabr. ibid. Rad^ 2. p. Cont. 19. Suarez.
in 3. p. To. 4. Disp. 9. Sect. 3. n. 8. all for this opinion. And against it
Aureol: in 1. d. 1^. Ruard. a. Sect. 5. That a man cannot be just sine Justitia
inhaerente por potentiam Dei absolutam: Pet. de Lor^a says. in 2. 2. q. 24. a.
12. d. 22. as the Protestants do, that Peocatum Mortal^ actuale (meaning some
one act of a heinous Sin) may consist with Grace and the Habit of Charity, but
not the Habit of such a Sin (that is in predominancy). See Malderus opinion, 1.
2. q. 113. a. 2. and 8. p. 574, etc. who says, that D^us remit^endo offersam
delet peccati maculam] and that [Macula is but the privation of Grace quatenus
facit hominem D^o gratum] that is, of Acceptability or Loveliness: And
accordingly he expounds the nature of Remission of Sin, as I said before.

And Brianson in 4. q. 8. fol. 115. C. D. diligently enquiring what it is that
remains after the Sin committed, can find nothing but 1. The Habit or
privation of a good habit. 2. And the Guilt which he calls Reatum culpae,
quae est q^^dam obligatio ad poenam debitam illi culpae. Illa (n) obligatio est
qu^dam Relatio realis, non fundata super actum culpae, sed super essentiam
a^im^ non nisi ut culpae actualis est praevia; which is just the Protestant
opinion, who say that the Guilt is done away by forgiveness, and the Habit by
Renovation, calling one Justification, and the other Sanctification: But we
better distinguish Reatum c^spae in s^, and Reatum p^^ae s^u culpae ut ad
poenam: One is the Reality of my being a Sinner, or one that did Sin. (This is
never done away). The other is the obligation to punishment for that Sin. This
is remitted.


and virtually containing all good actions; and being the operation of the
Spirit, by which he is said to dwell in believers.

306. 2. That this Rectitude or Holy Nature is first and radically active, in
our Complacency or Displicency, Love or Hatred; And that what a man Habitually
loves, that his Will is habitually inclined to: And against that which he
habitually hates.

307. 3. That yet in acting, this inclination works freely, and always is
specified by the conduct of the Intellect, which must tell us what is Good and
Evil, Amiable and Hateful.

308. 4. That Love and Hatred being practical Habits, do ever engage the will
in such Practical Resolutions, as are answerable to their nature and degree.

309. 5. That no Resolution will prove Holy Love and Inclination, but that
which is fixed as proceeding from a fixed principle, which is like a new Nature
in us.

310. 6. That this Resolution is first de fine: The Soul loving God and its own
felicity in his eternal Love and Glory, is first firmly Resolved to adhere to
God, and that felicity, and to prosecute it to the last, in all necessary means.

311. 7. That next the Soul firmly resolved of the use of means in general, is
resolved also to choose and cleave to Jesus Christ, as the Head and Summary of
all means, (as the Physician is as to Physic.) And ^o resolves to adhere to
all the Essentials of Godliness and Christianity.

312. 8. That all this is done by the Intellects discerning of those solid
Reasons, which prove to us the excellency, necessity and possibility of all the
foresaid ends and objects. And he that knows not fixing and ^olding Reasons
for his Resolutions, cannot be expected to have fixed Resolutions.

313. 9. That these general Inclinations, Love, and Resolutions for God, for
Means in general, for Christ and all the Essentials of Godliness and
Christianity, are constant in the Godly; and virtually contain a Love of and
Resolution for every known duty, and against every known Sin; but not actually:
And these continue to show themselves in adhering practically to these Objects,
and in the Practice of a Godly Life.

314. 10. That therefore Sin as Sin is hateful to every true Christian, and
Godliness as such lovely: And that in respect of this radical general Habit,
every true Christians love to God and Good is more than his averseness, and his
hatred to Sin more than his love or Inclination to the created Good for which
it is loved (For no man loves Sin as Evil).

315. 11. That the Inferior sort of Means and Good, appear not always in their
worth or necessity to the believer: Besides his Ignorance the remnants of
Concupiscence may pervert his Judgment so far as to doubt of some means whether
they are absolutely necessary, or at least, mihi hic and nunc. And this failing
of the Intellect may embolden the Will to some degrees of negligence, even of
known duties. And so we may doubt of some Sins whether they are Sins, and of
others whether they are so great as to be inconsistent with Gods love and our
Salvation; and by that failing of the Intellect to be emboldened to commit
them, while yet we adhere to God and holiness in the main as such. And so small
Sins are ofter committed, and with less reluctance than greater, because we
think that their badness and danger is not so great. And though at other times
we be more sensible of both, yet in the time of Temptation that apprehension
may be altered: For the mind of a Godly man is more mutable about the Means
than about the End, and about the smaller sort of Means and Sins, than about
the greater. And when the opinion changes not, yet the practical judgment may
change; or when it is not turned, it may be suspended: Or truth may be
apprehended with less quickening lively feeling; and then it will not
sufficiently work: As a loud call does suscitate us to action, when a negligent
whisper is neglected. And upon some of these accounts known sins when small may
more stand with Grace and be ofter committed, and more dully repented of, than
greater.

316. 12. And as we must distinguish of Sins as more or less dreadful and
dangerous, and of duty as more or less necessary, at least in our apprehension;
so also of Sins which are more or less within the power of a willing mind to
leave them. Some Sins are such, as that the forsaking of them requires little
more than a willing mind. As to forsake lewd Company, Taverns, Play Houses,
Harlots, Drunkenness, Theft, Oppression, Persecution, Perjury, Deceit, etc.
Mere will, though instigated by lust, commits them; And a will that is but
truly bent against them, may easily (as to power) cast them off. Whoever
commits them, does it because he will do it. And to live in the frequent
committing of these, is a greater sign of want of Holy habits, or Grace, than
of others. For there are other Sins which besides willingness require great
power, and care, and labor to forsake them: As to keep a just order in our
Thoughts; to keep them from vain objects; to keep our tongues from accustomed
vain words, to restrain strong passions upon great provocations; especially to
forsake Sins of privation and omission; such as are unbelief as mixed with a
weak Faith, and fears mixed with hopes and coldness of desire and prayer, and
sluggishness of labor and endeavor, etc. A man may be truly willing to be
stronger in all Grace, and to do all duty better, and to forsake all such Sins
as these, when yet through the mere weakness of his Graces or Spiritual life,
he cannot so exactly watch, nor so diligently labor, nor so patiently hold
out, as the case requires. Though it be not a Physical, but a Moral power
which he wants, and that culpably; yet such Sins may more consist with true
Grace than the former; and therefore are called ^^^s of Infirmity.

317. 13. When Ignorance of Truth, Duty, or Sin, comes from an ^willingness to
know it, or an unwillingness to use the known means ^ help us to the knowledge
of it, the neglect of such an unknown truth or Duty, and the committing of such
an unknown Sin, is to be ^dged of according to the measure of the foresaid
willingness, or ^nwillingness.

318. 14. For he is not sincerely willing to know a Truth, to do a ^uty, to
forsake a Sin, who is not willing to use the known necessary ^eaus appointed
for these ends. For he vilifieth God and Holiness who ^inketh them not worthy
the seeking by such means. To say, would love God and please him and be saved,
if I could do it ^ith a wish or without these means, is no saving desire.

119. 15. And to desire to be delivered from Sin, and to hate it ^ Sin, and yet
to love it for the pleasure so much more, as that the ^terest of God and Heaven
in us, is not strong enough to make us ha^^tually willing both to leave it, and
to avoid the temptations, and ^se the pleasure, but men had rather keep it than
leave it on these ^rms; this is no sincere repentance, nor sign of a holy heart
or life.

320. 16. Even the Habit of a particular lesser Sin (as of jeasting, ^^le
words, idle thoughts, etc.) may be stronger than the contrary par^^cular habit,
(I think) and thereby a man may habitually and actually live ^^d die in the
Sin; and yet that habit not prevail against the radical ^^bit of Holiness, of
Faith, Hope, Love, and Obedience in the ^^ain.

321. 17. A present full Resolution against Sins that are Great and of ^ie
desertion to a willing mind, is essential to Repentance; as is also a ^^esent
Resolution for great and necessary Duties, and to forsake some ^^aller Sins,
though it be necessary necessitate praecepti, I think is not ^^sential to
saving Conversion and Repentance, and necessary necessitate ^edii to Salvation.

322. 18. He that commits a Gross sin, (that is, a Sin evidently ^reat, and
in the power of a willing mind to forbear) so often as ^oth show that
habitually he more loves it than hates it, and had ^ther keep it than leave
it, does show thereby that all his professed ^epentance for it is unsound, and
his heart unsanctified, and that he ^ath yet no actual pardon from God.

323. Therefore those among the Papists who absolve such from their ^ns, who
commit Fornication or Drunkenness once a month (at least) ^r once in many
months, or often, and come between and say, I Repent, ^o but delude them. For
the nature of those Sins is such, that he that ^ converted to an habitual
hatred of them more than he has a love ^o them, cannot return to them so often:
And he that does not so hate them does not truly repent. And even their
Hildebrand (Greg. 7.) ^^ a Council at Rome expressly says, that [neither false
Baptism, nor false ^a feigned and unsound) Repentance do put away Sin.

324. 19. The chief trial of a man's Holiness and Repentance is by ^he main
scope and business of his life, especially in the positive part, and next in
the oppositive: when a man is conscious that God, and Ho^iness, and Heaven, are
his great end, which are dearer to him and more ^owerful with him than all
things sensible, and the interest of the flesh, and when he can and does
deliberately forsake all, when they stand in ^pposition to or competition with
God and Glory, and so as to the course of his life, does live by Faith, and not
by sense, this is the true evidence of true Conversion; and no Sins are damning
which consist with this.

325. 20. But because the truth of this must be discerned, not only by present
Sense and Resolution, but by practice to prove that Resolution true, therefore
no man can be certain of the sincerity of his own heart, and resolutions and
repentance, but by the practice of willing universal obedience, forsaking gross
and wilful Sinning, performing ^^cessary duty, striving to overcome
infirmities, and heartily desiring perfect Holiness, upon terms of
Mortification, Self-denial and dilig^^ use of means.

326. Therefore much sinning will at least breed much doubtfulness and
uncertainty of Justification and Salvation, and till it be forsaken no such
certainty will be had.

SECT. XXII. Few certain of Salvation: The Consequents of this in order to our
Concord herein.
327. I conclude therefore that certainty of Justification and sincerity is not
the lot of the weakest or weaker sort of Christians, but of the strong
confirmed Christians only. By weak Christians, I mean not those that have
weakest natural parts and common gifts (as Learning, Memory, Utterance, etc.)
But those that have the weakest Faith, Hope, Love, Humility, etc. For Grace is
not certainly discernable. 1. In the least degree. 2. When it is little in
action. 3. When it is much clouded and often I wonder that worthy Deodate, and
Tronchinus in their suffrages at Dort say, page 49, 50. Notitiam, sensum,
certitudinem istius Decreti Deus electis in hac vita largitur modo, mensura,
tempore quo ipsi placet: Ncc ullus est electus, qui aetate rationis capace non
ante mortem, certissiman istius decreti persuasionem per Spiritum Sanctum
accipiat. I hope they mean but an effect objectively certain. The many Texts
cited by them, else prove it not.
conquered by its contrary: But only when, 1. It is strong and in a good
degree, 2. And much in act, 3. And conquereth opposition.

328. Therefore few Christians have Assurance at the first (or of a
considerable time;) because few are strong at first.

329. Yea, therefore few ever attain to certainty who are sincere, because most
are still weak, and few come to strength and a great degree, and to much
activity, and great conquest of all the contrary Sins, of heart and life.

330. This being the case about certainty of Justification; as to the certainty
of perseverance might a man judge by the conveniences, of the truth, it would
draw us to think that the middle way of the Dominicans and some others were the
right: viz. 1. That the least degree (or first) of true saving Grace is
sometimes lost finally and such perish; But 2. That they who obtain confirming
Grace, by a greater degree do never lose it. For so the Angels and Adam fell
from the first degrees for want of Confirmation: And many think (though it is
not proved) that had they overcome in the first (or some more) trial, they
should have had confirming Grace for a reward. And the good Angels are
confirmed (whether by reward or mere gift or nature we know not). 2. This would
save Christians from that uncomfortable thought [I must go further th^^ ever
such and such a one did who fell away, and had lived strictly and suffered
patiently, or else I cannot be saved. For if this be true, a man may be saved
who goes no further, or not so far as some have done that sell away. 3. This
will keep men from security and presumption, in a state of weakness, and keep
them in a necessary fear of falling away; that they may avoid it. 4. And yet it
provideth a certainty of perseverance and Salvation, for strong Christians who
are (and perhaps they only) fit for it and capable of it. 5. And it tends
thereby to make men long for, and press toward a strong confirmed state. I
only say that if this Doctrine be or were true, it has or would have these
conveniences.

331. And I will boldly say, that (as I before said, The weakest Christians are
not ordinarily capable of present certainty of Salvation, so) the weakest or
worst sort of true Christians, are morally unfit for it. 1. He that sins as
much as ever will stand with Grace, and as ever he dare for fear of losing all,
is under so great obligations and necessity to be humbled, to fear, to be
penitent and deeply sensible of his great ingratitude that he is not fit for
the joy of Assurance of Salvation; and therefore not fit for assurance it self:
He that is certain to be saved, must rationally be full of Joy; which is
unseasonable to one that must lie in the tears of deep humiliation. 2. And such
a one that loves God and Christ, and Goodness, in the weakest measure
consistent with Salvation, must have all other Graces and comforts proportioned
hereto, or else there will be a monstrous inequality: But certainty of
Salvation is a degree of applicatory Hope, quite above that very little Faith,
and Love, and Obedience of such a one. 3. And this certainty must be the effect
and product of other Graces (Faith and Love, etc.) And a feeble Cause will not
bring forth an effect so much stronger than it self. 4. Gods Wisdom in
Government will not encourage even a child; in fits of contempt, neglects or
disobedience by such Assurance. How can he more Reward and Encourage the best?
And if every true Christian should have certainty of Salvation, when he sins
as foully, as frequently, as grossly, and lives as slothfully as ever will stand
with sincerity, it would tempt such to go on in Sin, and be no better. 5. God
has his castigatory punishments for sinful Children: Even to death it self
sometimes; and much desertion. And who should have such corrections, but the
worst of his Children? But the certainty of their their Salvation, uses not to
suit with such correction and desertion; or at least is forfeited in such a
case. Lastly, experience tells us, that it is not Gods will that the worst of
his Children (no nor any but the better sort) should have such Assurance: For,
1. De facto they have it not. 2. And in the nature of the thing it is quite out
of their reach.

SECT. XXIII. More necessary Concessions.
332. But yet all this is not enough to prove that any of the justified do
totally or finally fall away. The controversy must not be decided by arguments
from convenience, but by Scripture assertion; where the difficulty is very
great, because no small number of Texts seem to favor both the opinions, the
reconciling of which is not the work of every ordinary understanding. Those
that are brought for the certain Perseverance of all the justified may be seen
in Zanchy's Disputes with Marbachius, (the first hot and high agitation of this
controversy as a matter of great moment and necessary determination, which I
remember to have found among us). And those on the other side, Bertius,
Thompson, and the Arminians commonly have collected. My own opinion about it I
have so largely showed in a Book called My present Thoughts of Perseverance,
beforementioned, that I need not here again deliver it. Though between that
and this last opinion, as wise a man as I may be in doubt when he has done his
best for a satisfactory resolution.

333. I take Augustine's opinion so far as it is for Perseverance to be a
certain Truth, viz. That All the Elect shall certainly persevere, and that the
Grace of Perseverance is the consequent of Election, and not Election the
consequent of foreseen Perseverance, (unless you mean only that part of
Election which determines of Glorifying, and exclude that which decrees to
give Perseverance.) But the difficulty is about the non-elect. And it is most
probable that where God decrees Perseverance, he decrees to give Grace
suitable thereto; As when he decrees the Immortality of the Soul, he gives it
a Nature apt for Immortality. And therefore that such have Confirming Grace.
But the controversy is, whether all true Grace do so confirm?

334. That an Argument cannot be fetched for Perseverance from the mere Nature
of the Grace received, seems plain, by Adam's fall, and probable from the
Angels.

335. Some Vid. Mr. George Walker of the Sabbath.
to avoid this, deny Adam to have been Holy, and suppose him only Innocent, and
Neutral, and capable of Holiness (worse than those Papists Petavius in Elench.
There. Vincent. Len^s c. 23. p. 97. Says that Adam had 1. Exterior Grace, viz.
his outward blessings. 2. Interior: And that, 1. Permanent, which was Bona
Voluntas, vel Justitia Originalis ex omnium virtutum, fidei, spei, Charitatis,
tum caeterarum quae in mente aut Voluntate resident, concursu concentuque
colle^ta. 2. Transient, that is, Actual influx or inspirations. But whereas he
bitterly censureth Vincent: for saying that Grace was in some respect natural,
it is but de nomine that he quarrelleth. And it is as if we disputed whether
Health and Food were natural to Adam? They were not essential to his nature;
but the rectitude of it concreated with nature, and given by the Creator for
nature: And yet of Grace, because sine merito, though not as now, contra
meritum. God made all very good. In illa ^um secerat qui fecerat rectum.
August. ab ipso citat.
who feign his Holiness to be a supernatural addition to his natural state,
thereby preparing men to believe that man was not made Naturally with an
Immortal Soul, for Immortal happiness). But, 1. If Adam had an immediate Moral
disposition to love God as God, and acted this, he was Holy: If he had not, it
must needs be a Privation in him, and not a mere Negation: For a rational
creature must needs be naturally obliged to love his Creator; yea, this is the
first and summary Law of Nature to him: Therefore not to do it must needs be
Sin, and the sum of all Sin: Therefore Adam thus is made a great Sinner ab
origin before his fall. 2. If Adam loved not God in his weakest degree of
recovering Grace, he was unsanctified: But if he did (as certainly he did) then
it is not like that in his least degree of his recovering Grace, he was Holyer
than in Innocence (though he might stand on surer grounds). 3. And this opinion
makes unholiness of Nature to be no part of Original Sin: Because it would be
no Privation, but a Negation: For our Nature in Infancy is not obliged to have
that holiness which it never had and lost in Adam. And so Original Sin is
almost all denied, and an unholy heart is made as innocent therein. 4. We are
renewed according to the Image of him that created us, in wisdom,
righteousness, and true holiness, Col. 3. 10. Therefore it was holiness which
was the Image of God which we lost, and needs renewing.

336. The Argument for Perseverance from Gods Immutability will hold as to all
the Elect as such, but not to all the sanctified or justified as such. For the
Angels and Adam's fall did not prove God mutable. And God can judge a thing or
person to be changed, without being himself changed; but only denominatione
extrinseca a relatione ad mutatum, is variously denominated. And even his Law
or Covenant which says He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes
not shall be damned, will not at all be changed if it justify a Believer to
day, whom it condemned as an unbeliever yesterday, and should condemn him again
to morrow if he should apostatize; or if it conclude us guilty every day anew
of every new Sin which we commit.

337. It is a very hard thing to confute an Anabaptist, without granting that
Infant Justification may be lost. For experience proves * Brianson in 4. q. 4.
1. Corrob. fol. 36. Handling the question why the baptized Infants have infused
Habits of Grace, and Virtues, cites their opinions that hold the contrary, but
inclining to the affirmative, he has no better answer to them that object
experience, which oftest finds no signs of such habits when they come to age,
than that they are known to us only by Faith.

Matthew. 28. 19, 20.

Ephesians. 4* 2, 3.


that the Children of Godly Parents too often prove ungodly: And if they had
Justifying Grace in Infancy, they lose it: And if they have not, then the
Covenant in which they are entered does not certainly Justify them. And if so,
then it is either the very same Covenant which the adult are baptized into, or
another. If it be another then their Baptism is another thing: For Baptism is
but the celebration of our Covenant with God. And another Covenant in specie
makes another Baptism in specie. And if so, it seems to be no Baptism of
Gods appointing: For he has but One Covenant of Grace to be entered by us, and
sealed; nor but one Baptism: Indeed on man's part, there is a Covenanting with
the Heart and with the mouth, an outward as well as an inward Covenanting, or
Consenting: But it is all to one and the same Covenant of God. It is the same
species of Faith in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost which baptized
Hypocrites and true Christians do profess. And Infants have no Faith of their
own to profess, but are dedicated by another's will; the title-condition of the
Adult is their own consenting Faith; but the title-condition of Infants, is
nothing in themselves, but their Parents consenting Faith without them, which
dedicateth them to God. Now we suppose the Parents to do this sincerely. If
then the Covenant ascertain not present Justification to the Infant, who has
all the condition required by the Covenant, how can we say that it any more
ascertaineth Justification to the adult, it being proved to be the very same
Covenant and not another. But if it do ascertain it, then many lose it. I run
not into their error, who tell us (and would have none of us Preach Christ's
Gospel that will not say the same) that It is certain by the Word of God that
Infants baptized dying before actual Sin are certainly saved] without excepting
the Children of any Infidels, Pagans, or Apostates, which I cannot prove of the
Infants even of Hypocrites or unsound Christians, or that the Child can he
saved by that false Faith, which will not save the Parent or him that
dedicateth him to God; or that the Children of Hypocrites or Infidels have the
condition of Justification: And if that Word of God had been cited, that makes
the assertion certain, it would have been a great kindness to us from those
whose Justice must go for such: (But we are thought unworthy of it.) For my
part, I determine not the difficult case of Infants loss of Justification.
Their case is left dark to us in the Scriptures: But my judgment is fulliest
expressed by the words of the Synod of Dort, Art. 1.. 17. And Davenant's
Treatise on that point is very judicious, and considerable, if wherever he
speaks of Baptized Infants, you will but suppose him to mean the Infants of
true Christians, and not all.

338. It seems a hard saying that any member of Christ should be cut off, and
become a member of Satan, and perish, though he were but an Infant member. But
we must not let the Metaphor deceive us: It is not a Natural member of Christ's
Person that perishes, as if part of Christ himself fell off: But a
Metaphorical Mystical Political Member. And Christ thought it no absurdity,
Joh. 15. to warn his chief Members that they fall not off, and to speak by way
of supposition of his branches as cut off, withered and burned. And Adam and
the fallen Angels, before their fall, were the Beloved of God, and his Children,
and yet fell from that love. There must be therefore stronger Arguments than
this, to turn the Scales.

SECT. XXIV. The sum and end of this Discourse of certain Perseverance.
339. The end and sum of all that I have said of Perseverance is but this, that
the controversy is neither, 1. Of such weight; nor, 2. Of such facility and
certainty, as that it should be made necessary to our charitable converse or
Church Communion to hold either this or that: But we should number it with the
dogmata not to be imposed on others, nor fit to make any breach in the love and
concord of Christians; and for my part, I profess that I take him for the
worser Christian caeteris paribus, whom I hear with disaffection blotting the
names of others with notes of unsoundness and culpability, for dissenting in
this point on one side or other, either as holding or as denying the certain
Perseverance of all the justified, than those that differ from me in the point
it self, without any proud supercilious confidence. And that it is to be
numbered with Tolerable Opinions, I have proved by these Arguments, in sum, 1.
That which is so difficult that very few of the Learned and Godly Teachers of
the Church in all ages could discern a certainty of it, cannot be a point so
great or clear, as to be made necessary for all Christians or all Pastors of
the Church to agree in: But such is this: For my part I profess that though my
judgment incline more one way than the other, it is with no certainty that I am
in the right, and I see so great difficulties after my hardest studies and
search, that my inclination is not without much doubtfulness: And humility and
modesty forbid me, to profess a certainty or too much confidence for a
Doctrine, which I openly say, I cannot prove or find that any one Christian
held of about 1000 years after the Apostles days, Unless Jovinian may be
excepted, which is doubtful.
I have not read all Books, and therefore there may have been some such that I
know not of: But I know of none, that I remember for a far longer time. I know
the Learned Bishop Robert Abbot and others cite Augustine as on that side; But
it is past all controversy, that it is not all the justified but only all the
elect whose Perseverance he asserted. And I am not he that would be separated
from the Communion of all the ancient Churches, and Doctors, and all the Greeks
and Lutherans of these times. Methinks we should learn of the Papists at least
to be moderate in our censures, when they who are so much for Impositions, do
yet bear in part of this, with one another, in the controversies between the
Dominicans and Jesuits.

340. 2. My other reason is, as to the comfort of men's Souls, how little is
the difference between these two conclusions. [I am uncertain that every weak
Christian shall persevere.] And [I am uncertain whether I my self shall
persevere.] The first is the Arminians, and the second is all or almost all
weak Christians conclusion in the world: For I have fully proved elsewhere, 1.
That the sinfullest and worst sort of true Christians have not a certainty of
their own Sincerity and Justification, nor are they fit for it: Nay, that it is
only strong, active Christians who attain to such Assurance: 2. And that there
are but few strong active Christians comparatively in the world. 3. Yea, but
few that will say [I am certain that I am sincere and justified] (excepting
those that speak it opinionatively or presumptuously, experience satisfies us.
4. And that one that is uncertain that he is justified at all, cannot be
certain that he shall persevere in Justification, I need not ^rove. So that by
our own common Doctrine and Experience, it is ^ew true Christians that are
certain of their own Perseverance and Sal^ation: And what does this comfort
them more than their Doctrine, who say that it is not certain in it self, that
any besides the strong confirmed Christians, and the Elect shall persevere? and
that we can ^e certain of the Election of none but the confirmed and the
per^evering.

341. I confess it is a great comfort to doubting fearful Souls, if they ^an
soundly thus argue, in their doubtful state, [I am sure I had true Grace once,
and I am sure none fall quite away that have it: Therefore I am sure I have it
still.] But, 1. Even this could be the comfort of none ^ut those few that were
once of the stronger sort of Christians: For no other can say [I am sure that I
had true Grace once]. 2. And that present sense of sin which makes them doubt
of their present sincerity does ^sually make them as much doubt of their past
sincerity. 3. And though such a comfort I think be due to a causeless and
melancholy doubter, (who fears unjustly) which is fetched from former
perceived sincerity, yet it is not fit for all Christians that are fallen into
such doubts. For if a man be fallen as sinful, as will stand with any sincerity,
(even ^n gross Sin) it is not safe for that man to argue, [I am sure that I
once ^as sincere in my obedience; therefore I am sure it is so still] for the
reasons which I gave before But by Repentance he must make sure that he is
truly obedient, that he may be sure he was so.

342. For my part I will labor as earnestly as I can to make sure both that I
am sincere and justified and shall persevere, and I will be none of those that
shall command, commend, or encourage causeless troublesome fears: But
preventing fear is the means of perseverance: Heb. 4. 1. Having a promise left
us of entering into his rest, let u^ fear lest any of you should seem to come
short of it, Joh. 14. 4, etc. Abide in me and I in you. -- 6. If a man abide
not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and is withered, and men gather them
and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. 7. If ye abide in me and my
words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will -- As the Father has loved me,
so have I loved you: Continue ye in my love. If ye keep my Commandments ye
shall abide in my love -- Joh. 8. 31. If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my
Disciples indeed. So Col. 1. 23. and passim. And I will never reproach, or
censure, or disaffect such men as holy Bernard (though I am not of his opinion)
who said Sermon. 1. de Septuages. [Quis potest dicere Ego de electis sum? Ego de
praedestinatis sum ad vitam aeternam? Ego de numero sum filiorum Dei? Quis haec
inquam dicere potest, reclamante nimirum, Nescit homo si amore dignus sit an
odio? Certitudinem igitur non habemus: Sed spes fiducia consolatur nos, etc.

SECT. XXV. Degrees of falling, and danger.
343. Every degree of Grace that is true, is not to be supposed pr^portionable
to the strongest Temptations: But God preserves the weak effecttually by
keeping them from Temptations too strong for them. And that which a strong
Christian overcomes might overcome a weak one, were he assaulted by it.
Therefore to avoid and pray against Temptation, is the way to be delivered from
evil.

344. Yet the weakest true Christian, in choice, resolution and trial,
forsakes all for Christ, and loves God, and prefers Glory in Heaven before
his Life, and is a Martyr in resolution. And yet there are Temptations What the
Grace of perseverance, and what confirmation is, is a great controversy among
the Schoolmen. Malderus in 12. Tho. q. ^9 a. ^0. d. 1. mentions five
Opinions: 1. That they are both one, and consist in extrinsick Divine custody.
2. That the confirmed are necessitated to good, but the mere persevering do it
freely. 3. That confirmation is only a more intense degree of the same Grace.
4. Mere perseverance is by ordinary Grace with Gods custody, and congruous
means: but confirmation is by Grace of it self most effectual, though not
necessitating. 5. That confirmation is by a participation of the Gratia et
charitas patriae. Malderus rests in this difference, that the confirmed have
such a measure of Divine help and heavenliness, as is stronger than the
strongest Temptations: But the gift of perseverance only, is with such a degree
of Grace, as would not serve, if God did not keep such from stronger
Temptations. So that confirmation is a middle state between mere Perseverance
and Glory.
which are too strong for him: For 1. He that habitually prefers God to the
Creature and his life, may yet fall into such an act as Peter did; And by
acting contrary to his habitual disposition and resolution, may weaken the
habit, and forfeit Divine assistance, and deserve desertion. 2. And he that
valueth Heaven and the love of God before his life, may yet by the nearness of
an alluring Object, by the violence of sense and passion be drawn to a fleshly
sin, and thinking that he may have the pleasure of that particular sin, without
losing Gods love, he may be drawn first to less, and by degrees to greater. 3.
And he that is resolved for God, and Glory, and Christ, and Holiness, may meet
with such subtle Arguments of Infidels or Sensualists, which he is unable to
answer, and consequently unable to overcome. And his Understanding being
deceived, his Will may follow; so that perseverance must be by the avoiding of
Temptations.

345. The greatest sins after Conversion, which are truly repented of, are
pardoned by God: And must be pardoned by the Church in order to Communion, if
the manifestation of Repentance be such as answers the ends (the
signification of its reality) and the removing of the scandal and the dishonor
of Religion, of the Church, and of Christ.

346. The Sin against the Holy Ghost seems unpardonable by the Text, though
the Papists expound it by [hardly pardonably]. And it is [an obstinate
insidelity and rejection of Christ as a Deceiver, upon a settled conceit that he
did his Miracles by the power of the Devil, when they are convinced that they
were actually done; and so a blasphemous fathering of Gods great attestation
upon the Devil, and a rejecting his last Witness to the Truth, which must
convince those that ever will be convinced.] But I have wrote a Treatise of
this Sin, and so shall pass it by.

347. If a true Believer should be supposed to fall quite away from the belief
of Christ, it seems hard to imagine how he can do it without this blaspheming
the Divine attestation of the Spirit, by which before he was brought to
believe. And it seems that therefore, Heb. 6. and 10. this Apostasy is made
the same with the unpardonable blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, which yet proves
not that it ever comes to pass, but what it would be if it did.

348. Repentance which comes from fear alone, without the love of God and
Holiness, is no sign of justification, nor consistent with it: nor is such
attrition sufficient to forgiveness: For the heart is not changed to God
without love.

349. Though where there is more love to the Creature than to God, there is no
true Sanctification (speaking of rational and not of sensual love); Yet where
there is more fear of God than love to God, there may be Grace, though weak, so
be it God be loved above the Creature.

350. A Deathbed, or late Repentance, is then acceptable, and sufficient to
pardon, when it is the Heart or Love that is thus turned from the Creature to
God habitually; so that if the person did recover, he would live to God:
otherwise it is uneffectual; not because too late, but because unsound: But
because fear is usually the principle of such men's Repentance, it is much to be
suspected, though not dispaired of.

351. The day of Grace is never past with any man while life continues, so as
that if he truly repent, he shall not be forgiven: For that is contrary to the
Gospel Covenant. But it is so far past with some, as that after their obstinate
forfeiture, the Means, Help, and Grace of Repentance shall not be given them,
nor brought so near them as they were.

SECT. XXVI. Of final Justification, and how Paul and James agree about
Justification by Works.
352. Having said this much of constitutive Justification, and the notlosing of
it, and assurance of it and its continuance, and touched the second and third
sorts of Justification, (sentential and executive) as they are here in the way,
I need not say much of them as after this life, because it may be gathered from
what is said of Pardon and Justification constitutive: Yet a little I will add.
And 1. At death a particular doom is passed on the Soul as separated: But
whether only by execution and selfconviction, we know not.

353. The Resurrection as such is a common effect of Redemption, in right
antecedent to men's well or ill deserving: And therefore all are raised Joh. 5*
22, 25, 26, 27.
by Christ.

354. The Justification of Believers at the last day, will be that great
Justification, to which all that went before were but means, and imperfect.

355. Christ will be here both Judge and Advocate, and as both justify
Believers: And he will be the condemning Judge of the Wicked.

356. All men shall be then judged according to their Works or Deeds done in
the Body, whether Good or Evil.

It is a gross oversight of D. Petavius, Elen. There. Vincent. c. 27. p. 110,
111. to acknowledge no other Reatus but obligation ad poenam; when as there is,
1. Reatus facti. 2. Culpae, which is the violation of the Precept. 3. Ad
poenam, which resulteth from the threatening. And worse, p. 110. that non omne
peccatum est culpa sed hoc solum quod ex voluntate, id est* libero arbitrio and
alectione committitur nec imputatur in culpam nisi ex deliberatione and libera
voluntatis electione trocedat. A'as, that God's Law must be thus denied or
depraved, that sin may be made no sin, and so to need no Christ or Pardon.
Cont. 1. Analogically it is peccatum in an Ox to go out of the furrow: But
properly nothing in man is peccatum, but culpa: And all breaking a Law is
culpa, and nothing else is peccatum. 2. Not to deliberate is a great and usual
sin. 3. The omission of the Wills election or intention is sin, as well as an
ill election. Woe to him that repents not of these, and is not pardoned them.
357. To be justified then will not be to be judged sinless, (as is aforesaid)
but to be judged one that by Gods Law (which must be the norma judicii) is not
to be damned to Hell, but to be glorified in Heaven, or to be sentenced to
endless life, and acquit from this Accusation that we are damnandi, or to be
punished in Hell. And in order to this, to be sentenced such as have the true
causes and conditions of Right to Impunity and Life: which are, 1. Immediately
the gift of this Right by God himself in his Covenant, with Christ the Fountain
of it.

2. A true Right and Relation to Christ as our Head and Savior, and the only
Meriter of this Covenant-Gift, and Justification, and Adoption, by his
habitual, active and passive Righteousness and Sacrifice, advanced in dignity
by Union with his Divine perfection. 3. True Faith and Repentance, with Love,
Obedience and Perseverance, as the title-conditions required by the donative
and condonative Covenant.

358. As I have before said, that a man must be justified at that Day from the
charge of Infidelity by his Faith it self (and not by Christ's Merits) and from
the charge of Impenitence by his Repentance it self; So I add, that he must be
justified from the charge of Hypocrisy by his sincerity, and from the charge
of Rebellion by his subjection, and from the charge of wickedness by final
godliness and obedience, and from the charge of Apostasy by perseverance; But
from the charge of his wickedness before Conversion, and his pardoned sins and
weakness since, only by Christ's Sacrifice and meritorious Righteousness, and
the Pardon purchased thereby, and given in the New Covenant. And from the
accusation that we are Sinners in general, we have no Justification at all.

359. Judgment is the Genus, and Justification, and Condemnation are the
Species: Therefore to be judged according to our Works, is to be justified or
condemned according to our Works.

360. As I said, that it is God's Justice and Mercy, and Christ's Redemption of
us, which are chiefly to be glorified at that Day; but it is our personal
Gospel-Righteousness, or performance of the Conditions of the New Covenant,
which is then to be tried, and we, and not Christ, that are to be judged; So I
add, that the New Testament referring to this foreseen, does usually speak
accordingly, of justifying us by Faith, by our words, or by our works, that he
that does righteousness is righteous, etc. And it speaks of that same
Righteousness as constituting us just first, by which we must be judged just at
last.

361. It is very easy therefore where prejudice blinds not men, to see the
concord of Christ's saying, We are justified by our words, and Paul's by Faith,
and not by Works, and James by Works, and not by Faith only. Christ speaks of
a particular Justification, from a common great Crime, a wicked Tongue as the
sign or product of a wicked Heart; And this must be part of the personal
material Righteousness, by which we must be justified as true Christians. Tolet
in Romans 3. Annot 17. Estius in Romans 3. 28. and Vega de justi^. qu 3. p. 899.
say of Justification by Faith, as the Protestants do. Vid. and Stapleton. de
Justifi. li. 8. c. ult. and Bellarm. de Justif. l. 2. c. 7, 10, 11. Suarez de
Great. l. 7. c. 7. n. 29. Topper. art. 8. de Justif. p. 25, 26, 27. Vasqu. in 1.
2. disput. 202. c. 6. n. 45. Coster. Enchir. p. 292.
Paul speaks of our being justified by being Christians, and not by keeping
Mose's Law, or doing any Works which will be to us instead of a Christ or a
free-given Pardon, and Righteousness by him. And James speaks of the full
condition of Justification, as continued final and complete, as it consists
of its essential parts.

362. The Key of Understanding Paul's Discourses of Justification is, to know,
1. That the grand question which he first manageth is, Whether the Gentiles may
not be saved without keeping the Jewish Law, as well as the Jews with it? 2. To
prove the Affirmative, he proves that the Jews themselves cannot be saved or
justified merely or primarily by the Law, notwithstanding the divinity and
great excellency of it; but must be justified by a Savior, and free-given
Pardon and Right to Life, and to which the sincere keeping of Mose's Law was
intended to be but subservient. 3. That therefore it appears, that the Jews
did so fondly admire the Law, and their national privileges under it, that
they thought that the exact keeping of it was necessary and sufficient to
Justification and Salvation: And they thought the Messiah was not to be their
Righteousness, as a Sacrifice for Sin, and Meriter of free Pardon, and the Gift
of Life, but only a great King and Deliverer, to redeem them by Power from all
their Enemies and Bondage. 4. That it was not Adam's Covenant of Innocence or
Perfection which the Jews thus trusted to, or Paul does speak against as to
Justification (though a minore ad majus, that also is excluded.) For the Jews
knew that they were Sinners, and that God pardoned Sin as a merciful God, and
that their Petavius de Leg, and Great. li. 1. c. 7. Well opens the various
senses, in which the Law does or does not promise life eternal: And through his
two Books is much worth the reading of the difference of the Law and Gospel:
See Mr. Allen's Treat. of the Two Covenants, with my Preface; And Mr. Truman's
Great. Propitiat. with the Append.
Law had Sacrifices for Pardon and Expiation, with Confessions, etc. But they
thought that so far as God had made that Law sufficient to political ends, and
to temporal Rewards and Punishments, it had been sufficient to eternal Rewards
and Punishments; and that of it self, and not in mere subordination to the
typified Messiah. Therefore they thought that he that kept the Law so far as to
commit no sin which the Law punished with death or abscission, and that for all
his other pardonable sins, performed the required Penances and Sacrifices, was
by this, which is called The Works of the Law; that is, the keeping of the Law,
a righteous justifiable person. 5. That the thing therefore which Paul
disproveth them by is, 1. That the Law was never made for such an end. 2. That
even then it stood in subordination to Redemption and free-given life. 3. That
the free Gift or Covenant of Grace containing the Promise of the Messiah, and
Pardon and Life by him, was before the Law, and justified Abraham and others
even without it. 4. That their Law was so strict, that no man could perfectly
keep it all. 5. That every Sin deserves death indeed, though their Law
punished not every sin with death by the Magistrate. 6. That their Law was
never Obligatory to the Gentile world, who had a Law written in their Hearts;
and therefore not the common way of Justification. Jansenius. Aug. To. 2. c. 4.
asserteth, That the chief difference between the old Law and the new, is, that
the old was written in Stone and Tables, and the new only in memory and in the
heart, and so makes the Creed to be more properly this Law than the
Scriptures, as being written only on particular occasions. But though we
thankfully confess that the essentials of Christianity are so plain and few as
may be remembered, yet the Creed is contained and explained in the Scripture,
and without written Records, our Faith would have been but ill preserved, as
experience and reason prove.
7. That their Law, as such, discovered sin, but gave not the Spirit of Grace
to overcome it: Insomuch as though he himself desired perfectly to fulfill it
without sin, yet he could not, but was under a captivity, that is, a moral
necessity of imperfection, or sins of infirmity, from which only the Grace of
Christ could as to guilt and power deliver him. 8. That no man ever came to
Heaven by that way of merit which they dreamed of, but all by the way of
Redemption, Grace, free Gift and pardoning Mercy. Therefore their conceit that
they were just in the main, and forgiven their sins, and so justifiable by the
mere dignity of Mose's Law which they kept, and by the Works of the Law, and
not by the free Gift, Pardon and Grace of a Redeemer, and by the Faith and
practical belief of that Gift, and acceptance of it, with thankful penitent
obedient hearts, was a pernicious error. But the true way of Righteousness was
to become true Christians, that is, with such a penitent thankful, accepting,
practical belief or affiance to believe in God as the Giver of Salvation, in
Christ as the Redeemer, and his Spirit as our Life and Sanctifier, and to
accept Christ and all his procured Benefits, Justification and Life, as
purchased by his Sacrifice and meritorious Righteousness, and given in the New
Covenant on this condition, and so to give up our selves to his whole
saving-work, as to the Physician of our Souls, and only Mediator with God. This
is the sum of Paul's Doctrine on this point.

363. I say again therefore, for any man to say that some one physical act,
either assent, or consent, or affiance, upon one particular Object (Christ's
Righteousness as offered us) is the instrumental cause of our Justification;
and that to look to be justified by any other act of Faith on Christ, or on the
Father, or Holy Ghost, or on Heaven the final Object (God in Glory), or
secondarily as subsequent parts of the condition of Salvation, by Repentance,
by praying for Pardon, by forgiving others, by Obedience to Christ, etc. is to
look to be justified by Works in the sense that Paul excludes them; this is
but to abuse the Gospel and the Church, by a scandalous misinterpretation of a
great part of the New Testament.

364. St. James therefore having to do with some who thought that Leg. Placeum.
in These. Salvin. de h^sce. Vol. 1. and Conrad. Bergium in Prax. Cathol. and ^.
e Blank. These. de Just. and our Mr. Gibbon's Sermon. Of Justif. in the
Morning-Exercises at Giles in the Fields. Paraeus de Justif. Cont. Bellarm. l.
2. c. 7. p. 469. Nos imputari nobis Christi justitiam ut per ^am formaliter
justi nomin^m^r and simus, neque diximus unquam, neque sentimus, ut aliquoties
jam ostendimus: Id enim pugnaret, non minus cum recta ratione quam si reus in
judicio absolutus diceret, se clementia judicis donantis sibi vitam, formaliter
justum esse, etc.
the bare profession of Christianity was Christianity, and that Faith was a
mere assent to the Truth, and that to believe that the Gospel is true, and
trust to be justified by Christ was enough to Justification, without Holiness
and fruitful Lives, and that their sin and barrenness hindered not their
Justification, so that they thus believed (perhaps misunderstanding Paul's
Epistles) does convince them that they were mistaken, and that when God spoke
of Justification by Faith, without the Works of the Law, he never meant a Faith
that contains not a resolution to obey him in whom we believe, nor that is
separated from actual Obedience in the prosecution; But that as we must be
justified by our Faith against the charge of being Infidels, so must we be
justified by our Gospel personal holiness and sincere Obedience against the
charge, that we are unholy and wicked, or impenitent, or Hypocrites, or else we
shall never be adjudged to Salvation, that is, justified by God.

365. All this then is past controversy among considerate understanding men,
1. That Works justify us not as perfect, according to the Covenant of
Innocence, because we have them not. 2. That the Works or keeping of Mose's
Law, as conceited sufficient, or as set in opposition against, or competition
with a Savior or free Gift, or any otherwise than as the exercises of mere
Obedience under Christ (as Mary, ^^chary, Elizabeth, Simeon, John Baptist,
David, etc. used them,) could justify no man. 3. That consequently no other
Works set up either in the said opposition or competition, or as any thing of
Merit, or worth is ascribed to them, which is proper to Christ, or any part of
the honor of Gods free Gift, can justify no man; nor any other way, than as
mere conditions, and exercises of thankful obedience or acceptance, in pure
subordination to God's Mercy, and Christ's Merits, and the free Gift.

But that Works are not excluded from being conditions of our justification, or
the matter of it in any of these following respects: 1. That Faith it self,
which is our act, and an act of Obedience to God, and is the ^iducial accepting
belief in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for the benefits of the Covenant,
is the condition of our first Covenantright to these Benefits. 2. That this
Faith is not actual Obedience to Christ as Christ (at first, but only to God as
God). But it is the Souls subjection to Christ as Christ, which is our
Covenant-consent to our future Obedience, and virtually, though not actually,
contains our future Obedience in it. 3. That there is somewhat of love,
consent or willingness, of Desire, of Hope, of Repentance, which goes to make
up this moral work of Faith, as it is the condition; even our first
Christianity it self. 4. That as the making of a Covenant is for the performing
of it, and subjection is for Obedience and Marriage for conjugal Duties, so our
said first Covenanting-Faith is for our future Faith, Hope, Comfort, and
grateful Obedience and Holiness: And these are the secondary parts of the
condition of Salvation: And so are the secondary parts of our Justifications,
condition as continued or not-lost, and consummate: For to justify us, is, as
is said, to justify our Right to Impunity and Glory. ^. That, as is said, our
own performance of the condition of the free Gift of Impunity and Glory, by the
New Covenant purchased by Christ's Righteousness, is the thing to be tried and
judged in Gods judgment; And therefore we must so far be then justified from
the charge of ^ot performing that condition, of being Infidels, unsanctified
impeni^ent Hypocrites, Apostates, and so of having no part in Christ and the
free Gift, even by our personal Evangelical Faith, Holiness, Repentance,
^incerity and Perseverance. And all this justification by Works St. James ^s
for, and it is undeniable by any thing but prejudice, ignorance, and ^ding
pievishness. Let the Reader of quick understanding pardon my ^epeating the same
thing, which others will not yet understand.

366. Christ's Sermons, Matthew. 5. and 6. 7. and 10. and 13. and 18. and 21. and
Luke 6. and 11. and 12. and 16. and 18. and 19. and Joh. 1. and 3. and 5. and
6, etc. with all the Sermons in the Acts, and all the Catholic Epistles of
Peter, James, Jude and John, and Paul's Epist. to the Romans Chap. 1. 2. 4. 6. 7.
8. ^2, etc. Gal. 5. and 6. and a great part of the rest of his Epistles, are
^ade up of this Doctrine of Methinks Jansenius greatly wrongeth his Cause,
when he says, To. 2. c. 13. that Primus Augustinus intelligentiam divine
grati^ and novi Testamenti fide crediti a peruit fidelibus and ecclesiae. If we
should say, that [Primus Lutherus] they would take it for a note of novelty and
error: was the Church for 400 years ignorant of Grace and fundamental
Verities? Contrarily I think that Christ's plain Doctrine in his Sermons, and
the old Churches for 300 years in their plainer uncurious Writings, plainly
delivered all the necessary Doctrine of Grace: yea even the Creed it self
contains it.
Grace which I have asserted; And the ^eading of them will better instruct you
in the true sense of Remission and ^ustification, than most Treatises written
on that Subject which I have seen.

367. The perfection of Justification and Pardon will be by the final executive
act, the taking the justified into Glory.

SECT. XXVII. Of the fewness of the glorified, and the many that perish.
368. Though it be comparatively but a little Flock, and part of this world to
whom God will give the heavenly Kingdom, yet the number will in it self be
exceeding great. And it is very probable that (this Earth being a very little
punctum of the Creation) that taking all God's rational Creatures together, the
number of the damned will be found a very small number in comparison of the
blessed; even as the Malefactors in the Jailes are to the Subjects of the
Kingdom. For the worlds above us are incomprehensibly vast and glorious; And
the Text tells us, Heb. 22. 22. That we are come to an innumerable company of
Angels: Though the proportions be unknown to us, I speak this again, that
mistakes tempt not men to unworthy thoughts of the infinite amiable goodness of
God, or of the Christian Faith.

369. And what the Saints do want in number, they shall have in excellency, to
glorify the goodness of God. The little Flock which shall have the Kingdom,
shall be all Kings and Priests, and shall judge the world (Judgment in
Scripture is much put for Government): They shall be equal with Angels, and
shining Stars in our Fathers Firmament, and shall sit with Christ upon his
Throne: And shall in a word, in the perfection of their Natures, perfectly
know, love and praise, obey and delight in God, in a perfect society in the
sight of Christ's Glory, and be assured of this to all eternity. Amen.

And we see in Gods Works of Nature, high Excellencies are rare. There are not
so many Suns as Stars, nor Stars, as Stones, or Leaves, or Trees; nor so much
Gold as Earth; nor so many Men, as Flies, Fishes, and other Animals; nor so
many Kings as Subjects; nor so many Teachers as Learners; nor so many men of
learning and wisdom as ignorance. And we see there are not so many godly as
ungodly.

370. And, as I told you before, that as Israel was not all Gods people in the
world before Christ's Incarnation, and that the Chatholick Church now
succeeds them in their high and rare Peculiarities and Privileges above the
rest of the world, and far exceeds them in the greatness of our Mercies; and
that Christ's Incarnation has put the rest of the world into no worse a
condition than they were before; and that all the world is under a Law of
Grace, and none under the Law and Covenant of Innocence only: So I now add,
that all shall be judged by that Law which they were under; They that have
sinned without a (written) Law, shall be judged without that Law: And what
state each particular Romans 2.
Soul is in, the Judge only knows, and not we, who are insolently arrogant,
if we will step up into his Throne, and judge his Subjects without his
Commission. But this we know that God has various degrees of Rewards and
Punishments (as to Infants and Adult, so to the Adult among themselves.) And
that he that gained but two Talents shall be Ruler of two Cities: And he that
had but one might have improved one, though he could not have improved more
than he had: And that they that have done good shall go into everlasting life,
and those that have done evil to everlasting punishment. And the kinds and
degrees of their different Matthew. 25. last.
punishments hereafter, how great, and how far involuntary, they are beyond the
very miserable case of their sinfulness it self, are things that are unknown to
us. But certain we are, that the Judge of all the world will do righteously,
and that all wise and righteous men's judgments, when they shall see what the
number of Sufferers, and the sorts and degrees of their punishment are, shall
be fully satisfied of the Goodness, Clemency, Wisdom and Justice of God, and
never once wish it had been otherwise. And that the Servant that knew his Lords
Will, and prepared not himself, nor did according to his Will, shall be beaten
with many stripes: But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy Luke 12.
47, 48.
of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is
given, of him shall he much required: and to whom men have committed much, of
him will they ask the more.

371. It is little understood by most how much man by sin it self is
effectively his own Tormenter, (which tempts man to doubt of Hell, as if it
were Gods too much severity so to punish.) How Sin is a punishment it self, and
how God antecedently made man's nature such, that if he would sin, it should
torment him and undo him of it self (like poison to the Body) I have opened in
the first Chapter. See Gabr. Biel in 2. d. 36. that Omne peccatum est poena,
and the four Reasons of Bonavent. recited by him.

372. The Stoics and Platonists Revolution, and the Pythagorean
Re-incorporation, are so like the Christian Doctrine of the Resurrection, that
(though we must not with Origin seek to make them liker than they are, yet)
those Infidels are unexcusable who take this for incredible, and yet take the
other for the most rational conjecture. Such as are most of the sober Heathens
in the world. For the most religious and sober of them are Pythagorears to this
day: Lege Varenium de diverse. Relig. post Hist. Jap^n.


Bless, Lord, thy own reconciling Truths, to the healing of thy Churches, or at
least of some dis-joynted minds. And teach me with patience to bear the Obloquy
and Reproach of mistaken zealous Consurers: And forgive them that know not what
they say or do. And wherein I err, forgive and rectify me, and better inform
both the Reader and me.

The Third Part: OF God's Gracious Operations ON MAN'S SOUL; Their DIFFERENCE,
and the OPERATIONS OF MAN'S WILL. For the fuller Decision of the Controversies
about EFFECTUAL and DIFFERENCING GRACE. By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevill Simmons at the Princes Arms in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXV.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Preface. Page 1. Sect. 1. The Presupposed Principles briefly repeated, p.
7* Sect. 2. The Order of Divine Operations, p. 9. Sect. 3. Of the Operations
and Principles as compared, p. 12. Sect. 4. How far God uses Means, p. 16.
Sect. 5. Of the Causes of the different Effects of Grace (and Means), p. 18.
Sect. 6. Of the Limitations of Gods Operations on the Soul, p. 20. Sect. 7. Of
the Resistibility of Grace, p. 21. Sect. 8. What is that Operation of God on
the Soul, enquired of in many following Questions? And whether searchable by
man? p. 22. Sect. 9. Whether Gods Operation be equal on all? p. 31. Sect. 10.
Whether it be Physical or Moral? p. 32. Sect. 11. What Free Will man has to
Spiritual Good. p. 35. Sect. 12. More of Predetermination by Physical
Premotion, p. 37. Sect. 13. More of Man's Power, Natural and Moral, p. 43. Sect.
14. Whether the giving of Faith be an act of Omnipotency and a Creation? and a
Miracle? p. 46. Sect. 15. Of the Sufficiency and Efficacy of Grace? p. 48.
Sect. 16. Of Infused Habits and the Holy Ghost, even special Grace, p. 53.
Sect. 17. Whether Man be merely Passive as to the first Grace? p. 55. Sect. 18.
Whether the first Grace, and the New and Soft Heart, or Faith it self, be
Promised or Given absolutely, or on any Condition to be performed by man? ibid.
Sect. 19. How God may be said to Cause the Acts of Sin, p. 57. Sect. 20. How
far God, and how far man himself, is the Cause of Hell and other punishments,
p. 62.
The Conclusion.
. 1. The Concessions of the Synod of Dort, specially the British Divines: More
of Divine Motion or Impress, p. 67.. 2. The Epitome of Alvarez de Auxil. drawn
up by himself in Epilogo in Twenty Conclusions, considered, p. 70.. 3. A
Censure of the other three ways described by him, viz. 1. The Jesuits de
Scientia Media, p. 75.. 4. 2. Durandus's Way, p. 76.. 5. 3. That of the
Scotists and Nominals: Of Gods partial Ca^sality, p. 79.. 6. The true face and
Scheme of the Dominican Predeterminant way, in the Sense and Consequents, in
Fifty Propositions, and the Reasons of my preferring any before this, p. 80. A
Summary of all, to satisfy sober minds. p. 100. Additional Animadversions on
Mr. Peter Sterrey's Book of Free Will: making God the Author of Good and Evil,
as he is of Light and Darkness, p. 106.
The Third Part: OF GOD'S GRACIOUS OPERATIONS ON MAN'S SOUL: AND THE
SUB-OPERATIONS OF MAN'S WILL. For the Ending the Contentions about Sufficient
and Effectual, Common and Special Grace, and Free Will.
The Preface.
THE first Part of this Treatise, though largest, and fullest of men's
contentious Questions and opinions, is furthest from the true point of the
difference and difficulty, which troubles the Church* And is made large by
accident, by way of disquisition and detection of the many ens^aring questions,
and vain or hurtful wranglings of the Schoolmen.

The Second Part comes nearer our chief Controversies, and resolves many
other on the by; and contains the sum of that part of Theology, which is
most clear, and sure, and necessary.

This Third Part which comes up to the main Controversy, is short, and
troubles you less with other men's opinions, and Schoolmens Wranglings about
Grace and Free Will: Partly because you had enough of them by the way before*
And chiefly because I would not by tediousness, and recitation of Contentions,
obscure that which I most desire to make plain, nor discourage the Reader by
the length.

I think if I can manifest, that there is no real, or considerable difference
among the Learned and Moderate on each side, (such as are the Synod of Dort on
one side, and even Bellarmine, Suarez, Ruiz, etc. on the other, besides the
moderate Lutherans and Arminians, (who may be ashamed if they go farther from
us than the Jesuits) besides abundance of Schoolmen that are of a middle
strain, between the Dominicans and Jesuits,) few understanding Divines would
then think that there were any considerable difference remaining about
Predestination, or the universality of Redemption; Those differences being but
respective unto this.

But about Perseverance I confess that there does a real difference remain: But
that it is of less moment than most on both sides say, and such as is no way
fit to quench Christian Love, or alienate Christians from each other, or hinder
their liberties or peaceable communion, I have fully proved in the Second Part,
and formerly in a peculiar Treatise entitled, My Thoughts of Perseverance.

If therefore I can truly disprove our pretended difference about the
^^^rations of Grace, or at least prove it to be but as it is, no greater not
more intolerable than that of Perseverance, I shall think that all is done that
is (thus) necessary.

The main difference (seeming or real) is about the Power of Man's Will: Of
which I have spoken much in the First Part, and purposely leave much to the
Reconciling Praxis in the Second Book; which shall dissipate the cloud of
ambiguous words: Till then it shall here suffice to manifest, 1. That we are
agreed with them whose conciliation I endeavor, that ^^ is not the natural
Powers* essential to a man which we are deprived of. 2. But that these Powers
have by our common corruption, a sinful Disposition, unfitting them for a due
exercise for God and against sin. 3. And that all men (at least at age) are not
depraved in the same degree. 4. That this Ill disposition is called a Moral
Impotency, when it is such as while it remains, the sinful Act is ever done,
or the commanded act is never done. There is then no Moral Power. 5. That the
vicious sinful impotency of the will, and its Habitual or dispositive
unwillingness to good, and proneness to things forbidden, is all one. 6. That
he is Morally Able, who without any other grace than he has, can do the thing
commanded, or forbear the thing forbidden. 7. That there is no Power but of
God. 8. That Nature, common grace, and special grace, give several powers or
dispositions. 9. That a moral power is less than a good habit. 10. That every
man has a moral proper power to do more good than he does, and forbear more
evil. 11. That every man is commanded to use some means in order to his
salvation, which he is morally able to use. 12. That God uses to bear long
with the abusers of their Power before he forsake them. 13. That many have many
persuasions and helps to use their power that abuse it. 14. That it is just with
God to forsake such. 1^. And great mercy to the elect not to be so forsaken.
All ^^^^ will be made cleare^ in their due ^^^^, which I shall now here offer
you.

. 2. AS for the five Articles: I. The Article of Predestination,

II. And the Article of Redemption, contain no difference between the parties,
but only as they relate to the Articles of Free Will and effectual Grace, as is
aforesaid. For all must agree that God Decreed and Christ procured all that
Grace or Mercy for men which he gives them: Of which the Conditional gift of
the Love of the Father, the Grace of the Son, and the Communion of the Holy
Spirit in the Covenant of Grace, with a Commission to his Ministers freely to
offer it to all Believing Consenters, and to seal it and deliver it by Baptism,
is a great part: And many mercies, teachings, persuasions, and motions tending
to draw them to Consent is another part. God decreed not to deny men that which
he gives them; and Christ's Death procured them all that he gives them. To
which add what elsewhere I have opened, that there is no necessity of ascribing
to God any Positive Decrees of Negations or nothings. Else there must be a
Decree against the existence of all the myriads of possible animals, atoms,
names, words, etc. And remember that to Permit is not-to hinder, and so is a
mere negation, or a doing nothing; and that not-to-give faith, repentance,
grace, the Gospel, etc. is a negation, or a nothing, and so need no Decree,
seeing a not-decreeing to give, etc. is sufficient: so that the whole of the
Controversy about these two Articles is clearly devolved to the Controversies
of Grace and Free Will.

III. And concerning Free Will it cannot be denied, but that Natural Free Will
is part of that excellency or Image of God, by which man is differenced from
bruits; and that it is such a faculty by which man can in some instances,
determine his own will to this rather than that, without Divine
predetermination; which is certain in the ^ase of sin, yea and of some good.
For Adam's will could without any other grace than he had, have forborne his
sin. Or else still all is but resolved into Gods mere will. And it is agreed on
(as is said before) that all men can do more good than they do, and forbear
more evil than they forbear, and that without any more grace or help than they
have when they use it not: so that it is not abhorrent from the nature of
Free Will, for a man to make a good use or an ill, of the same measure of grace
at several times, or for several men to make several uses of the same measure.
Therefore it is no unjust answer to the question, [Why did he forbear this sin
to day, and not yesterday] or [Why did this man forbear sin and not that,
supposing them to have the same measure of assisting grace,] to say [Because,
this man, at this time, used that power which God had given him, in stirring up
his own will to concurt with grace, and the other man, or this at another time,
did not what he could.] Not that this answer is good in all cases, (where more
grace is necessary to the effect,) but in this forementioned. So that it is no
Deifying of the will of a Rational free-Agent, to say that it is essentially a
self-determining faculty, made by God in the Image of his Liberty, and
depending on him, and not able to Act without him as the first Cause, but yet
on supposition of his Natural preservation and universal concurse, and of his
directions and Laws, it is able to make choice hic and nunc to will or not
will, to will this rather than that, without Divine necessitating
predetermination, and without any more Grace or help than sometime it has when
it does the contrary: All which showing the natural power of man's will, and its
liberty, must be readily acknowledged by all sides, that will not say that
Adams first sin, and every sin of all men else, are all resolved into Gods
causation in case of commissions, and Gods non-causation in case of omissions,
and into Gods will in both; and that man can no more do any thing but what he
does, than he can be God, or overcome God, or live and act without God.

And as we must thus agree that natural Liberty consists in a
self-determining power peculiar to Rational free agents; so we are all agreed
except the Pelagians, that man's nature is vitiated by Original sin, and
therefore that the will which is naturally free from force and necessitation
(except from God, who never necessitateth it to evil,) is yet in servitude to
our own concupiscence, and is not free either from the enticements of sense, or
the erroneous conduct of a blinded mind, or from its own vicious habits,
(averseness to God and holy things, and proneness to things sensual, and
seeming good:) And therefore that this Holy, or Moral Liberty of the will, must
have the Medicinal Grace of Christ to heal it; (of which next*)

IV. And as to the Article of Effectual Grace, it is agreed on (and cannot I
speak not of Grace as it is Gods favor, but the effect: ^e gratia data, non de
gratia dant^.
with sobriety be gainsayed without subverting the main doctrine of the
Scriptures) that whereas besides the Preparatory or Promeriting Grace of
Christ's own performance, there is yet a threefold Grace necessary for the
application or conveyance of the Benefits purchased by Christ; in the measure
hereafter mentioned, all this is common.

I. The first sort of Grace lies in the enacting of a new Law of Grace, called
also in several respects, The new Testament, the new Covenant, and the Promise.
And as to this it is agreed, 1. That God made this Law, Covenant or promise in
the first Edition with Adam and Eve after the fall, Genesis 3. 15. (the seed of
the woman shall break the Serpents head,) and did by Actual Remission, of their
sin, and not-punishing them as the first Law threatened, yet more plainly
manifest to them the pardoning Grace of this Covenant; And that he made this
new Law or Covenant to all mankind in and by them: And that he again renewed
the same Covenant of Grace with all mankind in Noah after the deluge. Those few
inconsiderate persons that deny this, are not so valuable as to be an exception
to our Concord. It is an intolerable conceit of any to think that the tenor or
sense of the Conditional Covenant of Grace (for I talk of no other) extends
not universally to all men, but that any men are yet lest under no other Law or
conditional-promise or Covenant, than that of Innocence. For if that were true,
1. Then God should be supposed to make men a promise of Life, on a condition of
present natural impossibility; And to say to sinners [If you be not sinners,
you shall live.] 2. And to oblige men to the same Impossibilities as the means
of their salvation, saying still to sinners [I require you sinners that you be
no sinners that you may be saved.] 3. Which is indeed to say that the case of
all that are under the first Law of Innocence only is desperate, and they have
no more hope or remedy than the Devils. 4. And then Christ had mistaken the
matter himself, when he commanded his Ministers to Preach this Gospel or
Covenant to all the world, and every (humane) Creature, and tell them that If
they believe they shall be saved, and to offer them Baptism if they consent. 5.
And either Preachers must preach an untruth to many, or else not know what man
to preach to. 6. But the actu-al force and obligation of the Covenant, puts all
out of doubt, that the world is under a Law of Grace: For what man, that by
siding has not his understanding utterly distorted, to look only on one side,
can say that none but the Elect are bound to Believe in Christ, or to Repent of
sin, or to turn to God? and this as a means of their salvation? What man dare
say, that any Heathens in the World, are under no obligation, to use any means
at all, for the pardon of their sins, or the recovery and saving of their
souls? What man dare say that it is no sin in them not to use any such means?
And what duty or sin can there be without a Law? And what Law can bind men to
accept of Grace, and to seek it, and use means for pardon, renovation and
salvation, but the new Covenant or Law of Grace? Sure the Law of Innocence has
no such obligation. 7. Lastly, And Gods usage of all the world, puts the case
past Controversy. For he uses no man according to the mere Law of Innocence:
All the world have a great proportion of the Mercies of the New Covenant; and
therefore are not under the Covenant of Innocence alone.

Yet we maintain that the preceptive part of the Law of Innocence as to the
future, is still in force to all men [Obey perfectly;] And that the penal part
is so far in force as to make death in the first instant due for every sin: But
we add, 1. That the Remedying pardoning Law being in force with it, does
immediately dissolve that obligation, and make it uneffectual to the punishment
of believers: 2. And that the Promising part of the Covenant of Innocence is
utterly ceased by the cessation of man's capacity: And therefore that the
Preceptive part (for perfection) is now no Condition of Life to any man.

Two things I was wont in my Ignorance to say against the universal tenor of
the new Covenant. 1. That God distinguished and excluded some at the first
making of it, under the name of the Seed of the Serpent: But 1. No Scripture
gives us the least ground to think that men equally guilty, are some called
the Seed of the Serpent, and some of the Woman, merely as denominated from or
distinguished by Gods own will or decree, without any real difference in the
persons. 2. And if the Image of Satan in Original sin, were it that denominated
the Seed of the Serpent, then all the world should be excluded, because all are
such before they are regenerate. 3. Therefore it is plain that it is not mere
Original sin that denominateth any one, the Serpents Seed, in the sense of that
Text, but a consequent rejection and opposition of the Mediator or Grace of the
new Covenant.

2. I was wont in my great Ignorance in my youth to think, that All men were
merely under the first Covenant, till Conversion, and then they came under the
second only. But this was but Confusion. To be under a Law or offered Covenant,
as the terms of life or death, is one thing; And so all are under a Law or
Covenant of Grace, and no man under the mere Law of Innocence; obliged to
perfection as the sole condition of life: And to be obedient to this Law, and a
Consenter to this Covenant, and so to be in the Covenant as Mutual, is another
thing; And this is the case of Consenters only.

So that I may take it for granted that we are agreed, that as to the first
Edition of the Law of Grace to Adam and Noe, it extends or is in force to all
the world, at least, till by enmity against Grace, they have made themselves
desperate as the Serpents seed: Yea then, the Law of Grace is in force to them,
though they reject the Grace of it.

2. And as to the last Edition of the Covenant of Grace by Christ, 1. The
tenor of it extends to all; as is visible Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. Joh.
3. 16. 2. And Christ has made it the office of his Ministers by his
commission, to promulgate and offer it to all. 3. And whereas providence
concurreth not to the universal execution, we must all confess, that Christ
came not to put the world into a worse condition than he found them in. If he
did any no good by his Incarnation, he would do them no harm. Therefore they
that never hear the Gospel, are still under the first Edition of the Covenant
made with Adam and Noah, so far as it is unaltered. I add that word, because,
that so far as the Promise was to give salvation by the Messiah hereafter to be
incarnate, none is now bound to expect his future Incarnation, because it is
past. But the same benefits that were due to believers before Christ's
incarnation, are due since upon the true performance of so much of the
condition as is still in force, and not repealed.

3. And we must needs agree, that the Ignorance of the Apostles before Christ's
sufferings, of his death, sacrifice, and resurrection, does show, that the
faith of the Godly Jews then, was far more general, and less particular, than
the faith now required of Christians.

4. And also, that more was required then, to be known particularly by the Jews
that had the Scripture and Tradition to acquaint them with the Messiah to come,
than of the rest of the world, that had not those distinct discoveries, nor
Abraham's promises made known unto them: And how much Genesis 3. 15. might cause
them to understand, we may conjecture by the words At least this much was
required of all, that they believe that their sin deserves punishment, and
misery, and yet that God of his abundant mercy, by his Wisdom securing his
Truth and Justice, will pardon sin and grant salvation to all that truly
Believe and Trust in that his Wisdom and Mercy, and repent of their sins, and
unfeignedly give up themselves to God as their merciful Redeemer. Thus far we
are agreed about the Grace of the Covenant.

II. And as to the second sort of Communicative Grace, that is, The
Promulgation of this Law of Grace, and offers of the Covenant-Benefits to man,
we are and must be all agreed, 1. That (besides what Tradition sacrificing did
intimate,) the first Edition of the Covenant of Grace (as is said) is
universally promulgate by Providence. For whereas by the violation of the Law
of Innocence, all blessings were forfeited, and all miseries deserved, and no
man had any notice by that Law, of any hope or means of his recovery: on the
contrary, all the world has great abundant mercies, and are not punished
according to the first Law, and therefore have sensible forgiveness of sin; and
all have an inward testimony or conviction, that they are obliged to gratitude
for these mercies, and also to the use of certain means (as Repentance, Prayer,
etc.) in order to their farther pardon and salvation. And all this fully
demonstrateth that God has so far promulgated the old Edition of the Covenant
of Grace, as to make it notorious that the world is not under the mere Law of
Innocence. And to believe in a Merciful pardoning God, (as he was Exodus 34.
proclaimed to Moses is become even the Law of lapsed Nature.

2. And as I said, the last Edition of the Covenant is commanded by Christ in
his Ministers commission to be proclaimed to all the world: Yea Magistrates,
parents, neighbors, all men, in their several capacities are bound to promote
it. 3. And the world has actually heard so much of the Gospel, as that Paul in
his days said, That their sound went into all the Earth and their words to the
end of the world, Romans 10. 18. when it had gone but a little way in comparison
of what it has since done. Thus far we are agreed of the Promulgation.

III. The third sort of Grace is the Internal operation of the Spirit of God
upon men's hearts; And here it is that the heart of all our difference seems
to lie.

SECT. I. The presupposed Principles.
. 1. THe way of Gods operation on souls, yea, or bodies, or any creature, is so
unsearchable, that I had rather silence, than pretend to decide abundance of
the Controversies long agitated about it. And had not men's audacious decisions,
and furious contentions (not yet allowing the Churches peace) made it
accidentally necessary to repress their presumption and their error, I should
reverently have passed by much that I must now meddle with. But the cure must
be suited to the disease.

. 2. So much as is See a notable discourse of Bradwardint of man's little
knowledge of God, li. 1. c. 1. cor. 32. contrae philos. which excellently
rebukes audacity in this case.
intelligible herein, is divine, and honorable, and amiable; and the prospect
of Gods Providence is delectable to the wise. For his works are great, and
wonderful, sought out of them that have pleasure therein.

. 3. The nature or the order of them cannot be known by the single
consideration of particular effects; but by beginning at the original, and
proceeding orderly from the superior Causes to the inferior, and seeing how
every thing works in its proper capacity and place: which man can do but very
defectively; and therefore knows but little or in part.

. 4. It is necessary therefore that I briefly look back to the Principles of
Providence and Action; which were partly mentioned before, where UNITY in
TRINITY shines to us in God and in his works.

. 5. * GOD is ONE INFINITE SPIRIT, in THREE ESSENTIAL VIRTUES or PRINCIPLES,
LIFE (or ACTIVE POWER) UNDERSTANDING and WILL, Bradwardine li. 1. c. 1. cor. 8.
p. 5. Deus est Substantia and Potentia rationalis, habens intellectum and
liberam voluntatem, cognoscens actualiter and ^olens.
which are wonderfully ONE in ESSENCE, yet THREE we know not perfectly how, but
as the Scotists say, formaliter, or rather as the Nominals, by connotation of
their objects and operations ad extra, and so by Relation, and extrinstck
Denomination. Not that Life, Intellect and Will, are formally the same in God
as in the Creature, or can formally be conceived by us; But that while we must
know God in a Glass, man's soul must be this Glass, and the Scriptures must be
our Onomasticon and Logic Books, and we must use such Notions and Names of
God, or none.

. 6. Bradwardines language is, Deum esse Omnipotentem active; nullipotentem
passiv^. li. 1. cap. 1. corol. 1. n. 7. p. 5.
These Principles as Transcendent in PERFECTION, are called GREATNESS
Communit^r antiqui Scholastic^ agunt de int^ll^ctu, Voluntat^, and Potentiae
operativae D^^ quas^ d^ Potentiis ratione distinct is, inst^t^^ntque de ^llis
peculiares tractatus cum Magis. Thom. etc. Ruiz de Voh^^^. Dei disp. 14. ^. 4.
page 158. And he contradicting it says as much, Nihilomiminus intra ^asdem
linea^ and gradus intellectus and voluntatis distinguimus Potentiam executivam
^^ partem ^arundem Potentia* rum: But less aptly.
(or OMNIPOTENCE) WISDOM and GOODNESS (or LOVE) by names borrowed from their
effects upon the creatures.

. 7. This ONE GOD, is revealed to us in THREE PERSONS, The FATHER, the (...)
(Wisdom, Word and Son) and the HOLY SPIRIT. One in Essence: incomprehensibly
Three, ad intus; but discernibly Three, in their Operations ad extra, and
Relations thereto.

. 8. As we must conceive of GODS ESSENCE by INADAEQUATE Conceptions, (as
aforesaid) or not at all, so must we of his EXISTENCE as in the Creature we
call it Modally; viz. His ESSENCE being (...) (substance,) VIRTUS and PERFECTIO
(which in the Creature, is MATTER (or substance) FORM and DEGREE): and his
FORMAL VIRTUS being Potentia-Vitalis, Intellect and Will; so his Existence is
considerable, 1. In VIRTUE it self, radically, (which is Potentia Activa
Inclinata.) 2. As in Act, IMMANENT, objectively, (as Gods self living,
self-knowing and self-loving.) 3. And as in ACTION ad extra, either objectively
or effectively TRANSIENT. And in this third respect Gods Essence is the
Operator of all his works.

. 9. The Three Divine Principles (Vital-active Power, Intellect and Will) and
the Three Divine Persons, (Father, Word and Spirit) do always inseparably
cooperate; But so as that there is a Trinity also of their Impressions or
Vestigia, which are answerably to have a Trine attribution, each Principle
being eminently apparent in his own impression, though with the rest.

. 10. Gods WORKS are CREATION, GOVERNING and PERFECTING: And so he is 1. The
first EFFICIENT OF ALL BEING Ex QUO (by creating and continuing, which are as
one;) 2. The DISPOSING or GOVERNING Cause PER QUEM; 3. The END, AD QUEM, and IN
QUO perficiuntur.

. 11. God having given a BEING to the Creatures, and their various species of
being, is after by PROVIDENCE to manage them as Active or Passive in their
several Capacities: And the ACTIVE Natures are threefold which he has made to
operate on the threefold Passives; viz. INTELLECTUAL, SENSITIVE and IGNEOUS (or
VEGETATIVE in its proper matter) upon AIR, WATER and EARTH.

. 12. GOD is so Active as not to be at all PASSIVE. All the Active Creatures
are first Passive as receiving the Influx of the first Cause, and Inferiors
from the Superior second Causes: But they are Naturally Active in that
dependence, and supposing that Influx.

. 13. The works of Providence about the Existent Creatures, are MOTION causing
Motion: GUBERNATION causing ORDER: and ATTRACTION or meet objective
Termination, satisfying their Appetites, and giving them their Ends. Cyprianus
sie explicat Act. 17. In ipso sumus; movemur, vivimus. In Patre sumus, in Filio
vivimus, in Spiritu Sancto movemur: Pater est sons omnis essentiae; Filius est
Vita; Spiritus Sanctus est agitator seu motor: unde apud Hebr. nomen habet
Ruah, quod significat endelechiam, continuam and perennem agitationem: Vid.
Strigel. in Melanct. Loc. com. page 294.


. 14. MAN being endowed by his Creator with his Image, in Vital-Active-Power,
Intellect, and Free Will, a Threefold Virtue in One, as the formal Essence of
his soul, is peculiarly fitted for such acts of Providence as he must be under.

. 15. As the higher and Nobler Natures are under God the Immediate 1. Movers,
2. Governors of the Inferior; so also are they, 3. Their Immediate or nearest
End; having a Goodness in them fitted to attract, terminate and satisfy the
Appetites of the Inferior: God is not the only end of Appetites.

. 16. The Acts of Divine PROVIDENCE about MAN-existent, are, 1. Action or
Motion, 2. Special Government, 3. Love. From whence God is Related to Man (the
fundamental Relation of CREATOR supposed,) I hold with Bradwardine li. 1. c. 2.
cor. 3. Quod necesse est Deum servare quamlibet creaturam immediatius quacunque
cansa creata: Et c. 3. cor. 3. Quod nulla res potest aliquid facere, nisi Deus
faciat illud idem immediatius quolibet alio faciente: Et c. 4. cor. 3. ^adem de
Deo Motore; ^aking immediation for proximity, and facere and movere for the
action as such, and not for the mere moral specification and comparability.
1. As ACTOR vel MOTOR, 2. As RECTOR, 3. As AMICUS, vel FINIS, Lover,
Benefactor and End. 1. ACTION as such is from God in the first relation. 2.
Action as ORDERED is by him in the second. 3. Action as TERMINATED FINALLY and
in perfection, is in him in the third.

. 17. Creation infers Propriety; and making us Good and inter b^na and ad
bonum infers that God is our Benefactor: So that ab origin he standing in
these three Relations to us, from what is past, he is to dispose of us by
Providence accordingly.

. 18. Gods Omnipotence is most conspicuous in Creation (propriety), and Motion:
His Wisdom in Governing and Order: and his Good will in our Benefits
(efficiently) and our Perfection (finally) in mutual Love.

. 19. MOTION is caused by Moving ^^^ce impressed: ORDER (moral) by LAW or
signification of Gods Will de debito: And PERFECTION by attingency and union
with our END.

. 20. From the first resulteth NECESSITY properly so called: From the second
Moral RECTITUDE: In the third is FELICITY; as to single persons.

. 21. From the first (viz. God as Actor) upon Many or the Universe, arises
COOPERATION or Concurse; All things work together, as the Wheels in a Watch.
From the second (Divine ORDERING) arises HARMONY: and from the third,
UNIVERSAL PERFECTION and Melody of the whole Creation; and to man, perfect Love.

. 22. Motion is unresistible unless by a greater or unequal Contrary Motion, or
passive impedition: and its effect as such not free, but Necessary. Government
by Law is resistible, and obedience free. Final Goodness or Love, do perfect
and felicitate, necessarily and freely, not effecting, (for so they are not now
considered) but satisfying so far as they are enjoyed.

. 23. The Creation being past, and Beings existent (except what Generation and
Composition make, unfearchably*) and Gods fundamental RELATIONS settled, we
shall confound and be confounded, if we distin-guish not Gods after-actions
according to the Relations in which he works them, and their foresaid
differences in themselves.

SECT. II. The Order of Divine Operations.
. 1. GOD is the Immediate Cause of all things and actions, caused Bradwardine
ib. p. 172. seems to favor Averrois saying that God is Forma omnis formae,
and forma maxim essentialis and principalis cujuscunque formati: and so acts
all things: And indeed when we deny him to be the form of any creature, we mean
that he is More and not Less. And that we have not a fitter Analogical
conception of God, than that he is eminently more than the soul of the world.

And c. 14. p. 210. he calls [Necessarium] the most proper name of God. But
when he says c. 17. that Gods Essence, Omnipotence, Intellect Naturally
precede Gods Knowledge, and cause it, and so puts Causes and Effects in God,
he is too bold.


by him, as to the Proximity of God to the effect. For he is every where
present in Essence, and as near to every Being and Action as it is to it self.
We must not conceive of Gods using means, as we do of man's, where the Pen, the
Saw, the Knife, etc. is between the hand and the effect: God is as near and as
total a Cause of what he does, as if he used no second cause.

. 2. They that say God is thus Causa Immediata Immediatione and Suppositi seu
Essentiae and Virtutis, speak true, but not aptly, because it ill insinuates
as if Gods Virtus were not his Essence: when as in God they are all one: only
as inadequate conceptions we may distinguish suppositum a virtute, but not
otherwise; And it is not as quid creatum that we speak of Virtus.

. 3. Since the Creation, in the Motions of Providence, God who at first made
the Universe to be One by conjunction and cooperation of parts (as truly as a
Clock or Man is one) has settled a course of second Causes, that one thing may
act upon and move another; and though he work upon the Highest of these Causes
immediately without any other subordinate Cause, yet on all the rest he
ordinarily works by superior created Causes: which are some of them
Necessary and operate in one constant course, and some of them Voluntary and
Free, and operate more mutably and contingently.

. 4. The course of Necessitating Causes is commonly called NATURE, and the
Influence of Angels and other Voluntary Causes distinguished from Natural: But
they all operate as second Causes under the Influx and Government of God, upon
us that are here on earth.

. 5. There is no Place where any Corporeal being is, where some Active created
Nature is not with it: so that considering the proximity and the natures, we
may well conclude, that we know of no corporal motion under the Sun, which God
effects by himself alone, without any second Cause.

. 6. Joh. Sarisburiensis and some Schoolmen liken Gods presence with the
Creature in operation, to the fire in a red hot Iron, where you would think all
were Fire and all Iron: But the similitude is too low. The SUN is the most
Notable Instrument in visible Nature: And GOD operateth on all lower things by
its virtue and influx; God and the Sun do what the Sun does: and we know of
nothing that God moves here on earth (that is corporeal) without it.

. 7. But the Sun moves nothing (as the Cartesians dream) by a single Motive
Influx alone; but by emission of its Threefold Influx (as every Active Nature
does;) that is, Motive, Illuminative and Calefactive; which are One-radically
in Three-effectively.

. 8. This Efflux of the Sun is universal and equal ex part sui: But causes
wonderful diversity of effects, without diversity in God the prime Cause, or in
it self. The same Influx causes the Weed and Dunghill and Carrion to stink,
and the Flowers of the sweeter Plants to be sweet; some things to live, and
some to dye; some things to be soft, and some hard, etc. In a word, there are
few changes or various actions below (in bodies) which the Sun is not the Cause
of, without difference in it self: But not the specifying Cause.

. 9. The reason why one equal Influx causes such wonderful diversity of
motions, is the DIVERSITY of RECEPTIVE DISPOSITIONS and natures. Recipitur ad
modum recipientis. So one poise makes various Motions in a Clock, etc.

. 10. God operateth on second Causes, as God, Omnipotently; but not ad ultimum
potentiae, but Freely as he pleases.

. 11. God works by second Causes, according to the said Causes aptitude; so
that the operation of Infinite power is limited according to the quality of the
second cause which God uses.

. 12. There is a superiority and inferiority among Spirits as well as Bodies;
And whether God work on all our souls by superior Spirits as second Causes, is
unknown to us: It is not improbable, according to the order of his providence
in other things: But we know little of it certainly.

. 13. But certain we are that superior Voluntary Agents, Angels and Devils,
have very much to do with our souls, and operate much upon them. It is a
wonderful power, which wise observers perceive Satan has upon the Imagination,
or Thinking faculty; (of which I could give some instances enough to convince a
rational Sadducee.) And it is not like that good Angels have less power, skill,
or will.

. 14. And we are sure that God has ordained One Great Universal second Cause
to convey his Spirit and Grace by; which is JESUS CHRIST. As the Sun is an
Universal Cause of Motion, Light and Heat, to Inferior creatures, and God
operateth by the Sun; So is Christ set as a Sun of Righteousness, by whom God
will convey his spiritual Influx to men's souls: and there is now no other
conveyance to be expected.

. 15. Christ's Humane Nature united personally to the Divine and Glorified, is
by the Office of Mediator Authorized, and by Personal Union and the Fullness of
the Holy Spirit enabled and fitted to this communication of Gods Spiritual
Influx to mankind.

. 16. Object. A Creature cannot be a Cause of the Operation of the Holy Ghost,
who is God the Creator; Sending is the Act of a Superior: But Christ's humanity
is not superior to the Holy Ghost.

Answ. 1. Christ as a Creature is no Cause of any Essential or purely Immanent
Act of God (for that has no Cause.) But 1. He is a Cause of the Spirits
operation, as it signifies the effect; 2. And so the cause why his Act is
terminated on the soul; and 3. Of the ordering of these effects; why rather on
this soul than on that, and at this time, measure, etc. And 2. This Christ does
not as a superior sender of the Spirit, but a Ministerial, and a second cause:
As a Master pays his servants as his Steward determines.

. 17. It is certain that Christ is the Political Cause or Head of this
spiritual Influx on souls: that is, As Mediator is Authorized to determine of
the Persons, measure, time, conditions, of the Communication of the Spirit: But
whether he be a Physical Head of this Influx, by proper efficiency giving the
Spirit from himself, as the Sun gives us its Influx, is all that is
disputable. That is, Whether the Spirit be first given Inherently to Christ,
and pass from his person (as his) unto us, as the Spirits do from the Head to
the Members?

. 18. This question may be put, either of all Natural Being and Motion, or only
of Spiritual Motion in the soul of man. Whether Christ be so the Head of
Nature, as that all Nature in Heaven and Earth, is sustained and actuated by
him as the physical efficient Cause? or whether this be true of this Lower
World which was cursed for sin? or whether it be true, at least of Humane
nature? or whether it be true only of Gracious operations?

. 19. 1. That Christ has the Political dispose of the whole Universe
(contained in the words Heaven and Earth) the Scripture seems to assert. 2.
That he has the Political disposal of humane nature, and of all other
creatures that belong to man, so far as they belong to him (Angels, Devils,
Sun, Air, Earth, etc. is past dispute. 3. That the real ^hysical effects (acts
and habits) of the Spirit on men's souls, are caused by Christ's Moral Causation
by his Merit, and his Political Mission, is past dispute. 4. That besides all
this, the Spirit it self by Baptism is in Covenant with all the members of
Christ, and that as they are such, and is in a prior Covenant first Related to
Christ himself, and so by this Covenant given us in relation as we are united
to Christ, is past dispute. 5. And that Christ himself does make such Physical
changes on our souls by Means, and by the foresaid Political Mission of the
Spirit, by which we are made Receptive of more of the Spirits operations, is
past dispute. 6. But whether moreover, any Action of Christ's own Humane soul
glorified do physically reach our souls? or whether the Holy Ghost may in its
own essential Virtue (which is every where) be said to be more in Christ than
elsewhere and communicated to us as from the root, or the Spirits effects on
the soul to come by Reflection from the first effects on Christ, as Light and
Heat from the Sun by a Speculum or Burning-glass, are questions not for me to
determine.

. 20. Christ's spiritual Influx on souls is not single, but is ever Three in One
(as the Sun's aforesaid,) which are according to the Threefold Divine
Excellencies Communicated, and the Threefold humane Receptive faculties; viz.
LIFE, LIGHT and LOVE: or spiritual Vivification, Activity and Power, spiritual
Illumination of the Intellect, and spiritual Conversion or Sanctification of
the Will by holy Love.

. 21. It is certain that it is not only on believers that Christ operateth by
the spirit: For he draws men by it to believe: and many wicked men that are
not his elect have common, even miraculous gifts of the spirit, Mat. 7. 21, 22,
23. Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 6. 5, 6. 1 Cor. 14.
which are all communicated by Christ.

. 22. As Nature it self is in his Political power, and is delivered to him, so
far as it is reparable, and belongs to the reparation of man; so all gifts
and operations Received by any in the world, which are Mercies contrary to
commerit, are the effects of Christ: Even as the Sun shines in the night by
the Moon, and in the dawning of the day by it self unseen, and after by it self
appearing; so Christ shines to the Heathen world in abundance of natural and
providential mercies, and by the help of many Creatures and experiences; and to
some by nearer approaches, as well as to the Church by the manifestation of
himself. All which is evident, 1. Because the whole lapsed world in Adam and
Noe were brought under his own Covenant of Grace, according to which he
operateth. 2. In that so much mercy after sin, will not stand with Gods
regiment by the mere Law of Innocence, violated. 3. In that Christ is expressly
called the Savior of the World; and the Savior of all men, especially of them
that believe; who dyed for all, in that all were dead, that they that live
should live to him; who tasted death for every man, etc. And Joh. 1. 9, 10, 11,
12. That was the true light which lights every man coming into the world (or
coming into the world, lights every man.) He was in the world, and the world
was made by him, and the world knew him not. And v. 4, 5. In him was life, and
the Life was the Light of man: and the Light shines in darkness, and the
darkness comprehended it not, etc.

. 23. This threefold Influx of Christ's Spirit (for LIFE, LIGHT and LOVE) is not
equally effectual on all, nor equally effectual on the same person at several
times, nor each part of the influx equally effectual on the same person at the
same time. The Reasons anon.

SECT. III. Of the Operations and Principles as compared.
. 1. THough Power, Wisdom and Goodness or Love, all cooperate by the spirit of
Christ; yet in the work of Man's Recovery their Impressions are not equal. But
as POWER with Wisdom and Love, more appeared in the CREATION, (as is
aforesaid;) so WISDOM with Power, conveying Love, appears more in our
Redemption; and LOVE with Power and Wisdom is most conspicuous and illustrious
in our Renewed state, begun indeed by Sanctification, but perfect in our
GLORIFICATION. As to the Question between the Schoolmen define and beatitudin,
undoubtedly the Thomists err in placing it chiefly in the Intellect (And Medina
and others give silly reasons for it, and the Scotists (of whom Rada well
handles it) are far righter: And Agid. Romanus briefly and clearly tells us
the truth, Quodlib. 3. q. 18. p. 187. [Btatitudo est in aliquo finaliter and in
a^^quo formaliter. Na^ si ipsum objectum principa^^ Voluntatis, prout habit
rationem finis, sit beatitudo, oportet quod beatitudo principaliter sit in hoc
objecto: -- and co^sequenter formaliter in actu Voluntatis. Nam Voluntas in
suum objectum tendit finaliter; sed per suum actum teadit in objectum
formaliter: Ex quo apparet quod be ^titudo sit magis in ipso objecto
Voluntatis, quam in actu: quia ratio finis est magis in objecto quam in actu.]
This is clear truth, if you put but finis alone for beatitudo: For Beatitudo
qua talis is not the principal end of man; but God as God in his perfect
Goodness, and the fulfilling of his will next; and then our own beatitude with
that of the bles^ed: And he makes Vision (and not Love) to be the secondary
final object of all.


The Omnipotent Father (as is said) Creates Nature, with the Son and Holy
Spirit. The Son, the Wisdom of the Father, is the Physicion of souls, and
heals them by SKILL with Power and Love. The Holy Ghost, called by the
Schoolmen, The LOVE of God, dwelling and working peculiarly in us to and in
perfection, with power and Wisdom, is the PERFECTION of the soul: And so
Natura, Medela, Sanitas, are the various effects of the Divine operation.

. 2. Therefore the SONS operation in procuring and communicating the SPIRIT (of
Love and Holiness) is eminently sapi^^tial.

. 3. The Impressions of all the Divine Virtues are excellent, in their several
kinds: And it is hard for us to say that this is simply more excellent than
that: But we can say, which is more suitable to the nature of man, to be
esteemed and Loved by him. And so we esteem the Impressions of Wisdom and Love
as most suitable to us.

. 4. A Horse or Ox excels Man in strength, and a Bird or Hare or Dog in
swiftness; and a Mountain and an Oak in Greatness: And yet we account the
Wisdom and Moral Goodness of man to be a greater excellency, and to make him
the more noble Creature.

. 5. And God seems to tell it us, 1. By calling these his Image. 2. And by
making man the Lord of these stronger Creatures.

. 6. And among men, we take him not for the most excellent who is the
strongest, but who is the Wisest and the Best. And therefore the Wisest and
Best are by Aristotle said to be born by Nature to Rule the rest: and by all
sober men are thought to be the Fittest to Guide and Rule others; (how seldom
soever it comes to pass:) while the Robuster sort are Laborers and Mechanics.

. 7. Yet I deny not but the effect is answerable to the Cause; And as
Active-Power causes Action, and Wisdom and Government causes the Order and
Rectitude of action, and Love and Goodness the Perfection of it and the agent;
so Gods Vital-Power, Wisdom and Goodness, are equal, which are the Principles
of all: As the Father, Son and Spirit are coequal: And God is indeed glorious
in the Motion of Sun and Stars, etc. as well as in the Wisdom and Holiness of
man. But besides the foresaid suitableness, this difference must be considered,
that as Life, Intellect and Will, Power, By special Grace, some mean two
distinct things: viz. 1. Our Love to God and other holy Habits and acts, or an
Inclination to them. 2. Gods favor to us, and acceptance of us, and that as
relating to the Glory which he will give us: so that the first they call the
Habit of Grace, qu^ ens and qualitas, etc. and the latter they call the formal
nature of Grace, viz. quatenus Deo gratiosi seu amati sumus. So Alvarez de Aux.
disp. 60. p. 275. [Gratiam augeri in esse gratiae, (and similiter charitas in
esse charitatis,) nihil aliud est quam quod per illam acceptetur justus ad
majorem gloriam.] By which he decideth the question, whether Grace or Charity
be increased by remiss acts, or only by intense acts, saying that [1. Gratia in
esse gratiae, and similiter Charitas in esse Charitatis statim augentur, etiam
per actus remissos (that is, We are made more acceptable to God, for greater
glory:) But augmentum gratiae and charitatis in esse Habitus, quod homo meretur
per actus remissos, dabitur postea in primo instanti glorificationis.] And it
seems that so they sometimes take Charitas too, both for the Habit and Act of
our Love, and for our Amability or Dearness to God. Now this is ill done: For
these equivocal words signify these, not as one, but as two distinct things:
Amor and Amabilitas or Dearness are two things: Though Love be materially our
Loveliness* yet not formally: the latter being an ob^ective relation resulting
from the former.
Wisdom and Goodness, are Inadequate conceptions of One God, so all together
are a more perfect expression of him, than one of them alone. Now in all these
the former is still employed in the latter, as to the very sense of the word,
but not contrarily. Power does not always signify Wisdom or Love; but Wisdom
signifies the wisdom of one Potent, including power, (for there is Potentia
Intellectiva.) And Will or Love include Power and Act. So Action may be without
ORDER or Rectitude, and Perfection, but the order and perfection of Acts,
include or suppose the Acts.

. 8. It is therefore the glory of Gods SAPIENTIAL work of Government which
eminently shines forth in the communications of Grace by the Spirit of Christ:
But not that Government which was fitted to the state of Innocence; but that
which stands nearer to the End, as more demonstrating Love, and tending more
effectually to it.

. 9. Therefore it is much to be noted that all this frame of Grace as tending
to Glory, is usually called in Scripture, The Kingdom of God, and The Kingdom
of Heaven, Matthew. 13. 45, etc. which contains the whole frame of Political
Order and Government.

. 10. This Kingdom is the state of Relation between God and the Mediator as the
Head or Ruler, and Man as the Subject, as he is to be guided by Grace to Glory.
God who is Physically neither Pars nor Totum makes himself here as it were a
Relative Part, being the supreme Head; and the Mediator the supreme official
Head, or general Administrator: who has under him a course of Political means
for the accomplishment of this his work.

. 11. As Christ himself is the Head Means or second Cause, so under him are
Prophets and Apostles, eminently qualified to make them fit to do this work so
as tends to success.

. 12. These Prophets and Apostles were endued with that special infallible
Spirit, by which they certainly delivered Christ's doctrine and actions, and
faithfully discharged all their trust.

. 13. They had the power of working Miracles many ways to confirm their
doctrine as the Truth of God. (Besides Christ's M^racles.)

. 14. The Scriptures are Gods Record, which they left us to be the continual
standing signifier of his will.

. 15. In these Scriptures are his Doctrine to teach, his precepts to make duty
and oblige, and forbid sin (by prohibition;) his own and servants examples to
move; his threatenings to drive; his promises to draw, formed into a Covenant,
strongly to engage; the Records also of his Judgments and Mercies upon others,
that they might every way be fitted to their sanctifying use.

. 16. He has also instituted his Sacraments by which the mutual Covenant might
be celebrated the more obligingly for its effects.

. 17. He has appointed his ordinary Ministers as his standing officers through
all generations to preach this word; And he endoweth them with special gifts
thereto; and charge them vehemently to preach in season and out of season,
with urgency and importunity, even to all mankind, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Mat. 28. 19,
20. whatever it cost them, and whatever they undergo.

. 18. He has appointed also Prayer as his Means to obtain Grace by preparing
the heart to a due receptivity; by the excitation of desires after it: And
Praise and Thanksgiving to sweeten it to us in the review when we have received
it.

. 19. He has commanded exercises of humiliation, confession, bringing down the
body, to fit us to receive it by a due sense of our sins, unworthiness and
wants.

. 20. He has appointed the public assembling of his servants, that concurse
might augment the Sacred flame, in the performance of all this Sacred work.

. 21. He has instituted the Lords day, to be wholly employed in such works and
helps, that it be not neglected and lightly done.

. 22. He has commanded every private Christian to be a helper to others, by
conference, exhortation, and good example.

. 23. He has made Pastoral discipline a great ordinance to promote the due
performance of all the rest.

. 24. He has commanded us by secret Meditation, Consideration, Examination,
etc. to preach to our selves, and night and day to think on Scripture, God,
Christ, Glory, etc. and to stir up all Gods graces in our selves, and to
reprove our selves for all our sins.

. 25. He has made it the duty of Parents to teach their Children diligently
his word, lying down and rising up, at home and abroad, Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. and to
educate them in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, having bound them first
in Covenant to God and the Mediator.

. 26. He has made it the duty of husband and wife to help each other herein,
and of masters to help their servants, and all relations to sanctify their
places and opportunities to this use.

. 27. He does by multitudes of mercies and deliverances further all this work,
to make known the more his Love to win the hearts of men.

. 28. He greatly promoteth it also by seasonable afflictions, to humble the
proud, and awake the sleepy.

. 29. He makes it men's great duty to tame the body, and mortify
concupiscence, and make no provision for the flesh to satisfy the lusts
thereof, Romans 13. 13, 14. and 8. 13. Gal. 5. 21, 22.

. 30. He commands us to avoid the company of the wicked, and to join in the
Communion of Saints, and walk with such as will be our helpers toward Heaven.

. 31. He commands us to avoid all Temptations of Satan, and the world and
flesh, and to live in a continual war against them.

. 32. He makes all the world about us, the book or glass in which we may see
our maker and his will; yea even our own natures; and every Creature does
preach him to us; and all things must be sanctified and used to this holy end.

. 33. He sets Death continually before our eyes, assuring us of the
shortness of our lives, and showing us how we must leave this world, that we
may read Vanity upon all, and not be deceived by it.

. 34. By all this we see that this Kingdom of Christ, is a sapiential frame of
Moral Causes, designed for the Government of man, in right ordering his
internal and external acts, and glorifying eminently the wisdom of our Ruler.

. 35. And he that will think rightly of this excellent frame must have all
these things in his consideration: 1. That Christ himself is not only a
Justifier and Actor of us, but a Prophet, Priest and King, and that the
Government is laid upon his shoulders, Isa. 9. 6.

2. That we are not only Patients and pardoned sinners, but also Subjects, and
engaged Covenanters.

3. That Christ's Church is not like a Statuaries shop, but a Kingdom, and a
School, where all must learn and obey.

4. That Christ has not only Motive power, but Laws, Promises, Threatenings,
etc. to work by.

5. That his great blessings of Glory are his Rewards, and Hell at last after
those here, are his punishments, foretold to work on souls.

6. That he has a day, in which as Rector, he will judge the world in
righteousness, according to what we have done in the body.

7. That faith is wrought by Preaching, and Love and Hope and obedience are the
ends and uses of faith.

8. That the felicity of individuals, and in them of the Heavenly Society in
one Glorified body with Christ, is the end of all, where Gods Remunerating
Justice is to be glorified, and his governing Wisdom and Love for ever.

. 36. From all this I conclude, That they that slight all this work of God, by
the contemptuous name of Moral Suasion, and take it to be a diminutive term as
to the honor of it, to call it Moral, and by Means, and talk of Gods work of
Grace on the soul, as if there were no more in it very honorable, than a
physical Motion, and God Converted souls but as Boys whip their Tops, or Women
turn their Wheels, or the Spring moves the Watch, are Cartesian blind
Theologues, and overlook the very nature of that Theology which they profess,
which is the Doctrine of the Kingdom of God over man; And while they see little
but Matter and Motion, they are fitter mechanically to treat of or deal with
Stones, or Bricks, or Timber, than men ^ being unfit to treat of humane
Government, much more of Divine.

SECT. IV. How far God uses Means.
. 1. CHrist who is the chief means is used in all the Conveyances of Grace, to
any one in the world.

. 2. God has a double work in Illuminating and Converting souls: One by
activity of exterior appulsive causes: The other within us on the Agid.
Column. Romans Quodl. 1. qu. 2. p. 5. cites Dio^ys. de div. nom. l. 3. as
holding that every order of second causes is like a beam of light streaming
down from God, as so many cords let down to men to draw them up to God: And if
a man should take hold of one of them and ascend to Heaven, he might imagine
that Heaven did bow down to him, when indeed it moves not, but he would draw
himself up to it: so when upon Prayer or other second Causes, God does us good,
he seems to incline and bend to us, but it is not so, but he is unchangeable
and it is we that are drawn and moved to him, and by the use of means by us, we
are conjoined to Gods purpose, that the things may be done for us which he has
decreed: Vid. reliq. where he confuteth the contrary errors.
faculties of the soul, without those causes. I cannot better illustrate it,
than by the causing of sight, hearing, etc. The Light without us, is not only a
terminating object (as some dream,) but an Active thing, or Action, which
operateth by appulse upon the eye: And the Sun and Air are the causes of it.
The eye is not only a passive Receiver (as some dream,) but an Organ where the
visive spirits, and soul are Active: And God works internally on this visive
faculty by his influx, to sustain it in its activity. And by a congress of
these two fires or Active causes, the sensitive soul does see. Now we all know
that God gives the external light only per media, by the Sun, etc. But how he
sustaineth and actuateth the Visive faculty is more difficult. His own influx
or Causation is undoubted: And that the same Sun ut causa universalis
cherishes and moves the visive spirits: But whether God move the sensitive
faculty or soul it self, by any superior spirit, or mediate cause* in its
motion or action toward and on the exterior light, is past our knowledge:
(Though the order observed in other cases, makes it not improbable.)

Even so in the Illumination of the mind, and conversion of the will, we are
sure that beside the terminative object, there is an external motion which by
the foresaid means is made at least on the senses, and imagination, whatever it
do further on the Intellect: But in the superior Influx on the soul it self,
what use God may make of Angels or other superior spirits or causes, we cannot
tell. We are sure (as is said) that if there be a second cause, yet as to
proximity it is never the less nearly from God: And souls being Intellectual,
and for ought we know of the highest nature of Creatures, though not the
highest Degree, neither is improbable, that God moves us by a second cause, or
that he does it without.

. 3. But as Christ's fore-described mediate Causality is still supposed, so it
is certain that God does not only work (as some think) concomitantly with the
word, but by it as his Instrument. Though his ways of cooperation are past
the reach of man: yet this much is sure, 1. That he adap^eth the means to do
their work, both word, Minister, etc. 2. And that his concurse makes the due
Impression on the sense and imagination. 3. And though no Philosopher certainly
know whether the Images in the fantasy be merely passive as to the Intellect,
or what use is made of them and the passions to Intellection and Volition; yet
such use as is naturally to be made of them for these ends, God makes, and
manageth them accordingly by skill and power.

. 4. But here MOTION the effect of Active force, and ORDER of motion, as the
effect of GOVERNMENT, must be well distinguished: For it is not so much the
second Causes of the souls Action, as such, that we are now enquiring after:
But of the ORDER and Rectitude of its Actions, which is done by Government.

. 5. That God does work Grace on man by means, ordinarily, (as ordinarily he
causes natural effects by means; and Miracles are rare) may be proved by all
these following evidences.

. 6. 1. In that he has made so large provision of means, and that in an
admirable frame, which is as it were, a Moral world. Which he would never do in
vain; nor if he ordinarily workt without them that work which he has appointed
them to do. It is the reason of the British Divines in their suffrages at
Dort. Had not God decreed to work Grace by means, he could have done it with a
fiat.

. 7. 2. The Glory of this Kingdom or Sapiential Rule, which is so constantly
and largely given him in the Scripture, Psalm. 103. 10. and 145. and 119.
throughout; and Matthew. 25. As the Ship*master or Pilot is praised who by a Helm
can turn about the Ship as he will, Jam. 3. 4.

. 8. 3. God works on all things according to their nature: And this is
suitable to the nature of man: And the Causation is answerable to the effect:
And ORDER is a moral effect, which needs not a Creation but a moral ordering
Causation.

. 9. 4. Experience tells us that those prosper best in grace that most
faithfully and diligently use the means: And we never knew of any man 1 Timothy 4.
15. Prove. ^: 20, 21. and 3. and 5. and 8. and 13. 4.
in the world, that came to Actual knowledge, faith, or Love, without means;
but all by the causality of them.

. 10. 5. We find that the greatest neglecters and despisers of means, are every
where most graceless, and the worst of men.

. 11. 6. We have (Ministers and people) frequent and strict commands, to use
means most diligently, constantly and carefully.

. 12. 7. We have abundance of promises of Gods blessing upon the Licet omnis
causa secund^ proprie dicta, causet effectum ex natura rei, tamen quod ipsa sit
causa non est ex natura rei quia solum ex voluntate Dei. Alliac. in 4. q. 1. F.
use of means: Act. 26. 17. I send thee to open their eyes and turn them. Romans
10. How shall they hear without a Preacher, etc. Isa. 55. 2, 3. Hear and your
souls shall live. Matthew. 28. 20. I am with you always, etc. Luke 10. 16. He
that hears you, hears me. Psalm. 19. 7, etc. The Law of the Lord is pure --
Converting the soul. 1 Pet. 1. It is the incorruptible Seed that regenerateth
us. Heb. 4. The word is powerful -- and a searcher of the heart, etc.

. 13. 8. When God will save a people he sends them the Gospel, and Amos 8. 11.
Prove. 29. 1^
when he will forsake them he takes it away.

. 14. 9. The Devil shows his malice to souls and grace, by opposing the
means, depriving men of them, or keeping them from them, or from the faithful
using of them.

. 15. But it is none of my meaning that the bare means of it self does change
the soul, or that it is the principal cause: But only that God operateth Moral
effects by Moral means, as he does Natural by Natural means, being still the
prime Cause of all himself.

. 16. If we thus conjoyn all Causes and separate not what God has conjoined,
it will help us the better to escape error in this matter. But if men will
dream that all the honor or action that is ascribed to second causes, is a
derogation from God and a dishonouring of him, they forsake the truth and
injure him.

. 17. For if this were true, that to honor the means or acknowledge Though God
be proxi^u^^ (not as in loco) in all his operations, yet seeing he operateth by
second causes, he does it according to them, as all experience tells us:
Therefore to end these Controversies, we should consider more how those causes
operate.
second Causes, and their aptitude and efficacy, is to dishonor God, then God
should be the greatest dishonourer of himself, by making and using such causes
and means; And so many Creatures as there be in the world, so many dishonours
are cast on God; and the excellentest Creatures would dishonor him most: which
sottish conceit must needs be joined with Manichaeism, that an ill God was the
Maker of the World. God is Glorious in all his works, and shines to us in them
all.

SECT. V. Of the Causes of the different Effects of Grace and Means.
. 1. Gerhard. Tom. 2. de lib. a^b. cap. 6.. 1. supposes that no cause of the
efficacy of Grace is found in the will of man, as being dead and vicious; but
yet that Grace does not physically determine the will, but so work as leaves
it a power to resist: and that resistance is it that makes the difference
between man and man by making Grace uneffectual.

And Georg. Calixtus was of the same mind, as you may see in his words de
Minist. Verbi. p. 241. and in Judic. de Controvers. number. 33. See ^e Blank These.
de distinct. Grati^.


ALl that is Good in the Difference between man and man, is Willed by God, and
Caused by him: But nothing that is Morally Evil.

. 2. As in Nature, God seems to Cause Motion in genere by an equal universal
Influx of the Sun, which makes no difference per se, but per accidens; But the
wonderful variety of motions and effects is otherwise caused: So it seems
that Christ the Sun of Righteousness, affords by his Means of Nature (which
he Politically manageth) an indifferent influx or help for Action as Action to
the souls of men: which as Dr. Twisse frequently says well, is to be called
Nature rather than Grace (except as the repriving of Nature is Grace) so far as
it is mere Power to Act; because it is equally indifferent to a good act as a
bad, and to do or not do.

. 3. The Power of Action as such, being given by an equal Natural Universal
Influx, it is the ORDER of Actions, where we must enquire of the difference and
its Cause.

. 4. Action it self is not a proper substantial being, but a Modus Rei. But yet
it is such a Mode as (by the Cartesians leave) requires more Causation to it,
than a mere non agere does. But ORDO Actionum is but a modus modi.

. 5. ORDO is the beauty of the World, and soul; the genus of all Relation in
fundamento, and of all morality, and worthy to have had a notable place in the
predicaments: And yet we know not what to call it, whether any thing or
nothing. The ORDO Rerum is not Res: And it is Rerum status; which we better
know in se, than we know with what Logical Notion to cloth it.

. 6. This excellent Nothing is the sum of Morality in its form; and the
business of frail man on earth, and much of the glory of the Church triumphant
in Heaven. It is Gods work and not ours to make new substances; It is ours to
keep ORDER in our selves, as Gods work, yea, in the Actions, which God by
Nature enableth us to. So vain a thing is man that can do no more than this,
nor this but by the Power given him of God.

. 7. Vainly therefore do the Dominicans pretend that it is a Deifying of the
Will of man to say that God can enable it to Cause the various ORDER of man's
Actions, by mere moral helps, without Gods predetermining premotion to that
order. For this is to cause no Real being. And he that is moved to the Act in
genere needs no more premotion from God, to the disorder and sinfulness of
the Act.

. 8. And they that will call the production of faith, a Creation in the strict
and proper sense, do not understand, that Creatio est Rerum, non ORDINIS rerum
jam creatarum, vel existentium. An Act is of it self improperly said to be
created, in a pre-existent Agent: That is not called created which is educed e*
potentia materiae; nor that which is produced by the Potentia Activa
prae-existentis forma: Faith is an Act of the same Natural Power or faculty
which we had before: And Grace (or rather Nature usually) suscitateth that
faculty to the Act as an Act in genere: And Grace does cause us to ORDER that
act aright, as to the due object, and other circumstances. But if any will call
it a Creation, I contend not about the name.

. 9. But the whole state of the Man, Habitual, Relative and Practical set
together, is called in Scripture, a New Creature, and the New Man, tropically,
but not unfitly: Partly because we are really new, though not by another
Humanity or Species of Natural Essence, yet by many Accidents: And partly,
because those Accidents are so great and make so great a change of our state,
as that they emulate a natural Essence; and we use to say in common things,
that when an unlearned man is made learned, and a poor man a Prince, and a
dying man healthful, he is another man.

. 10. Though God be one and the same, and Christ the same, and the Law and Word
and many Antecedent means the same to many on whom they have different effects,
This difference may be caused many ways. The Causes of difference.
As 1. By the diversity of other inferior or concomitant second causes: 2. By
the diverse Disposition of the Receivers (a common cause of varieties in the
World:) 3. By the diversity of Impediments and temptations: And many other
ways.

. 11. I know that Bradwardine li. 2. c. 32. Cor. p. 612. says that Deum non
dare scientiam, eratiam aut perseverantiam seu quodlibet munus suum creatur^
capaci, est causa quare ipsa non accipit, and non habet: and non e contra. Et
(p. 614.) Quicquid obex dicatur potest illa resp^nsio corripi, cum nullus
possit hunc obicem tollere nisi Deus, vel per Deum prius praetollentem; and si
ipse cum voluerit tollere, irresistibiliter tollitur; Auferam cor lapideum, etc.
The great question is, How far the diversity of Receptive Dispositions is from
God? Answ. 1. God made all equal at first in Adam. 2. All were equal in sin by
his fall. 3. Cain and Abel differed from several causes, and not one alone.
Abel differed from Cain in faith and obedience, by Gods grace as the chief
cause, and his own will and agency as the second cause. Cain differed from Abel
by unbelief and sin, by his own will and Satan's temptations. 4. The sins of
later parents (as of Cain, Cham, Esau, Achan, Gehezi, etc.) make a further
difference, by depriving their posterity of some means, helps or grace, which
else they had been equally capable of with others. 5. It is certain that man
has much to do about his own heart, by which he is to be the second cause of
his own Receptive disposition; and if he fail, is the only cause of his
indisposition.

. 12. Difference is but Dissimilitude: And an alteration of one of the subjects
which soever, will make it dissimile or to differ from the other. When the good
Angels stood and the evil fell, if you ask, Who made the difference, It was the
Devils by forsaking their first estate: Though Constitutively, both their sin,
and the Angels obedience made the dissimilitude. If you suppose Cain and Abel
equally under grace at first, and ask, Who made the difference, I answer,
Constitutively Cains sin and Abels righteousness makes, or is, the difference:
But as to Reputative efficiency, Cain made the difference by rejecting grace.
So if you should suppose two equally qualified with common grace, and one of
them to lose it, the efficience of the difference is Imputable to him. But if
you suppose two equally lost in sin, and one converted and not the other, the
Constitutive Causes of the difference are ones sin and the others repentance.
But the Imputable efficiency is Gods grace and man's repentance or will, that is
recovered.

. 13. But when Paul does ask, [Who made thee to differ?] he means [Who gave
thee that good by which thou differest?] and expounds it by [What have thou
which thou have not received?] And no doubt but all good is received from God:
And this would have held true, if God had by equal operation done as much on
the other which had been uneffectual by his indisposition or rejection.

. 14. Nature and Scripture persuade us, that the same measure of help or influx
is not enough to make one repent or believe, which is enough to make another.
For the difference of souls, and temptations, and impediments plainly prove it.
The same strength will not move a Mountain, which will move a Feather: nor the
same Teaching make an ignorant Sot to understand which serves a prepared
person.

. 15. Bodily aptitude, or ineptitude do much to vary receptivities; which are
usually Gods punishments or rewards for Parents actions: And oft-times for men's
own. Some by fornication, gluttony, drunkenness, sports and idleness, make
themselves even next to Brutes.

. 16. But we have great Reason from Scripture to believe that though Gods Laws
be equal, and his Judgments where men do not make an inequality; yet as a free
Lord and Benefactor, he deals not equally with all that are of equal merit:
Though he do no man wrong, nor deny any what he promised in his Word, but keep
perfect Justice as a Governor; yet he may do with his own as he list, and he
will be specially good to some, though others see it with an evil eye.

. 17. Whether all that are elect have at first a greater measure of the Divine
help and impress than any that are not converted, no man can say (of which more
anon.) But certainly all the elect were fore-decreed by Gods will to that
certain conversion, which others were not so decreed to.

SECT. VI. Of the Limitations of Gods Operations on the Soul.
. 1. THat which sticks in the minds of many is, that God being Omnipotent, all
his operations must be equally unresistible and efficacious; because none can
conquer God: But they must consider, that though he be Almighty, yet he does
not all that he can do: nor do his works equally manifest his Omnipotency. And
there are these causes, for Limiting his operations in the effects.

. 2. 1. Gemina operatio Providentiae reperitur, partim naturalis, partim
voluntaria. Naturalis per occultam Dei administrationem quae etiam lignis and
herbis dat incrementum. Voluntaria vero per Angelorum opera and hominum; Vid.
catera. August. de Genesi ad lit. l. 8. cap. 9. and plura li. 9. cap. 15.
The chief cause is his Wisdom and Free Will. It is his Will to do what he
does, and to do no more: which has no cause.

. 3. 2. Another cause is, that God operateth by Jesus Christ, whose Humanity is
finite, being a Creature; and God works according to the Instrument or
medium: As he shines by the Sun, Moon or Stars, according to their several
natures, and not according to his mere omnipotency, so does he communicate
Grace by Jesus Christ.

. 4. Mark 6. 5. He (Christ) could there do no mighty work, because of their
unbelief: and 7. 24. He could not be hid: and 1. 45. Jesus could no more openly
enter into the City: with many such places, all speak of an Ordinate power
working not ad ultimum posse.
And Christ by Office being King and Prophet, will operate upon certain terms
which in his Sapiential Government he sets down. And God will not violate those
terms.

. 5. 3. Also under Christ there are many subordinate Causes; There are his
Word, Preachers, and all the forementioned means and helps: and Christ will
work according to these means. Though he tie not himself from doing more or
otherwise. I have proved that this is his usual way. And the effect will be
limited according to these second causes.

. 6. As the Sun shines on us first in and through the air, which abateth
somewhat of its force; and then through the exhalations, and then through the
glass window, and each makes some alteration as to the effect on us; so is it
in this case.

. 7. 4. But the notable limitation is the foresaid Indisposition of the
Receiver. Every eye has a tunicle which the Suns light must penetrate: But he
that has a suffusion, or he that winketh, has a greater impediment to limit
the effect: so is it with the various degrees of Indisposition, or moral
incapacity, which yet be nothing if God did work ad ultimum posse, and did not
as aforesaid; work according to his free will and second causes.

SECT. VII. Of the Resistibility of Grace.
. 1. TO Resist Grace signifies, 1. Either Not-to Receive it Passively Ruiz de
Vol. Dei, disp. 1^.. 6. p. 187. distinguishes of Gods will, 1. As to its ratio
totalis including not only the vi^ aut causalitas effectiva, but also the
formal reason of Volitio effi^ax, which includes the prescience of future
contingents: And so he says, It is never resisted. 2. Secundum partialem and
inadaequatam rationem praecise ut causa efficiens nostrorum actuum liberorum,
and prout offert motiva, and confert causas secundas, and suum concursum,
abstrahendo a formalissima ratione Volitionis efficacis, quae quidditative
supponit formalissimam rationem praescientiae, etc. Et ita etiam in sensu
composito cum tota causalitate illius in actu primo, ut praecisus ab actu
secundo, potest non sortiri effectum.
; as a stone receives not the rain ad intus; or as oil resists water; or
hard things receive not impressions as the soft. 2. Or Not-to-Receive-Actually;
which is Receptio Moralis; as a man receives not a gift who consents not; or
as he resists the light who will not open his eyes: The bare Not-Consenting
with the Will, or not using the senses or organs, not opening the hand, etc. is
such a Resisting. 3. Or an Active opposition, which is more. As a man resists
an Enemy, (with heart or hand); or a man by Nolition, and not only Non-volition
resists a suitor.

. 2. Man's sinful soul resists Gods gracious operations, all these ways. 1.
It is Passively become undisposed to Reception: And thus he is said to have a
hard heart of stone, and a seared conscience, and to be dead and past feeling,
Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. and 2. 1, 2. 2. It does not do what it can do morally to
receive grace, that is, it does not Conari or suscitate it self to be willing
of it. 3. Yea, it does Positively resist by Action, and is unwilling of Gods
gracious operations: And this is twofold, 1. By willing the contrary, and
prosecuting carnal interest, over-loving the pleasures of the flesh, and so
turning away from the motions of grace, 2. And therefore by an enmity to that
grace and work, which would Bradwardine li. 1. c. 1. cor. 8. p. 5. proves that
Gods will is universaliter efficax nec impedibilis, frustrabilis aut
defectibilis: which we grant as to his will as it is efficient and not merely
final and complacite: But yet the Schoolmen that say, he is not Omnivolens,
give reason for it.
convert him, and take him off his chosen Idols.

. 3. No creature by resisting God, does abate or retund his essential Power or
Activity, nor make any thing properly difficult to him.

. 4. All the Elect resist Grace before it overcome and convert them: And all
our lives after we resist it too commonly when it exciteth us to duty, and
draws us from sin.

. 5. He that repents not of his Resisting of Gods Spirit and Grace, does not
understand and well repent of his sin.

. 6. All Resisting is not Overcoming: All Resist grace, but all overcome it
not, that is, do not frustrate it as to the due effect.

. 7. There are several Degrees of yielding to Gods motions and operations, and
so several degrees of overcoming. He is fully overcome by it, who yields to
it wholly; He overcomes it in some part, who yields to it but in part. And
because Gods grace moves us to more than we ordinarily yield to, therefore we
do ordinarily overcome it in too great measure, even when we are happily
overcome by it.

. 8. God works not alike on all: sometime (as on Paul) he so suddenly
changes the mind and will, as that at once he both produces the Act of man's
consent, and also takes away even the moral (though not the natural) power to
the contrary in the antecedent instant. So that no man ever denies consent who
is so moved. And sometimes he procures Actual Consent by such an operation, as
in the antecedent instant might have been resisted and overcome, there being a
Moral Power to the contrary. So that there is Actually-Converting Grace which
was superable in the antecedent instant, as to Moral power; and there is such a
converting Grace as no man ever does overcome.

. 9. Gods grace when it prevails, does not take away, but determine the
Natural power in it self, but by so doing formaliter and relative it makes it
no power ad hoc to the contrary, in that instant. Of which more anon.

. 10. Such grace of God as comes from his Absolute Will or Decree of the due
Event, is never overcome. For Gods decree is not frustrate.

. 11. Gods gracious operations are never overcome by any contrary Act but what
he himself is the Agent Cause of, as an Act: For in Him we Live and Move and
Be. Yet man is the only Cause of the Inordination of that act, by which it is
set in opposition to Gods other acts: For God does not militate against himself.

. 12. The case lies thus: God antecedently to his Laws, framed Nature, that
is, the Being and Natural Order of all the World; and so he became the Head or
Root of Nature; the first Cause, who by his wise decree, was to concur to the
end with that Natural frame, and to continue to things their proper forms and
motions: And man is one of his creatures, having a Nature of his own, to which
God as the God of Name does Antecedently concur. By this natural concurse of
God, the fomi^ cator, the murderer, the thief, etc. are naturally able to do
those acts: But being free agents that can do otherwise, God makes them a Law
to restrain and regulate them. And when they break this Law, they resist that
gracious concurse, which suitable to the organical cause, God conjoyneth with
the means: But they do this by their Natural power and activity; not used as
God requires them, but turned against his own Law. So that if God would
withdraw his sustentation, and destroy m^ns Nature, they could not resist his
grace. But that he will not do, being his antecedent work: and so God is
resisted by his own-given-power and act, disordered and turned against his
grace.

. 13. The Will of God which is thus resisted, is only 1. His Preceptive or
Legal will, de debito. 2. And his will of purpose, to give man so much help and
no more by which he can and ought to believe and Repent, is said to be resisted
or frustrate so far, when by man's fault it does him not that good which it
might have done.

. 14. Gods Grace and Spirit are said to be resisted when the Word and other
Means are That God does govern inseriora per superiora, and work by means, not
for want of them, but from the abundance of his Goodness, so as to communicate
to his creatures the dignity of causality, See Aquin. 1. q. 103. a. 8. and q.
104. a. 2. Alexand. 1. p. q. 26. m. 5. a. 2. and 3. and m. 7. Albert. 1. p. q.
67. m. 4. a. 1. Richard. 1. d. 39. a. 2. q. 3. and d. 45. a. 2. q. 2. Agid.
Romans 2. d. 1. p. 1. q. 2. a. 6. and ibi Gabritl d. 1. q. 2.
resisted which call him to his duty. For these themselves are gifts and acts
of grace.

. 15. But it is not the bar^ Word or Means alone, but the Spirit working in and
by those means which is so resisted: For though no mo^tal man can clearly know
just how the Spirit concurreth and operateth by the Word and Means; yet we may
know, that God does limit his own operation to the aptitude of the means
ordinarily; and that he works with and by them, not according to his
Omnipotency in it self considered, but according to the means or organs. And as
in Nature he operateth, nor quantum potest but agreeably to the order and
aptitude of Natural Causes; so in Grace he operateth, non quantum potest, but
according to the aptitude and order of the sapiential frame of Governing-means
of grace.

. 16. When the preaching of the Word, Education, Company and other visible
Means seem equal, God has innumerable means, supernal, internal, external,
invisible and unknown to us, by which he can make all the difference that he
makes in men: So that we cannot prove that ever he works on souls, without
any second cause or means at all: (though we cannot prove the contrary
neither.) And therefore he that resists all means, for ought we know in so
doing resists all Gods gracious operations on his soul.

. 17. I know not how to find both sense and concord in the words of your
Alvarez de A^x. l. 7. disp. 59. p. 264. Ead^m contritio que est ultima
dispositio ad gratiam and in genere cause materialis antecedit illam; In genere
tamen causae formalis and efficientis, est effeclus ejusdem gratiae: and
propterea quamvis non sit meritoria gratiae, est tamen meritoria vitae aetern^:
-- Et p. 265. Contritio qua penitens disponitur ad infusionem gratiae
habitualis, est meritoria vitae aeternae, ut Thom. 1. 2. q. 112. a. 2. ad 1.
Ergo est effectus gratiae habitualis: Nulla enim operatio hominis est-meritoria
vitae aeternae nis^ procedat a grati^ habituali, and ordine saltem naturae sit
ea posterior: How can the Act be the ultima dispositio to the infusion of that
habit which it flows from? Unless he mean eadem specie, and not numerically:
which yet is false: For it is not eadem, or else he falsely supposes that the
same Love of God may go before Grace.
Whereas Dr. Twisse so frequently asks, Whether Gods condional will (and so
his operation) be [Volo te velle, modo velis, or credere modo credas,] to give
us faith if we believe, and so makes non credere or non velle to be the only
resistance; and the Arminians to be ridiculous in making the effect antecedent
to the cause as a condition of the causation and itself: This semi-subtilty,
though it beget voluminous confidence, must cry peccavi, if a little more
subtilty do but detect the defectiveness of it. We are not now enquiring of the
Rations fidem habendi, but of the Rations non habendi; nor are we enquiring
Whether God have made a Covenant or formal Promise of giving faeith upon
antecedent conditions; But whether he deny (or give-not) grace for actual faith
(effectual or sufficient) to any but those that resist and wilfully omit the
preparatory acts which they were able to perform? even preparatory Volitons? Or
if you will make the question to be de ratisnibus fidem habendi (not de causis
Actus donandi) Whether God do not ordinarily give or produce the act of faith,
in that soul, which does not wilfully resist, and omit such preparatory acts as
it could do? even Volitions? And so I answer,

1. It is not [I will give thee faith if thou will believe, or I will make thee
willing if thou be willing of the same thing.] But it is, [1. If by resisting
common preparing grace, thou so harden ^hy heart, or increase the privation of
receptive aptitude in thy self, as that the same degree of grace, means, help,
impress, will not change thee, which otherwise would have done it, and will
change another not so self-hardened, thy gracelesness and destruction (both
absolutely and as compared to others that are converted,) is imputable only to
thy self.

2. And if thou be unwilling to use the Means as thou art able, to hear, read,
or meditate on that which should affect thee, and unwilling (Privatively) to
hear and receive the inward motions of my Spirit, which should convince and
turn thee) and wilt not either by previous Cogitation, or immediate conatus and
suscitation of thy Intellect to Think, and of the will to its act, actively
concur to receive my gracious motions and influx; thy gracelesness (absolutely
and comparatively) is imputable, not to me, but to thy self.

3. Much more, if when thou can do otherwise, thou run the contrary way, and
turn thy thoughts and affections eagerly after vanity, and hate and oppose my
help and grace, because it is against thy lusts.]

2. Or if you will take it in the form of a half promise, or encouragement from
God; thus,

[1. If thou will not by wilful progress in sin, and custom, so increse thy
Privation, and obdurateness, as that the same measure of Gracie^s Means and
Impress will not convert thee as would do one that has not so abused common
grace:

2. And if also thou will at the present do what thou can in stirring up thy
own will to concur, and thy Intellect to consider, and wilt but Consent that
my Grace shall help thee, and that thou will wait for it in the use of means:

3. And if thou will not hate and resist my motions, as enemies to thy lusts,
and turn wilfully after vanity, in such a degree as thou art even Morally able
to forbear; Thou shall find that I am gracious and merciful, abundant in
goodness, and truth, and forsaking none before they forsake me, and have not
appointed thee these means in vain. To whom thus prepared did I ever deny the
grace of faith? Name him if thou can.]

So that [Volo, si velis hoc] is one thing, and [Volo si velis aliud, and si ad
hoc volendum quantum potes teipsum suscites, and Gratiam non oppugnes, nec
contraria prosequaris, quando pravas Volitiones fr^nare possis] is another
thing.

. 18. That God gives his gracious operations sometimes in a Resistible limited
degree, besides what is said, is most evidently proved,

1. In that all Divines confess, that in making the World, he has not done
quantum potest, but quantum voluit.

2. In that there are innumerable Possibilia quae non sunt aut existentia aut
futura. God could have made the World sooner, or made more Orbs, Earths, Trees,
Men, Brutes, in specie, numero, and done more acts, and made more alterations
than he does.

3. There is certainly some Divine operation with and by his instituted means,
which is limited to their instrumental aptitude.

. 19. And it is no dishonor to Gods Omnipotency to work thus limitedly and
resistibly: For,

1. Else he should be the Author of his own dishonor; who freely diversifieth
Instruments, Receptivities and effects throughout the World in wonderful
variety.

2. If the total Non-Volitions, Non-operations, or forbearing to do what he
could (as in all the innumerable Possibles aforesaid) be no dishonor to him;
then to will only in tantum, and to operate hoc and hactenus, limitedly and
resistibly, is no dishonor: being more than not to Will and Work at all.

SECT. VIII. What that Operation of God on the soul is, which is the subject of
our many questions: (as Whether it be equal on all? Whether it be resistible?
Whether it be moral or physical? Whether it be sufficient, when it is not
effectual? etc.) And what the various opinions about it are, and how uncertain
they are.
YOU may think this should have come first; but for some reasons I have
reserved it to this place.

. 1. I think the Ignorance of this in a great measure is common to all mankind:
But the Ignorance of men's Ignorance, and presumptuous contending about what we
understand not, pretending (even to triumphant scorn of dissenters) that we do
understand it, is the very life of most of our contentions about these points.

. 2. My own judgment is, that our own Intellection and Volition in the body,
are Acts that take in so much of the sense, imagination, and corporeal spirits,
into that of them which we perceive and denominate, as that we cannot tell how
far the Acts even of our own separated souls will differ from these which we
here perceive, and from perception call Intellection and Volition. And much
less do I know the difference between Gods Vital-activity, Intellection and
Volition, and ours. Some likeness there is, or else ours were not his Image:
But all Schoolmen and Divines agree, that the names are not Univocal, and that
it is not the same Thing in God as in man, which these names signify; And that
no man can have a formal conception of them. I am satisfied that a glowworm or
the fire in a flint, yea or in a stick or clod, is incomparably liker the Sun,
than Man's poor Life, and Intellection and Volition is like to Gods. And if so,
how unfit are we unnecessarily to dispute of these acts of God with curiosity?
or at all so as implies a nearer likeness? The Lord knows that I would with
reverence withdraw from this consuming fire, and no further meddle with it,
than the Glorifying of God, and the pacifying of the contentious, and the
healing of divisions, and calling off the presumptuous, does require.

. 3. The great difficulty is, what it is which we must conceive to go between
Gods essence and man's act or inclination given* Dr. Twiss accuses the Jesuits
for denying Intellection and Volition to be instantaneous Acts, sine motu: And
yet his friend Alvarez holds the Divine Act antecedent to be properly motio,
and would have his predetermination so described qua praevia motion^ actuali,
causis secundis praesert^m liber is inharente, illas applic^t ^d operandum,
etc. But it is either God or an effect of God which he calls motio: If an
effect, it is so called as it is in the receiver. And what motio* antecedent to
man's Act, can be imagined in man, when motion is an Act, though every Act be
not motion? Therefore they voluminously dispute de non ente, or of they know
no^ what. If we must have a distinct conception of it, I think, Vi^ impress^,
fitter.
By [Divine Action or operation] must be meant, 1. Either something in God, or
something caused or Created by him. 2. If caused or created, it must be either
something in the second Causes, or something in the Recipient soul. I think the
distribution is sufficient.

. 4. I. In GOD, there is nothing but GOD: His Life, Knowledge and Will are no
accidents, but his essence: And therefore invariable, and no subject for any of
these questions. To ask whether Gods Essential Knowledge, Will and Activity, be
equal or unequal, physical or moral, etc. is to dote.

. 5. But yet this Knowledge and Will of God is transient or terminated
Objectively, when it is not so Effectively. And so God is said to know things
differently, as they differ; and to will things differently, as they are
different objects: But this speaks truly nothing New or various in God, but
only a Relative and so denominative connotation of his simple essence, from
these objects, whose diversity gives diverse names to Immutable, most simple
Unity. Of this all Schoolmen (for substance) are agreed, however the Thomists,
Scotists and Occamists differ about the notions of Ratio ratiocinata,
formalitas, and denominatio extrinseca.

. 6. II. If it be the operation of the second Causes, ex part operanti^^^n,
and so of God by them, that we dispute of, the disputes would have the easier
decision. But this is denied by the Dominicans, and another Infusing Immediate
operation is made the subject of these Controversies.

. 7. III. It remains therefore that it is only the effect as in the
soul-receiving, which we dispute of. And if so, this must be remembered, that we
dream not of any Controversy about Gods Action, as ex part agen^is, in Him,
or between him and the soul.

. 8. In man's soul, we know of nothing, but 1. The substance in the first notion
as answerable to Matter in bodies. 2. The form, which is a Threefold Virtue or
faculty in One; viz. The vital Power, Intellect and Will: which is at once
Virtus, Vis and Inclinatio naturalis ad proprias actiones. All these are but
Inadequate conceptions of the same simple essence, and not compounding parts.
None of this is the thing in question, for the soul is presupposed to be a
soul. 3. The Accidental and mutable Disposition of the faculties to the Acts.
4. The Impressions of s^periour Causes (God and means) in moving to the Acts.
5. The Acts of the soul themselves. 6. The Habits. I know of no more.

. 9. I. Though All Habits are dispositions, yet all Dispositions are not
Habits: And before Habits, the soul may be many ways predisposed to the Act:
As 1. By former acts of another sort, which yet conduce to this. 2. By other
habits that are preparatory. 3. By deliverance from many Internal and External
Impediments. 4. And lastly, By the Divine Impress it self in the instant of
Nature, though not of time, before the Act. For God so disposes the soul to
act.

. 10. This predisposition, is sometime but a Moral Power, that is, in so low a
degree, as contains only the Necessary power to the act, with which alone it
is sometime done. And sometime besides this Moral Power, it contains some
further degree of accidental Inclination, or propensity to the Act. And these
degrees are various, in various instances and s^bjects.

. 11. II. When God moves the soul to believe or repent, we must conceive that
in the instant antecedent to the Act, the soul receives some Impress or
Impulse from the divine essence by which it is disposed or moved to act
A^xilium praevium non appellatur a nobis Forma Voluntatis impressa: quoniam hoc
nomen significare videtur qualitatem, constituentem potentiam in act^ primo:
sed proprio vocabulo dicitur motio Actualis, qua Deus vere efficienter facit ut
liberum arbitrium operetur actum liberum determinatum cum vera and expedita
facultate qua potest illum non operari si velit. Alvarez de Auxil. disp. 23. p.
108. M^tio is the proper notion, he thinks, between God and the Act or Habit of
man, as aforesaid; but unaptly, I think, so conceived by him.
. And though spirits (especially God) move not by such contact and impress as
things corporeal, yet in an unconceivable manner, some spirit, some spiritual
Impress, Influx, or motion must be Received, by which faith is caused. And this
Impress and the Disposition to the Act, caused by it, perhaps are really the
same.

. 12. III. The Act it self by this, and by the soul disposed and excited, is
next caused: not given as pre-existent, but given by causal efficacious
suscitation of the pre-existent faculty or power.

. 13. IV. The Habit, which is a Promptitude to facile acting, is caused by all
the forementioned causes conjunct, and not by any one alone, viz. by God, and
his Impress on a soul some way pre-disposed, and by the soul it self further
disposed and excited by that Impress. But of Habits more anon.

And here because almost all our seeming difference depends on the question,
What it is that is between Gods essence and man's act, which is the cause of our
Act, or may be called grace (sufficient or effectual, more or less, etc.) I
shall tell you how Alvarez handles the question, and thereby further show you,
that it is a thing unsearchable, and past man's knowledge, and though I satisfy
my self with calling it an Impulse or Impress, or a Received energie or force
or Influx, yet these are but general notions, and tell us not as to a distinct
formal conception, What it is; And you shall see that the boldest disputers
know no more.

Alvarez de Aux. l. 3. disp. 19. p. 77. tells you that there are these several
opinions of it, (What is the previous motion by which God moves and applies
second causes to operate?)

I. Some Thomists hold that It is a Quality, not permanent, but by way of
transient disposition with operation: Cabrera 3. p. q. 18. ar. 4. dub. 1. Conc.
4. n. 58. For it must be some Virtus, and that must be a Quality: Imperfect
supernatural acts, as attrition, fear of hell, etc. are before habits, and have
only such transient virtues or qualities, etc.

II. Others hold contrarily that Gods motion is nothing besides his own will or
essence and man's act, being simultaneous; Their reasons I omit. So Bradwardine
and many others. And this would cut short most of our present Controversies if
it would hold.

Dr. Twisse says Vind. Great. li. 2. p. 2. Crim. 3. c. 15.. 9. p. 348.
Probabile esse nullam motionem a Deo recipi in Voluntatem; sed quia Deus velit
Voluntatem creaturae Velle aliquid, necesse est ut velit. Ratio haec est, cujus
solutionem mihi expediat Arminianus aliquis: Sola Dei Voluntate factum est ut
Mundus crearetur. Quis enim influxus Dei potest fingi praecedaneus qui
occuparetur circa nihilum, etc.




III. Others hold that Gods previous motion is somewhat received in second
causes in order of nature before they operate: and when they are asked, What it
is, they say, It is really the very operation of the second cause (e. g. man)
it self, as it proceeds from God -- And so that Gods premotion and
predetermination of our Will is not really distinct from the actual
determination by which the will determines it self, but is the same; The same
act being of God and man. (So that they make this motion to be somewhat
received before we act; and yet nothing but our act; which is absurd.)

IV. Other Thomists hold that It is somewhat really distinct from our
operations: and that is, Quoddam complementum virtutis activae, quo actualiter
agat. (And he that knows what predicament this complementum belongs to, and
what it is, let him take this opinion for more than a mere complement.)

And here they tell you that they speak not of Gods simultaneous concurse; for
that Alvarez confesses is nothing besides Gods essence and man's act: But of
his previous motion, which he says, is somewhat more. So Amesius Antisynod. de
Great. c. 2. page 255. Satis esset apud omnes pios dicere Dei Velle sine ulla
Impressione intercedente certe posse efficere ut Voluntas consentiat ipsius
Vocationi. I now meddle not with the truth of this, and Twisses argument is
easily answered; But I entreat the Reader to note into what all our
controversies are by these excellent men reduced, who yet most aggravate them.
What now is the Gratia efficax ad credendum? Nothing besides Gods esse but ipsa
fides. Is faith effective of it self? No. Is Gods essential will effective of
it? Who ever denied it? What place is there for Controversies of sufficiency
and efficacy, when it is but Gods essence and the known effect of which they
speak, and hold not (as Alvarez does) any motion or Impress made by God upon
mind or will at all? Gods will then is effectual, quia vult effectum: and it is
virtually sufficient for whatever he wills not, but could will. But then no
man can possibly do any more good or less evil than he does, because no more or
less is willed of God, which volition is the first necessary Cause of all
things. And is not all their Volumes de Auxiliis Gratiae, and the several
sorts, previous, simultaneous, operating, cooperating, etc. merely vain. when
there is no such thing as any Grace besides Gods mere will, and the Act of man:
And yet Dr. Twisse elsewhere says that Gods Decrees do nihil ponere in objecto.
(As if they differed in the nature of motion.) And he says, that this is true
both of supernatural acts which are from Infused habits, as faith hope, Love:
and of Imperfect supernaturals as fear of hell and attrition, by which man is
remotely prepared for Justification ^ which proceed not from supernatural
habits, but from the spirits special impulse, not yet inhabiting, but moving.
And Alvarez thus concludes --

I. That which God does in second causes, by which these act, is, Aliquid
habens esse quoddam incompletum, per modum quo colores sunt in aere, and virtus
artis in instrumento artificis -- It is Aliquid incompletum and transiens cum
ipsa operatione. (Are you ever the wiser for all this?)

II. Hoc ens incompletum praevium actioni causae secundae producitur in illa
effective a solo Deo, and nullo modo dependet efficienter ex influx^ ipsius
causae secundae. And therefore herein the will is passive, though not in its
own Act, (as he falsely affirms Luther to assert; for what can act and not be
active?)

III. When second causes, natural or supernatural, have by their inherent form,
sufficient Active virtue, per modum actus primi, proportioned with the effect,
then Gods premotion is not a Quality but proprio vocabulo dicitur, Motio
Virtuosa, by which the universal cause makes the second actually operate,
according to its proper mode: Therefore it is not a Habit or disposition or
natural power.

IV. Yea in Imperfect supernatural acts (as fear of hell) which go before
habits, and by preventing grace are elevated to the acts, it is not a Quality,
but Motio Dei virtuosa by which they are done; and is of the same sort with
that which causes acts from habits.

V. This previous Motion is Really distinct from the operation of the second
cause -- and is not our act it self; but is immediately from God. (Which he
uses many arguments to prove.)

And can all this give any man a formal conception, what it is, which he
calls, aliquid incompletum, and Motio Virtuosa? We know not what the Vis
projectis impressa is in corporeals: And can we tell how spirits, and how the
God of spirits makes his Impressions? or what the word Impression or Motion
here signifies? We know that we know it not if we know what we know and
know-not. And why is it called Motio Virtuosa? Virtus he makes a quality: It
is no quality, and yet Virtuosa. Omnis motio est Actio. Is it Actio Increata?
Then it is God himself; which he denies, and speaks of somewhat between God
and man's Act. Is it Actio creata? Then it is a Modus Agentis, for so is every
Action, as such, as distinct from its effect in patiente. And if so, it cannot
be modus Dei; for then it is Ipse Deus: And if it be modus hominis, it is
either homini^ agentis vel patientis; If the first, then it is man's Action: If
the second, it is formally no action: For modus patientis is passio; though
many would confound action and passion with saying after their Masters, that
Actio est in patiente, which is equivocation.

So that the plain truth is, that man's understanding can reach no further than
to conceive, 1. That our souls are the termini of Gods Volition and Active
power. 2. That though God act not on us by corporeal contact, yet we must call
our selves Patients, and think of the Attingency of his Active essence with its
effects, by some Analogy of Corporeal attingency, contact, and impressed
moving force. But truly to know how God touches, moves, operateth on any
Creature and by what Impressions, or what there is indeed between Gods essence
and man's Act, we know not at all. And if Christ had never said, Joh. 3. [so is
every one that is born of the spirit] our own experience might have told us
that we know it not.

Boldly then tell our Church-distracting wranglers, that contend about the
nature, sufficiency, efficacy, resistibility of this Act of Grace, that they
know not the very subject of their disputes. And shall we still fire the Church
by striving about words that profit not but subvert the hearers, and tend to
the increase of ungodliness?

Yea and shall bold blind zeal use the Reverend names of God, and his precious
Truth to color and countenance these pernicious contentions? I grant that the
nature of Grace, and the concord of it with Free Will may be soberly treated
of. But when men have followed the controversy beyond the ken of humane
understanding, and there will proceed to build great Fabrics upon unknown
suppositions, and perversely contend for them against Love and peace, they do
but serve Satan against God, under the color of his sacred truth and name.

And I think it not amiss here to tell you what Alvarez says to this Question
(de Aux. l. 12. disp. 118. p. 481.) An Concordia liberi arbitrii cum gratia
p^ssit demonstrari naturali ratione (vel, cum Infallibilitate Praescientiae,
Providentiae, and praedestinationis Divinae?) Where he tells you that one
opinion of some Catholics is, that [It is certain by the doctrine of faith
that man has Free Will, but it cannot be proved by natural reason.] The second
opinion is contrary, that [It is not only evident to natural reason that man
has free will, but also the concord of it with the infallibility of Divine
prescience and providence may easily and clearly be made out by Scientia
Media:] which is the Jesuits way.

But the third opinion which he defends is, that [Free-will may be evidently
known and proved by natural reason alone: But how the actual use of it
consists with the infallibility of the prescience, providence and
predestination of God, and with the efficacy of the helps of grace; cannot be
perfectly known or comprehended by natural light alone, and therefore the
reason of it must be Believed and the understanding captivated to the obedience
of Faith.]

Where note, 1. That though he say [perfecte] he proves that it cannot be
known by that which is below a perfect knowledge. 2. And that he denies not
only a practical saving knowledge, but a proper theoretical or dogmatical
knowledge.

For this he cites those words of Cajetan at large (in 1. p. q. 22. art. 4.)
which many others cite and commend, [In ignorantia sola quietem invenio, etc.]

And there is no man besides Alvarez higher for the Dominicans way of Absolute
predetermination, than D. Bannes who is of Cajetans opinion (in 1. p. q. 23.
art. 5. and 2. 2. q. 10. art. 1.) [Siquis non intelligit quomodo usus liberi
arbitrii sit liber, and nihilominus sit effectus jam praedefinitus a Divina
providentia, oportet eum credere -- and Primum omnium debuisset credere quod
aiunt se non posse intelligere: Credimus enim Catholicum mysterium Trinitatis,
etiamsi non intelligamus.]

And Alvarez cites Calvin (lib. de aetern. Dei praedest. cont. Pigh. p. 136.)
saying [Siquis hoc mentis suae captu superius esse excipiat, idem de me fateor.
Sed quid mirum, si modulum nostrum imcomprehensibilis and immensa Dei majestas
exsuperet? Atqui tantum abest ut pro carnis ratione explicandum suscipiam
sublime istud reconditumque arcanum, ut quod initio praefatus sum assidue in
memoriam redire velim, desipere qui plus scire appetunt, quam Deus revelaverit.
Quare nos potius docta ignorantia delectet, quam intemperans and ebria plus
quam Deus permittit curiositas.]

What Augustine confesses you may see a little in Alvar. ib. p. 482, 483. but
more in himself often.

What Suarez, Hurtado, Mendoz. and other the most subtle philosophical Divines
confess commonly of the incomprehensibility of these things, and the darkness
and uncertainty of our conceptions, I have elsewhere partly cited; and any that
reads them may find.

Now all this being so notorious, and their ignorance commonly confessed, may I
not confidently infer, 1. That then (seeing all must be reconciled by
Believing) we must have nothing obtruded on us herein, which is not to be
proved by the Word of God. What the Word says of Predetermination, of the
manner of Gods operation on second causes, and influx on souls, and of the
nature of his first effect or Vis Impressa, etc. we will receive: But yet men
must not snatch up a metaphorical expression in one or a few Texts, and urge
that against the frequent and plain expressions of the Scripture; of the
spirits. Operation on souls, Christ himself says (which is more than all
forecited) [The wind blows where it lists, and ye hear the sound thereof,
but ye know not whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that is
born of the spirit.] But as for the operations of God by the word preached and
other means, and the Holy Ghosts operation by and with those means, and the
Holy Ghosts indwel^^ng and operating after in Believers, these are frequently
asserted in Gods Word: And that all Christ's members have his Spirit,
regenerating, illuminating, quickening, sanctifying them, both as he is in
Covenant with them to be the sanctifier of their souls, and as the Love of God
and all his Graces are by him caused in us: all this is sure.

But if men will go further with us, and give us as many distinctions of Gods
Grace as Alvarez does, and tell us that besides God himself, one of them
(simultaneous operation) is nothing but man's act; and another (previous motion)
is somewhat else, but no man knows what, but may be named [motio Virtuosa]
though it be neither God nor a quality nor a humane act; And then will dispute
how much of this [some thing] this motio virtuosa, will serve to such an
effect, and how much to another, and how and by what reason it is efficacious;
and will build on his assertions such a systeme of consequents, as shall make
up the doctrines of a sect or party, which shall set up with this stock to
militate against the Love and unity of Christians: this is the course that I
oppugn.

Once more, Let the Reader note that the ways of reconciling Grace and
Free Will, as Alvarez mentions them, are these four.

I. The Jesuits way by scientia media, which I need not recite to the Learned,
but think it meet to recite Alvarez words of their description of Grace.
[Supponunt gratiam praevenientem and excitantem esse formaliter actiones
quasdam vitales, quas Deus in nobis sine nobis operatur: sine nobis, inquam,
libere co-operantibus, non tamen sine nobis vitaliter and efficienter
concurrentibus; and consistere in illustratione and illuminatione Intellectus,
atque excitatione and suasione voluntatis: quae efficienter procedunt ab
intellectu and voluntate, non quidem ut Libera, sed ut Natura est: quamvis
antecedenter dependeant a Voluntate ut Liberum arbitrium est, quatenus viz. ex
ejus liberate fuit dependens, quod homo compararet notitias mysteriorum fidei
vel eorum quae facienda erant, accedendo ad praedicatores, vel alio modo eos
propria industria acquirendo, quibus notitiis Deus se insereret, eas elevando
suo speciali influxu, ut supernaturales sint, and quales ad salutem oportet;
and sic sortiantur naturam gratiae praevenientis. Supposita ergo Illuminatione,
qua Deus illuminat Intellectum, and proponit Voluntati bonum, ut sibi
conveniens, affirmant, quod statim absque ulla liberate oritur mere
naturaliter in voluntate motus affectionis ad bonum sibi propositum: quo motu
allicitur and quasi invitatur ad amandum illud bonum, and imperandum potentiis
executivis, ut illud exequantur, ut v. g. ad imperandum intellectui ut
assentiatur rebus fidei propositis and explicatis. In his ergo duobus motibus,
viz. in illustratione Intellectus and affectione voluntatis a Deo elevatis suo
speciali influxu, consistere aiunt gratiam praevenientem and excitantem.
Liberum autem arbitrium his duobus motibus gratiae praevenientis adjutum and
excitatum, liberam habet potestatem imperandi aut non imperandi assensum fidei:
Quod si voluntas fidem amplecti velit, actumque credendi imperet intellectui,
influente simul nutu gratiae praevenientis quam habet, elicit in seipsa actum
supernaturalem, qu^ fidem amplecti vult, quoque assensum imperat intellectui;
simulque Intellectus motus imperio illo supernaturali voluntatis,
illustrationeque divina adjutus, elicit actum supernaturalem assentiendi
revelatis, and Gratia excitans seu praeveniens novo influxu, quo una cum libero
arbitrio influit in supernaturalem actum fidei, sortitur rationem gratiae
adjuvantis, cooperantis and efficacis. Si autem voluntas pro sua innata
liberate fidem nolit amplecti, gratia excitans and praeveniens manet intra
limits gratiae sufficientis, nec est efficax, quia voluntas non voluit fidem
amplecti, cum potuisset.

II. The second is Durandus's way [Nullum esse necessarium Divinae voluntatis
concursum ad actiones secundarum causarum, sed sa^is esse quod Deus eas
produxerit in esse, and ipsas naturas, earumque virtutes postmodum conservet.]
But this is a partial recitation, for this sustentation of their Active Virtues
is the same with an Universal Influx or Concurse to action as action, which
Bellarmine is for. Read of this Ludov. a Dola.

III. So Malderus in 1. 2: q. 111. a. 3. dub. 1. [Hic Dei concursus quod
attin^t ad identitatem realem ex part termini (nam ex part principii est ipse
Deus, aut Dei voluntas) est ipsa actio Causae secundae quatenus est a Deo.
Nihil ponit in ipsa Voluntate, sed est influxus D^i in actionem seu effectum.]
So many others.
The third he says, is attributed to Greg. Arim. Scotus and Gabriel, (great
Wits, if any.) Cooperationem Divinam se tenere ex part effectus, non Causae,
h. e. Con^ursum Dei non determinare Voluntatem nostram, nec aliquid in illam
imprimere aut operari, sed immediate influere in effectum, eumque producere
illo ipso momento quo a voluntate nostra producitur: Ergo Deus non determinat
Voluntarem nec Voluntas Deum: Nam uterque concursum libere adhibet, and si
alter no^^^ concurrere, opus non fiet, sicut cum duo ferunt ingentem lapidem --
Et licet simul operentur, tamen Deus operatur quia Voluntas operatur, non
contra: (But this is partially recited, and it is true only of the effect: And
his confutation is that then Graetia est pedissequa* Voluntatu: And why says
he not, God is pedissequus hominis, because he judgeeth men according to their
works?)

I have otherwise opened the matter than is expressed here of any of these. But
can the sober Reader think that the IVth way (which is that of the Dominicans
predetermining premotion of all acts good and bad) is so much surer than these
three, as that he dare venture on that supposition to cry down his Brethren as
enemies to the Grace of God, and to his Providence, who would gladly ascribe
all to both which belongs to perfection, and are only afraid to deny Gods
holiness, and the Christian Religion, by resolving all sin and damnation into
the mere Will and Love and Irresistible Omnipotent efficiency of God?

SECT. IX. Whether Gods Operations be equal on all?
. 1. IF the question be ex part Dei, it is absurd to make a question of it.
For God is the same, whatever the diversity be in his Of Preparation for Grace,
Medina notes three degrees of it: one which Grace ever follows (which is it
that our Divines mean by effectual Vocation) and this he says, is never had
but by Gods special help: (the other two are distant and common.) But that the
Schoolmen of the other parties think otherwise he confesses, and says, In hac
quaestione Durand. Scot. and propemodum omnes Nominales, quos sequitur Adrian.
Quodlib. 7. q. 4. tenent partem affirmativam, scilicet quod homo per s^as vires
sine speciali auxilio Gratiae, potest se ad Gratiam praeparare, sic ut
consequatur gratiam infallibiliter, and ex merito de congruo: D. Tho. tenet
contrarium: Medin. ib. p. 593. But then by sufficiens praeparatio ad Gratiam,
he means Conversion it self, dimovere animum ab iniquitate, and st in Deum
convertere; sicut convertere faciem ad solemn, ut qui^ illuminetur.
works. And Gods acts as in himself, are God. And there is no Virtue or Efflux
from God, but what is a creature, or effect of God.

. 2. If the question be of second causes, and of Gods operation in and by them;
I answer, 1. Some things God Gives and Does as Rector of the World, by a Law,
or according to a Law: And herein God does equally, till man make a difference
(as is aforesaid) viz. in his Legislation (though not in the promulgation) and
in his Judgment. 2. Some things God Gives and Does, besides, as Owner and
free-Benefactor: and here he primarily makes a difference. So that there is a
certain sort and measure of grace given equally, till men make a difference:
And there is a sort and measure given unequally, by the mere will of God, as he
diversifieth Natural things.

. 3. But if the question be of the effects on the soul, those effects are, 1.
Man's predisposition, 2. The divine Impress, 3. The Acts, 4. The Habits, as is
said: And as to the first; God equally disposed man at first: But two Causes
have filled the World with very unequal dispositions: One is man's sin,
corrupting themselves and their posterity more than as they are the seed of
Adam (and this God is no Cause of.) The other is Gods free differencing mercy
to some of equal ill desert, giving them both Greater outward helps, and Common
Grace, and fewer impediments, and so more preparing them for special Grace. But
no man by Indisposition is deprived of special Grace, but he that has
contracted more than he had from Adam only. And God does not equally repair and
dispose all that have viciously undisposed themselves: Though while they are
here, he gives such mercy to all, as tends to their recovery.

. 4. If the question be of the equality of Gods Impulse, or Influx on the soul,
1. There may be a diversity of further effects, where the Impress is the same
in kind and measure; because of men's various Dispositions to receive it, and
their various concurse: That may convert one, that does not another. But yet
God does not make equal Impressions on men's souls: For, 1. His own free will as
a Liberal benefactor does more for some (as Paul) than for others. 2. Men's ill
deserts may so forseit grace and quench the Spirit, as to make a difference. 3.
The means much differ which several men have: And God usually operateth
according to the means, upon the soul.

. 5. If the question be either of the Act or Habit, it is no question: For that
were but to ask, Whether all men have equal faith, love and other graces? which
common experience denies.

. 6. Whereas some will stick at my mentioning a Divine Impress on the soul, in
nature antecedent to Act and Habit, I would have them remember, that either
there is such a thing or not. If there be, I rightly mention it. If not, we are
instantly at an end of all this sort of Controversies, and Calvinists and
Arminians cannot differ if they would. For then the question must be only about
that which is past question, viz. 1. Either about Gods Act as in Himself, which
is his simple Essence: 2. Or about the Act and Habit of Faith, Love, etc. in
Man, which all the World knows is not equal; For all men have not faith: For
as for pre-disposition, the question will be revolved to the same point; It is
certain that all are not equally disposed, and it is certain that Gods Acts as
in him are his Essence.

SECT. X. Whether the said Operation be Physical or Moral?
. 1. THis paltry question is worthy but a few words, though ^ make too much
stir. Of the sense of the words Physical and Moral having spoken before, I will
not repeat it here. 1. If the question be de operatione ut est actus agentis,
before the effect, it were but to ask, Whether Gods Essence be Physical or
Moral? which is unworthy an answer.

. 2. 2. If the question be of the Action of second Causes, as the Preacher,
etc. if truly Acts, they are both Physical as they are really actus naturalis,
and moral as they are the acts of free intellectual agent^* But the Acts of
Laws and other objects merely as objects (on man) are called Moral Acts,
because they are but nominal; but indeed are no Acts, and therefore neither
Physical nor Moral. For they are but signa; and significare is not agere; but
is only an objective aptitude, by which an Intellectual agent can ^difie it
self. All the Books in my Library teach me without any Action, by being signa
objectively to my active Intellect.

. 3. 3. If the question be of the Divine Impress on the soul, it is quid reale,
and therefore physicum: And it is moral as it is the principium actus moralis.
The same is to be said of our own Acts and Habits; They are physical and moral
accidents. And they cannot be moral, unless they be physical.

. 4. But it must be known that to be quid natural and quid morale, formally
differ; as Actus qua talis, and ordo qua ordo, do differ ab ordine se^
Relatione ad Legem and ad finem morum: and Moralitas est actus Physici, vel
privationis Relatio, viz. ad Regulam and finem morum.

. 5. But if the question be not of the Morality of the Act, but the Morality of
the Cause, viz. Whether Grace or divine action do cause Physically or Morally?
I answer plainly, that There is no true Cause which is not Physical: A moral
Cause, not physical, is but Causa reputata vel ^^minalis. Objects are usually
said to Cause morally: But if they be merely objects, they cause not
efficiently at all; but by termination only materially constitute the Act in
specie. But some things vulgarly called objects (as Light, Heat, etc.) are
Active and so effect. And he that does proponere objectum, does indeed effect,
by speaking or doing: But he does not effect any thing by the object on the
mind, as it is a mere object. But the Vox loquentis does more than present an
object: It does by agency suscitate the Spirits and operate on the organs of
sensation. And many mercies, afflictions, and other means forementioned, have
their several ways of active operation. But it is readily confessed, that
nothing corporeal can by any direct efficiency operate on a soul; but only
Active Spirits like it self. Remember therefore that I take the word Physical
here as the Schools do, largely, as comprehending Spiritual or hyperphysical:
And I plainly say de nomine, that Gods operations of Grace are to be called
Hyperphysical in respect to God the Agent, and Physical as they are Physical
effects on man, and Moral as the same are in instanti secundo also moral
effects. And that they are called Moral in two usual senses: 1. In that it is
Morality or Virtue that is produced by them: 2. And in that objects being much
of the Means, the operation or efficiency of objects as objects, is properly
none at all; They do but materially (as it were) constitute the Act, and
terminate it, and occasion it, as sine quibus non, which many call a Moral
Reputative, Metaphorical Causation. And yet diversification is much by objects.

. 6. If this stumble any who look not at the greater inconveniences on the
other side, and occasion them to think that it is little efficient operation
which we own in the collation of faith and conversion: I desire them to
consider well,

1. That it is no new substance at all that is to be produced; but a pre*
existent substance and faculty to be actuated.

2. That it is not an Act as such in genere, that is to be caused by Grace* but
the due ordering of acts as to right objects, etc.

3. That the soul as such is an Active Spirit, not indifferent between Action
and cessation; but as naturally prone to Act, as the earth to rest, and as a
stone in the air to descend, and as the Sun to move and shine: so that it is
never one minute out of Action, even in this earthen tabernacle from its first
being to the last breath, day or night: Though in different manner.

4. That God as the God of Nature does uphold the soul in this Active Nature,
affording it that Concurse or Influx necessary thereto, which in Nature he made
due to it: As he does to the Sun in its action, and to the souls of Brutes. So
that Activity as such, distinct from the due order of it, is given by God in
Nature.

5. And God has placed the soul in the Universe, as a wheel in a Watch, where
it must needs have some effects of the cooperation of Concauses, or superior
agents.

6. And Angels and Devils who have very much to do with our souls, do work as
Voluntary Agents, in Political Order, though not without the regulation of Gods
Law or Will.

7. And God can do what he will on souls without any second cause, though
whether he do so, or what, we know not.

8. All this being supposed for Efficiency, objects duly qualified may do much
for the Order of Acts, though properly they do nothing: so that though they be
but ut Materia ad formam, occasions sine quibus non; yet the reasons of the
great alterations in the World, being admirably fetched from the various Passive
or Receptive dispositions of matter, no wonder Cum Thomistae dicunt, Deum suo
auxilio efficaci physice praedeterminare Voluntatem ad actum bonum, non
excludunt Motionem Moralem, sed eam praesu^^^^^^ Alvarez de A^xil. disp. 23. p.
108. ^^
if it be so with man's soul also.

A spark of fire which long was unseen, if you put Straw, Gunpowder or other
fuel to it, may burn a City or Kingdom, when yet the fuel is not an efficient
cause (save the fire that is in it) but an objective Matter.

What work does a Student find all his life among Books? What abundance of
knowledge does he learn by them, which he had none of in his Infancy? And so do
Travelers by viewing the actions of the World. And all these are but fuel to
the fire. The soul only is the Agent, and all these are signs and objects that
do nothing really on the soul at all.

You may lead a Beast up and down, and govern them by objects; which yet act
nothing on them.

So Satan does by the Drunkard, Glutton, Fornicator, Gamester, Covetous, etc.
What Reputed work do objects make on them by doing nothing?

Thus Ver^m and Bonum are said to work. And the case is this, The Active
Spirit, is not only Naturally Active, but Essentially Inclined to some certain
objects (Truth and Goodness): And this Inclination being their very Nature,
when the object is duly presented to it, and it self delivered from all false
objects, and erroneous Action on them, and ill habits thence contracted, it
will Naturally work accordingly. And therefore duly (externally and internally)
to bring God and Holy objects to the prospect of the soul, is the way of
working them to God.

And sure the World would never make such a stir about Preaching, to get fit
men, and to persuade them to diligence, and to keep sound doctrine, etc. if
these objective causes, as fuel to the fire, did not do much, by occasioning
the Active soul to do its proper work.

9. Yet still remember (again) that Jesus Christ is the Political Head of
Influx (if not more;) who sends forth the Spirit, as he please, but
ordinarily upon his settled Gospel terms, to work on souls, by his threefold
forementioned influx, with and by these means, according to them, but in an
unsearchable manner; As God does in Nature by the Sun and other Natural Causes.

SECT. XI. What Free Will Man has to Spiritual Good, etc.
. 1. THe understanding of the Nature of the Power and Liberty of the Will, is
the very key to open all the rest of the controverted difficulties in these
matters: But having spoken of it so much before, in the former part of this
Book, and more elsewhere, I shall no further weary the Reader with repetitions,
than to note these few things following.

. 2. If any like not the name of Free Will, Libera Voluntas, let them but agree
about these two, the Power of the Will, and Free-choice, Nolite esse adeo
delicati, ut abhorreatis ab us^ vocabuli [Lib. arbit.] Hypocritarum propri^m
est rixari de vocabulis. Nemo offendatur hoc titulo, quia August. in multae
Volum. and singulis fere pagellis ad fastidium Lectoris hoc vocabulum inculcat.
Melancth. Loc. Com. de lib. arb. c. 1.
Liberum arbitrium, and they need not contend about Free Will.

. 3. 1. As to the first, It is the very Essence of the Will to be a natural
Power or faculty of Willing Good and Nilling evil apprehended by the Intellect;
and commanding the inferior faculties, either politically or despotically,
difficultly or easily, perfectly or imperfectly, according to its resolution
and their Receptivity.

. 4. 2. The Liberty of choice is not only Libertas Voluntatis, but Libertas
Hominis, when a man may have what he chooses or wills: Here the Act of
choosing is the Wills; but the object is somewhat else; either an Imperate act
of some inferior faculty, or some extrinsick thing. So we say truly, that the
unbeliever, or unconverted sinner, may believe, may repent, may have Christ and
life, if he will (as Dr. Twisse frequently asserteth.)

. 5. 3. But the Liberty of the Will it self, is but the mode of its
self-determination, as without constraint it is a self-determining principle in
its elicite Acts, considered comparatively.

. 6. The Liberty of the Will is threefold, 1. Liberty of Contradiction, or
exercitii; 2. Of Note, that the Papists confess, that by Christ's Case it is
proved, that Libertas specificationis inter bonum and malum is not necessary to
merit: So Pet. ^ S. Joseph. These. Univers. page 90.
Contrariety or specification in the Act: 3. Of objective specification, which
is Liberty of Competition. 1. The first Liberty is to will or not will; to nill
or not nill. 2. The second is Liberty to will or nill this. 3. The third is
Liberty to will This object or That, or to nill This or That. Of the real
difference of these three, see Rob. Baron. Metaphys. I take not that which many
Schoolmen call Liberty of Complacence to be another sort of Liberty: Though I
distinguish Liberty of simple Complacence, from Liberty of election; as being a
prior distribution: And I deny not, but that Liberty (of Complacency specially)
may stand with necessity of immutable disposition, yea* and with some sort of
necessitating operation of God; as is in Christ and the Glorified: And in this
large essential sense Liberum and Voluntarium are all one, supposing
Voluntarium to be the act of a self-determining unconstrained will. So that the
word [Free-will] being so exceeding ambiguous (as my foresaid Scheme shows)
we must be sure that we pretend not the Controversies de nomine to be de re.
But it is the Indifferency of a Viators will that we have now to do with, and
not that state of perfect determination, or that Amplitude or advancement of
the will, which Gibie^f and such others talk of: And note that by [Posse agere
vel non agere] which we put into the definition of free will, we must not mean
that Potentia moralis metaphorica, which is nothing but the wills moral
disposition or habit; but the Potentia Naturalis: And so it may be said of
Christ and the glorified, that their not sinning or not willing sin, is not ex
impotentia naturali, but ex perfectione.


. 7. The Will has not all these sorts of Liberty about every object* For it
cannot will known evil as such, etc. But it has all these about several
objects.

. 8. By this power and Liberty, the Will is made of God, to be a kind of Causa
prima secundum quid, of the Moral ORDER or specification of its own acts: Not
simply or strictly a Causa prima; For 1. It was God the first Cause that gave
man this self-determining Power. 2. It is God that upholdeth it: And so it
still depends wholly on his supporting will. 3. God concurreth by his
universal Influx, to its acts. 4. God is still the Lord of it, and can turn it
as he please, and overruled it to his Ends, and has put no act of ours from
under his power. But he willingly so forbeareth his own further operation, as
that he has made the Will able, on supposition of his foresaid support and
universal influx, and rule, to Determine it self to the said ORDER of its Acts,
without Gods particular predetermining premotion.

. 9. As in the Vital and Intellectual faculties, it is Gods Image to be Able to
Act Vitally, and to understand; so in the Will this self-determining Power and
Liberty, and Imperium over other faculties, is part of the same Image. And it
is Gods wrong and dishonor ^o have his Image denied and dishonored: And
therefore to deny this Power of the Will is as much a disgracing of Gods Image,
as to deny man to be Rational.

. 10. God made man such an Intellectual Free Agent, that he might be a fit
subject for Sapiential Moral Government: and accordingly he settled a Kingdom in
the World: And as he governs mere Natural Agents, by Natural motion, so he
governs Man as a Moral agent, by Laws and Moral means and motion: For he
rules all things according to their Natures.

. 11. Yet as man, even his will, is quid Natural^ as the subject of his
morality, and as Aquinas often says, Ipsa Voluntas est quaedam natura; so God
does by Natural agency and Causation continue and actuate man as Natural, that
so he may govern him morally in the rest, even in the moral ordering of his
Acts.

. 12. When men say that the will is free from co-action, they mean not all the
same thing. By co-action some mean nothing, but that willing is not nilling; or
that God does not make it to be unwilling and willing of the same thing, in the
same respect, at the same instant, that is, God causes not contradictions, it
being Impossible: And so with the Prede^erminants usually to will, and to will
freely, signify the very same. And if this be all the Liberty of the Will,
then to move it as Naturally as a Stone is moved, to hate God, to will all sin,
and nill all duty, so as that it can no more do otherwise than make a World,
were no abatement of its Liberty, because it is Volition and Nolition which are
the acts that it is moved to, (whether by God or Satan.)

. 13. But I yet see not why it may not as properly be called Coaction, to move
the will by physical necessitation to will o^ nill, as to move the Intellect to
understand, or to move any natural agent.

. 14. If you say, that the word [Coaction] imports reluctance, o^
unwillingness, or opposition; I confess with Scotus, that Potentia pass^v^ is
well distinguished, into naturalem, neutram, violentam: and that the word
Coaction may be so strictly taken, as to signify no motion but of a viola^ed
Patient: and so it is but lis de nomine: But a Necessitating motion o^ ^
natural, and neutral patient is the same thing, what name soever you call it
by. And they that acknowledge the pravity of the will, and its corr^pt
aversness to God and spiritual good, must needs, by this rule, make Gods
gracious change by predetermination to be a coaction, as being the motion of a
contrarily disposed patient: contrarily, I say, i^ instanti priore; for the
motus is supposed to change its disposition and act at once: But if still they
say, that it is not contrary in eodem instanti, and that is its liberty; I say,
then if the Devil had power as easily to effect by physical premotion a hatred
of God and will to sin, in all men, as I can move my pen, it were no loss of
Natural Liberty. And so man's liberty differs not from a beasts, or from a
plants, indeed, but only in the Nature of the Act: one wills, when the other
does but appe^er^, but all by the like physical unresistible efficiency from
other cau^es. This is but to play with the name of Liberty.

. 15. We take not this Liberty to be inconsistent with all kind of Necessity,
as is opened before in the Table of Liberty.

. 16. Nor do we confound the several sorts of Liberty, (as the said Table
shows) 1. A Political Liberty from Restraint of Laws is one thing (not
questioned in these disputes;) 2. And a Moral or Holy Liberty from vice or
sinful dispositions and acts is another. 3. But it is the Natural Liberty of
man's will on earth, that we speak of.

. 17. So far as any man is vicious, he wants the Moral Liberty of his will,
and so far as he is virtuous and sanctified he has it: that is, His will is so
far freed from sin.

. 18. We take not Liberty of Will to consist in Neutrality See Fr. Mac^do
against White.
of disposition or mere Indifferency: For the will acts freely when it acts
according to its Inclination and habits, with the greatest propensity, yea,
constancy of self-determination.

. 19. We take not the Indetermination of the will to be its perfection; but its
Natural Imperfection: But such as God has made it in, in this World, where all
his creatures have not the same perfection. Therefore we do with judicious
Strangius distinguish the essential Liberty which is selfdetermination
according to Reason, from that liberty of Indiff^^en^y, which is inconsistent
with predetermination and necessitation.


. 20. Therefore though God has thought this Indeterminate, selfdetermining
Will, to be fittest for a Viator in his trial and preparation for felicity, yet
perfection consists in the most Determinate state of Love, with the greatest
necessity which proceeds from the perfected nature of man, and the full
communication of Love from God, which we hope to have in Heaven for ever. And
he is best on Earth who is nearest to this state.

SECT. XII. Somewhat more of Predetermination; with an answer to Dr. Twisse.
. 1. THough I remit the Controversy of I remit the Reader to Strangius against
the necessity of predetermination.

Percipere non possum quomodo statui possit Deum causas liberas, etiam ad actus
intrinsice malos, physice praedeterminare, quin inde sequatur Deum esse peccati
authorem, etc. Le Blank These. 56. de Concursu, etc.


Predetermination to a peculiar full Disputation on that subject, yet this
touch in transitu I shall give here.

1. It is not Gods mere Volition or Decree of the Event that we speak of; but
his Physical Motion.

2. It Is strange the Dominicans are for burning and tormenting men for that
which they hold God does do in them and by them, and necess^tate them to. See
Bra^wardine li. 3. c. 1, 2. ^^^od Deus quodammodo necessitat quamlibet
Voluntatem creatam ad quemlibet liberum actum suum, and cessationem a^
va^ationem ab a^^u* and bo^ necessitate naturaliter praecedent^: and cor. p.
649. Omnia qu^ sunt, fiunt aut eveni^^t, sunt, ^^^^ and eveniunt ^^ aliqu^
necessitate ip^^ natural^t^r praecedent^. This is just Hobbs.

So^. 5. ^^ 654* that No creature has simple liberty of Contradiction, or
Contingency, but only secundum quid in respect to second causes: but only Gods
acts of will ad extra are simply free and contingent. As if God had given no
creature Liberty to forbear sin or do good; but doing it or not doing it were
from Gods necessitation, though not from the creatures!


The Dominicans (the Masters of the Inquisition, and Murderers of the Waldenses
and Albigenses of old,) and therefore faulty as well as the Jesuits, though
there are very Learned men among them both, do commonly hold, that No Creature
natural or free can act, unless God by Immediate physical efficient premotion
predetermine it to that act, both in the act as such (which they call the
substance of it,) and all the modes, circumstances and order of it.

3. Augustine and Jansenius after him, with their true followers hold not this
necessity of predetermining premotion to all acts, natural, or sinful; but only
to spiritual good acts: which is not from the Nature, but the Corrupt^^n of
^^an* and therefore the predetermination is not made, say they, by Gods Common
Natural Motion, but by Medicinal Grace.

4. Durandus and his followers (as Lud. a Dola) and Aureolus partly, do hold,
that if God do but uphold ^ll creatures, as compaginate in the Universe, in the
Nature he made them in, (and so natural Inclination, and media and objects all
supposed) this sustentation and Influx maintaining their Active Natures, and
means, is sufficient to cause an Act, without another particular predetermining
premotion of God. As e. g. in Naturals, they think that if a Rock were
violently held up in the Air, God continuing its Natural Gravity, and all other
circumstant Natures and Concauses, this Rock if loosed can fall down of it
self, without another predetermining premotion of God. And that a new Act of
God (supposing the said support of Nature) is more necessary to the
not-falling, than to the falling of it: As it was to the fires not burning the
Three Confessors, Dan. 3. And I am unable to see the error of this Opinion.

And so in Free agents, they think, that if God continue the Nature of a
free will, with all circumstants and necessary natures, it can freely determine
it self, without another act of predetermining premotion; And does so in each
act of sin: Though as Jansenius says, by accidental corruption, for Conversion
we need Medicinal Grace.

5. The Jesuits, and all others explode this Opinion of Durandus as singular,
but give so little and slender reason of their dissent, as would draw one the
more to suspect their cause. Instead of it they scarce know what to assert: But
Bellarmine and the chiefest of them, under a pretended opposition, speak (I
think) the same in other words, Even an Universal Concurse like that of the
Sun, which operateth in specification according to the nature of Recipients,
which specify the effect. Which Universal Influx, no doubt, Aureolus and
Durandus include in Gods sustentation of Nature: For to sustain an Active
Nature in all its Active disposition, by a suitable active Influx, is
universally to cause its motion. The difference they are unable to assign.

6. After these come Hobbs, Cartesius and Gassendus, with a swarm of
Epicureans, (a Sect commonly despised even in Cicero's time, and yet called
Wits in ours by men that have no more wit than themselves); and some of these
say, that Motion needs no continued cause at all, any more than non-movere:
But when a thing is in motion, it will so continue, because it is its state,
without any other continued cause than the motion it self. And so they may as
well say (and some do) that when a thing is in Being, it will so continue till
it be positively annihilated, without any continued causation of its being. As
if esse and existere were nothing more than non esse; and agere were no more
noble a mode of Entity than non agere, and so needed no more (that is, no)
Cause. (For non esse and non agere need no Cause:) When this distraction is
worn out and shamed, the next Age will reproach us for attempting the
confutation of it; And yet the Wits of this delirant Age have not the wit to
understand a Confutation.

Some of them say, that Spirits cannot move bodies for want of Contact (as
Gassendus). Some say, that Matter and Motion are eternal, and that of
themselves; As if there were no God but Matter and Motion. Some say, that there
is a God who gave matter one push at first, and so set it in that motion by
which one body by a knock will move another to the end. And some say, There is
no other Intellect; but the wonders of wisdom and order in the World are done
by such fortuitous motion.

But Hobbes meets the Predeterminants and says, that the Will is free in
that its Act is Volition; but that this Volition is necessitated by superior
or natural Causes as much as any motion in a Clock or Watch, and that it is
unconceivable that any Act or Mode of Act can be without a necessitating
efficient cause. But he differs from them in his consequents, and in the Notion
of a Spirit, acknowledging no being but Corporeal.

. 2. The Predeterminants commonly build not their doctrine on Gods free will,
but on the Necessity of the thing: As if it were a contradiction, which God
cannot do, for God to make a creature that can Determine it self, ad ordinem
actionis without his particular predetermining premotion; or to make a Stone
that can fall from the Air of it self, unless he move it downwards, besides his
sustentation of its natural gravity, and all other natures, by his Influx, or
universal Concurse.

. 3. But till they can prove the Contradiction, they must pass for the denyers
of Gods Omnipotency, which is to deny a God.

. 4. Let the Reader note, 1. That all the rest of their arguments save this one
are of no value. 2. And that Dr. Twisse affirms that God is not* always the
effector of all Good either of Profit or Pleasure which yet he says are Good.
Now if there be no such Entity in Bonum conducibile, vel Bonum Jucundum, as
necessarily to require God to be the Cause of them, tell us if you can, Why
there is so much entity in Malum morale, as that man is not able to cause it,
unless God predetermine his will? Yea, as to Entity, there is no more in Bonum
honestum, than in the rest forenamed: His words are [Nos tueri poterimus,
Malum fieri, esse Bonum per se: ne^^pe in genere Boni conducibilis, ad certum
aliquem fi^^m: sed arguit adversarius, Ergo Deus esset non modo permissor, sed
and effector ^jus mali. Prorsus invalida consequentia: Apparet enim non necesse
esse ut Deus sit effector omnis Boni in genere conducibilis: (N. B.) Vix enim
datur aliquod peccatum, quod non sit alicui conducibile -- Neque necess^ est ut
Deus sit author omnis boni jucundi, magis quam ut sit author peccati. Nam
certissimum est, and extra omnem controversiae al^am positum, peccatum esse
bonum in genere jucundi, etiam in genere conducibilis: potest enim peccatum
nobis cedere in salutem -- ] Vind. Great. li. 1. p. 1. sect. 7. p. 133. But
whereas the Doctor upbraideth Arminius for confusion in not distinguishing the
three sorts of Good in this controversy, An ^^li existentia bonum sit? viz.
the bonum honestum, utile and jucundum; I must desire the Reader to avoid also
the Doctors confusion, and to be so much more accurate than he, as to remember
that this distinction is but de Bono Creaturae, whose pleasure, profit and
honesty are distinguishable: But that above these God Himself is the absolute
and simple Good, and that things are first Good as related to him, the Prime
and Ultimate Good: And that the highest formal notion of Goodness in the
^creature, is none of those three, but the conformity of things to the Will of
God, the absolute Rule of Goodness. And therefore when we ask, An bonum sit ut
sit malum? we mean not an sit bonum hominis secundum quid, but an sit bonum
simpliciter, viz. conform Voluntati Divinae? And if they can prove that Deus
velit* ^^^^ fieri, we will confess it to be Good. But 3. Yet I deny it to be
bonum utile, seeing it does the sinner no good. For Bonum jucundum in genere is
not sin. God would have men have more Pleasure than sin brings, and not less.
But it is hoc minus jucundum sensibile preferred before hoc magis jucundum
spirituale, which is sin. Now the prelation of a Less Pleasure to a Greater is
no Pleasure. So that sin is neither utile nor jucundum. And the Doctor is quite
out, in calling ^ccasio a medium* conducibile: and confesses that sin is no
otherwise conducible to Gods Glory but as occasio. Whereas occasio, as such, is
no medium at all, no more than possibilitas est ens; unless you take Medium
very largely.
Their chief argument is, that the moral specification of an Action is an
Entity; and to say that any thing can cause any Entity without Gods first
causing it, is to deifie that creature making it a first cause. Answ. 1. The
comparative Order of Actions, (as the terminating them on this object rather
than that, and at this time rather than that, etc.) is but the modus modi
entis; and so is no proper entity. 2. Or if the Name be the quarrel, it is no
other Entity than what God is Able to make a creature Able to cause without his
predetermining Causality. 3. This power is the excellency of the creature, and
the honor of its Creator.

. 5. As for their argument, that there is no effect without a cause, nor
difference in effects without a difference in the causes; and that an
undetermined cause cannot produce a determinate effect; I answer, 1. God is the
cause of all differences without any diversity in himself. And he is the Free
cause of all things necessary in the World. 2. The soul is Gods Image. 3. The
Will when undetermined has a self-determining power. Therefore this is but
petere principium. 4. But there are many sub causes that are a reason of the
determination; As objects, opportunity, knowledge, the removing of competitors,
etc.

. 6. Therefore Gibieufs, Guil. Camerarius, etc. way of predetermination by the
Causa finalis, is nothing to our question; that being no efficient, but a
Material, objective or Moral Causation.

. 7. When they say, that else God depends on the creature, and is determined
by it, (as to his Concurse:) I answer, 1. How can Gods free upholding the power
of a free agent, be his dependence on it, when it expressly speaks its
dependence on him, without whom it cannot be nor act? 2. No creature
determines Gods Immanent acts: nor his transient, as to the mere Impress and
first effect; and so not Gods Act at all: unless Terminating be Determining. It
is only its own Act which the creature determines, which is a secondary effect
of Gods act, as proceeding from the second cause. Gods Influx makes all that
Impress on the soul which God intends absolutely: But whether by that Impress
the sinner will consent, the will determines, and is the chief determiner in
Evil.

. 8. Says Dr. Twisse Vindic. Great. lib. 2. p. 2. Digres. 9. [The second cause
non agit in primam, etc. Hoc faceret vel volendo, vel ali^d agendo, etc.] Answ.
It Is granted: God is not passive, nor does any second cause act on him as
passive: Who is his Adversary in this?

. 9. He adds [Neither on the Influx of God do we act: for an Act is not the
subject of an act.] Answ. 1. If by Gods Act and Influx he mean not the Effect
on the soul, it is a false supposition that Gods Influx or Act is any other
than his Essence: But if the said effect be meant, I have showed you that both
Indisposition in the Recipient, and a contrary Act may resist it.

. 10. Against our Passive determination of the effect, he says, that [God is
denied to act by physical action on man's will -- which if he did, he would
rather determine it, than be determined by it, because it cannot resist him,
etc.] Ans. 1. The will does not resist by reaction on and against God; but by
Indisposition, and by its own not acting when it can, etc. 2. Who dare deny all
Physical Action of God on man's will, when it is quaedam natura? 3. The will
does not Determine Gods will, nor reject his Impress, but only determine its
own Act. 4. If God would act ad ultimum posse, the will would never disobey or
fail of the due effect.

. 11. He says ib. [Doth God move only to the Act in genere? or also to this
species of action? The first cannot be said, For Suarez, Hurtado, say that God
determines the Agent to this Individual act. And the creature has as much
need of help to the species of motion (which is perfecter than the genus,) as
to the genus. And Gods Influx is singular, and not determined to Generical
nature, etc.] Answ. Gods universal motion (as the Suns) does necessarily make
its Impress on the creature, and gives him sufficient help ex part sui to
Act; yea, necessarily continues the soul in some Action. And that Action is
singular, and not a non existent universal. But it is only the General Nature
of a singular Act which Gods Natural Influx necessarily causes: And the Moral
species (what need soever we have of help to it) is caused otherwise; not by
this common Influx of God as the root of Nature, but by a special Gracious
Influx with and by special supernatural means. And this it does only to Good
and not to Evil: and not always with a causally necessitating influx, as to
our act.

. 12. He adds [If the will need not Gods motion to its Act in specie, it is
either in genere entis, or in genere moris. The first cannot be said: For the
special Nature includes the General and more. And the species in genere moris
are no species of acts, but only accidents of humane acts, and that only by
extrinsick denomination as to the Law,] etc. Answ. 1. The vanity of arbitrary
Logical notions, is a wood for you to hide the matter in. You are not able
certainly to define what physically specifieth an Action, and what not. To say
that one is the species of an Act, and the other is but an accident and no
species, is but to say that you will say what you list. We use to say that Acts
are specified by their objects: And so when objects differ specie physica vel
morali, the acts do so. But when the question is with Judas, shall I betray my
Master or not? with another, shall I be perjured or not? with another, shall I
commit this Adultery or not? with another, shall I pray in season or out of
season? to another, shall I love God or the creatures more? shall I will or not
will this? shall I will it or nill it? etc. Here you are so much at liberty
that you may please your self with saying, that to betray and not betray, to
forswear and not to forswear, to love more or less in degree, etc. are physical
species of entity, and so make physical species of Action. But I will not say
that non agere and non ens is a species of Entity physical: Nor do I believe
that we need Gods Influx ad non agendum as such.

And as for your Accidents of Actions, if you mean Relations, it is their
fundamentum that we are questioning. The extrinsick denomination is founded in
Relation, or else it is Causeless. In a word, Man by Common Influx can determine
his own will to go this way rather than that, and also not to go, and this
without a further physical predetermining premotion of God.

. 13. But here let the Reader note, that when he makes Moral Good and Evil no
species of Actions, but an extrinsick denomination (which is true, abstracting
the relation from the fundamental difference of the Acts), and makes God the
Naturally necessitating Cause of all that is physical in the acts, he makes
God equally the necessitating prime Cause of Good and Evil, which are but
relations resulting from the specified acts.

. 14. He adds [If God move the will it is to that same act which it does, or
to another. If to another, why should it be said that God moved it to that
which is not done rather than that which is done, when we speak not of moral,
but necessary physical motion?] Answ. The Particle [To] does cheat you by
ambiguity. 1. As [to] notes, the effect, of God alone, it is [to] the Impress
which he makes on the soul; which effect he still obtains, which urges it
toward its own act. 2. The same I say if [to] signify an absolutely intended
end. 3. But if [to] signify the natural tendency of Gods Impulse as to an
effect possible and desirable, yea, and due by command from the subordinate
cause (man's will,) then it was [to] our act of repentance, faith, duty, that
God moved us: That is, he gave us that Power, and necessary influx by which it
might and ought to have been done by us.

. 15. It is but to make toil for the Reader to answer all these fallacies and
quibbles, founded in some false supposition or ambiguous word: else I would
answer the rest of that Digression, and his Digres. 5. li. 1. p. 2. contra
Alvar. Only here I must take notice, that in this Digr. 9. he himself rejects
Greg. Arim. and Hurtado's assertion of Gods Determining us to this or that
Numerical Act, as distinct from another ejusdem speciei, ut merum figmentum,
and ad curiositati hominum nimium infoelici satisfaciendum duntaxat
introductum. Whereas were it not for wearying the Reader, I might show, that
the same Reasons will hold for or against this numerical, as are for or against
his specifical predetermination. And the species having no existence but in the
individuals, and himself saying, that Gods motion is ad actus singulares, if he
say that it is not to that singular act that is done, rather than that which is
not done, he gives up his whole cause.

. 16. But to this he has an answer that it is a fiction and unsound to say,
that [Possibilia quae nondum existunt do differ numero: cum differ numero
est tantum existentium.] Answ. 1. He may as well say, that esse possibile is a
fiction: when possibile is terminus diminuens ad esse. And is not possibile as
much a fiction de specie as de numero? That which is not, neither is in specie
nor in numero. But there is a Possibilitas numeri as well as speciei. Yet with
this answer he often insulteth over the Schoolmen, when at another time he would
have said that Possibile has an esse cognitum in both respects.

. 17. And I think the good man forgot that by this he quite overthrows his
Book de Scientia Media, and much of all his other Books, which are animated
with the supposition of Gods Will causing faturition from eternity. For if only
existentia differunt numero, futura non sunt existentia: And if the futurition
of differentia numero be not decreed nor eternal (as of this Sun, this Earth,
Paul, Peter, and their singular acts, etc.) then nothing is future from
eternity: And so we are brought to the Arminians election of species only, and
not of individuals (in primo instanti) which is rejected. Sure God electeth
Individuals, or none: And if so, it is future individuals. Individuation
existeth not but in existentibus. But if foreknowledge and Decree may be of
futures and non-existents, it may be of individuals that are such, as well as
of species.

. 18. Yea, he proceeds to say page 412. [Deum scire plura esse possibilia
quam sunt, non est scire multitudinem rerum possibilium; sed tantum scire se
praestare posse ut detur major multitudo rerum existentium quam actu sit: Quare
multitudo rerum individuarum Deo notum est tantum existentium, sive ea sit
multitudo actualis, sive potentialis, etc.]

And yet the soul of his Book de Scientia Media is [Causa transitionis rerum e
numero Possibilium in numerum futurorum.] And my foresaid opposition to his
Eternal Causation of futurity, is hereby confirmed. 2. It Is true, that to know
quid possibile, is not to know it to be existent, nor any more than to know
what God (e. g.) can do; and so to denominate Nothing, quid possibile, as
relating to Power: (And so Ariminens* says Nothing may be Related.) But the
like must be said of futurity: And it holds equally of the species and de
numero, and possibilium and futurorum; so that here we have confitentem reum
about the dance and dream of notions and nothings which I have before showed
they beguile men's understandings with.

And hence also my former doctrine is confirmed, of the non-necessity of a
causal decree of Negatives or Nothings, or of a Positive Volition of them.

. 10. The truth is, an Act of man's soul is such a thing, that de existentibus
it is hard for any of their subtilties to make known the difference of species,
accidents or individuals ab objectis: And to know what interruptions they must
be, that go to cut one Immanent act into two, or hinder unity.

SECT. XIII. Of man's Power Natural and Moral.
. 1. I Have said so much of this also in the other parts of this Book, that a
little here may serve.

1. Man has no Power whatsoever but from God; and therefore does not act as a
prime Cause properly, because but by a derived power.

. 2. That which is a Power but hypothetically on Condition of something not
existent, especially not in our power it self, is no power properly and
univocally, but equivocally only. As to say, I am able to leap to Heaven if God
will Cause it: I am able to lift a thousand pound with sufficient help which I
have not: I am able to see if I had light: or to see a Phoenix if there were
such a thing: or I am able to will or move with Gods necessary predetermining
premotion (say some) which I have not. None of this is a true Power ad hoc. But
to constitute a formal Power, it is necessary that I have all things, without
which I cannot do the act.

. 3. It is a contradiction to say that when a man has the true Power to
believe, yet he cannot do the Act, As Jansenius and Dr. Twisse do, in making
more absolutely necessary to it.
without further premotion: which is to say, He that can believe, cannot
believe. The Power connoteth the Possibile.

. 4. Potentia rationalis naturae humanae non potest minui extrinsice, and
entitative, per destructionem alicujus gradus ejusdem potentiae; potest tamen
minui per appositionem impedimenti, quale est peccatum, vel per inclinationem
contrariam ad peccata; quae inclinatio generatur per actus males: Necesse est
enim ex hoc quod aliquid inclinatur ad ^num contrariorum, quod diminuatur
inclinatio ejus ad aliud: Cum ergo peccatum sit contrarium virtuti, ex hoc ipso
quod homo peccat, diminuitur bonum naturae, quod est inclinatio ad virtutem:
Alvarez de Aux. li. 6. disp. 45. p. ^10. Ita Thom. 1. 2. q. 85. ar. 1. in corp.
The true Natural Power of Intellection and Volition, every man has as a man:
And when God, Christ, Heaven are brought to us with all the Conditions
necessary to Objects of Intellect and Will, we have formal power to understand
and will them, in this Natural sense. What is necessary to the Being of an
Object, and Revelation, I desire the Reader to see distinctly opened by me, in
a small tract called, The Certainty of Christianity without Popery.

. 5. But the soul it self has a vicious Indisposition to the spiritual
exercise of these faculties or powers: And this is the morbus facultatum; And
this Indisposition is called a Moral Impotency; because the soul is unfitted by
it to the exercise of its natural Power.

. 6. When this Indisposition is so great, as that no man in that case does do
the act, we say he is morally unable: And when it is not so great, but that
under that Indisposition some men do the act, in that state of help we say that
such a man is morally able. Therefore he that is yet more disposed, is so More
able, and it has various degrees.

. 7. But if a man have so great a disposition (skill and will) as that he is
ready to the facile and frequent performance of the act, that Promptitude is
called a Habit, and is more than a mere moral power (though a power also.)

. 8. It is certain that men can do more than they do: not only that they could
do more if God would predetermine them, or give them more grace; but that
properly they can. The worst has Power to do more good, and forbear more evil,
than he does; And so have the best.

. 9. Adam had true proper Power, natural and Moral, to have stood when he fell:
He sinned not for want of necessary Power to have forborne it.

. 10. They that deny this and resolve all sin into Gods unresistible
necessitating operation, or denying of power absolutely and antecedently
necessary, I think do make way for Hobbes his Theology, or subversion of
Religion.

. 11. Moral Power and Impotency are primarily such in the will (the first seat
of morality) and derivatively or secondarily in the Intellect and executive
Power. And therefore it is not originally and radically of physical necessity,
but Free, as the will which is free is the Cause of it.

. 12. Jansen. de Great. Christ. l. 3. c. 15. denies that without effectual
Grace men have a complete power to the Acts; but says yet, They have power, 1.
Remotissime, in that they have free will. 2. By faith, not joined with Love, as
being the beginning, etc. 3. Yet more by Love as the root, etc. And he notes a
double Impotency, Una est ex defe^tu alicujus quod non potest quantumlibet
magna volu^tate, vel fortiter volendo suppleri. Talis est Impotentia illius qui
caret rebus temporalibus ad largiendum, etc. (This is natural Impotency.) De
tali Impotentia verissimum est quod D^us non jubet impossibilia: Nam hoc ipso
quo talis oritur impossibilitas, vel praeceptum extinguitur, vel certe ad illud
implendum, is cui praecipitur non amplius obligatus est. Non est enim culpae
Voluntatis quod non ^iat, etc. Altera ex defectu ipsius Voluntatis se^
Volitionis oritur, quae si adesset, quanta adesse debet, praeceptum facillim^
impleretur: Tantummodo enim fortiter volendo impletur -- Haec Impotentia nullo
modo excusat cum qui non impl^t quod praecipitur: Posset enim implere si
vellet. Quod si nol^erit, and ideo non potuerit, quis non cum dixerit pro ipsa
tam perversa obdurataque voluntate culpandum*Vel^nt, plen^que velint; mox ut
voluerint, imple^untur: si autem nolint, ideoque non possint, quis nolentibus
vitio non vertat, etc? Nam revera defectus talis potestatis non est aliud quam
duritia mal^ voluntatis, a qua suscepta recedere non posse, non est aliud quam
tenaciter nolle.
Nature teaches all the world so much to difference between man's Voluntary and
Involuntary Acts and Habits, as to take the first to be directly laudable or
culpable, as being not only virtuous or vicious, but in their relations to the
Rule, to be Virtue or Vice it self; and the more men have of a vicious
obstinacy and voluntariness in evil, the more all mank^nd condemn and hate
them. Whereas involuntary necessity is everywhere taken for a just excuse: yea
a necessit as volendi in a mad man or a phrenetick or melancholy person, makes
them the objects of men's compassion. And this Light and Law of humane nature is
not to be rejected, because it may seem hard to answer the sophisms of those
that would confound these sorts of Power and Impotency.

. 13. Therefore of a man that is no otherwise unable to Love God (e. g.) but
only because (or in that) directly or indirectly, he will not, that is, is
Dispositively, Actually and Habitually Unwilling; it is more proper and
intelligible to say that he will not, than that he cannot: Though we may also
say He cannot, when we mean but that he will not: But the most explicatory
words are best.

. 14. No man-shall be able so far to accuse God and excuse himself justly at
last, as to say, I was truly willing to have Christ and Life as offered me, but
I could not: or I was truly willing to leave my sins and wor^^ly vanities, and
to live a holy life to God, but I could not: Yea Augustine and Twisse say more,
that no man can truly say, [I would believe but cannot] (which yet I think
needs some limiting explication.)

. 15. Obj. But though all men Can have Christ (or faith) if they will, yet the
unregenerate are unable to be willing.

Answ. By Unable you must 1. Either mean that they want the Natural Power or
faculty of willing it; 2. Or that they want some naturally. necessary concause
or object, without which this faculty is no formal Power ad ho^* 3. Or that the
Will is not well Disposed so to Act.

1. The first no man will say that takes an unbeliever for a Man. 2. The
second no man will say that will not by Hobbes his physical necessitation, turn
Religion into a name or nothing, or the natural mot^on of an Engine called Man.
3. And the third (which is the truth) must be named as it is: In Controversies
which exercise so great animosities and ^^^^al zeal as this does in the
Churches, it is an injurious thing to use sed^^ing improper names, when the
more plain and intelligible are at hand. Hereafter speak plainly in your
contendings, and instead of [Cannot] say, An unconverted man will not believe,
and his will is viciously undisposed to it, yea ill-disposed against it. Hold
to this that we may understand each other; or confess that you quarrel about a
word.

. 16. Obj. The Scripture uses the word [Cannot:] Can a Black^ore change his
skin, etc.

Answ. 1. The text may as fitly (at least) be translated [Will a Blackmore
change his skin, etc.] Yet the word [Cannot] is brought in in the application;
for here it is all one: That is, the meaning is, that some custom in sin does
cause such a settled Ill disposition or Habit, as without special Grace is never
overcome: Which signifies no more, than a r^^ted wilfulness and Love of sin,
and enmity to Good. 2. But the meaning is not to affirm these two sorts of
Impotency to be of the same nature [An Ethiopian cannot change his skin, were
he never so willing] and [he cannot be willing to change it, without Grace.]
But you cannot say that an accustomed sinner cannot learn to do good were he
never so willing: nor yet that he can be as easily willing as the Ethiopian,
nor as hardly made willing as the Leopard. 3. Figurative speeches are frequent
in Scripture, and may alike be used by us in the like cases. But in
Controversies a trope is an equivocal till explained, and must not be used
without necessity and explication. 4. Where the text once says, They could not
believe or repent, it says many and many times They would not. 5. The phrase
[They could not believe, because Esaias says, etc.] Joh. 12. 39. notoriously
speaks but of an Impossibilitas Logica consequentiae, and not of a physical
disability in themselves, though it intimates a settled wilfulness. 6. When
it is said, Act. 4. 14. [They could say nothing against it,] it signifies not a
want of physical power, but mediate advantage. It Is said of Christ, Mark 1. 45.
He could no more enter into the City -- 6. 5. He could there do no mighty work
because of their unbelief. 7. 24. He could not be hid. Isa. 5. 4. What could
have been done more to my Vineyard? Jer. 15. 1. My mind could not be toward
this people. Mark* 3. 20. They could not so much as eat bread. 1. These. 3. 1.
When we could no longer forbear, etc. -- 1 John 3. 9. He cannot sin -- Heb. 9.
5. Of which we cannot now speak particularly. Act. 4. 16. We cannot deny it.
And 19. 36. These things cannot be spoken against. Joh. 7. 7. The world cannot
hate you. Luke 11. 7. I cannot rise and give thee, (and yet he did.) Luke 14.
20. I have married a wife, therefore I cannot come. Mar. 2. 19. They cannot
fast. Neh. 6. 3. I cannot come down. So Genesis 34. 14. and 44. 26. 2 Cor. 13. 8.
Numb. 22. 18. and 24. 13. Jos. 24. 19. 1 Samuel 25. 17. Psalm. 77. 4. and other
places; I think you will not say it is natural and utter disability that is
here spoken of: No nor of God when it is said that He cannot deny himself or
Lie, 2 Timothy 2. 13. Tit. 1. 2. We must therefore explain such doubtful words,
before we draw controverted conclusions from them, as supposing them falsely to
be univocal.

. 17. The same Natural faculty may by the Alteration of objects and means,
become formally a Power or no power ad hoc vel illud. And when Nature made it a
faculty, Grace can make it a formal power to this or that without changing it
in it self at all, in many instances or cases.

. 18. Men have a power even moral to the use of many means which God has
appointed for the begetting of faith, before they have a moral power to believe.

. 19. God has appointed or commanded to all men, the use of certain duties and
means for their Recovery by faith and repentance unto God: And there is no man
that is not obliged to use such means; nor any man that is to use them in
desp^ir of success: The very command being some signification of Gods will,
that obedience shall not be in vain. Whether the name of an Implicit Promise
be apt for that command, I leave to those that have a mind to contend about
names.

. 20. Though a mere Indifferent faculty be (as Dr. Twisse says) rather to be
called Nature than Grace; yet it is Grace 1. Which gives a gracious object to
that faculty, though thereby it be still but an undetermined Power. 2. And it
is more Grace which takes off some vicious Illdispositions of the soul; and
gives it some more Disposition to believe, though but so much as common grace
does give.

. 21. It is not a mere Power that God gives men to Repent and believe: But a
Power accompanied with many Gracious help^ and means to determine it aright (of
which before.)

. 22. He that will not use such Power and means does thereby forfeit further
grace Brianson in 4. q. 8. Cor. 3. fol. 152. maintains, i. Quod ad obtinendam
eratiam necessario ex part hom^nis praecedit aliqua dispositio. 2. Quod talem
dispositio^em homo per selpsum potest si vult in se inducere, praesupposita
influentia g^n^ali D^i. 3. Quo l talis dispositio ex part hominis nullam
inducit necessitatem introductionis gratiae ex part Dei: sed totum fit mera
gratuita Dei voluntate. But the second must be done by common preparing Grace.
: However God does not always take the forfeiture, and will not of his elect
to their destruction, but does pardon them.

. 23. By all this it appears, 1. That all men have a natural power or
faculties, enabled to all that is necessary to salvation, so far that it is not
the want of a proper natural power that shall necessitate them to sin and
perish; 2. That this Power is by vice undisposed to believe, etc. 3. That it
has some Indisposition to all that virtue or moral good which tends to
salvation. 4. That it is not equally undisposed to all such Good. 5. That it is
Indisposition to some means of Recovery, is no greater than what may be
overcome by Gods commoner sort of Grace. 6. That this commoner Grace is not
herein ever so effectual, as that all that receive it, do all the good that
they can do by it, even in a moral sense; nor all that some others do that have
no more help: But the wilful negligence of the receiver, or his diversion or
resistance frequently frustrateth it; though not always. 7. That the right use
of this commoner grace, in the use of the foresaid means, is a way appointed by
God himself, and not in vain, by and in which men may be made fit to receive
that special Grace which will call them savingly to believe. 8. That no man is
denied that special grace that deserves it not by the abuse of Common grace.
(How the ca^e of Infants depends on the Parents I must not instance as often as
the exceptions of wranglers require it.) 9. And therefore no man is condemned
for want of natural Power as such, but only for want of stirring up his natural
power by those helps of grace, by which he might have done it, and for want of
that further Good (faith, love, obedience) which by the helps rejected he might
have been brought up to, had he not wilfully neglected the power and helps
which he had. 10. Yea usually God long waits patiently on sinners with the
tenders of mercy, while they reject it, before he utterly forsake them.

SECT. XIV. Whether the giving of faith be an Act of Omnipotency? and a proper
Creation? and a Miracle?
. 1. THe Reader must pardon me for troubling him with such frivolous questions
about names, seeing unhappy Theologues have made it necessary. An Act of
Omnipotency has several senses Creation is an ambiguous word: Pet. de Alliaeo
in 4. q. 1. G. tells us of four Ordinary senses of the word, 1. Facere
aliquod esse post non esse: 2. Facere aliquid esse post non esse ab illo agente
quod potest hoc sine causali influxu materiae vel subjecti. 3. Facere aliquid
esse post non esse, sire concursu causali seu influru materiae vel subjecti
sine subjecto praesupposito ex quo illud fiat. 4. Facere aliquid esse post no^
esse absque agente se solo causante, and sine concursu alterius causae
efficient^. Malderus 1. 2. qu. 113. a. 9. p. 578. ex Tho. and August.
Justificatio impii est maximum opus Dei. Secundum quantitatem tam magnum est
Angelos justos c^eare: sed secundum quantitatem proportionis majus est impios
justificare -- quia major est di^properti impii ad gratiam quam justi ad
gloriam; sicut ex plebeio creare ducem quam ex duce regem. Aug. Tr. 72. in Joh.
Justis create and impios justificare, aequalis potentiae, hoc autem major is
misericordiae est.
:

1. If the meaning be Whether Omnipotency be the Agent Principle, it is past
dispute. For it is all one as to ask Whether it be an Act of God? God has no
Power but Omnipotency, that is, perfect power.

2. If the meaning be, Whether the Giving of faith be an Adequate effect of
Omnipotency, it is also negatively past doubt. Though those that take God to be
but Anima Mundi, say that Either the World is Infinite or that God is not
Infinite, as thinking the World to be his adequate effect; yet Christians are
commonly agreed, that God has no adequate effect. Even the making of the
universe, the Giving of Christ, and the Glorifying of the Church, which are the
highest effects of his Power, Wisdom and Love, are not adequate effects; For
nothing but another God can be an adequate effect of God: And another God, is a
contradiction.

. 2. 3. But if the sense of the question be only comparative; As, 1. Whether
Omnipotency be more eminent in the giving of faith than Wisdom and Love (or
Goodness)? 2. Or whether Omnipotency be more eminent in giving faith, than
other works of God? they are both needless questions. And to the first I say,
No: To the second, those other works of God must be named, and compared, by the
presumptuous that have no safer work to do.

. 3. 4. If the question be, Whether the giving of faith be so great a work that
no Power below Omnipotency could suffice to do it? I answer, it is a
presumptuous paltry question of rash men. But yet if it must be answered, it
must be negatively: Because as Omnipotence is more illustrious in the making of
the world, than in causing a man to believe; so Christians agree that the world
it self (as I said) is not an adequate effect of Omnipotency: Which makes so
many of the subtilest Schoolmen conclude that God could not be proved to be
Omnipotent by the whole Creation ^as such, were it not further to be gathered
from the notices of his perfection. Which were false if by Omnipotence they
meant only a Power that can do all that is done: But they mean An Infinite
Power; which they say must be so seen in an Infinite effect. But the world is
not Infinite.

. 4. As to the second question, it is either de nomine or de re. If the former,
let every man speak as he list for me, rather than I will contend with him,
whether Creation of faith be a fit name. As to the matter, 1. It is agreed on,
that faith is not a substance; 2. Nor an Accident con-created with a substance;
3. Nor a composition of substances into one, done by secondary Creation,
Generation or Art. 4. But that it is the right ordered Act of a substance,
whose natural power which performs it, was pre-existent, though without that
act and the moral disposition. Therefore it being a Modus entis or modus modi
that we talk of, the common name is Alteration and suscitation, actuating and
ordering: But if men sober sometime call it a New Creation (as indeed the whole
frame of holiness together is called the New Creature in the Scriptures) and
sometimes the Divine nature, sometimes Regeneration, sometimes a Divine
Artifice, Alteration, Conversion, Sanctification, etc. it is the same thing
that is meant by all their several names.

. 5. As to the third Question, Whether it be a Miracle Justificationem non esse
proprie Miraculum, Vid. Malder. ib. p. 578.

Et Br^anson. in 4. q. 8. Cor. 2. fol. 144. confessing it above the power of a
Creature to justify us, but not properly a miracle.


p 1. As a Miracle signifies a wonder, a thing is wonderful either for the
Rarity or for the Great appearance of Gods power in it. In the first respect,
faith is not so Rare as to be a miracle: In the second, the Sun and Heavens are
a greater wonder than faith.

2. But as a Miracle signifies that which is done by second Causes, but
unknown to us, and out of Gods ordinary way of working; so it is no miracle.

3. And as some men call that a Miracle which exceeds the power of the second
causes, so all things would be Miracles that God does: For they are effects of
his power as exceeding the power of second causes.

4. As a Miracle is that which is done by God without any second causes, Many
good people would never be so much against the acknowledgement of second Causes
if they understood the matter: But they ignorantly think it derogateth from God
the first cause.
so some think that the propagation of souls is a miracle: But of souls and
faith it is much unknown to us, how far God uses second causes; But that
Generation as to one, and Preaching and all other means to the other, are some
sort of second causes, We have no reason to think that God uses no second
cause in working faith. It is much to be noted which Pet. de Alllaco says in
4. q. 1. E. Plus facit Deuteronomy faciendo aliquem effectum mediante causa secunda,
quam si faceret eu^dem effectum se solo: Quia in prima factione sunt plures
termini divina actionis quam in secunda. For as he said before, Quandocunque
Deus facit aliquem effectum mediante causa sceunda, ipse non solum facit illum
effectum, sed etlam facit causam secundam esse causam illius effecti. Mar^ this
well.
is sure.

5. And lastly, if by a Miracle be meant that effect, which God produces both
above the power of second causes, and by a more glorious exertion of his own
power than in his Course of Nature and Government he uses by and with second
causes, so it is not a Miracle, because in the way of his ordinate cooperation
with his Gospel, he ordinarily produces it.

. 6. So that as all Christians must confess that we had never believed if God
had not wrought it in us by that spirit of Wisdom and Love which is Omnipotent;
so to contend any further whether it be a Miracle, and a proper Creation, or an
effect of Omnipotency as such, etc. are such questions as presumptuous
Schoolmen heretofore, and hotheaded Sectaries in our times, have used to
afflict the Church of Christ with, and to tempt their ignorant zealous
followers into such employments, as most effectually destroy their charity, and
injure others, and scandalize the world.

SECT. XV. Of the sufficiency and efficacy of Grace.
. 1. I Have said so much of this before as that, lest I be tedious by
repetition, I must be but brief. Malderus against the Synod of Dort and 1. 2.
q. 111. art. 3. dub. 8. bestirs himself with special industry to tell what
Gratia efficax is: And he concludes that it is afflatus gratiae praevenientis,
and sub genere gratiae excitantis; and quae non respuitur cum respui possit;
rather praeparans voluntatem quam adjuvans: rejecting Valentia who places it
in the Habit of Grace caused by excitation; and a Lorca who takes it to be
adjuvant; and those that make it co-operant; and those that place it in
praedetermination physical; of which he confuteth four opinions, p. 502. and
says Probabilior sententia est quae negat omnimodam gratiae infallibilitatem,
adeoque efficaciam sumi posse ex sola reali aliqua differentia, considerata ex
part gratiae praevenientis. And that Just and unjust have effectual grace, and
therefore it differs not from sufficient really. And he resolves all per
scientiam mediam, that Grace is effectual because ex proposito convertendi Deus
it a hominem trabit sicut aptum novit ut sequatur and certissime secu^urum: and
so that Grace i^ effectual er natura sua and not so called only ex eventu.
I. By sufficient Grace is meant that which is necessary to the effect, and
without which it Cannot be, but with it, it may be, though it sometimes be not.

. 2. That there is such a sufficient Grace not always effectual to man's act,
is before proved by Adams Case. And that no man has such now for any means or
duty in order to his recovery, as Adam had to stand when he fell, is not to be
asserted or received. And that no prepared soul has such sufficient Grace to
believe, that yet believes not, is a thing that is past our reach to know.

. 3. This sufficient Grace consists in a Power to the act: when the
Indisposition of the natural power, is so far altered, or repressed, as that by
the means and helps vouchsafed by God, the act is Morally possible to be done.
For he that truly can do it, all things considered, is well said to have such
necessary grace.

. 4. But God of his bounty usually gives men more than such a mere moral
possibility, by many additional helps and urgencies to the act, which I
mentioned before.

. 5. But by [sufficient] is not meant [As much as is useful; yea or needful to
the Ascertaining of the Event, much less to the meliority of the act.]

. 6. II. The EFFICACY of Grace relates to the effect: And by the effect it
must be described. Efficacy is Aptitudinal, which is the force and fitness of
the Efficient Cause: Or Actual, which is Efficienty it self.

. 7. Aptitudinal efficacy is 1. In God; 2. In the means: And 1. In Gods
Absolute Power; 2. In his Ordinate Power.

. 8. 1. Gods Absolute Power is Omnipotency, or Infinite; and therefore was
aptitudinally efficacious to make a world before it was made.

. 9. 2. Gods Ordinate Power is the same Essential Omnipotency denominated from
the Connotation of those effects, which he has decreed to produce, according
to the limited aptitude of second Causes and means, or the disposition of the
recipient, or at least, as limited in the effects by his mere free will.

. 10. In these respects, though still Gods power in it self be Omnipotency, yet
in the limited way of operation, it is various, 1. As Gods Will quoad terminos
is various, 2. And as the means are various, 3. And as the Receivers capacities
are various. To one, the same operation ex part Dei and mediorum (though not
from the same Decree) is abundantly efficacious, and to another not.

. 11. And thus God so limiteth the effect of his Power, as that it shall be
effectual sometime on a Condition to be freely performed by man receiving it,
even by a former help, and not absolutely.

. 12. Therefore all that is Aptitudinally efficacious, is not actually
efficient of every effect to which it was thus apt.

. 13. The aptitudinal efficacy of the means being of God, falls in with his
ordinate power, herein, and is not the thing in question.

. 14. The effects in respect to which Grace is called efficacious are, 1. The
Giving of the Means themselves. 2. The first Impress on the soul. 3. The
altering of the souls Disposition. 4. The production of the act. 5. And of the
Habit. And it must be some of these effects which are called efficacious or
inefficacious to others. So that by that time the state of the Question is
truly opened, this which Dr. Twisse says Arminius durst never speak out his
opinion of, and which he and others make to be the very heart of all these
Controversies, perhaps will appear to be nothing.

. 15. For what is that Grace whose efficacy you enquire of ^ Is it Gratia
operans or operata? The efficient cause, or the effect? If it be Gods Gratia
operans, it is either the Prime Cause or the second Causes. If it be the Prime
Cause, it is Gods essence only; Even his Essential Power, Vasquez. in 1 Tho.
^^^^ 19. disp. 8c. p. 5^ ^^^^ [Voluntas libera De^, ^^^^ essentia Divina
significata per modum actus vitalis and affectus eliciti, cum revera sit
ipsamet substantia Dei; includit tamen habitudinem etiam quandam rationis ad
res futuras, quae liber^ Deo convenit, sient etiam res libere futurae sunt: Cum
enim haec relatio consurgat ex fundamentis non necessaries, ^^^^ ex rebus
ipsis, and obj^^^^ futuri^; ipsa etiam habitud^ ^^^^re Deo convenit; non
intrinsice, sed extrinsec^ solum denomination^; quam Deo convenire, and non
conve^ire, ^on est absurdum. Ergo cum Velle liberam Dei non solum includat
essentiam, sed cum tali respect^, ^ti-^^s^ libera Volunt as poss^^ D^o adesse,
and abesse, ni^il sequitur absurdi, quod divina simplicitati and immutabilitati
repug^et.] This little is all that they can tell us, what Gods free Volition of
extrinsick effects is. And can you tell us any more? Bradwardine denying in God
any executive power besides mere Volition (though he call him o^^nipotent
antecedently to his self-knowledge and Volition) does make Grace ^x parts D^^
to be nothing but his Will, that we shall do the act, and be such and ^^ch.
Intellect and will. And is that the Question [Wherein consists the efficacy
of Gods essence?] Why it consists in it self if you mean Aptitudinal
efficacy; It is Gods essential Virtue. If you mean Actual efficiency, that
speaks the effect; of which more anon. So that about Gods essential efficacy
there is no Controversy.

. 16. But if you say that It is his Potentia qua ordinata and not qua
essentialis vel absoluta that you enquire of the efficacy of; Remember that the
word Ordinata or Limited signifies no alteration in Gods Power at all, but
only An effect which as Limited and ordinate, from whence the Power causing it
is extrinsecally so named. Gods essential Power is never limited but Infinite;
and to be Ordinate, is but to have ordinate effects. So that still either the
Controversy must be of Gods essence, (which is past Controversy,) or of some
second cause, or some mere effect.

. 17. And if you transferr the Question to the efficacy of second causes, 1.
You will deny your selves, that means and second causes have any power but from
God; 2. And that the very nature of those causes is sufficient to the
ascertaining of the effect, because they cause mostly morally^ And it is one of
the accu^ations against the A^minians (right or wrong) that they lay all on
moral suasion or causality. 3. And second causes are so numerous, and unknown
to us, that we are incapable of judging well of their efficacy. 4. But it is I
think agreed between you, that the force of Means or second causes in
Conversion is not such as necessitateth the will. Or if some of the Schoolmen
and Jesuits, which with their Scientia Media do join Gratiam per congruitatem
mediorum efficacem, do make this efficacy to be the chief cause of the effect,
yet they deny it to cause necessarily; at least always, when the effect
follows. And what if we add, that objects effect not as such? And therefore
this question de efficacia causarum secundarum, must extend to some second
effective Agents, and not only to objects as such, nor to those that preach,
present and offer objects, as such: And what that Agent Cause must be, under
God, by that time you are agreed, you will find that they are new Controversies
that will there rise up before you. And yet I think that if we will needs
wrangle about the efficaciousness of any cause foregoing the first effect it
self on the soul, it must be of the efficacy of some or all these second
causes, or we must question whether God be God? For I can find nothing else to
question.

. 18. It remains then that the question, Wherein the efficacy of Grace
consists, must be meant of Gratia operata, even of the effect it self. And
then either you mean, that this effect is efficacious to it self, or to
something else. The first is such a contradiction as is not to be imagined,
(that you should think that an effect is its own cause, and ask How does faith,
e. g. cause it self?) Therefore there is nothing left, but only to question,
How the first effect of God on the soul in its conversion is efficacious of the
second?

. 19. And here 1. Some of you will grant that as motion causes motion by
contact of bodies, so the first effect on the soul can cause the second. And
others of you will deny it, and say that Gods Actions being diversified only by
the diversity of effects and objects, that which causes the second effect is
to be denominated a second Action, and not the same numerically which caused
the first; no nor specifically if the effects specifically differ. And so as
scholastic wits here exercise their curiosity, without respect to Arminianism
or Calvinism, you will here fall into notional Controversies in the way.

. 20. 2. But granting that the first effect is that efficacious Grace which
must cause the second, how shall we know what the first effect is, and what the
second? Gods Grace like the Sun is still shining though we are not still
receiving it: When it works but the commoner sort of effects, these tend to
more and more. The first Gracious effect may be forty years before Conversion.
But this is not your meaning: But I suppose you will say that it is the first
special effect or gratia operata, that is proper to the saved, which you mean.
But to pass by, that Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius (much more their
predecessors) held that sincere faith, Love, holiness, Justification, present
right to Life if they so dyed, are not proper to the saved, but that some lose
all these, If you say but [proper to the Justified or Sanctified or Converted,]
or, it be the first effect which is proprium Justificandis which you mean; Are
we agreed what that is?

. 21. Either the first effect on the soul, or the first Gratia operata, is the
Act of faith it self, or somewhat antecedent. If the Act (as many subtly
maintain) then it were a foolish question to ask, Whether the Act of faith be
Effectual to cause it self, and How? Therefore it must be somewhat antecedent,
or we can find no matter for our Controversy de efficacia Gratiae ad credendum.

. 22. If somewhat antecedent to the Act, it is either a Disposition, or Infused
Habit, or an Impression, Impulse or Influx which is neither Disposition nor
Habit. Dico 1. Non certo constare ex divinis literis esse hujusmodi Habitus
supernaturales. 2. At (baptizatis) infunditur Gratia ^o sensu quod efficiuntur
D^o grati and consortes divinae* naturae, and renati. 3. Conceditur Dei
adjutorium ut credamus, velimu^, diligamus, per inspirationem and infusionem
spiritus sancti. 4. Dei adjutorium desuper infusum est omnino necessarium ut
credamus, diligamus, etc. and non tantum ut facilius credamus. Medina in 12. q.
51. p. 282.

See many definitions of a Habit confuted in Medina 1. 2. p. 271. and that,
which he rests in is Aristotle's, Qualitas qua recte vel male afficimur.




. 23. 1. A proper Habit of faith it is not: Though Mr. Pemble singularly seem
so to think, yet he means but a seminal disposition. And it is commonly held
that the Habit is given by sanctification, after the Act given in Vocation. 2.
But if it were otherwise, the Habit is not always sufficient to ascertain the
Act. For holy men often sin against a Habit, and believers do not always
exercise it. Habits Incline per modum naturae, but do not certainly determine
to the act. 3. And of a Disposition it must be so said much more.

. 24. 2. And if it be an Impulse or Influxus Receptus (as I think we must
affirm) this is but a general notion, of which our understanding is very crude
or small. A mere Motus it is not: For (as was said in the beginning) the Divine
Influx is threefold, viz. From Vital-Activity (or Power,) Wisdom and Love, to
Life, Light and Love, in man. Now, as I said, if there be no such Impulse,
besides the Life, Light and Love produced, our Controversy is at an end: For
these are not efficacious or efficient of themselves. But if such a different
Impulse there be, it is hard to know what it is in man. I conceive it best
expressed by all these inadequate notions conjunct: 1. An inward urgency to
this threefold act; which is called in the Schools, both auxilium, concurse,
and Influx: 2. By which Urgency the soul is more Disposed to the Act (in hoc
ordine) than it was before: 3. Which Disposition contains in it a Moral Power
to that Act (so ordered) and somewhat more; even some Inclination to perform
it. If any man can tell me better what that Divine Impulse is which is
antecedent to man's Act, I am willing to learn.

. 25. Now if this be the question, Whether this Divine Impulse, which is the
first effect of Gods spirit, be of its own nature efficacious to produce
According to Jansenius the first Grace is Necessary Delectation or Love in act,
before that which is free and full. And if so, then there is no grace causing
this grace, and so none to be the subject of this question, Whether it be more
or less, sufficient or effectual, operating or cooperating grace, which makes
one man love God initially rather than another? For it is no Grace, b^ Gods
essential will; this Love be the first Grace, and no received Impulse
antecedent to it.
our Faith, Love, etc. as the second effect, I answer, 1. Sometimes Gods
Impulse is so Great, as propria vi, does change mind and will and overcome
resistance, and procure our act. 2. Sometimes it is so strong as that it
prevails against the contrary ill-disposition, so far as to give man a Moral
Power to the Act, with some Inclination, which yet contrary habits and
temptations do overcome, and the Act does not follow, which yet was not for
want of Power to have done it: And this is called sufficient Grace. 3. We have
great reason to believe that as in some Instances Gods greater Impress is the
chief differencing Cause, so in other Instances an equal Impulse of God on
unequally disposed subjects, does produce the Act of faith, etc. in one of
them, which it produces not in the other, through the incapacity of the
recipient. 4. Therefore there is a double degree of efficacy or Vis, One which
only so far moves and helps the will, as that it can do the act, and
sometime does it without more: Another which is so strong as that the second
effect always follows it. 5. But whenever the Act of faith is produced (by
force or Impulse more or less) God is the first and principal cause of it, and
man but the second, and the praise of it is accordingly due. And I think this
decision accommodateth both sides of our contenders.

. 26. The foresaid Impulse or first effect, is only the work of God (and the
means) and not ours: But the Act of Faith, Love, etc. is Gods work and ours;
and ours as Free-agents. Therefore that Impulse of God which is Aptitudinally
efficacious on supposition of man's due reception and self-excitation, is often
not Actually effectual for want of that Voluntary Reception and self-excitation.

. 27. As to the various effects of Grace forementioned, 1. As to the
preparation of Means and Gracious medicine (Christ, the Covenant, etc.) Grace
is efficient of it self, and does it.

2. As to the first Impulse or Impress on the soul, God certainly effects it,
in some degree, wherever his spirit works on the soul.

3. Some Urgency, and some degree of disposition to the act, is constantly
contained in this Impulse. And usually it gives a moral power to the Immediate
Act-required.

4. The Act of faith sometimes follows this Impulse through its invincible
force; And sometime it follows it through its sufficient force, and the due
Reception Omne agens. requirit de necessitate aliquam dispositionem in suo
passo: Maxim si illud passum habeat dispositiones action^ illius agentis
contrarias, ut patet de igne etc. Ergo cum Gratia non sit minus inmo magis quam
naturalis forma; Certum est quod Gratia requirit majorem dispositionem in
passo. Et voco illam dispositionem; Libertatem arbitrii sui Deo submittere, and
se ad alteram partem declinare, scilicet ad volendum Gratiam recipere, and
dolere de culpa commissa voluntary and libere per attritionem, Brianson in 4.
q. 8. cor. 3. fol. 152.

This is just the doctrine of our Protestant Preachers, supposing that Common
Grace must make this preparation which the Papists grant.


of the subject. And sometimes it follows it not at all, through the
Recipients indisposition.

5. The Habit of faith ever follows a special Act, through the powerful
operation of the Holy Ghost. But usually it goes not before the Act: Man has
not a fixed Habit to promptitude and facility of believing before he believes,
but after.

6. The Habit ordinarily procures following acts, by the way of Inclination:
but not necessarily nor always. For by strong temptations, Habits are often born
down.

. 28. If the question then be, Whence Gods Grace is Aptitudinally and
Potentially efficacious (able and fit to effect?) It is because God is God that
he is Able; and his Impulse is such because he makes it such.

And if the question be, Whence Grace is Actually efficient of its first effect
(the Impulse?) It is because God will so do; and his will has no Cause, being
the first Cause.

And if the question be, Whence Grace is Actually efficient of man's faith? It
is by its Impelling man to believe.

But if you ask, Whence faith it self is; or of what cause is it an effect? I
answer, of God as the first cause, and the Means as his Instrument, and of the
Believer as a free second Cause.

And if the question be, Why sufficient Grace which is Effectual ad Posse is
not effectual ad agere? It is because (being but sufficient,) man's
Indisposition and wilful neglect or opposition, makes him an unfit Receiver.

. 29. There being nothing then but Gods essence (and the means) antecedent to
the first effect on the soul, and that effect ever following where God works:
and the second effect being the effect both of God (by the first) and of man as
a free agent, the questions, unde efficatia Gratiae, and unde effectus, are
thus healingly answered.

. 30. Obj. But the will of God is the first differencing and effectual Cause:
And that not as it is his essence, but as it is terminated on the Creature and
decrees such an effect.

Answ. 1. It is no will but his essence which is so terminated or decretive. 2.
That termination makes no difference at all that is real in the will of God,
but only in the effect or object. 3. What is the difference then between Gods
will simply in it self, and as willing from eternity a thing not yet existent?
None really at all. And that which is not yet, being Nothing; what Relative,
Connotative and Denominative difference such Nothings can make on the will of
God, besides the variety of imperfect notions in man's frail Intellect, let the
wise consider.

. 31. From whence it is that School-divines after Augustine say, that with God
there is no futurum velpraeteritum, no foreknowledge or fore-decrees,
properly, because no difference of time, but only knowledge and will of things
as present.

. 32. Yet Gods Vital Activity, Knowledge and Will as he himself is the object
of them, have a Greater distinction; because to be self-living, selfknowing and
self-loving are his Essential Acts on himself the eternal object (which made
many Ancients account them the Trinity of persons.) And also to Will an
existent Creature is an extrinsick denomination from existence: But to will
that which is not, (that man shall be, that he shall believe hereafter, etc.)
as it is nothing really different from Gods essence, so it is but an extrinsick
denomination of his essence, from nothing.

SECT. XVI. Of Infused Habits, and the Holy Ghost Given us* The Schoolmen that
speak most for the necessity of Infused Habits, cannot agree what use they are
for; Aureolus supposes chiefly for the right circumstantiating of Acts, rather
than for promptitude to them and pleasure in them. And when all is said, they
give men but small comfort from them, saying (as Aureolus, Brianson, etc.) that
no man can be sure that he has them, seeing acquired Habits may do the same
things that Infused do.

[Utrum Beatitudo supernaturalis hujus vitae sit magis in Habitibus quam in
operationibus, vid. Suarez Metaph. disp. 44. sect. 8. n. 18. and Molina 1. p.
q. 12. ar. 5. disp. 2. ar. 2. pro habitibus. Sed contra inquit Aegid. de Sancta
Praesentatione Li. 4. de beatit. q. 5. a. 3. p^. 471. His non obstantibus
oppositum* affirmant omnes Theologi qui bac de re scripserunt: nec videtur
posse de hoc dubitari. And yet Alens. 2. p. q. 104. m. 3. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 51.
a. 2. ad 3. and q. 63. a. 2. ad 3. and Valenti^^. To. disp. 4. q. 3. punct. 2.
etc. are for preferring Habits.

Idem Aegid. de Praesentat. li. 4. p. 443, 444. tells us that by Grace God is
Present in the soul as his Temple otherwise than by Immensity and sustentation;
But his praesentia Amicitia can mean nothing but the special effects of Gods
Love.

Nostra tempestate non solum est temerarium, and periculosum, sed fere
hareticum habitus insusos negare; Nam Council. Vienens. etc. and universi
Theologi uno consensu affirmant dari habitus insusos: Medina in 1. 2. q. 51. a.
4. 282. But Soto li. 2. de not. and great. c. 17, 18. says that the Council.
Trid. purposely forbore to define the case of infused habits.

Let the Reader note that Jansenius proves that Pelagius himself asserted
infused Habits given in baptism, and that without merit. Jans. Aug. To. 1. li.
5. c. 22. p. 126.



. 1. EVery operation of the Holy Ghost is not the Giving of the Holy Ghost,
which is specially promised in the Gospel to believers. For there are 1. Many
common works of the Spirit; 2. And the special effect of faith it self before
it.

. 2. This gift of the Holy Ghost unto Believers, was formerly two fold, the
Gift of Miracles or wonders, and of special Holiness; of which the latter
continues to the end of the world.

. 3. The spirit is Given to Believers in several respects conjunct. 1. In that
he is Given to Christ their Head, with whom by Union they are Relatively one
Body* 2. In that He is Given to them by the Baptismal Covenant, in special
Relation to their own persons, to be their sanctifier: In which respect they
are Baptized into the name of the Holy Ghost, as being now in Covenant theirs.
3. In that he works in them* the Acts and Habits of Holiness, even of Love to
God and to his Image; and helps them in all duties, and against all
temptations, enemies and sins. But not that his essence is more in them than
elsewhere, but his Operations from those Relations.

. 4. This Gift of the spirit is the great privilege of believers, and of
Gospel times in the eminent degree, and He is the great Agent, Advocate and
witness of Christ in us, the divine nature, and name of God and his mark upon
us: our witness, earnest, pledge, and first fruits of life eternal; and the
great difference between Christ's living members and the unregenerate world.

. 5. So powerful and fixed is this Habitual Holiness or Love of God (for that
is the sum of it) that though it be no substance, nor alter not man's species,
nor operate not by natural necessitating determination, yet it strongly and
constantly inclines the soul per modum nature to the act of Love; and so
emulateth nature, that it is called in Scripture the Divine Nature, and the new
man.

. 6. The greatest blessing in this world is to have more of this Spirit, and
the greatest punishment, to be for saken by the spirit, and deprived of it: And
believers themselves must fear most, lest they should quench and grieve the
spirit, and be punished with any measure of its desertion: And their great work
is to cherish it carefully, and obey it faithfully and constantly.

. 7. The word [Infusion] as to Habits being metaphorical, is ambiguous. 1. If
the question be, Whether Habits be so Infused as that they are caused without
Means? we must deny it ordinarily.

2. If it be, Whether they are not at all procured by any cogitations, desires,
or preparatory duties of our own, to fit us to receive them? It is to be denied
as to the ordinary way.

3. If the question be, Whether the Act of faith do ever go before the Habit,
as a cause of it? It must be affirmed of the ordinary case.

4. If it be, Whether the Habit ever go before the Act? we must say, that some
Impulse disposing to it does. And God can cause a Habit before the Act: But we
cannot prove that he ever does so, much less that it is his ordinary way.

. 8. Whence it is plain that ordinarily All Infused Habits are so far also
Acquired, as that they follow means and the Act: But all Acquired Habits are
not such as are called Infused.

. 9. The difference is in this, that Habits are said to be Infused when the
Holy Ghost does excite the soul to the Act, and by that Act unto a settled
Habit, by such a special powerful Impulse as would not follow Gods ordinary
operation by mere natural second Causes. As the seal set home on the wax by a
strong hand makes a deep impression, more than when it is laid on lightly by a
child: so are sacred objects and means and motives when set home by the spirit
(allowing for the differences of the things.)

. 10. Whether in every true Believer a fixed Habit of Love instantaneously
follow the first act of true faith, though weak: or whether in many God only
give after the first act so small an increase of the Disposition, as is short
of the true nature of a habit, till increased by frequent acts, is a case that
I think more difficult than needful to resolve.

. 11. That which God works in Infants, is a seminal fixed disposition: But I
cannot prove that it is a proper Habit.

. 12. Whether Adams Natural sanity or sanctity antecedent to his first Act, was
to be called more properly a Habit, or only a seminal disposition, I leave to
others. But if his, and Infants be to be called Habits, you must say that they
are only certain General Habits, such as Health in the Body, and not those
particular Habits, which are strictly so called.

. 13. The nature of a Habit is not well known to mortal men. We know that it is
a strong and fixed Disposition to prompt and facile action of this or that
special sort. But what that Disposition is, we well know not: That is, whether
it be the robur of the essential virtues or faculties of the soul,
(Intellection, Will, Activity?) And if so, wherein that second Gradus Virtutis,
which is not essential differs from the first that is? And whether it be any
thing else than a secret constant Act, in and by which the soul is excited to
more sensible acts, it is hard to know. But certain I am that besides those Acts
which taking in somewhat of Imagination or sense are ordinarily perceived by us
(which are our ordinary conversation,) the soul has also some deep secret
fixed acts, which make no use of sense or Imagination, or none that is
observed; and yet are the ruling acts of the man. Such commonly is the Intentio
finis which operateth constantly without memory or observation in all use of
means. As a travailer on his journey keeps on his way, while he seems
wholly taken up with the occurrences, company and talk of his way, and thinks
not sensibly of his end: And yet had he not an unobserved Intention of it, he
would not go on. And night and day the soul has this secret insensible sort of
Action.

. 14. As when a spark of fire is blown up to a flame, and the excited Act does
tend to more, and the more it burns (caeteris paribus) the more it is
strongly inclined to burn; And yet no man can say that here is any new Matter
that was not before existent, nor that the second degree of fire is not of the
same nature with the first, nor that there is any thing but nature and action
which inclines it to more action; And yet how the same essence before not
perceived is suddenly blown up by Action to such observable appearance and
effects, is past the power of man to understand aright: So some such thing
there is in the present case, allowing for the difference of natures, and kinds
of operation.

SECT. XVII. Whether man be merely Passive as to the first special Grace.
. 1. Answ. 1. THe Nature of man's soul is to be an Active Spirit, *
Indifferentia Voluntatis in ordine ad auxilium praevium est indifferentia
passiva: caeterum in ordint ad actum liberum, qu^m producit praedeterminata
tali motion^ praevia, indifferentia Voluntatis est activa and libera. Alvarez
de Aux. disp. 23. page 115.
and therefore what ever it receives, it receives it as it is in that nature.

2. But the same soul is Passive as well as Active, and that in the prior
instant of nature; For it must receive from God the first cause: which made the
Greek ancient Doctors and many of the Latins say as Damascene in sense,
(though in grosser words) that the soul in respect to bodies was immaterial (or
incorporeal) but it was material in respect of God.

. 2. Not only in its Receiving the Spirits first Impulse to Believe, the soul
is Passive before it is Active: but also in its Reception of every sort of
Divine Influx, even to every natural act. So that in this there is no
difference between Conversion and any common act. For the soul is first passive
in all^: even in receiving that Natural Influx by which we Live and Move and Be.

. 3. But the soul which is passive in Receiving Gods Impulse to believe, (the
first effect,) is Active in the producing of its own Act of believing, (which
is the effect of many Concauses.) And, as I said, It is not the Habit of faith
properly so called, which it passively Receives before the Act.

SECT. XVIII. Whether the first Grace, and the New and Soft Heart be Promised
and Given Absolutely, or on any Condition on our part; And so of faith it self?
Answ.. 1. BY the first Grace is meant, either simply the first, or the first
special renewing Grace on the soul, proper to them that shall be Justified. Of
the first Grace simply there is no Condition; for it is given Universally to
all, (viz. a Reprieval, a Law of Grace, a Redeemer, etc.) And after this there
is much common personal mercy given conditionally* and much absolutely, to all
or some. And as to the first moving inward Grace, see how copiously the Jesuit
Ruiz (as Vasquez and others) proves that it has no initium in us, no not an
occasion or disposition, much less merit, for which it is given: And he
reasons from the Names, Creation, Generation by the seed of God,
resuscitation and Gods being found of them that sought him not, and from the
Cause of the difference between man and man. De pradest. Tr. 3. disp. 18. ^, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, etc. p. 227, 228, etc. Even Medina 12. p. 596. is so hesitant as to
say] Esse probabilem sententiam Doctorum quod facienti quod in se est ex
facultate naturae Deus* ex sua misericordia nunquam denegat gratiam. Sed dico
quod probabilius est and magis consentaneum sanctis patri^us, praeclpu^
Augustino, non esse Legem infallibilem quod homini p^^atori facienti quod* in
se est, ex facultate natura, continub conferatur gratia. Nam si esser Lex
infallibilis certe initium and bona pars justificationis esset a nobis, etc.]
Thus the Papists herein differ as much as the Protestants among themselves.


. 2. It seems to me an error (which by oversight I was long entangled in my
self.) to think that by the new and soft heart, is meant the first special
Grace. For most Divines agree, that it is proper sanctification which is meant
by it, as distinct from antecedent Vocation. Vid. Ames. Medul. de Vocat.
Rolloc. de Vocat. Bishop G. Downame against Pemble, Hookers Souls Vocation,
Joh. Rogers of faith, and many others. In Vocation they suppose the Act of
Faith and Repentance suscitated by the Spirit; and thereupon a
Covenant Relation to Christ and to the Holy Ghost, with Regenerating,
Sanctifying Habits ^o be given. And I see no reason to be singular herein.

. 3. That faith is by the Law of Grace, made a Condition of this
Sanctification, and the Spirit promised us [if we will believe,] and so the
Spirit given to us by Covenant in Baptism when we believe, is plain ill
Scripture, and the commonest doctrine of all Divines.

. 4. Therefore if it be this Spirit of Sanctification that is meant by the New,
the Tender, the Circumcised heart, it is not promised and given absolutely, but
on condition of faith.

. 5. Let us peruse the several Texts where it is promised. Dent. 30. 1, 2, 3,
6. [When thou shall call to mind among all the Nations -- and shall return unto
the Lord thy God and obey his voice, according to all that I command thee this
day -- thou and thy children, with ^^ thy heart and all thy soul; that then the
Lord thy God will turn thy c^^tivity -- And the Lord thy God will circumcise
thy heart and the heart of thy seed to Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart
and with all thy soul, that thou may live.]

Here it is a Grace consequent to a condition, even to much obedience, which is
described.

And Deuteronomy. 10. 16. it is a command [Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, and
be no more stiff-necked.]

Jer. 32. 36, 37, etc. [I will gather them out of all Countries whither I have
driven them -- and will bring them again into this place, and I will cause them
to dwell safely; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I
will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever.] So
Ezekiel. 11. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. In all which,
there is a promissory Prophecy, how great a deliverance God would give the
Nation of the Jews, both for body and soul; And their temporal return and
liberty is promised and prophesied in the same manner as a new heart is. But
here is not a syllable to prove that this is the first special Grace; any more
than perseverance is, which in the same manner is promised in Jer. 32. 40. [I
will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart.] To say nothing
how far in the first sense this was National to the Jews, nor how the
performance did expound it, (For doubtless it is performed,) the Text it self
premiseth [I will be their God, and they shall be my people] with other
mercies. And no doubt but Faith and Repentance go before this Covenant Relation
to God; and therefore before the following gift of the Spirit, ver. 9. and Chapter
11. 19. And Ezekiel. 18. 31. the same is commanded, [Cast away from you all your
transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a
new spirit --.]

. 6. The promissory Prophecy of Jer. 31. 31, etc. is recited by the Penman of
Heb. 8. 8, etc. to prove the cessation of the old Jewish C^venant, and that a
better should succeed. And this much is easily proved out of both, 1. That God
would certainly have a holy people among the returning Israelites, 2. And
especially that he would have such in the Christian Church, as should be
sanctified to him by his Spirit, and have a new and tender ^eart. And
Predestination is well proved from the Text. But there is not a word to prove
this to be the first Grace, nor that Gods promise gave any man right to it, but
upon condition of believing. For if Gods Decree, Prophecy, or general Promise
saying absolutely [I will do it] did prove it to be the first Grace, it would
prove perserance such; which is false. The words prove no more but that God
will do it.

. 7. And as this is no personal promise giving any man a right to the thing
promised, which he may claim; but only foretelling what God will do, or give to
some: so he has other promises which are part of his Law of Grace, and do give
men Right to these same Benefits. And so the Spirit of Sanctification and a new
heart, is promised on Condition of believing; which therefore is the former
special Grace.

. 8. If any therefore will prove that faith is given Absolutely, they must not
do it by those Texts, which speak of Sanctification, which faith is a condition
of.

. 9. But as to the question it self, Whether Faith be given absolutely or
conditionally? I answer, 1. There is no absolute promise of faith made to any
persons; but only promissory predictions of some indeterminate unnamed persons,
that God will draw them and give them to Christ, and they shall believe and
live.

2. All men have means and duty appointed them, for the seeking of that Grace
which may convert them.

3. They are hereby bound to believe, that if they so do, they shall not lose
their labor. For God sets men on no unprofitable work.

4. Those that do this most faithfully, and have most preparing grace, are the
likest to become believers, and the ordinary receivers of special grace.

5. Whether de nomine this encouragement shall be called a promise or
equipollent, let them contend that list.

6. God can and does suddenly convert some without such preparations; or else
give them both sorts of Grace immediately as once.

SECT. XIX. How God may be said to Cause the Acts of sin?
I Have said of this also so much before, as that this Breviate here must
serve. It is ill said, [Profite^ mur incunctanter, prorsus impeditum iri quod
universi simpliciter Bonum est, si impeditetur peccatum: quoniam h^^ pact^
impediretur patesactio Divine misericordi^ parcentis, and justitia vindicant
is: Qu^ quidem patesactio; non minus universi Bonum censenda est, quam q^^libet
alia c^jus^ibet Del proprietatis, in ipso tanquam in speculo rel^cent is.]
Twiss. Vindic. Great. li. 1. p. 1. page 133.

It is dangerous to talk so boldly of these mysteries. Here seem to me many
errors and confusions. 1. It is false that God could not make known to the
world that merciful nature which now pardons sin, and that Justice which now
punishes, if there had been no sin. His Laws* Promises and Threats do
antecedently make them known. And God could cause blessed Spirits to know all
his perfections before there was any sin. 2. Gods Holiness and Goodness is
called Mercy and Justice by extrinsick denomination, and connotation of sin and
misery. And if his Holiness and Goodness had been known as preventing all sin
and misery, men will think that he has not proved that this had been Evil in
the Universe, or less Good. 3. Posita Divina Volitione as the rule of Good, it
follows I confess, that it were evil not to have that will fulfilled. But I
deny, that God wills sin or its existence. Therefore it is not Good because
not Volitum a Deo. It is sufficient, that it is not so far evil as to be
Absolute Nolitum; but only evil, 1. As prohibitum, 2. As hurtful to the sinner,
and to others. Methinks they that maintain that sin is Privatio, should not
say, that it is Positive Volitum a Deo. 4. All this depends on that curious
question, Could not God have made the World better than it is? or at least as
good with many alterations from what it is? They that hold the first, say that
God freely made things no better than they are: But had there been no Devils,
no Sin, no Toads, no disorder, the world had been better, that is, a perfecter
demonstration of Gods perfection. But they that are more modest, ar^ content
with the latter, and say, that God freely made things as they are, and not
necessarily. But it had been necessarily if no other way had been as good. And
that if God had pleased to show his Goodness by preventing all sin, it had been
as Good, and no loss or disparagement to the Universe. 5. And he does through
all his Books beg the question, Whether a mere occasion be a conducib^e medium
and so good? If he will stretch the word Medium so wide as to extend it to a
mere evil sin^ quo non, or presupposed, which has not the least causality,
efficient, material, formal or final, I will not strive for a word. But
conducibile notes some kind and degree of Causality, which sin has not to the
glorifying of God: It is the destroying of sin, that God is glorified by: Where
the malum amovendum is not the bonum conducibile, but the ill state of the
matter, without which God had not glorified himself by this Act, but by some
other as well.




. 1. It must be well considered, that God made man's Nature before he made any
positive Laws for him: And that the Law of Nature it self, is in order of
Nature after Nature though not in Time: Man being first considerable as Man,
before he be considerable as obliged to duty. And also that the Law, both
Natural and Positive, is before man's obedience and sin. So that as man is first
in order of Nature Man, and then Gods Governable Subject, and then (in order of
Time) obedient or dis^bedient; so God is first his Creator, and then Nature
Motor, and then his Governor by Legislation, and then his Gracious Helper, and
lastly his Judge and Rewarder.

. 2. Therefore as Natural Being (substance and faculties) and Natural Motion
are antecedent to Morality; so Gods causation of both these is antecedent: and
therefore to be Creator, Preserver and Motor is not to be the Cause of sin, or
of Virtuous acts, as such.

. 3. God as Creator was not pleased to make all his creatures of one kind, nor
of one degree of excellence: but in such variety as is wonderful to our
observation. Besides the innumerable species of beings, and the innumerable
parts of every compound being, the dissimilitude of indviduals of the same
species is admirable: so that no two faces are perfectly like, no nor no two
Stones in the Street, no two Trees, Birds, Beasts, etc. And therefore it is but
consonant to the rest of his works, that MAN is neither perfectly like to
Angels nor to Brutes: For as God made one sort of creatures naturally
determined to things sensible, and another sort necessarily (though freely)
determined to things spiritual; so it pleased him to make a middle sort, endued
with Reason and free will, undetermined as to their choice, and able freely to
determine their own Volitions, without any predetermining premotion of their
Creator or any other. That so they might be fit subjects to be governed in this
Life, by Laws and other moral means.

. 4. God as Creator makes substances, with their necessary Accidents, and as
the Natural Orderer of them, places them in their natural order: and as Motor
(or Actor) he causes Action as such; But as Moral Rector he causes only the
Moral Order* of Actions, as far as belongs to a Rector (the rest being
presupposed in Nature,) and leaves it to man to cause the rest.

. 5. Seeing God is not to be blamed for making such a creature as man (of a
middle, defectible, undetermined Will, left to his free choice, with necessary
helps,) it being part of the beauty of his works to be diversified; He is not
then to be blamed for any of the sins of such a creature, because he supporteth
his Being and his Active Nature, and is his first cause of Action.

. 6. God could prevent all future sin, if he absolutely willed so to do, either
by destroying the World, or disabling the sinner, or by withholding his Moving
Influx, or by such a change of his nature, as should make him indefectible. But
he that made man in this Middle state, will so continue him, and not make a
change in the frame of Nature, to fulfill our wills.

. 7. No Act as an Act, no Vital Act as Vital, no Intellection, no Volition as
such, is Virtue or Sin; And therefore to cause it as such is not to cause
either moral good or evil.

. 8. As God is Related to us as our Owner, Ruler and our chief good,
(efficiently as our Benefactor, and finally as our End;) so to consent to these
Relations, and to the Duties of our correlations, and to Practice them, is the
sum of all Moral Good; even Dispositively and Actually, to be Resigned and
devoted to God as our Owner, to obey and please him as our Ruler, and to be
Thankful to Him, and totally Love Him, as our Benefactor and our ultimate End.
All Moral Goodness lies in this.

. 9. By which it appears, that Morality consists in the due or undue ORDER
of our actions and dispositions, as they are a Moral Agent's related to God
himself in these three Relations, and to his Actions therein, viz. his
Disposals, his Laws, and his Attractive final Goodness with his Benefits.

. 10. In these, the Morality consists as simpliciter talis in all three
inseparably, (as Gods Relations are inseparable and our correlations:) But the
Relation of our Actions to any one of them, is Morality secundum quid.

. 11. And among them all, our Action, (submission, resignation, patience) to
God merely as our Owner, is Moral but in the slenderest initial sense. And our
Actions as related to him as our Rector, are Moral in the fuller formal sense,
(And therefore by most accounted the only formal Morality, as being a relation
to a Law): But yet our Actions as Related to God our Benefactor, Lover and End,
are Moral in the highest, most perfective notion.

. 12. It is not only sub ration^ obedientia as it is a thing commanded by a
Law, that Love to God is Morally good, but also in that superior sense,
formally as it is the Love of God. And therefore Love is called the Law of
Laws, and the fulfilling of the Law, not only as commanded by a Law, but as
being the End of the Law, and the state of perfection above it (as Christ is to
the Law of Moses;) and also as being a Law eminenter (something greater) though
not formaliter.

. 13. But as there is an Order in these Relations, so is there in the Morality
of our Actions as toward them: So that the Last still includes the rest
foregoing. All Love is Obedience; and all Obedience is submission to our Owner:
But all Obedience is not Love, nor all Submission or Resignation, formal
obedience to a Rector: Though they must all concur, and not be divided, when
they are formally distinguished.

. 14. I have thought it necessary (though I be guilty of some repetition) to
open here the Doctrine of formal Morality (Virtue and Vice,) because we cannot
understand how God is vindicated from being the Author of sin, till we know
what sin is; which we cannot do till we know what Virtue is; which we cannot
do, till we know what Morality is: And also because the Schoolmens most subtle
elaborate enquiries into this point (especially de nature peccati) are
generally too little subtle or accurate, as comparing it with this little, you
may perceive.

. 15. From all this it is plain; 1. That God as the mere Author and Motor of
Nature, does not cause us to Obey or Love him. And therefore that these must be
caused by another superadded operation.

. 16. Yet when we Obey and Love him, the Generical Nature of the Act is from
God as the God of Nature, viz. as it is Intellection, Volition, Action: But
that these Actions are so duly ordered as to be thus terminated on God and
things commanded, is otherwise caused: For though the Generical nature of
Action, Intellection and Volition as such, be seldom found but in some Moral
species, and that be never found but in singular acts; yet can one causality
procure the Generical nature, and another the Specifical, and another the
singularity* in the same action. As the Sun is the Generical Cause, and the
Virtus Seminalis the specifying, and the Individuatio seminis the
Individ^^a^ing, of Plants, Animals, etc.

. 17. As God is the God of Nature, so he has settled Nature in such a constant
course of motion, as that we have small reason to expect that he should there
make any ordinary mutations* And therefore (as the Sun aforesaid) he does by
his Generical Influx concur* with all Specifying and Individuating Causes,
according to their several natures or receptivities.

. 18. They therefore that suppose that God as the Cause of all Action, must (of
natural necessity ad esse) by physical efficient premotion predetermine every
Act natural and free, to its object compared with other possible objects, and
that in all its modes and circumstances, do confound Nature and Morality* and
leave nothing for God to do in causing Holiness, but what he must needs do to
cause all action that is caused, (allowing the difference of the second
effects, ^ yea, but what he does in causing every sin: (For his Pracept is not
with them the Causing predetermination.)

. 19. Jesus Christ* and his Gospel with all the fore described frame of moral
means, and the Spirit* to cooperate, are the proper second causes* by which
God as RECTOR will on his part ordinarily cause Moral Good; and hinder Moral
Evil; and by which as our Lover and End he will draw man's soul to himself in
Love.

. 20. God as Rector (though he vary his Laws in some things to several ages and
places, and promulgate the same Gospel, with inequality, on several accounts,
yet) according to the respective Laws that they are under, deals with all men
in a certain equality, which is called Justice: that is, His Laws antecedently
to man's acts make not difference, and as Judge he makes none, but what man's
different actions require according to the said Laws and Justice. But yet as
Owner and as Benefactor he is free (not against, but) above his Laws, to make
many inequalities, which are no injustice; they being not acts of formal
Government: and so he may do with his own as he list. And thus though God give
all their due according to his Law of Grace, yet he gives to his Elect, such
proportions of Grace, as he gave them no antecedent Right to by his Law: (or at
least to many of them, passing by the controversy now, whether he do so to
them all.)

. 21. God could cure and sanctify all men, if it were his Absolute will; but
he does not, and will not; being no way obliged: And he will be no loser nor
sufferer by the creatures sin.

. 22. Gods absolute will is as fully accomplished by man's free acts, as if they
were all necessitated and Natural: And man's actions are as free, as if God had
made no Absolute Decree of their futurity (as in Good he has done, if we may
so ascribe futurity to his Decrees.)

. 23. It seems that all sin begins in the wills omission of what it was
able to have done. Even when Adams appetite was to the forbidden fruit, and
some think that this was the first part of the sin, it seems that it was
rather in the Wills not restraining that appetite when it could have done it:
And then positive sins do follow thereupon.

. 24. There is more Brutishness in sin, and consequently more privative and
less positive faultiness of the Reason and Will, than many do consider (which
Paul partly means, Romans 7.) For it is certain, 1. That a passion, e. g. anger
or fear, may be forced on a man suddenly as ^n a Brute, without Reason. (As if
you come behind one and affright him, or strike him suddenly: no Reason raised
that passion, and consequently no Rational Will.)

2. It is certain that this passion without Reason can cause despotically a
corporal motion* as the fearful will start, and run, and the angry strike
without any reason or rational will, but as a Beast does.

3. It is certain that it is the office of the Will to Rule this passion, and
these motions.

4. And that it must have due information from the understanding, that so to do
is good, and best.

5. If this information of the understanding did never miss of determining the
Will, then man would never sin, but when the understanding failed of its
necessary office, before the will: which would resolve all sin into the will of
God as much as if he directly moved the will to it by necessitating,
unresistible predetermination. For the Intellect as such has no Liberty, but
is necessitated by objects, further than it is under the Empire of the Will.
And the Objects and Intellect are made by God.

6. Therefore it follows that there is a certain measure of Intellec^^^l true
apprehension, according to which the will can excite and determine it self
(without ^^y thing which it has not) and yet can forbear. And that this
not-willing what and when it should, is the beginning of all sin.

. 25. God is no Efficient or Desicient cause of this first Omission of the
will: For efficient it has none: And deficient God is not, who gave man power
to have done it. But man is the deficient Cause.

. 26. Man's not believing, not knowing, not loving, not obeying, not desiring,
trusting, fearing, etc. being the far greatest part of the sins of his life
Which made the worthy Bishop Usher dye with these words, as his last, [But
Lord, in special forgive my ^^^ of omission.]
, we see by this are not at all of God.

. 27. Though multitudes of positive Acts of sin do follow such omissions, (and
go before some of them;) yet they being not sinful as Acts, but as Disordered
(against the Rule and End, and upon undue objects, and especially
comparatively* preserring the wrong object before the right) it seems that in
their first instances they are all Omissive, and Positive in the second only:
which makes the Schoolmen so commonly say that sin is a Privation.

. 28. Yet the Moral formal Relation of sin, is not only Privative, but a
Positive Disobedience or Disconformity: And so as Quid Morale formaliter -- sin
has as much Relative being as Duty has, viz. 1. As contra Legem
significantem, 2. Contra Voluntatem Dei significatam; 3. Et contra J^^ Divini
Dominii Imperii and Amoris.

. 29. If any be unsatisfied in this, it is certain that in the Velle hoc
prohibitum potius quam hoc imperat^m, there is no more physical entity, than in
the Velle imperatum, no nor than there is in the Velle indefinitely considered
as on any object. Or if any deny that, it is certain that there is no such
addition of Entity (it being but ordo modi) in any such sinful Act from which
as such the formal obliquity or sin resulteth, but what man can do, and does,
without Gods causing the Act as so ordered and terminated. So that God is no
way the cause of formal sin.

. 30. Bradwardi^ deals more plainly, and makes Gods effectual Volition to be
the total immediate cause that man sins, though it be no sin in God to do
so* and says that God wills it for good uses, (as the sinner does, or if he
do not, it is because God makes him unavoidably do otherwise.)
They that say, He causes all that man causes, and that as the first
neces^itating or insuperable cause; but yet is not the cause of the form of
sin, contradict themselves; seeing that form is but a Relation, which resulteth
ipso facto from its fundamentam and terminus, and ne per divinam potentiam
cannot but do so; And has no other cause but what causes them.

. 31. And they that say, that yet God is not the Author of sin, because he is
under no Law, do but sport with dreadful things. And they mean that God is the
chief Cause of all men's sins in the world, but not of any sin of his own; which
is none of the question.

. 32. God does neither Cause the sin, nor the futurity or existence of it, as
some vainly distinguishing, maintain: (especially Dr. Twisse and Rutherford.)
For (as Estius and others truly say) to cause the sin, is nothing but to cause
the existence of it. And sin as sin, Dr. Twisse often says, is not willed by
the sinner himself.

. 33. So far as God Causes not sin, he wills it not: and they that say that
he Loves and Wills the existence of it as a means to his glory, abuse Gods
Moliness, and are confuted before, Par. 1.

. 34. How God overruleth sinners, and the effects of sin, and procures his own
ends, not by the Means or Causality, but Occasion of it, I have so largely
there opened, that I must refer the Reader thither.

SECT. XX. How far God, and how far Man himself, is the Cause of Hell and other
punishments.
THough somewhat be said of this, in the Conclusion of the second Jo. Major in
4. sent. d. 50. fol. 289. q. 1. inquit concl. 3. [Sive actus damnatorum
dicantur mali, culp^ vel peccata, non patientur aliquam poenam inflictam
ratione illorum actuum: Quia non sunt in statu merendi and demerendi] sed addit
[Signanter de poena inflicta loquor quae a culpa distinguitur, and ejus est
reordinativa per cruciatum. De poena enim acta non est possibile dare culpam
quin suam poenam habeat annexam, eo modo quo idem potest habere se.] Ipsa
scilicet peccandi continuatio, est poenae and miseriae continuatio. Nec mihi
probabile videtur, quod Demerendi ratio cessat apud inferos: Praemium quidem
mereri non possunt; At quare non Poenam commereri sunt putandi? Nonne adhuc
sunt subditi (etiam ipsi daemones) and sub quadam Lege? ide^que peccandi adhuc
capaces? and nonne omne peccatum sua natura meretur poenam? Ipsius scilicet
Joh. Majoris ibid. Conclus. 1. Est, [Damnati habent multos malos actus in
inferno libere.] An op^abilius sit damnatum esse, an non esse, vide quae ibidem
sequuntur, ubi concludit [Itaque tenco si daretur viro optio, vel non esse, vel
esse in perpetua flamma, quod licite posset vel alterutrum, eligendum est non
esse: Nam minus malum habet rationem boni.]

See Aureolus in 2. d. 31. a. 2. page 301. showing ten ways how one sin
causes another, and so multiplyeth and continues it self in the wicked.


Part, I think meet to say more here, because I find that the not understanding
it does tempt many to unbelief, and others to hard repining disaffected
atheistical thoughts of God.

. 1. Again here consider that God made man such as he is in Nature, before
either Laws or sins or punishments had any being; so that if you can but
forgive God for making you men, (that is, Rational Free-Agents) you can have no
fair pretense of quarrel with him: As will appear by these considerations
following.

. 2. Man's Body and sensitive soul are of such a nature, as that things
inconvenient will be his pain: He that will take poison shall be griped and
tormented by it, and he that will eat unwholesome meat, or will surfeit shall be
sick, and he that will cherish diseases by sloth, or excesses, or abuses of
nature, will have the pain of them; And he that will wound himself, or break
his bones, will be his own afflicter; And he that cuts his throat or hangs
himself, must dye. And all this without any doing of God, besides the making
him a man, and continuing such a nature (under his Government) in and with the
world.

. 3. Not only positive hurting, but omissions will bring men's bodies unto pain
and death; As not eating, not exercising, not keeping warm, etc. And
consequently such a life of prodigality or sloth as tends to such wants.

. 4. The inward senses, Imagination and Passions are so constituted as that
their inconveniences will be a pain and torment, as well as the inconveniences
of the outward senses. 1. Cares and Melancholy thoughts are distracting. 2.
Desires breed such care, and are themselves like a thirst or hunger to the
soul. 3. Fears are tormenting. 4. Sorrows if deep and long are as a living
death. 5. Anger is a vexatious fever of the mind: And revengeful malice and
envy do prolong it. 6. Despair anticipateth eternity of misery, etc. 7. And
Love it self (how pleasing soever at first) is the strength of them all.

. 5. The superior faculties, as they are more noble, are capable of greater
misery; and their corruption and disorder is the worst. To have an ignorant
erring mind, that takes evil for good, and good for evil; To have a carnal,
malignant, wicked, obstinate, froward Will and sinful Affections, and by these
to have men's actions misguided, and so the sensitive soul it self brought into
the foresaid misery, through bad government, is a misery to man in the Nature,
and immediate effects of the thing.

. 6. Man lives among multitudes of fellow Creatures in the world, which will
all be tormentors of him if he will make them such. As a post will hurt him if
he knock his head to it. The fire will burn him if he touch his flesh with it.
The water will drown him if he will leap into it over-head. The Sun will scorch
him, the frost will pain him, if he expose himself to them. A Lion or Mastiff
will tear him if he avoid them not. His neighbors will hurt him, (likely) if
he hurt them, and cross their interest: Men in power will hurt him if he offend
them: And all things will be to him as he behaveth himself to them.

. 7. All this being Natural, let us now consider what sin does to the sinner
here, and you will find that almost all his calamity consists in his very sin
it self, and the natural effects of it: But yet it is sin as man's, and it is
punishment as from God, when yet God is no Cause of the sin.

. 8. This is plain if you consider that Gods Act by which he makes sin a
Punishment, was Before the sin, though the Relation of a Punishment come after
the relation of sin. Here are two Agents, 1. God making Nature and a Law
therein; 2. Man disordering his actions by transgressing. 3. Hence Immediately
follows Guilt or the form of sin. 4. And with it, even in the change, or
after it, the natural pain, of loss or hurt; 5. And this is Related to man as a
punishment for the sin, in the last place.

For instance, God made man, and God made meat, wine, and poison: God tells
Man in Nature, [I have made thee such a Creature, as that excess of Meat will
make thee sick, excess of Wine will make thee mad, and Poison will torment and
kill thee: I have given thee self-love, and command thee that thou avoid all
these; and I will not deny thee necessary help; But if thou will not, it will
be thy pain, which I will that thou suffer for and by thy sin.] I need not
further apply it here; the application is obvious.

. 9. All this I speak only of natural punishments which by the Law of nature
follow sin: what is supernatural is after to be considered.

. 10. And 1. It is evident that the Reatus culpae is either the sin it self or
its inseparable effect. He that has once sinned is Related to God as a sinner.
And an infamous Relation, such as of a Rebel, a Rogue, a Murderer, etc. is no
small evil, in all sound men's esteem.

. 11. 2. Sin is the Deformity, disorder, and disease of the soul; and its
Habits are a kind of Vicious Nature: It is the Nature of Devils to be exceeding
malignant, rebellious and at enmity with God and spiritual Goodness: To have a
Nature or Disposition, which is averse to that which should be its own end,
delight and happiness. And a wise man would rather be annihilated, than turned
into a Toad, a Snake or Adder, though their nature be not offensive to
themselves. How much more would he rather be annihilated than become a Devil?
Wicked men are liker to Devils than they are aware of: They Love not God and
Holiness: nay they have a malignant enmity to him: which makes them so averse
to all that is Holy in their lives, and to be such persecutors and haters of
good men. So that the Scripture calls their wisdom Devilish, yea and
themselves flat Devils in plain words, and the Children of the Devil, Jam. 3.
15. Joh. 8. 44. Joh. 6. 70. One of you is a Devil. And 13. 2. Act. 13. 10. Thou
Child of the Devil and enemy of all righteousness -- 1 John 3. 8, 10. He that
commits sin is of the Devil -- Therefore they are adjudged to suffer with the
Devil and his Angels, as the Saints shall be equal with the Angels of God. For
the truth is, a Saint and an Angel, and a wicked man and a Devil, do differ
less than is commonly thought on. Now what sober man would not rather be
Nothing, than be a Devil? To have a venomous, malignant, malicious, restless,
rebellious nature, at enmity to Good and in love with evil? And who is it that
makes men to be such? Not God but themselves.

1. Is it not a great calamity to be mad? Wicked men are far worse: and they
made themselves such.

2. Were it not a great misery to have a nature that had no Love to, or delight
in, health, cleanliness, dwelling, food, friends, etc. but hated all of them,
and set against them? How much more to have such an enmity to God and holiness
and our own salvation?

3. Were it not a misery to have a nature distrustful of all our truest I eg.
Bradwardine l. 1. c. 1. cor. 31. contra effraenes dlcentes omnia bonis and
malis aequaliter ev^nire; malum aliquod impunitum, vel bonum aliquod
irremuneratum manner -- fingentes quoque divinae pietati and misericordiae
infinitae nusquam congruere punire quodcunque delictum, sed totum semper
dimittere misericorditer impunitum. Nonne (inquit) omnis peccans to ipso fit
malus and culpabilis, vel pejor, etc. amittitque pristinam libertatem and
innocentiam and fit D^o dissimilior and remotior ab ^o? and nonne hoc est poena
and poena quam magna? and unde hoc nisi a prima justitia, a primo retributore
omnium qui est De^s? See also his Corol. 38, 39. Lege Jansen. August. de stat.
pur. not. l. 3. c. 2. p. 358. Quod peccatum non potest non puniri a Deo: etc.
3. Quaenam sint illae poenae quae tam arcte cum peccato cohaerent. Et c. 4.
Quod peccator in peccato manens non potest beatus fieri. Ubi itiam Augustini
sensum de hisce videre est.
friends: afraid of poison in all that we eat and drink, and still thinking
that our own parents seek our death? How much more to have a distrustfulness of
God?

4. Were it not a misery to be deceived with a thousand errors, and to take
evil for good, and good for evil: and to spend ones days in bewildring
perplexities or fal^e conceits? How much more to be mistaken about God, and
things of greatest excellency and consequence?

5. Were it not a misery to have a Will that is perversely set against the
wills of all our Governors and dearest friends? That must needs have and do
whatsoever is forbidden us by the greatest, wisest and best of men? How much
more, to have a Will that is thus set against the will of God?

6. It is a misery to have a violent Appetite after that which cannot be had,
or cannot satisfy. To have vehement hunger and thirst without meat or drink,
etc. Wicked men have such a diseased appetite after things that God told them
would neither be satisfactory nor continuing. All this and more is in sin it
self, in the Habits or Nature, which God never made.

. 12. The exercise of this diseased vitiated Inclination, is an actual torment:
As it is more Joyful to use Grace, than merely to Have it; so is it as to sin
more calamitous. And 1. Men's wilful blindness and neglect of God, depriveth
them of all the excellency and delights of holy knowledge.

2. Their Disaffection and malignity depriveth them of all that holy Joy, and
unvaluable sweetness, which comes in by the exercise of the Love of God; And
of all the pleasures of a holy life. As a sick stomach does loath a feast, and
a malicious man has not the pleasures of friendship: so how can that soul
delight in God that Loves him not?

3. Unbelief and distrust deprive the soul of all that quietness and content,
which follows faith and confidence in God.

4. A Rebellious will does lose all that Rest which the obedient find in
pleasing God, and in his blessed will.

5. Luxury and carnality and all sin deprive the soul of the pleasures of
temperance, chastity, innocence, and a good and quiet conscience.

6. Wickedness and sloth deprive the soul of the pleasure of doing good to
others, by works of charity, which is very great. Abundance such privations are
in sin.

. 13. And sin it self brings the contrary torments. 1. Sinful malignity against
God and Good men makes the wicked eat their flesh as it were with envy, and
vex themselves with persecution and revenge.

2. Sinful anger is a sinners rage and pain: And though he have pleasure in
revenge, it is a painful pleasure, like a troublesome itch.

3. Self-willedness makes a man continual vexation and disappointment, while
he must needs have that which he cannot have, or which will torment him when he
has it.

4. Carnal Love is the root of misery, while it Tantalizeth the soul, or
longs for its own vexation.

5. Sinful fear is a tormenting distraction.

6. Sinful grief is a continual sickness and self-vexation.

7. Sinful Desires engage men in self-afflicting labors.

8. Sinful cares are as thorns in a man's heart.

9. Sinful Impatience and discontent is torment it self.

10. Sinful, confused, unruly thoughts, are the annoyance and the shame of the
soul. And all these are men's own sins, not Caused by God, but by themselves.

. 14. Next Sin it self, there is the natural consequent of it, which is caused
by the sinner himself. As 1. That God does not complacentially Love him: which
is no change in God, whose Nature is to Love Good and Hate Evil; but in the
sinner himself, who has made himself incapable.

2. And that Gods Hatred is terminated on the sinner, is his own doing* Even as
he that would open his naked breast to the scorching Sun, or cold Frost, is
hurt by himself. When God hates a sinner and delights in a Saint, there is
no Diversity in Him, but in Them.

3. The loss of Right to Heaven and all Gods special benefits, is their own
work, and not by any change in God. God made a Deed of Gift of Heaven to the
faithful: And if they be unfaithful, it is their own doing to cast away or
refuse that right.

4. Abundance of temporal mercies men's sins cast away. For

. 15. Sin does here torment even men's bodies. The slothful and the prodigal
bring want upon themselves: The glutton, drunkard, fornicator, and the idle,
breed painful diseases in their own flesh: And most men dy^ by some sinfully
contracted maladies.

. 16. Besides the Natural consequents, and the natural effects on the Body,
there are natural calamitous effects of sin on the soul; As 1. The
consciousness of a man's sin, called An evil Conscience.

2. The shame that arises from the guilt.

3. The Conscience and sense of Gods displeasure (a tormenting thing.)

4. Sadness for our folly in hurting our selves.

5. And fear of all the after miseries. All hitherto mentioned, men do
themselves against themselves.

. 17. Yea more, men themselves make other men their tormentors. The angry stir
up others to hurt them. The offenders stir up Magistrates to punish them. The
fornicator chooses a filthy disease under the name of a pleasure, and kindles
a putrid fevor in his own soul. The covetous and unjust make all men their
enemies; and so do many of the proud, tyrannical and oppressors. The froward
will not give themselves rest in their own families; but make Wives, Husbands,
Children, Servants, and every thing to be their own vexation. And O what work
do bloody Tyrants by Wars and persecution make to themselves and others in the
world? and what Calamities does miserable mankind bring, by folly and
wickedness, on themselves?

. 18. In a word, shall we not believe that there is a Hell, and know much of
the nature of it; when we see a Hell already begun on earth? and the whole
world walloweth in folly, filth, impiety, and woe? As Heaven is known here by
its first fruits of the spirit, so Hell may be (I think) more known by its
beginning, as more notorious. Men are almost Devils already: conceive them but
all turned fully into Devils by themselves (and not by God) and you will know
much of Hell.

. 19. And for the Life to come, consider, that God made man's soul Immortal
before man made it sinful: And who can expect that God should alter or destroy
his work? Live we must, because we have Immortal souls. And must not men look
to Live as they are? Such then as the wicked make themselves, no wonder if they
continue.

. 20. And then exceeding wickedness will make them Devils; and all that they
here initially brought on themselves, will be there in eminency. Their Minds
will be blind as to Good and Evil, though not as to mere notional Truth. Their
wills set against Gods will. Their hatred of God and goodness increased: Their
Intellects, memories and thoughts, will be the treasury of pain; Their wills
and affections the seat of misery^ And their invigorated power, will make all
lively.

. 21. And a mind thus blinded cannot see God as Good, but only as hurtful by
Justice. A Will that has no Love to God and holiness, can take no delight in
them. Heaven must be to them as a feast to a sick stomach: They turn their own
Hearts from God and Heaven, and deprive themselves of all its joys. They hate
the Heavenly society; and so ^an be none of their companions in delight. They
deprive themselves of Innocence, of Divine Love, of the Grace of the Holy
Ghost, of part in Christ, of peace of Conscience, by wilful diversion,
opposition and incapacity, as he that shuts his Windows against the Sun-light.
It is themselves that turn themselves thus out of Heaven.

. 22. And it will be their own Lusts that will tantalize or torment them. For
God did let them know that this world and its pleasure must soon forsake them:
They cannot expect that God should give them wealth, meat, drink, and carnal
pleasures, after this life: If they will needs contract a fleshly thirst, God
is not bound to follow them with satisfaction.

. 23. Even their malignity (like Satan's) will be their torment, filling them
with envy at the felicity of the Saints, or hatred of their holiness. And when
we are in Heaven, Devils and devilish men will be in subjection to the Saints,
so low and base as will increase their rage.

. 24. It is likely that their very nature or substance will be much more base
than that of the Glorified, as their place and condition will be: For God is
not bound to make them Naturally Glorious. Devils dwell in the air and earth:
And inhabitants use to be connatural to their Regions and Elements.

However, it is a groundless fancy of too many that think that the sensitive
faculties shall cease. The Organs and manner or sorts of sensation may be
altered: But the soul will be still sensitive as well as rational
(notwithstanding their vain objection about bruits.) And therefore the
condition they put themselves into, will as necessarily give them sensible
torment, as poison will in the stomach, and as despairing men now torment and
make away themselves.

. 25. At least when they have bodies, they will have sense.

. 26. Devils and wicked men with them, will objectively torment them.

. 27. I deny not but besides all these there may be punishments more
efficiently from God. But all this alone, which sinners not only Deserve but
Inflict upon themselves, will make a Hell of unspeakable misery.

The Conclusion, Summing up the several ways of the Contenders.
I Shall conclude with a further Explication, 1. What the Judgment* of the
Protestants was in the Synod of Dort about the nature of Grace (besides what I
have cited of theirs before.) 2. I shall give you some Animadversions on the
Epilogue of Alvarez, 3. And of the Jesuits way of Scientia Media: 4. And of
Aureolus and Durandus's way: 5. And of the Scotists and Nominals Causa
Partialis: 6. I shall fullyer give you the sum and Consectaries of the
Dominican Predetermination, and the reasons which alienate me from their way.
7. I shall Epitomize Jansenius, with some Animadversions on his way: 8. And
sum up in few words what sober minds may rest in.

. 1. AND that you may see how little difference there is even in this point of
Effectual Grace, where all the difference seems to be founded, 1. See what
the British Divines say in the Synod of Dort; de art. 3. and 4. suffrag. p.
124.

Th. 1. There are certain outward works, ordinarily required of men, before
they are brought to the state of Regeneration Romans 10. 14. Mat. 6. ^^. Act. 13.
46. Psa. 58. 5.
or Conversion, which use to be sometime freely done by them, and sometime
freely omitted: as to go to Church, to hear the Preaching of the Word, and such
like.

Th. 2. There are certain inward effects, which are excited in the hearts of
those that are not yet justified, previous to Conversion and Regeneration, Act.
2. 37.
by the virtue of the word and spirit: such as are, the knowledge of Gods will,
the sense of sin, the fear of punishment, the thoughts of deliverance, some
hope of pardon. To the state of Justification -- Gods grace uses not to bring
men by sudden Enthusiasm, but prepared and fitted (or disposed) by many
previous actings by the Ministry of the word. As in natural Generation there
are many previous dispositions 1 Cor. 4. 15.
before the reception of the form; so in the spiritual we come to the spiritual
birth by many foregoing actings of Grace. If God would immediately Regenerate
and Justify a wicked man, not prepared by any knowledge, any sorrow, any
desire, any hope of pardon, there were no need of the Ministry of man and the
Word Preached to do it --

Th. 3. Those that God thus affects by his spirit by means of the Word, them
he truly and seriously calls and inviteth to faith and conversion. We must
judge of the helps of Grace by the nature of the offered benefit and by Gods
plain word, and not by the abuse and event. Se^ing the Gospel of its own nature
calls men to Repentance and Salvation, seeing the excitements of grace tend
to it, we must not think that 2 Cor. 5. 20. 2 Cor. 6. ^^ Gal. 1. 6. Rev. 3. 2.
God here does any thing dissemblingly -- Nor can it be imagined that that
calling by the word and spirit can make men unexcuseable, which is given only
to that end to make them unexcuseable --

Th. 4. Those whom he thus affects, God forsakes not, nor cease to promote
them in the true way to conversion, before he is forsaken by them, by voluntary
neglect, or the repulse of this initial grace. The talent of grace once given
men of God, is not taken away from any man, till he bury it by his own fault.
Therefore we are often warned in Mat. 2^. 2^.
Scripture, not to resist or quench the spirit, nor to receive the grace Heb.
3. 7. Prove. 1. 24. 2 Chronicles. 24. 20.
of God in vain, nor to fall from God. Yea it is plainly given as the reason of
Gods forsaking men that they first forsake him --

Th. 5. Many lose these beginnings -- Mat. 13. 19. Heb. 6. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 21.


Th. 6. The Elect do not so behave themselves under these preparatory workings,
but that for their negligence and resistance, they might justly be forsaken of
God: But such is Gods special mercy to them, that though Joh. 6. 37. ^er. 14.
7. and 32. 39. Phil. 1. 6.
for a time they may repel or suffocate this exciting and illuminating grace,
yet God does urge them again and again, and cease not to promove them, till
he fully subjugate them to his grace, and place them in the state of regenerate
sons.

Th. 7. All men resist Gods grace, and God might justly forsake all, Romans 9.
18. and 11. 35. Act. 28. 27.
-- but does not -- ]

By all this it is evident that they took not man to be forsaken of God in the
state of mere original sin, or the corrupt mass, but as a wilful resister and
refuser of offered Grace, and often after the receiving of much preparing grace;
and that God forsakes none till they forsake his grace.

2. To the same sense our English Divines commonly tell us how, ordinarily God
prepares, men for conversion before he convert them; and how far persons
unconverted may go in common grace: He that reads Mr. Hooker of New England,
Mr. John Rogers his doctrine of faith, Mr. Boltons instructions for comfort --
Mr. Meads Almost a Christian, and abundance such, will see that they were of
the same mind.

3. Hence it is plain, that those persons that resisted this further work of
grace, and forsook God first, had true Power to have done otherwise; and could
have gone further than they did, without any other grace than they had: (Though
quoad necessitatem sequentem vel consequentiae, it might be inferred even from
Gods prescience, that it could not be.)

4. They here describe Gods effectual grace by moral titles, of Gods urging
them till they yield; though (as after they open it) Gods renewing active
influx, makes new creatures, and is not a mere moral indetermining suasion
leaving the will indifferent.

5. The truth is (as is aforesaid) no mortal man can tell of any difference on
Gods part between his common and special agency on souls, but only on the part
of the work done; Nay it is against the doctrine of all ^orts of Divines both
Papists and Protestants as to the generality, that there is any difference at
all. For they all say that all Gods actions ad extra are nothing but his
essence (viz. his essential knowledge, will and power) which is undividedly
one, as terminated, effecting, related and denominated variously: E. g. by one
Volition he wills diverse products, but not by diverse volitions See the
Conclusion of the first Chapter.
ex part sui, either considered specifically or numerically; but the
specification and individuation is only in the effects, and in Gods will as
relatively denominated. And if this be all men's doctrine, what an unhappy case
is the Church fallen into, that the very same men that say this, should yet
intolerably quarrel, Whether this one Divine attingency or operation shall be
called Creation, infusion, urgency, excitation, persuasion, physical,
hyperphysical, moral, or what else, when all are agreed that all are one and
the same ex part Dei.

And as to the effects, I do my self think that a certain Impulse received on
the soul, is the first effect, and the Act of man (as faith) is but a second,
and that of both Causes: But we cannot tell well what that Impulse is; And
therefore must dispute in the dark about the differences of it. And this is
nothing to them that own nothing but Gods essence as the cause of our act, as
the first effect: If their opinion hold true that as in Creation there was no
mediate Impulse between the Creator and the Creature (for there was no
recipient,) so here there is no effect on the soul before the Act and habit of
faith it self, then what is that Grace whose Ratio efficaciae we can make a
Controversy of? Ad hominem at least I may say that it is common acts and
habits, overtopt by fleshly interest and concupiscence, which are wrought by
common grace; and that it is special acts and habits overcoming the flesh and
world, which are wrought by special grace. So that those firemen that are
resolved that yet differ they will, and implacably differ, and their
adversaries shall be enemies of Gods Grace whether they will or not, are yet
defective in that acuteness and pregnancy of wit which is necessary to pretend
a real disagreement, and are forced to say that they disagree when they have
not wit enough to seem to prove it to any but those that take their choleric
zeal and reproach for proof: For in this there is no difference among us.

6. Obj. At least we can prove that we differ in this, about the effects, that
one side make Gods gracious habits given to believers to be, such as may be
lost and dye, and the other do not.

Answ. That is no difference: You still want wit to make differences though you
want not will. For both sides are agreed that perseverance arises not from the
mere nature of the Habit of grace, but from Gods superadded sustentation. For
Adam and the fallen Angels had (as is commonly held) such kind of habitual grace
as we (though objectively differing.)

7. Seeing there is no difference, on Gods part (as they all conclude,)
Resistible grace and irresistible, sufficient and effectual, can have no
difference, but in the very effect or event, and the connotation of man's Power
or impotency to the contrary. I know (as I have said) that not only the
Dominicans and Calvinists, but Suarez and other Jesuits, say that Effectual
Grace is such ex part principii as is forcibler for faith as the effect. But
they contradict themselves, who confidently say, that besides that effect, it
is nothing but Gods essence which has no degrees or real differences. And man's
power of Resistance and frustration is none as to Gods will and essence, but
only as to the effect; When he could have done otherwise.

8. The same Vanity they declare in the question, Whether the same degree of
Divine Grace, help, or operation, would Convert one man as does another, or
would Convert as does not Convert. When they are agreed that the effect is not
the same; and that the cause has no degrees of difference.

9. And though it is past man's understanding to comprehend how all the various
effects in the world should be produced without the least diversity in the
Cause (Will or Action) ex part agentis, and that Velle salvare Petrum, and
velle damnare Judam, should be perfectly the same Volition ex part Volentis;
yet it is the liker to be true because man cannot comprehend it; as long as he
has no evidence to prove that it is not true. For God is incomprehensible.

10. Seeing then that we must concent, 1. That God Decreed to do all that he
does, and properly and absolutely no more; 2. And that Christ's death is the
cause of all that it effects, and properly of no more (Of which the
conditional gift of pardon and life is part,) And so that all the Controversy
1. Of Decree, 2. Of Redemption, is resolved into that of the effects; 3. And
seeing all the effects are such whose difference we little differ about, if at
all; and ex part Dei agentis they agree that there is no difference: where
then is the Difference among all the contenders?

. II. Alvarez his Epitome in Twenty Propositions, considered.
BUt that all this may more plainly appear, I will recite the Twenty
Conclusions, which Alvarez in his Epilogus gives us as the sum of all his
Book (one hundred twenty one Disputations:) And I shall tell you how far they
are all to be consented to. * Thus Bradwardine concludes his Book with thirty
six errors, and as many verities, which he would have the Church, especially
that of Rome, determine. But leaving out the most unsavory parts or
expressions of his own judgment, Whether God be the chief necessitating Cause
of all sin, is none of them.


I. Free Will in lapsed nature cannot without the help of grace do a moral
work, which by cooperation of the supernatural End shall be truly good, and a
work of Virtue; so as that by the doer it be referred to God beloved simply
above all, as to the ultimate natural End.

Answ. It is granted, (and more) that though all natural men have one sort of
Grace given them, yet, I think, this cannot be done without special saving
grace.

II. Man by the sole strength of nature cannot assent to all supernatural
mysteries propounded and explained to him, as revealed of God, or because
revealed of God so as the formal reason of his belief is Divine revelation.

Answ. It Is true: He must have commoner grace to believe them dogmatically and
uneffectually; and special saving grace to believe them practically and
savingly.

III. Not only faith it self, but also the first beginning of faith proceeds
from the help of grace, and not from the strength of Nature only.

Answ. Very true.

IV. The free will of man in lapsed Nature cannot without the help of Grace
Love God above all simply, even as he is the author of Nature.

Answ. It Is true.

V. Man in lapsed Nature without the help of Grace, cannot fulfill all the
precepts even of the Law of Nature, nor overcome any great difficulty and
temptation, even for any little time, which it is necessary to overcome, for
the keeping of that Law.

Answ. True: Therefore they have some Grace that do it.

VI. There is no Law, nor ever was made by God, of his giving the actual helps
of preventing grace, to them that do all that is in them, by the sole faculty
of nature: nor has Christ merited or would have any such Law.

Answ. True: For he gives some common grace to all men antecedently, without
any condition on their part: And though he give to those that use their common
grace to the utmost (or near it) sufficient encouragement to go on and hope
that such endeavor shall not be in vain as to the obtaining of peculiar grace,
yet de nomine vel definitione, Whether this encouragement shall be called a
Law, or a Promise, or neither, we contend not.

VII. God by his helping grace flows into free will by premoving it that it
may cooperate, and also truly-efficiently together with the same free will
causes its pious operation.

Answ. It Is true: But all adjuvant grace produces not the second effect, which
flows from both Causes, (of which before and after.)

VIII. When God by his exciting Grace, strikes and touches the hearts of men,
he does not expect that the will by its innate liberty, begin its motion, by
Consenting: But God by adjuvant grace effects, that it freely and infallibly
Consent.

Answ. It Is true of all that do consent: But God has a degree of exciting and
adjuvant grace, which are Necessary and give the posse Velle, which cause not
the act, through man's defect: And though God expect not that effect, as one
that is deceived, yet he commands it, and requires it of us. But exciting
and adjuvant Grace are all one on Gods part: And if you will difference the
same things as connoting diverse effects, you must denominate it more fitly from
the effects, by words that notify the difference.

IX. Adjuvant Grace and Free Will are not Partial Causes of supernatural
Consent, as two drawing a Boat, so as neither is premoved by the other, or
makes it cooperate with it.

Answ. True: For God premoveth the will of man, though through man's fault it be
not ever effectual. And though Gods will and man's be two Causes of the same
effect, the term Partial is scarce fit, while man has his whole power and
activity from God.

X. Scientia media is not to be ascribed to God, -- But all prescience of the
future co*operation of the will, even from the foresaid Hypothesis,
presupposes in signo rationis the free decree of Gods will, by which
absolutely (or granting that Hypothests) he will in us and with us effect that
operation if Good, and permit it if Evil.

Answ. Here come in your presumptions of things unknown or false. 1. That God
knows future contingents, and conditionals is certain: But I think this
scientia media unfitly named, and an unnecessary distribution, and insufficient
to the Jesuits ends.

2. And your fiction of signa rationis, and the necessary antecedence of a
decree of Gods, to his knowledge of every Volition of man, is a more ungrounded
and perilous figment, which you have not proved. It seems a denial of Gods
Omniscience or perfection, that he cannot know an act future as future, but
only as decreed to be so.

3. You deceitfully talk of permitting evil while you plead for the
irresistible predetermining premotion of the will by God to every evil act with
all its circumstances: Is that but Permitting?

4. To permit is Nothing: no act of God; but a non-agency: not to hinder. And
how prove you, that God must of necessity have a Positive Decree, for every
Nothing or non-agency? Is not the not-willing or notdecreeing to hinder a lie,
e. g. (supposing natural concurse,) or to make more worlds, enough to the
production of that lie by an ill inclined nature? or to the not-being of more
Worlds? We are in the dark, and God is infinitely above us, and these
tremendous mysteries are not to be so presumptuously handled by unproved
assertions.

XI. There is on our part no Cause, Reason or Condition assignable, for which
Gods supernatural providence, in comparison of this or that has the formal
reason of predestination, or retains the common reason of providence: but
predestination is to be reduced into the sole free will of God.

Answ. Most of this is about mere words. The word Predestination connoteth
various effects and objects: and so is called various Acts. There is no
efficient Cause in the Creature of any act of God: But there are objects
without which Gods Acts have not their special denominations; and these objects
are the termini, and called Material Constitutive Causes of those various acts
as denominated various, specially or numerically: And so Gods Decree or Will to
Justify and Glorify man, has something in the object as a necessary
condition of it That is, of that object.
, which is not ^^ the object of his decree of giving faith; And that has
something in its object, which is not in the object of the decree of giving a
Redeemer to the World, or making the World, etc. if you will at all distinguish
Gods decrees by their objects, or effects: But if not, there will be no matter
for any Controversy.

And Predestination is an ambiguous word: If it be taken for All Gods
fore-decreeing, or all about man, or all of Good to us; then our Being is the
first effect of it in us, and the making of the World a preparatory effect,
etc. And so, no doubt, the first effect supposed us no men, before, and
therefore no condition in us. But if you take Predestination for Gods decree of
Giving us Grace and Glory only, then it is presupposed that we are lapsed
sinners.

And the decree of damning men is exercised only on them as foreknown damnable
sinners; And the decree of penal denying Grace or faith to sinners for sin,
supposes them such punishable sinners: But the bare Negation of a Decree to
give faith to one to whom the absence is no privation, is unfitly called
Reprobation, (though men may talk at their own rates;) And we grant that some
such no-decrees have no condition in the objects, for they have no objects: e.
g. If you will feign that God decreed from eternity, to give me no faith before
the Creation, or before I was born; or to give Innocent Adam no faith in a
Savior as dying for him* this were no reprobating act. But when God has given
men a Savior with his common grace to believe in and accept, here if he deny
them necessary grace to believe, it is a penal act. And note that Christ and
Common grace as absolutely given to mankind, and offered to individuals, ever
goes before men's accepting or refusing him: And no man to whom he is offered,
refuses him for want of necessary help, till by sin against that grace he
forfeit it.

XII. God by an absolute and efficacious decree of his Will, antecedently to
the prescience of the future good use of free will, predetermined all good
acts, which are done in time, specially those by which the predestinate come to
eternal life.

Answ. The substance of this seems true: only 1. Whether you fitly denominate
a decree efficacious from eternity, which effects nothing till the Time, I
leave to them that dispute of words.

2. You presumptuously determine Gods Decrees to be antecedent to his
prescience herein; when they are neither before nor after one another.

3. If by predetermining you mean more than predecreeing or prevolition, as if
man's will was predetermined, when it was not determined, or determined before
it had a being, you speak contradictions. But Gods own will was eternally
determined (if we may so say of that which was never undetermined) to give all
the grace that he gives in time, and to cause all the good acts that he
causes, as he causes them.

XIII. The Cooperation of free will with the gifts of grace, is in the
predestinate, an effect of predestination; and efficiently proceeds from God
making us by the help of grace freely to cooperate; and consequently depends
not on the sole and innate liberty of the will.

Answ. I think so too.

XIV. We must necessarily distinguish of a twofold help of Grace; one
sufficient, by which man may be converted to God, or work piously: The other
effectual, by which God effects that he be actually converted, and act
piously.

Answ. Hold to that, and contradict not the terms in your description, and
all is well.

XV. The effectual help of preventing or preoperating grace moves man's
free will to act, not only by persuading, alluring, inviting, or other morally
attracting, even inwardly; but also efficaciously and truly effecting, that the
will moved and excited of God determine it self and act well.

Answ. We know what man's persuading and moral operations are (a little): But
the difference between these interior acts of God named by you no man knows.
You cannot prove that his Interior swasion is not truly efficient of the act:
nor know you how God pro^ureth our determination, as to the mode of his
interior operation. Your arbitrary names have no signification of your true
formal conceptions of the matter. This Controversy therefore is vain.

XVI. The efficacy of the help of preventing grace, and the infallible
connection of it with the free cooperation of the will, is totally founded and
taken as from its first root, from the Omnipotency of God, and from the
absolute and efficacious decree of his will, willing that the man whom he
moves be converted and work piously: nor does this efficacy any way depend, no
not as on a condition sine qua non, on the future cooperation of the created
will; though the free act by which man persevereth depend effectively on his
will moved by God.

Answ. 1. I grant that all the good that comes to pass is fore-decreed by God.
2. But Gods mere will effects it not without his Power. 3. His power
effects it not from eternity before it is effected. 4. You leave out one of
the causal Attributes; The effect of Grace is as well from the Wisdom of God,
as from his Will and Power 5. Gods act depends not on man's will. But man's
cooperation which is his own act, you must confess depends on his will as
the effect on the nearest efficient. 6. The non-efficiency of sufficient Grace
depends on the sinners will. It was not merely nor principally from an
absolute efficacious Decree or predetermination of God, that Adams will omitted
his duty first, or committed sin first. And if any run to the common shadow
that sin has no efficient cause, and man only is deficient, I answer 1. He is
the first Reputative Deficient (though not culpable, because under no Law) who
must be the first efficient of the contrary and is not: As if Adams body had
never had a soul, God was the first Non-efficient Cause, that is, into whose
will and non-agency the whole ratio defectus is to be resolved. 2. Forget not
that Alvarez himself says, lib. 6. disp. 45. p. 210. [Licet peccatum originale
non sit pro formali aliquid positivum sed privativum; peccatum tamen actuale
est pro formali aliquid positivum, and causat in anima habitum vitii -- ]

XVII. Supposing effectual Grace in free will, it infallibly follows, that
free will will consent and act piously: so that these two are incompossible,
that effectual Grace be in a man, and that he actually dissent.

Answ. True, because it is not called properly effectual, unless either 1.
Because it effects, 2. Or as it comes from an absolute decree of effecting,
3. Or is of such a nature and degree that it cannot but effect. And in all
these cases it is true.

But such Grace may be eventually uneffectual, which had a sufficiency ex part
sui to effect.

XVIII. The gift of perseverance, as such, and the efficacy of it, depends
not, no not as on a Condition sine qua non, on the cooperation of our
free will, but on the absolute decree of God, effecting man's perseverance.

Answ. This needs no other explication or observation, but as aforesaid. Only
that the Jus ad gratiam qua ad finem perseveremus, is given on condition, in
the Gospel, from how absolute a decree soever it proceed.

XIX. Effectual aid and a Power of dissenting, are compossible in the same
subject, and consist in the same will.

Answ. True: And remember that a true Power is that qua vere possumus; and not
that faculty which could do this or that if God will predetermine it, and
otherwise cannot; no more than the Sun can shine without him. When God
withholdeth the Influx necessary to action, such a faculty is no true power as
to that action in that State.

XX. By preventing Grace efficacious as aforesaid, the Liberty of the will is
not destroyed, nor the actual use of it hindered, but is wonderfully perfected
and roborated.

Answ. There is a Liberty that is perfected by some even necessitating
Free Will in name is owned by you all: I say as August. Enchir. c. 105. Sic
oportebat prius hominem fierl ut and been velle posset, and male; nec gratis si
been, nec impune si male: postea vero sic erit ut male velle non possit. Quia
ordo praetermittendus non suit, in quo Deus voluit ostendere, quam bonum sit
animal rationale, quod etiam peccare possit; quamvis sit melius quod peccare
non possit.
predetermination of God: And there is an inferior Liberty of Imperfect
Viators, which some efficient Divine predetermination (feigned by you) would
destroy. And if God did by that insuperable premoving influx (which
omnipotently moves all things) predetermine all men and Devils to all the
wicked Volitions and actions that ever were done, with all the circumstances,
and as respecting every object comparatively, so that no creature ever did nor
can resist such a predetermination any easier than make a World, this were to
destroy the true Liberty of that Creature, with his innocence and felicity:
however you may at pleasure put the name of Liberty on, and deny the name of
Necessity to, such an absolutely necessitated Volition and act; and then may
say, that they are premoved and predetermined to do the Act of all sin freely
(or constrained to do it without constraint,) and so the liberty of the will is
established. For I see not but cogere ad Volendum is as apt a phrase, as cogere
nolentem ad agendum; when a will formerly innocent is irresistibly
predetermined by physical efficiency, to all those comparate circumstantiate
acts, which are forbidden in Gods Law, and that on pain of man's damnation.

But note how wisely Alvarez left out the great difference, about
predetermining to the acts of sin, from this summary of his disputations.

. III. Of the three other ways, and I. Of the Jesuits way.
Quest. AS you have past your judgment on Alvarez and his Dominican way, tell
us how much you think well or ill of in the other three ways mentioned by
Alvarez, and recited by you sect. 8?

Answ. I. I have said enough before to answer this: Briefly, as to the Jesuits
way de scientia media, 1. It is certain, that God knows all that Vasquez in
1. Tho. q. 22. d. 99. c. 6, 7. after the rejection of many opinions holds this
the only way of Concord, 1. Gods preventing operating grace is Vocatio Congrua
with good cogitations, and the primus motus voluntatis ante actum liberum. 2.
Gods cooperating Grace ad consensum liberum is neither before nor after our
act, but concomitant and simul. And so causes no antecedent necessity, but
concomitant (existentiae.) 3. This supposes Gods Scientia futuri
conditionalis. Against this Dr. Twisse has said much in a peculiar Digression.

And surely God ever operateth as God, which is ut Causa prima. But how far he
determines is the doubt.


i a capable object of knowledge: And therefore he knows what conditional
propositions of future contingents are true.

2. Whether this should be called scientia media or not, is a vain question.

3. Gods acts ex part sui being but his Essence, and all one, can no otherwise
be distinguished, nor ordered as to the denominations of priority or
posteriority, than as the objects are distinct, and by their order of priority
and posteriority allow us by Conn^tation so to denominate the acts.

4. The Intelligibility and the Amability of things are in themselves
simultaneous, though from the order of humane operations, we say that things
are first Intelligible, before they are Amiable. And so we may say of God after
the manner of men; but not otherwise.

5. God does not will the form, or the act of sin as circumstantiated, and as
the form necessarily resulteth from it: neither for it self, nor propter aliud;
the essence or existence.

6. Therefore God does not foreknow sin as willed and decreed by him: nor
therefore foreknow it because he wills it.

7. God fore-knoweth (or knows) the formale peccati as well as the materiale:
yet almost all confess, that he wills not the formale: Therefore he knows
that which he wills not: Therefore his Volition of it is not necessary to his
knowledge of it.

8. There is no effect in God: for all that is in God is God; who is not
effected: Therefore there is no Cause in God of any thing in God: Therefore
Gods will or decree of Good is not the cause that he foreknoweth it, no^ his
foreknowledge the cause that he wills it: But he both knows and wills all
that is Good, at once.

9. Gods inward operations on the soul are real efficiencies, and yet moral,
and to us unsearchable: They cause the will to determine it self to Good, when
it does so; but how we know not. But we know that he ordinarily works by
means, and according to their aptitude.

10. God uses such means with the free wills of his elect as he foreknoweth
will prevail with them; and sets them in such circumstances as he
foreknoweth they will freely act aright in: But his inward grace is the
principal or chief cause: And he does not will or decree to give them such
means and circumstances, because he foreknoweth they will prevail. That is,
Gods will and decree as in him has no cause.

11. But the word [because] is in Scripture applied sometimes to Gods Love or
hatred, and sometimes to his outward acts: (as John 16. 27. The Father loves
you, because ye have loved me and believed --) And in the first case that which
is meant, is, that the qualification of the object is the material constitutive
cause of the act of God, (not as it is Himself, but) as relatively denominated
ab extra from the object in specie vel individuo. And in the second case, It
means, that the effects of God ad extra called his transient acts as in
passo, have their proper uses, and we our commanded ends in using them: And so
God is said to send Ministers, e. g. because he would save the hearers; that
is, the Ministry is a cause of men's ^^lvation.

12. From all this it appears, that they err who think that their scientia
media is equally useful in the points of Election and of Reprobation, and that
they run pari passa. For all Good is both willed and known, and so Election
supposes not the foresight of our faith or obedience as causal or antecedent,
(if we speak of that Act of Election which is to faith and obedience.) But Evil
is foreknown and not willed at all: And therefore there is no such Reprobation
which is a will or decree that men shall sin: And the non-impedition of sin
being no act, needs no positive act of will or decree Yet none of the stress
of their differences lies on this; And the Jesuits with the rest assert a
Positive Volition de peccato permittendo, without proof: which I leave to ^uens
various opinions.
. But Reprobation which is the decree of damning, ever supposes the object to
be a foreseen-sinner finally rejecting grace.

The rest about this is spoken to sufficiently before.

. IV. II. Of Durandus 's way.
II. AS to the way of Aureolus, Durandus, Ludov. a Dola, etc. I conceive it is
commonly rejected, because not understood, or because the wording of it
sounds disgracefully; But it is a great matter that all confess, how easily
it would end all these controversies, were it true. And by Lud. a Dola's
Explication, and what Capreolus says of Aureolus, I conceive that they are
commonly mistaken. Durandus thinks, that to the motion of the Creature it is
necessary 1. That God by his continued No doubt but God is quoad praesentiam
Immediate in all his efficiency, and as Near to the effect, as if he used no
second cause: But yet he is not so immediate as to exclude second causes, as
media: And while he uses them, he operateth on us according to their kind of
operations, even as if they were between him and the effect. And this is the
sense of Durandus and a Do^a, and easily reconcileth all.

Amyraldus de lib. Arbit. c. 4. concurreth with Durandus.

It is cons^derable that all confess, that if Durandus's way did hold, it
eas^ly ended all the controversy. As Lud. le Blank notes These. 3. de Concurs.
Juxta hos doctores nulla est difficultas in conciliando divino concursu cum
liberate, etc. And this way is as consistent with Gods certain disposal of
events as predetermination it self.


influx continue the being and the nature and properties of the agent; 2. And
that he continue all the circumstant creatures, concauses and objects and the
media of action; 3. And that no powerful impediment hinder the action. Now, say
the Jesuits and Dominicans and the rest, God does moreover concur as the first
cause to the Act it self, by an Immediate efficient Influx, besides that by
which he upholdeth the Power and second Causes. But I think that Durandus
means as much as they: that is, that God does not only uphold the creature in
its mere esse, but in its Nature, which is its Mobility, and its principium
motus; And this Nature is not only a Power to Action, but also an Inclined
Power. So that for God by constant Influx to continue a Natural Power and
Inclination to Action or motion, with all necessary concurrents, without
impediments, is truly by his Influx to concur to the motion as the first
Cause; while his Influx is not only as to Being, but as to the Motive force,
and inclination: And no more than this does seem to me to be simply necessary
to motion.

Here the Reader must know, that the Controversy is equally of Natural and
Free agents and action. And first let us enquire of natural action.

I. Fire is an Active nature, as much Inclined to Action as Earth to non-action
or rest. Yea, its Active Virtue and Inclination is its very Essential Form, and
this as to a threefold action, viz. Motion, Light and Heat. If God then make
Fire and continue its Nature or Essential Inclination For I have before showed
how many ways this is certainly done.

The whole experience of the world shows, that God does operate by second
causes according to their natures and ways of operation; Therefore it more
concerns us here to know, what second causes do on the soul in good and evil
actions, than in these disputes is usually observed.

Adrian. Quodl. 3. fol 18. Sententia Durandi and plurium aliorum certum tenet,
etc. Quam opinionem ultimo tradit Magister 37. d. 2. judicium relinquens
prudentis lectoris examini.


to these acts, and continue fuel approximate with all necessary concauses and
media without impediments, to say that this Fire yet cannot burn or act,
without another kind of Divine premotion besides all this, even an Immediate
physical impulse, besides the described Influx, is a plain contradiction: For
Fire is essentially an Inclined Power to act. And that* which has a true Power
to act, can act: It Is a contradiction to say, It has power, but it cannot. And
a Power naturally inclined to act, will act, caeteris paribus.

The question then is, Whether it be an impossibility for fire to burn* if God
do but as the first Cause of Nature, continue its burning power* and
inclination with all concauses? or rather, Was it not a Miracle for the three
Confessors, Dan. 3. not to be burnt in that fiery Furnace* If you say, that the
Miracle was, in Gods withholding his additional premotion, you then imply that
God as principium vel causa prima Naturae does ordinarily give that additional
premotion. For that is no Miracle which is not dissonant from the common course
of nature. But nothing can belong to God as the Cause of Nature, but to
continue Nature as he made it, and he actually premoveth and concurreth while
by his Influx as the first cause, he continues all its Moving Nature, both
Power and Inclination.

In the motus projectorum, so far as the moving vis impressa continues and
prevails, the motion continues accordingly; And who can prove that though
the vis impressa continue, e. g. in a Bullet shot out of a Gun, and all
concauses, yet there can be no motion, unless God otherwise thrust it on, or
move it by some other impulse*

Suppose a Stone or Rock hang in the Air quasi per filum, or by somewhat that
hinders its descent: If God continue the Natural Gravity of that Rock, which
is not only a power but an inclination to descend, and if he continue all
concauses and media, and if the thread be cut or the impediment removed that
held up the stone, yet says the Dominican, this Stone cannot fall unless God
moreover by another action thrust it down, or* by an efficient physical
premotion predetermine it; or as* the Jesuits say, unless God concur with a
further moving Impulse. A plain contradiction: That a Power of motion, strongly
inclined to act, so as a greater power is necessary in the impediment that will
hinder it, and this in genere Agentis, continued by Divine Influx, yet cannot
act, unless otherwise moved.

God works so constantly by Natural Inclinations of second causes, as fully
proves to us, that ut prima Causa Naturae, he has decreed so to work. And how
is that then but by his Influx into Nature as Nature?

If my house cannot fall when the foundations and pillars are gone, unless God
otherwise thrust it down; If I cannot fall though I leap down from the house
top, unless God otherwise thrust me down; If the Town cannot be fired unless
God predetermine it or concur, besides his continuation of Nature; why should
we fear it; when we know not that God decrees any more than the continuation
of natural causes and that action which is by them, and by him as the upholder
of them?

II. And the case of Free-agents is here confessed to be the same. The Influx
into their Natures and Virtues is it that continues them in esse substantiali
and in esse movente and moto: An Act is but the modus substantiae. And it
surpasses my understanding to conceive what it is, for God physice influere in
actum immediate, and non in potentiam seu virtutem agentem: nor how he can be
said to move the faculties to act, that does cause the act and not meddle with,
(and therefore not move) the faculty. Nor know I how an Act immediately (and
not the agent) can be the terminus of a physical motion. Though it is easy to
conceive how God should cause an act by moral and extrinsick objective means.
Therefore, as God moves things Natural by his Influx into their moving
Virtues, or into the moving Virtues of second Causes, which being Active
operate on passive matter; so as the Soul and its Will is quadam natura
inclined to Action in genere, and to will good in special, God as the cause of
nature moves it by his Influx into the faculty, as he does other natural
agents: But having made it a Free self-determining Agent, his Influx upholdeth
and moves it as such: And the same Influx is upholding and moving, and moving
as upholding; seeing God as Motor also, does influere in naturam vitalem and
liberam. Besides which supporting and moving Influx, no other predetermining
premotion is necessary to an Act as an Act, (that I know of.)

But the very natures or dispositions of lapsed man being depraved, the
reparation of them is necessary to holy actions; And here also God operateth on
the faculties, by right disposing them, and by that grace which Augustine and
Jansenius well call Gratia medicinalis, (his special Influx causing,
maintaining, and actuating it) he causes the holy actions of believers.

I do verily believe, that Durandus and his followers, under the name of
supporting the natural and free faculties, did mean inclusively that which
Bellarmine pleads for, A General Concurse to the Act as an Act; And that they
differ in words and not in sense.

And if his doctrine hold not true, I cannot see how God can be said to Permit
men's sinful Actions, or any action at all. For if neither the Inclination of
natural agents, (as of Fire to burn, a Stone to descend, etc.) nor the
Inclination of the most wicked nature, would cause any act, unless God
otherwise cause it by premotion; then there is no place for Impedition, (for we
cannot be said to Hinder a Stone from speaking, or a Mountain from walking, nor
anything from any act which it could not as): And permittere is non impedire.
And therefore Gods moving a man to the Act of sin, is not a permitting him to
sin; Motion being one thing, and the not hindering of motion, another thing (or
nothing.)

. V. III. Of the Scotists and Nominals way.
III. ANd as to the third way, ascribed by Alvarez to the Scotists and
Nominals, I think that de nomine it is not a proper expression to call God
causa partialis. But if we agree of the sense, we may bear Vasqu. (ubi sup.)
takes Alex. Al. 1. p. q. 26. n. 7. a. 2. ad. 1. and Ronavent. 1. d. 40. a. 2.
q. 1. to be for him, because they say, Actus nostros esse liberos quia Divina
voluntas non est Tota Causa, sed cum libero arbitrio; quod cum sit proxima
causa modificatur concursum prim^. But if this be his opinion he joyneth with
these Scotists and Nominals de causa non-totali. So Pet. a S. Joseph. Those.
Univ. de Deo, says that God is Causa totius effectus, sed non tota Causa, sed
partialis.
with improper expressions about God, of whom we can say nothing without some
impropriety. Doubtless God and man are not to be accounted coordinate
concauses of the act; but whatever man does, he does it in subordination to
God. But God operateth 1. As the prime cause of Nature, in a stablished way, by
natural causes; And so he gives man his Natural vital power and the Liberty of
using it: and by this Power and Liberty a man can do more than he always does.
So that Gods natural causality and concurse does not bring all the Power which
he gives men into proportionable adequate Action: but men freely exercise the
same power sometime more and sometime less. 2. And in the like manner God
causes gracious or holy acts: Rectifying our Powers, and fortifying them by
holy habits, and preserving and actuating them, by the Holy Ghost: Yet the
Spirit is to Grace, as God the prime cause is to Nature: He gives us more
Gracious Power than we use, and than his own concurse always reduces into
adequate act: So that Gods operations in Nature and Grace are not ad ultimum
posse Dei, nor ad ultimum posse hominis; but limited by his most wise and holy
will: And man as a free agent is not only Able, but obliged, to use his power
further, than by all Gods concurse or premotion it is used.

And in this sense I conceive it is that Scotus and others call God and man
Causae partiales, in that there is a certain proportion of premotion and help,
which God as the first Cause of Nature and Grace, does afford to man; And there
is moreover a certain use of Gods help and Grace, beyond what God
predetermineth man to, (as comparative to this object rather than that, etc.)
which man can do, and is bound to do; Not independently or in co-ordination
with God; but by the Power and Liberty which God only gives and upholdeth, and
affords him sufficient help to actuate. Now if man do this Part which is left
to his liberty, the effect always follows. If he do not, it may not follow,
though God gave him that necessary help or grace or premotion which is commonly
called sufficient. And when Scotus likeneth God and man, to two drawing a Boat,
where the strength of both must concur, I believe he meant no more than I have
said.

1. All the Power is of God as the total first cause.

2. All the Grace that rectifieth and disposes our faculties, is of God as the
total first cause.

3. All the Act as an Act in genere, is of God as the total (though not the
sole) cause.

4. All the Holiness or Moral Goodness of the Act is of God as the total first
cause (though not the only cause.)

5. But all the sinfulness or moral evil of Acts and Habits is from Man.

6. And that implies, that man's free will is not so much freed from sin,
mutability and infirmity, but that it can neglect to use well the power and
helps of grace afforded. But of total and partial Causality I have spoken more
fully in the first Book. And of their opinion, that Gods Influx puts nothing
into the will, but only is ad actum seu effectum, if it be true, it easily
ends the controversy of the difference of sufficient and effectual grace, as
to that Act: But it is to me unintelligible, and the thing quite above all our
understandings, and very unfit for bold disputes, or mutual censures.

. VI. The true face or Scheme of the Dominican predeterminant way, as to the
sense and consequents.
I Do readily confess that, as the sum of all the Controversy is, Whether man
have truly any Free Will, that is not moved as necessarily as any natural
motions are caused; so the arguments of Hobbes and the Dominicans and Dr.
Twisse are not easily answered. And had we not better proof of all that
Morality and Religion which is inconsistent with this opinion, I should my self
be inclined also to think, that we must be contented with the naked name of
Liberty; there being nothing indeed, but Volition necessitated; and that man is
an Engine moved by God and other causes, no less necessarily and physically
than a Clock or Watch, but only by more invisible causes and to us unknown, and
therefore our Volitions are called Contingent and free, when truly there is
nothing contingent in the World. We that converse in the body with things
corporeal, are so much strangers to our selves and to all the race of
Intellectual-free Spirits, that we are very prone to such gross corporeal
imaginations, and to think that all action is like the motus projectorum,
violent, and necessitated; and that it belongs to the perfection of the first
mover that it should be so, yea, that he himself should be in all things the
most necessary agent, and consequently all things necessitated by him.

But as Alvarez confesses, Free Will is proved by Aquinas and many others, by
natural proofs, and no Predeterminant or Hobbist can give the tenth part so
full and certain proof, of the necessitation of all Volitions, as we can give
of all the contrary principles in Morality which are overthrown thereby.

And therefore (whatever some think of the fatum Stoieorum) the Light of Nature
taught almost all the Philosophers in the World, the Freedom of man's will, and
the morality there founded: of which Groti^s has collected so full a Volume of
testimonies in his Book entitled De fato, that it shall save me the labor of
transcribing any.

Yet though I think Christianity inconsistent with their opinion, I doubt not
but many of the Predeterminants are good Christians, and excellently learned
and acute Divines, as not apprehending the inconsistency of their own thoughts:
And I confess that there is a Religion consistent with their fundamental error,
which I shall therefore put into the Scheme, lest any think that none but
Hobbes has made the right deductions from it.

And remember, that I charge them not to say all the words which I here lay
down, but only that the reason why I my self do above all others shun their
principles, is because I take this following to be the true sense and
complexion of them, which I must also believe, if I do believe them: And I
suppose the Reader to be acquainted with their own words, and to have their
Books at hand. At least that he have read Bradwardine and Alvarez, and Dr.
Twisse and Rutherford. de Prove. Better says Joh. Racon in 1. sent. d* 40. art.
2. De^s aliqua futura non vult v^lie efficaci; sed solu^ permissive: and
respectu sic productorum voluntas divina est Causa per Generalem, tr^buens
agenti particular^ facultatem agendt sic vel sit: non tamen determinat agens ad
aliquam neque efficienter vult banc vel illam: and ist^ modo Voluntas divina
est causa actuum nostrorum quantumcunque deformium: -- Talium actuum est causa
determinans Voluntas humana praesupposita influentia generali Del* Unde ideo
pecco quia vol^ peccare: ita quod actus voluntatis m^ae est jam determinans me
ad peccandum.

And Gab. Biel post Scotum* Ita est ca^sa effectiva rectit^dinis quod quantum
est de se daret illam act^^, s^ voluntas cooperaretur. Universaliter enim
quicquid D^us dedit antecedenter; daret et^am consequenter, q^antum est ex s^,
si non esset impedimentum: Vcluntas autem quantum est ex s^ non dat
rectitudinem actul. Gal. in 2. d. 37. a. 3. q. 1. dub. 1. Ita and Okam in 1. d.
46. and 38. and fer^ iisdem verbi^ Orbellis m. 2. d. 37. and ita Fr. Mayro 1.
d. 37. q. 1. ad 4. and q. 2. ad 4. and q. 3. concl. 4. and Greg. Arim. 2. d.
37. q. 1. a. 3. and d. 28. q. 1. a. 3. ad arg. 12. and alil quamplurimi. ^
Bradwardine l. 1. c. 34. p. 300, 301, etc. speaks too plainly to this
purpose, with Hug^ 1. de Sac^. 4. part. 1^. being more careful to make people
think well of his [Deus vult malum] than to deny it; [Non quia quod dicitur,
non been dicitur, s^d quia quod b^ne dicitur, non recte i^telligitur.] And his
mollification is that [God wills sin only secundum quid; for Gods Velle
simplic^ter, as it is commonly taken, is to Love and approve it as good, and to
reward it: And because the Vulgar so take it, we must not before them say that
God wi^^ leth sin, because they too much abhor it. No act is unjust simply,
but all just, and all the consequents of it just, in respect of God the Author.
Therefore simply in the Universe, there is no sin or deordination; God wills
sin as a Physicion does poison in his medicine, for the exercise of the good,
the punishment of the evil, the contemplation of the beauty of the world. He is
not the author of evil as he is of good; for of that he, is the sole giver of
faith, charity, etc. creating it. And God constrains not men to sin against
their wills: nor does he cause it unjustly and culpably, etc.]

Is not this mere Hobbs? 1. Does God will any thing but good? Is not sin good
then if he will it? 2. Is Gods not Rewarding it, a not willing it? What if he
rewarded not men for loving him? You feign God to will and cause all sin, and
then damn men for it, and then prove that he is not culpable or did not
properly will it, because he damned men for it. 3. Do you not make God as much
the cause of evil habits and acts as of good, when you make him the total cause
of all that is in them? 4. Do you not say that the sinner does evil for good
ends, and not for evil, as well as God? 5. Is not man an agent in Loving God as
well as in hating him? 6. Is it any better to make a man sinful and miserable
by making him willing, than to make him so by force against his will? Nay,
could a man be made a sinner by force without making him willing? Is it not a
contradiction? 7. Why call you it poison which God makes a medicine of? You
mean not that there is any evil in it which God caused not (as you say) more
immediately than man: and so that God* first made it poison and then put it
into his medicine. 8. And why are you afraid of speaking your opinion: to the
world? Is it not because you are conscious that you speak against the common
principles of nature, in which the vulgar are founder than your self? 9. And
much of this is* because you cannot tell how God punishes sin with sin, unless
he cause sin. What if by the Law of nature in Creation he ordain that he that
is a glutton shall be sick, and that Arsenick shall corrode his bowels that
eats it, etc. and drinking too much Wine shall breed the Gout, etc. Does he
therefore cause men to eat and drink too much? or is not the excess from them?
and yet the penal relation and consequents from God?

And suitably to all this he defines Grace and Free Will; viz. Grace effectual
(without which no one sin can be avoided) is Gods will that it shall be done:
(And so no man can any more do any thing, than what he does, than he can make a
world.) And free will (li. 2. c. 1.) is [Potentia rationalis rationaliter
judicandi, and voluntarit exe^quendi:] so that to will* and freely to will, is
all one. And so man is moved to every sin, by necessitating premotion to do it
freely, that is, he is made willing, that is, sinful.

So c. 32. [In omni nonactione Deo and creaturae communi, prius naturaliter est
Deum non-agere quam ipsam and quia Deus certam actionem per creaturam non agit,
ideo creatura illam non agit, and non e contra.] So that all omissions (of
faith, repentance, obedience, etc.) are fully resolved into Gods first
non-agency p. 611. [Quis nesciat quod quia Deus non fecit unum Angelum, aliam
Stellam, coelum majus, ideo non facta sunt? Ita quioquid non fit a causa
secunda Deus vult non fieri, and non vult positive: Scilicet habet noll^ illud
fieri ab ta. Prius ergo naturaliter and causaliter est Deum nolle positive,
quare and non v^lle and non facere causam secundam agere, quam ipsam non
agere.] This is plain dealing: All men that Love not God, and all that hate
him, are such because God will have it so, and make them do as they do. It
would save many tedious volumes and intricate disputes if all would speak as
plainly. But what is the Christian Religion then?




I. Their fundamental Principle is, that It is naturally Impossible for any
agent Natural or free to do any act, or vary any; comparatively or
circumstantially, but by the Immediate Physical efficient adequate
predetermining Premotion of Gods Omnipotency, as the first Cause; besides his
Influx by which he sustaineth their natures and concauses, and affords them
his general Concurse or premotion to the act as an act in genere only. And it
is Impossible for any Agent so predetermined by physical premotion, not to act
in all the circumstances that it is so moved to act in.

II. To say that any creature can act without this physical predetermination to
all the circumstances, or can forbear to act when so predetermined, is by
consequence to say, that such a creature, is God, the first cause. For it is as
impossible, as to be God, or to make a World.

III. Yea, the creature that will forbear any act which God so predetermineth
him to, must be stronger than God and overcome him, or do contradictions.

IV. And if God had not decreed so to predetermine by physical efficient
premotion, he could not have known any future acts. No, though with Scotus we
say, that he willed all those Acts antecedently to his prescience, it would not
serve, unless he willed so to predetermine the agent in causing them.

V. Yet we will say, that the Will is free: but we mean only that to will and
to will freely are words of the same sense. For a man is said to will freely in
that he wills, and his Willing is not a Nilling.

VI. Free Will then is nothing but Facultas Voluntatis and rationis ^d
utrumlibet agendum vel non agendum and ad agendum unum vel alterum: sed tantum
prout a prima causa physice praedeterminatur: That is, it is such a faculty as
God can predetermine to act which way he will, by making it will: yet its
Indifferency is not only objective or passive, but also Active, because it is
an Active Power of the will which God predetermineth. God predetermineth the
will to determine it self.

VII. We will call this the wills Power, but it is but hypothetically a Power,
viz. It can act if God physically predetermine it: else not at all. As the
Wheels of the Clock can move if the Poise or Spring move them, or rather; as
the hand can move, if the Will and the Spirits in the Nerves do move it.

VIII. The will is said to be free, partly by reason that its active power is
capable of being determined by God, and then by it self ad utrumlibet, and
partly in that it is not liable to coaction.

IX. The will that is by Omnipotent physical premotion efficiently
predetermined by God, is not constrained, because it wills not unwillingly:
that is, so far as it is willing it is not unwilling and reluctant.

X. Yet the will that was one way inclined, habituated and acted in the
precedent instant, is often physically premoved and predetermined by Omnipotency
to the contrary act in the next instant, which it could not resist: As he that
in this instant wil^eth Chasti^y, may in the next instant be predetermined by
unresistible Omnip^tency to will fornication; or he that Loved God may be
predetermined and premoved by God to hate him the next moment. But we will not
call this irresistible efficiency [coaction,] because it is ad Volendum, and so
in ipso act^ there is no reluctance or resistance.

XI. When God has given man a Power with liberty to will or nill, or not will,
to will this or that, and also gives him all necessary objects and concauses,
and also as the first cause of natural and free action gives him all that
Influx which is necessary to an Act as such, yet the moral specification of
that Act, to this proposed object rather than that (as to hate God, rather than
to hate sin,) or to this Act rather than to that (as to hate God, rather than
to Love him, or to speak a lie, rather than the truth) has so much Entity in
it, that it is a blasphemous deifying man to say, that man can do it, without
Gods fore-described unresistible predetermining physical premotion.

XII. God made the Law which forbids sin, and God made man's nature
Intellectual and free to be ruled by Law; and God made and orders all the
objects, temptations and concauses; and God by the said efficient, physical
premotion causes irresistibly every act of sin in all its circumstances: (As
when David was deliberating, Shall I do this Adultery and Murder or not? God
first by omnipotent motion determined his will to it, or else he could not
possibly have done it.) And sin in its formale is nothing but the Relation of
Disconformity to Gods Law, which can have no cause but that which causes the
subjectum, fundamentum and terminum; nor can it possibly be, but it must exist
per nudam resultantiam, hisce positis. And yet though God make the man, the
Law, the act, the object, and all that is in the world from whence sin
resulteth as a mere relation, we are resolved to say that God is not the Author
or Cause of sin.

XIII. Yea, though the Habits of sin are certain Entities, and therefore God
must needs be their first cause in their full nature, according to our
principles, who account it proper to God to be the first and principal cause of
any such entity; yet we are resolved to say, that God is not the Cause or
Author at least of sin.

XIV. Yet we will say, that he is an enemy to Gods Providence, that holds
that man can possibly do any wickedness, unless God thus predetermine both
Will, Tongue, Hand, and every active part, to every act which he has forbidden
with all its circumstances.

XV. Sin is caused by God as to the circumstantiated Act which is the
materiale, but not as to the formale: And yet we must confess, that the
Relation is caused by causing the subject, foundation* and term, (all which God
principally does,) and can be caused no otherwise.

XVI. But the formale of sin is but a defect or privation, which is nothing:
Therefore man and not God is the cause of it; For God cannot be a deficient
cause, nor have any privation. And yet we cannot deny but that 1. There is as
much positivity of Relation in disobedience as in obedience, in curvity as in
rectitude, in disconformity as in conformity. 2. Nor that God can be a Cause of
Privations (such as death is,) though not a subject of them; even such a cause
as they can have. 3. Nor that some of ours (even Alvarez) say that sins of
commission (and habits) are positive in their formale. 4. And sin is such a
Nothing, as is man's misery, and he is damned for and by. And if it be such a
Nothing as can have no cause, man can no more be the cause of it than God. 5.
And that the Reason of non existences, negations, or privations, is as
notoriously resolved into the will or non-agency of the first necessary cause
of the contrary, as existences and positives are resolved into his will and
agency. And if a man cannot think a good thought by any help that God can give
him, unless he physically predetermine him to it, then the reason why man does
it not is as notoriously to be resolved into Gods not-predetermining him to it,
as the reason why he does it into his predetermination: and as it is night,
because the Sun shines not.

XVII. But at least we can say that God is not the cause of sin, because he is
under no prohibiting Law. Though it be true, 1. That his nature or perfection,
the root of all Laws, is more than a Law: 2. And we know indeed that this
proves him not at all to be no cause of the sin of man, but only to be no
sinner himself though he cause it: which is none of the question.

XVIII. And from this necessity of predetermination it follows, that all that
part of our holiness and obedience which consists in not sinning, is not at
all caused by God, e. g. that we hate him not, nor his truth and ways and
servants, that we murder not, commit not adultery, steal not, lie not, covet
not, blaspheme not, wrong none, do no evil, etc. we need no help of God for
this; Because if he will not move our wills by efficient predetermination to do
them, it is impossible for us to do them at all.

XIX. And though we say that God wills sin to be, by his permission only and
not by his efficience, yet indeed predetermining by efficiency as the first
cause, is the principal efficiency: And properly we must say that God
permits no sin at all; For we say that his permission proves the
consequence of the thing permitted: And therefore we must say that he
permits no sin but what is done. And that which is done by commission
positively he effects by effecting the fundamentum; and therefore permits
not: And men sin by omission because God does not make them sin, and not
because he merely permits it. For permission is not de impossibilibus.

XX. God wills not sin, because he wills it not as sin, in its formale:
which also we must confess that the wicked themselves do not.

XXI. And whereas we hold that God cannot foreknow things future, but as he
wills or decrees them, we must confess that the formale peccati as well as
the materiale, was (such as it is) quid futurum, (if it was but futura
privatio:) And therefore this would infer that God willed and decreed the
formale peccati also.

XXII. Gods Will is his Love: and what he Wills he Loves.

XXIII. God wills the futurity and existence of sin, not only of the
materiale, but the formale, even of all the sin that ever is done.

XXIV. The existence of sin is Good and Amiable, not only by accident, but per
se, as being very conducible to the Glory of Gods Justice and Mercy, and
therefore is per se Willed and Loved of God.

XXV. It is incomparably much more sin than Holiness which God wills, and
Loves, and by predetermination causes in mankind on earth: For it is much
more sin than Holiness that existeth in man: And all that existeth God causes
as aforesaid (the circumstantiated act, and so the resultancy of the relative
form:) And he wills and Loves the existence of all, and the thing existing
so far as he causes it.

XXVI. God Wills, Loves and Causes sin incomparably more than wicked men
do: For they Will and Love it with a humane mutable dependent will; but God
with a Divine, primary, immutable will. Man causes the forbidden act (whence
the relation resulteth) with a Will that is irresistibly moved so to do by God
(as the pen writes; only s^o modo with Volition:) But God causes it as the
first omnipotent unresistible cause, of all that the Creature does in sinning.

XXVII. The same must be said of God and the Devil, who can no more commit one
sinful act, till God unavoidably predetermine his will to it, by his premotion,
than sinful man can.

XXVIII. God by his Law, does strictly forbid all those sinful acts which he
principally and unavoidably causes: And he strictly commands all those good
acts, whose contraries he thus causes us to do.

XXIX. Though there is nothing in sin which can have a cause, of which God is
not the Principal cause, and though he Wills and Loves all that he causes,
yet the Scripture says that God hates sin, and cannot behold it, and hates
all the workers of iniquity, and that it is abomination to him, that he is as
one laden with it, and wearied, provoked, and offended by it. And that he
Loves the Acts of obedience and holiness, when he will not cause them, but
does cause and will the contrary.

XXX. Pardon and salvation is promised and earnestly offered by God, to the
Reprobate themselves, on condition, that they will believe and repent, when God
does unavoidably as the first cause, determine their wills to the contrary
acts, even to disbelief and impenitent hatred of God and holiness.

XXXI. The Law of God is, that all the Reprobates shall be damned to hell fire,
if they will not believe and repent, when his omnipotence does unavoidably
premove and determine them to unbelief and impenitence: and if they will not
give over those acts of sin, to which God does thus unavoidably move and
determine them.

XXXII. Gods executions are answerable to these Laws; and all save Christians,
and all professed Christians saving the sanctified, are to be punished in hell
fire for ever, only for not doing the acts of Faith, Love and obedience, when
God as the first cause predetermined them to the contrary; and for doing the
acts of sin, when God unavoidably moved them to it, and made them do it: so
that consequently all that are damned, suffer in hell, for not being Gods, even
the first sufficient causes of their own acts, and for not being above God or
stronger than he, that is, for not overcoming or avoiding, his invincible and
unavoidable predetermining premotion unto evil acts.

XXXIII. The same must be said of the Devils, who sin and suffer on the same
terms.

XXXIV. Q. What kind of torment then will there be in Hell? Can Conscience
torment men for doing that which they were unavoidably made to do by
Omnipotency? and for not doing that which without Divine predetermination they
could no more do than make a world? or for not doing that whose contrary they
were thus predetermined to? that is, for not overcoming God? (when they know
the case.)

Or must we not more congruously say, that the state of Hell torments lies in
a most vehement hatred of God for so using them, and a justifying of
themselves? Or will every mouth be thus stopped in judgment?

XXXV. Q. Is not Divine Justice the most perfect Justice? and the exemplar of
all humane Justice (allowing for disparities?) And should Kings and Judges
imitate this fore-described course? And how then would they be esteemed?

XXXVI. Q Is not that best which is most agreeable to Gods Will and Love? And
therefore sin better than Holiness in all that have sin, and not holiness, and
in the Godly so far as they sin? because that it shall be so, is more (yea
only) willed by God, and caused by his predetermination?

XXXVII. Q. Whether this doctrine tend not to utter Infidelity, as to the
Christian faith, by making it seem to men incredible? Is it credible that God
sent his Son so wonderfully to expiate those sins which he so loved and caused
as aforesaid? and to save his people from their sins, which God thus
unavoi^ably moved them to commit? and to destroy the works of God, under the
name of destroying the works of the Devil? Must Christ suffer, bleed, die and
bear Gods wrath, for that which God unavoidably made man do by his principal
determination? And is it easy for him that believes one of these to believe
the other?

XXXVIII. Q. How will men preach and hear the Gospel, if they do it in
congruity with this doctrine? Will they say [God sent us to beseech and charge
you, not to do that sinful act, which you cannot do unless he make you do it by
predetermination, and which you cannot avoid if he so make you do it. He
beseeches and importuneth you to do all those commanded acts, which you can no
more do than make a world unless he predetermine you to do them, nor can
forbear them if he do?]

XXXIX. Q. How will men Repent, confess, resist temptations, pray, and use the
means of Grace, if they believe that all sinful acts in the world are thus
unavoidably Caused, and Willed and Loved of God as good for his Glory?

XL. Q. Whether they that teach (as Dr. Twisse often) that sin is not malum Dei
sed nostri, do not take it to be no injury to God, nor displeasing to his will?
Or is not injury and displeasing, evil in respect to God as the terminus,
though it be no h^rt to him, nor his evil as the subject or agent? And does not
the opinion that it is Evil only to us, and Good to God as conducible to his
glory, teach men to hate it only out of self-love, and not out of love to the
glory of God? yea to Love it as conducible to Gods Glory, more than to hate it
as evil to our selves; seeing Gods Glory must be preferred above our selves?

XLI. Q. Is not sin thus made a coequal with Christ? who is but a means to the
glorifying of God, to which faith (Dr. Twisse) sin is sum conductbile?

XLII. Q. Does not this doctrine make the sanctification of the Holy Ghost to
be unnecessary? when all that is to be done to save us from sin, is for God not
to make us sin by his premotion* Or does it not make sanctification to be
nothing but this predetermination of God, which is made as necessary to sin as
to duty, and so natural and gracious operations made the same, and God to do as
much to produce evil efficiently as good?

XLIII. Q. Is it not much worse to man, if God by predetermination make him
first a sinner, (and wicked by sinful Habits) and then damn him for it, than if
he should damn an innocent man for nothing? For sin and pain is far worse than
pain without sin. And to compel the will unwillingly to sin, were it possible,
is less than to make it willing.

XLIV. Does not he that affirms that the Devil does but sin as efficiently
predetermined by God, and does not force, nor determine any man's will to any
sinful act, but that God predetermineth all men and Devils to every sinful act
committed, I say, does he not describe God as worse than Satan (horresco
quaerens!) if sin be the denominating evil, and the causing of sin be more than
tempting to it? Had I not rather my will were resistibly tempted to sin, than
unresistibly made to sin, by predetermining efficient premotion?

XLV. Is not the objective Reason in Devils of man's implanted Enmity against
them, Genesis 3. 15. because they are Enemies to God and us, as being themselves
Lovers of sin, and Tempters of us to sin and misery?

XLVI. Does not he take the directest course to root out the Love of God and
all Religion from the World, and to tempt men to hate God, and so to begin a
Hell on Earth, who describes God in Satan's likeness and much worse; as much as
being the principal cause of all sin in men and Devils, is worse than sinning
when predetermined, and tempting others to it?

XLVII. I think that the Dominican Predetermination, directly and necessarily
overthrows all certainty of Divine Revelation, by man, or Angel, and
consequently all certainty of the Christian faith: even by overthrowing the
very formal object, the Divine Veracity. For if God efficiently premove and
predetermine all wills and tongues and pens to all the lies that ever are made
in the world, then 1. To do so, is not inconsistent with his perfections or his
will; 2. And then we can never know when he does not so, unless by the event.
This is grounded on these suppositions,

1. That Gods revelations to us are not Immediate only by himself, but by some
Creature, Angel or Man, or a created voice or sign. 2. That the Ratio
certitudinis of such Revelations by a Creature, is because it is God that is
the chief author of them. 3. That it is not conceiveable how God can by any way
of Revelation be more the author of it, than by physical efficient immediate
adequate predetermining both will and tongue to the act with all its
circumstances. Call it by what name you please, Inspiration, Vision,
Illumination, Impulse, etc. it can speak nothing more of Gods Agent efficient
Interest than this predetermination does. 4. If it did do more, yet it would
overthrow all certainty of our faith: Because if God can efficiently cause, and
that* as the total principal cause by predetermination, all the lies that ever
were told in the world; we can never be sure that the other mode of his
operation so far differs from this, as that he cannot be the chief cause of a
lie in this way as well as of all lies by predetermination. I have driven many
to say their utmost, and could never yet hear any such difference assigned, as
could prove any Inspiration whatsoever, to have more of Divine Causality in it,
than physical predetermination does signify and import: nor how this principle
leaves us any certainty that the tongues of all the Prophets and Apostles were
not predetermined to speak falsely, (ab antecedente; and so their pens.)

XLVIII. To say that God is not able to make a Creature with power to determine
any one Volition of its own, even as modified, comparate or circumstantiate,
without his efficient physical predetermination aforesaid, says more against
Gods Omnipotency (though on pretense of a contradiction) than I dare say or
think.

XLIX. Yet after all this I grant that if all proper free will and contingency
be denied, and every act in the world (as comparate and circumstantiate) made
as necessary by predetermination as the motions in a Clock, yet a certain
Religion is consistent with it, and the Atheist that hence would nullify* all
Religion absolutely, would raise false inferences from this principle. Much
more persuaded am I, that many that hold it are very worthy holy persons, much
better than I am or can hope here to be, as not discerning the inconsistency of
their opinions (as I said.)

L. The Religion^consistent with it I conceive must be such as this:

1. There is a God who moves all things by physical necessitation, even man's
Volitions as well as any natural actions.

2. This God does all that he does himself by necessity, viz. of perfection,
not of co-action: And there is no contingency in rerum natura.

3. This God has made his Creatures of various ranks and degrees of
excellency: And man a more knowing Creature than the Bruits.

4. Among men he makes some wise, some foolish, some good and Godly, and some
vicious and ungodly; And as he makes the difference of men and beasts, of a
Horse and a Toad, of the Sick and the sound, of Prince and people, rich and
poor, so does he of godly and ungodly, chaste and unchaste, etc.

5. Yet man being Intellectual, God will move him by means and second causes;
and therefore has made him Laws, obliging him de jure, and commanding his
utmost diligence to keep them; promising and threatening Life and death
hereafter for the keeping or the breaking of them: and appointing Ministers and
Magistrates to persuade and drive him on.

6. And it is likely though not certain that God will do according to these
Laws, in some considerable degree.

7. Man by his Nature, and by Scripture (which may be true) is bound to Love
and serve his God above all other, as the Cause of all the being and good that
is in the world, (whatever he do by us,) and of all our good.

8. There is another life of Reward for the good* and punishment for the bad,
which must be our hope and fear.

9. Gods Laws are called moral means, but Cause only as physical engines or
tacklings* to move man's will by the said necessitation.

10. Gods hatred of sin, is no true hatred or nolition (where sin is:) but only
his prohibiting it to us, and his punishing men for it.

11. If God did send Christ and the Apostles, and Miracles, etc. it was only to
be tacklings or parts, in this engine of physical operations.

12. God causes and Loves sin as much as obedience; but he makes it not so
Good and Lovely to us, it being our disease and misery.

13. As God no otherwise hates sin than sickness, and sinners than the sick,
and looks on good and bad but as modal physical differences caused by
himself; so must we do also: and hate that most that hurts us most.

14. To mourn for sin, and confess it, and strive against it, or talk of
Christ's suffering or satisfying for it, any otherwise than as a Voluntary
disease and misery of man, or to avoid any sin any otherwise than as a misery
to our selves or others, is but the error of superstitious men.

15. Men should do all that ever they can to cure their sins, and live holily,
so far as increases not their misery, and no further; and this only as a
physical Voluntary perfection, and as the avoiding of a natural misery to
themselves and others.

16. God will punish man, not out of any hatred of sin (which he wills and
causes) but out of a differencing will, as he makes Toads and Serpents, and
causes Cattle and Fowl to be killed by us, and Horses labored in pain:
Therefore we have no reason to fear any other misery in Hell, than Gods
arbitrary disposal brings on the more wretched sort of his Creatures, without
any sinful commerit or provocation; and perhaps little more than we voluntarily
here choose and bring upon our selves, or of the same kind, our sin it self
being our punishment though it pleases us, (As scratching is to him that has
the itch.)

17. Therefore the end of a man's life is the public good and his natural
felicity; besides and above which to make God our End, as he is holy and to be
pleased by Holiness, is an error; for all that comes to pass whether sin or
holiness, do equally please and fulfill his will, as they are equally caused by
him, according to their several natures.

I Have delineated this hypothesis with its consectaries as truly as I can. If
any expect that I should have given you their own words for all that I have
said. 1. Remember that I charge not all these words on them; but mention their
judgment with the consequents. 2. That I charge not these consequents to be
owned by the men, but upon their doctrine. And let any man discharge or
justify them that can. 3. But I desire no more to prove that I wrong them not,
than that the Reader be acquainted with their own writings, and not to impose
too many on him, particularly, with Bradwardine, Bannes, Holkot and Alvarez,
and with Piscator, Maccovius, Dr. Twisse, and Rutherford de provid. And I
desire him first but to read the words which I have before cited and confuted
of theirs in this Treatise; and the words of Alvarez and Twisse which I have
cited and answered in my Disput. contr. Praedeterm. in Methodo Theolog.

And I must profess that the Religion here described in the end, is all that I
can prove consistent with their opinion truly understood in it self and its
consectaries; and that if I held their doctrine, I think I could have no other
faith: Which I have annexed lest the Hobbists should think that their
principle, were it proved, would justify all Immorality and Irreligion. For
this much they might be obliged to notwithstanding it.

But he that can see so great eyidence for the Dominican predetermination,
above the other three ways, and what I have here farther added, as for the
sake of it, to admit so great a change of his Religion, or so great a degree of
the forsaking of true Religion, he sees not with my eyes, and I hope I shall
never see with his, though I am not a stranger to the pretenses for their way,
that make it seem plausible to them that do respicere ad pauca.

And if any think that I deal too harshly in clogging their opinion with such
odious consequents, Let them prove them inconsequent, and I will recant it: But
if they cannot, civility shall not make me hide and favor so great Impiety;
and as little in Doctrine as in manners, (as Adultery, perjury, blasphemy;
etc.) because he that thinks he does well, will not Repent, and an erring
mind will justify sin, and fight against God and his truth in his own name;
and it is more to Teach men to break a com-mand, than to do it, and confess the
sin. They think it is for God that they err; And I think it is for God that I
detect it. And who it is that erreth indeed, the Light must discover, and the
studious impartial prepared Children of the Light must discern; and the Father
of Lights must finally judge.

Note that in the first part I speak as in the name of the Predeterminants;
till I come to the Questions, and thence-forward I speak as in my own name,
which the Reader may easily perceive.

. VII. Of Jansenius his way of reconciling Grace and Free Will.
. 1. BUt after all these comes Jansenius, and justly blaming Philosophy as the
great occasion of our heresies and errors, which misled the Schoolmen,
Jesuits and others, he goes to Augustine alone (as Lombard thought he had
well done before him;) and disgraceth his cause by saying that Augustine first
taught it to the Church, (as if Grace had been unknown by the former ages:) And
because many will not be at the labor to know his mind by reading so big a
volume, I shall briefly select what concerns the matter in hand, and
animadvert upon it.

1. His first Tome describes the Heresy of Pelagius, wherein he proves that
Pelagius held all this that follows concerning grace:

1. The Remission of sins, containing 1. Conversion to God, 2. The abstersion
of the blot and filth, 3. Reconciliation, or remission of Gods offense, 4. And
of the eternal punishment. Jansenius Aug. To. 1. l. 5. c. 22. p. 126, 127.

2. That Pelagius owned the Infusion of habitual grace. And that God in Baptism
did blot out all sins, purge, cleanse and expiate them, save and renew the
soul, restore nature, deliver from the body of this death, and from the
contracted custom of sinning: He held that Grace does Regenerate, Illuminate,
cause Faith, Justify, (even Infants,) Sanctify, make us new Creatures,
incorporate us into Christ as his members, give us the anointing of the Holy
Ghost, not only restoring us to the state that we were in in Adam, but to a
better, and to be adopted sons of God, and saved. cap. 24. And 25. as to the
Relative effects, that Grace Reconcileth man to God, makes him an adopted Son
of God, and the Temple of the Holy Ghost, an Heir of God, and coheir with
Christ: So that they acknowledge not only Habitual Infused Grace, but more;
even in Baptism: As also the Assisting motions of the spirit to good acts,
making them possible.

Also that after Pope Zozymus had condemned the Pelagians, they went further,
and that their design was but to lay men's salvation or damnation on free will.
lib. 6. c. 7. etc.

And when he comes to characterize Pelagius, he does it as he does elsewhere
the Protestants, and as Malignants do Religious persons, by presumptions: viz.
that he was indeed as Augustine says, Temperate and of a good life but
singular and very proud, (which he proves by his opinion, and because he was
against Swearing, and said, that Gods servants mouths should vent no bitter
thing, but only that which is sweet; and that Christians must be so patient as
readily to let go what is taken from them, and that gallantry and gay clothing
is contrary to God, and that enemies must be loved as friends, and yet not
believed, and that Riches must be forsaken, etc.) as holding nothing mean and
moderate: that he affected novelty (and yet his ^rrours were old, coming from
Origin, ^uffinus, Palladius, Evagrius, Jovin^an and the Philosophers) that he
affected fame, admiration, hypocrisy, pretending to more holiness than others,
under the garb of poverty, etc. over-^alued Reason, Logic, Syllogismes,
Philosophers, etc. All which I mention, not to abate any man's dislike of any
one error of Pelagius, but to show that it is so usual for dissenters to make
one another seem odious, and to feign or aggravate faults, and to vilify or
deny Gods grace in others, that he that would not be tempted into malice,
uncharitableness and slander, must take heed what he believes, even of men
accounted most abominable heretics. Doubtless Pelagius his denying original
sin, and his laying too much on man's will, and too little on grace, are things
to be detested.

II. Jansenius asserteth that the Angels and Adam had such Free Will as could
obey or disobey, and so could determine it self to good, and persevere therein,
without any more grace than they had when they did it not: And that by this
Free Will some Angels stood and some fell, and Adam fell when he might by it
have stood, and thereby fell from a nobler sort of Free Will, which consists
in a due subservience to God, and fell to the Love of Himself (not primarily of
external things) instead of God, and to selfdependency and dominion. De Great.
primi hom. c. 6. p. 40, 41, 42. etc. 7. [Nos hic asserimus tanquam sine
dubitatione verissimum juxta doctrinam sancti Augustini and ecclesiae, omnia
hujusmodi opera adeoque and ipsam fidem and dilectionem Dei, ab eo potuisse per
arbitrii libertatem fieri sic ut ea non donaret ei gratia Dei.] vid. c. 7, 8,
etc. The reason of this was sanitas Voluntatis Adami. c. 9.

III. Yet Grace was necessary to man and Angels both to perseverance and to
every good act. c. 10, 11. And c. 12, 13, etc. this Grace necessary to all was
not Habitual Grace, (for that they had;) nor general concurse, which none
denied: but it was Actual Adjuvant Roborating help. But the Grace given to
Angels and Adam was Adjutorium sine quo non, giving the will power to determine
it self, but not Adjutorium quo which ever determines it. One gives the
Power, and the other the Act. (The same that is meant by the common distinction
of Grace sufficient and effectual by the Dominicans.) Yet this Adjutorium sine
quo non did with free will procure the Act in the standing Angels, and Adam
while he stood: But that made it not Adjutorium quo because it is not so called
(efficax) only ab eventu: but because it so helps that illo praesente
continuo fiat id propter quod datur; illo absente nunquam fiat. p. 63. c. 14,
15. One is like Light and the visive faculty ad videndum; the other ut ipsa
visio (such as all formal causes are, and Gods simultaneous efficiency.) The
difference is (c. 15.) that Adjutorium sine quo non does but perfect the power,
and the chief honor belongs to the will that uses it and could choose: But
contrarily the adjutorium quo is the principal cause of the Act, and leaves
not the event to the will, but uses it effectually to the act intended.
Therefore merit and perseverance in Innocence were no special gifts of God.

IV. That without or before faith no good work is done, but lies and sins: l.
3, and 4. c. 1. p. 223. no nor without true Godliness, p. 261. and passim. To
think that Infidels and ungodly have any true virtue, is dotage. c. 17.

V. The first sin had no necessity, being mere sin, and no punishment, and so
easily avoidable and wholly voluntary: Other sins are also punishments, and so
partly involuntary and unavoidable and necessary: Though a sinner may forbear
one sin by another. cap. 22.

VI. A rational Creature could not be made of God sinless without true Love to
God, or at least a faculty most sufficient to love him and cleave to him. De
statu not. pur. l. 1. c. 17. p. 323, 324. nor can God withdraw that grace of
Love from the innocent. c. 13.

VII. The grace of Adam, and of Christ, Adjutorium sine quo non, and Quo, do
thus differ, that the first serves the will, and is determined by it: The
second (Adjutorium medicinale) gives* the ipsum velle to the unwilling, which
else it could not have. The Great. Chr. Sal. Li. 2. c. 4. and is more than Lex,
scientia, revelatio, remissio peccatorum, gratia sufficiens, habitualis, and
per congruitatem efficax. c. 5. Also 1. The Adjutorium sine quo non gives not
Merit to the will, but it meriteth it self: But the Adjutorium Quo gives us
the ipsum opus and meritum. 2. The former is meritum humanum; the second
meritum divinum, as given of God. 3. To the first Life would be merces meriti:
To the second it is a free gift; Reward and Gift are repugnant. Angels merited
life. 4. By the first and free will Angels persevered: but we cannot but by the
second. 5. The first (fine quo non) was given them that were to be differenced
by free will: The second to them that are to be differenced by grace. c. 6, 7,
8. One is adjutorium possibilitatis, the other actionis. c. 9.

VIII. That since the fall no good can be in or of man, but by Gods gift, and
is not laudable in any but God. c. 23. Man has no part of the praise. This
grace is, ever effectual, determining, rapeth the will so that it is scarce
perceived to act: It uses the will as an instrument, which way God will: It is
insuperable, irresistible, not merely potential: It is never uneffectual, but
in all that have it infallibly effects. c. 24, 25.

IX. There is no grace of Christ but this (quo): None now fine quo non, or ad
posse. c. 27. That ceased with innocence.

X. This grace is ever effectual, but not ad omnia: It gives some small degree
to some, and more to others: And the weakest have not enough to produce faith,
prayer, hope, obedience, but some Velleities and Complacencies only. c. 27. p.
86.

XI. He distinguishes sufficient Grace into that Prater quod nil aliud ex
part Dei per modum Principii necessarium est ut homo Velit ^^t operetur: And
that Quod satis est ut homo dicatur posse operari, quamvis ali^^ adhu^
necessarium est ut de facto operetur. The later he denies not: As to the
former he says, Nullum jam dari hominibus lapsis gratia sufficiens, quin sit
simul efficax. lib. 3. c. 1. p. 102, 103. This Gratia sufficiens is but the
sine quo non, the grace of innocence and not medicinal, and that which Pelagius
and the Massilienses held against Augustine, yea, ad gratiam naturae pertinet,
and Lapsorum reparationi inutilis and pernictosa. cap. 2. p. 104. For it
supposes Nature to be sound. Quid homini misero perniciosius, quam illa gratia
abundare, qua nemo unquam, fatentibus scholasticis, nisi majorem damnationem
assecutus est? Hoc ipso quippe ^^^squisque damnabilior est, quo magis
sufficienti gratia abundavit, Nemo ^^^^ unquam sufficienti gratia usus est, aut
utitur, aut uietur in aternum; qui mitius puniretur si tali auxilio caruisset;
quo Deus neminem vel damnandorum vel salvandorum usurum esse praescivit.

He concludes c. 4. Nullam Christi gratiam effectu operi^ ad quem efficiendum
voluntati datur, ulla voluntatis pervicacia frustrans.

XII. He makes this to be the great doctrine of Augustine, that All Gods Law,
both old and new, is given to convince men that they cannot keep it, and all
written precepts are to show men their sin, which makes them the worse,
because of the Laws restraint and commands: And that Law and Grace thus differ,
that Christ's Grace is only Gods making us will and do; and the Law shows that
we cannot, and so drives us from is to Grace; c. 4. That to Jews and
Christians that have written Laws, there is no sufficient or adjuvant grace,
but what makes them do the act. c. 5. No potential grace (that gives the
power) is sufficient to the act, unless it give the act. c. 6. Hence is the
necessity of sinning, p. 126. Unbelievers want Remote as well as Proximate
sufficient help and all its principles. c. 11. And the Commands are to them
impossible, yet make them unexcusable, c. 18, 19.

XIII. That impotency excuses a man, when he strongly would do the act and
cannot; but not that by which he would not do it, though he cannot will it
without grace. p. 145, 146.

XIV. Christ's dying for All, is meant only for all the Church, or all sorts:
yet as he gives to others the grace of faith and Love without perseverance and
salvation, so far he dyed for them* and prayed for them. c. 20. p. 163, 164.

XV. The essence of the grace of Christ is a Heavenly Suavity or Delectation,
given before our free act, by which the will is bowed to act what God will. It
is a vital and indeliberate act of the soul, even of Love and Desire before
Consent, and that Delight which is our Rest and Joy. li. 4. c. 1. and 11.
Plainly it is a necessitated complacency, which is the first act of Love; when
God and Righteousness, not for our selves, but for themselves and as such, are
Pleasing to the soul.

XVI. Christ's grace is necessary only to Love God sincerely in every act of
obedience, and only this Love and Suavity is Christ's grace, whatever other
graces or acts as to the name it is found in. li. 5. c. 1. For nothing is good
that is done only by Fear, and not in Love of Justice. The Justice Loved is not
any habit or act of the soul, but God the Eternal Justice. c. 2. and the
Justice of his Precepts. Virtue is nothing but the Love of God. c. 3. The four
Cardinal Virtues are fourfold Love of God: And so all others. c. 4, 5.

XVII. By the Love of God is not meant only that degree by which we Love him
above all, but true sincere Love of God for himself, and not ullius creaturae
intuitu: which is either Imperfect, not Loving him so well as the creature,
(but only to an uneffectual Velleity) which yet how remiss and small soever, is
the true and chaste fruit of the Love of God, even amoris amicitiae: or more
perfect, which justifies. The first is quaedam dilectio justitiae quasi
simplex ejus complacentia, quae non eo usque increverit, ut adversantia isti
bonae voluntati valeat superare. This goes usually first, and sinners find a
good will to goodness, and like it, and many years perhaps are wishing and
purposing to leave their sins for it, and turn to God, till at last Love
prevails. And this though imperfect, is true sincere Love, not from a perfect
habit, but from the excitation of the Holy Ghost: It has the same object as
perfect Love, that is, Justice for Justice, or God for God, not loved on
consideration of any other reward: which proves it sincere Love. Such wish to
live chastely, temperately, justly, but cannot come to it. Out of this
imperfect love, springs faith; faith may be habitually many years before
Justification: Justification is the grace of perfect Love to God above all:
Hope and Perfect Love also come from this initial Love. c. 7, 8, 9.

XVIII. As Hope, so Reward and respect to it may stand with this grace of Love:
For the Reward is not desired ex amore concupiscentia for our selves only; cum
enim charitatis proprium sit and unica voluptas diligere Deum, non quia hoc
sibi suave vel utile vel gloriosum est, vel alia quacunque consideratione
redundat in se, sed quia ita est ordo creatur^ sub creatore, qui propter
seipsum super omnia (ex superexcellenti bonitate) diligendus est -- ita unicum
praemium est, veritatem and bonitatem Dei facie ad faciem contemplando
ardentius amare and lauaare Deum; non quia utile est and beatificum diligenti,
sed quid ae^^rnae veritati* congruum, dilecto debitum, etc. Amoris hic
inchoati, Amor futurus consummatus unica merces. Praemium Dei ipse Deus est.
Quisquis delabitur ab illa charitatis puritate, ut amore concupiscentiae
incipiat velle and concupiscere sibi Deum, totum dilectionis ordinem quem
natura docet, and Lex aeterna praecipit, diligendi perversitate perturbat. Nam
and Deum ad se refert, and seipso fruitur, quorum utrumque aeterna and
indispensabili lege proscriptum est. c. 10.

XIX. The fear of punishment (and attrition) is good, being f^g^ mali; an
Antecedent of wisdom: It is from a certain general grace, but not that properly
called the grace of Christ: The Spirit of the Old Testament even of fear, is
Gods Spirit: not that which Christ dyed to give men, which is contrary
(delectation;) but another much inferior grace, which after the firm belief of
Gods judgment and eternal punishment, fortassis Gratiam peculiaris cujusdam
providentiae and operationis non excedit. They that have but the Righteousness
of fear by knowing the Law, have not Gods righteousness but their own: Indeed
they have faith and that radicated, but not Christ's proper grace, but that
which may come ex proprii arbitrii viribus, excited by providence, or, if you
will, inspired fear: no sin can be avoided by it, but by other sin. c. 22, 23,
etc. It is but of self-love. It is Legal righteousness and our own. c. 31, 32.

XX. Liberty of will is either mere Voluntariness, whose contrary necessity is
involuntarii coactio; or that free state which is the Love of God, consistent
with simple necessity. lib. 7.

XXI. Gratia Christi est Praedeterminatio voluntatis, sed non Dominicanorum
praedeterminatio. 1. Praedeterminatio physica est motio nescio quae virtuosa,
habens esse incompletum, ut colores in a^re, impetus in impulso: Gratia Christi
est verissimus motus voluntatis, ineffabilis, viz. delectatio, etc. 2. Praed.
physica non est eis actus Vitalis animi, sed aliquid cui voluntas tantum
passive subjacet: Gratia contra, etc. 3. Praedet. physica in quibuscunque
circumstantiis voluntas collocetur, omnem superat resistentiam and semper facit
effectum: contra delectatia victrix, si alter ard^ntior est, in solis
inefficacibus desideriis haerebit animus. 4. Praed. physica est instar
concursus cujusdam generalis Dei in ordine supernaturali: Adjutorium Christi
non ita. 5. Praed. physica necessaria statuitur omnibus agentibus ex vi causae
secundae, etc. Christi adjutorium laesa tantum voluntati propter vulnus
necessarium est. 6. Praed. physica propter naturalem indifferentiam voluntatis
exigitur: Gratia non ita -- 7. Praed. physica statui innocentiae necessaria
dicitur: Gratia Christi non ita, ergo hi (Dominicani) magis Aristotelici quam
Augustiniani sunt. Gratia tamen est Praed. physica: And grace and free will are
reconcilable as Predetermination and free will are. l. 8. c. 2, 3, 4. Summa
est, quod Gratia Amantem and Volentem facit: and non tantum posse velle dat. In
conclusion he belyeth Calvin, 1. As denying in man boni and mali electionem,
and so in many ^ther points. cap. 21.

XXII. His doctrine of Predestination as congruous to this I pass by, ^nly
adding that he denies Angels to be elected of grace or to perseve^ance, which
was but foreseen, and they were made to differ, not by ^race, but by merits:
Man is elected to merits and glory; but to glory before the foresight of
merits. The Reprobation of Angels was after the ^urpose of giving them
sufficient grace, and the foresight of sin* Permis^^on of sin was no effect of
it: But the Reprobation of men was by Gods positive absolute will, of men in
original sin, and the effect of it excaecation and obduration; but not the
permission of the first sin. lib. 10.

This is the Epitome of Jansenius as far as concerns our present business.

The Animadversions.
. 2. I. IT seems Augustine and Pelagius were both pious men, that differed in
the methodizing and wording those fundamental conceptions in which they agreed;
by which Pelagius ran into errors. And I doubt, he was not so innocent as
Jansenius intimates, when he makes Augustine to be the first true Teacher of
grace, and Pelagius his Opinion to have been so ancient. And if it were not too
bold to say so against one that read over all Augustine ten times, and all his
writings against the Pelagians thirty times, I would say that I think that
Austin owned more universal grace and free will, than Jansenius supposes him
to have owned. Of Prosper and Fulgentiu^ it cannot modestly be denied; who I
think were of Augustines mind.

II. He confesses that self-determining free will and sufficient Grace, were
the condition of the Angels and innocent man; and so that it is not alien to
Gods government, or prerogatives, for subjects to be so Ruled and Judged.

III. He seems to me to ascribe far too much to innocent man and Angels in
using sufficient grace, when he makes their wills the chief laudable cause of
the effect: I rather think that no Angel ever did any good, the chief praise of
which was not due to God as the principal first cause. God gives them all the
power, liberty, help, means, motives, by which they do it; Besides that they
did nothing but what he fore-decreed and willed they should (eventually) do:
Therefore there is no good but of him as the first cause, though not as the
sole cause.

IV. Whether the best actions of Infidels or ungodly men be properly to be
called good, is but a Logomachy: Call them but a Less evil, or the abatement of
evil, and actions that tend as Means to their repentance, and salvation, and I
shall not disagree with you in this.

V. His concession that the first sin was not necessitated is of great moment:
But it is a great mistake, that following sins are necessary, because they are
punishments. It is not the existence of the sin that is a punishment, but the
hurtfulness of it supposing the existence. If drunkenness, or gluttony be
themselves noxious and penal, that is but a consequent of their existence,
which was not necessitated by God as punishing them that caused them.

VI. The sixth I think sound, and the Schools [pure nature], as if Adams Love
(in the principle) was not his necessary Sanity, is unsound.

VII. Here again, 1. I think he gives too much to free will in innocence, and
too little to God. For Gods Help did not then serve man's will so much as Gods;
and God fulfilled all his will while Angels used their power and liberty, and
they did no good but what God willed and caused as he saw best. And while man
and Angels used their liberty, they fulfilled Gods will in all their duty, as
much as if they had been necessitated by natural predetermination.

2. And it is not true that their sufficient grace gave not Merit to the will:
For it follows not, that because they could have omitted a duty, therefore in
doing it they did any thing of which God was not the prime cause: He that gave
them all their power, disposition* objects, helps and motives, did give them
that which he calls Merit.

3. It is his grand error that Gift and Reward are repugnant, and that Life
would not have been to Adam, and was not to the Angels of free gift, though of
Reward. For it is impossible that any creature can merit of God as a Proprietor
in point of Commutative Justice; seeing God is the absolute Owner of us and all
things, and no creature can give him any thing but what is his own: Therefore
there is a natural impossibility that quoad valorem rei, aut ipsum beneficium a
creature can have any thing but of free gift: But God who is an Owner and
Benefactor is also a Rector, and so the cause of Moral Order as well as of real
Benefits; And so that which as a Benefit is a mere gift, yet quoad ordinem
conferendi is given by God per modum praemii to those that will Accept the Gift
according to its nature, and denied to those that will despise it and refuse
it. As a Father will give a purse of Gold to the Child that will thank him, and
humbly take it; and not to the Child that will spit in his face.

J^nsenius does so weakly open the nature of Merit and Reward, as that alone
would show that he was not meet for his great undertaking: Though he
excellently show that God is our Reward himself, yet the Rat^^nes praemii he
^aith little to, that can satisfy the judicious. Of which more anon.

4. Angels were differenced inter se by Gods will and their own: And we
confess, that so far as sin made the difference, it was by their own will and
not by Gods: But was he sure that no such difference is made since the fall
among men? He will confess, that when Eve sinned before Adam, it was she that
made the difference: And how can he prove, that it was not Cain who by sin
first differenced himself from Abel? or the Prodigal, Luke 15. that by
forsaking his Father, first differenced himself from his Brother? According to
his own principles who holds falling away from Grace and Justification, does
not he that falls away, difference himself from him that stands? He can
never prove, that now two men may not have equal help from God to go to Church,
or read a good Book, and one do it, and the other go to the Tavern; or read a
Play-book.

VIII. 1. God does not so use man as his Instrument in good, but that he gives
the Instrument its proper aptitude and action as to the effect: And that which
it is and does may be spoken of it: To say a thing is good, is to praise it* and
good must be called good; And to say that you were the Actor of Good and that
Voluntarily, is to praise you. Therefore the Actor of good ex natura rei
deserves praise, seeing Truth must be spoken of all things.

2. God himself does so often praise his servants, and promise to honor them
that honor him, that to say no praise is due to them is to charge God with
error.

3. To deny all Reward, and Merit as it signifies Rewardableness, or Moral
^ptitude for Reward, is to deny the greatest part of the Scripture; to deny God
to be our Rector, and so to be our God, to deny the whole frame of his
Sapiential Government, and his glory therein, and so to deny his Laws,
Judgment and Execution, Sin* Duty, Heaven and Hell.

Th^^ sum of all is this, ^. No man or Angel can merit of God in Commutative
Justice as Proprietor* But only as Rector. All is (as is before said) of free
gift from God as ^roprietor and Benefactor*

2. The same God who is Omnipotent, is also sapientissimus and optimus: And he
that glorifieth his Power eminently as the Author of Nature, as Creator,
Conservator, and Motor, does also glorify his Wisdom in rerum Ordine: And he
orders Moral Agents eminently per sapient^am ^t Rector per media moralia,
viz. Doctrinam, Leges, Judicia: And he glorifieth his Goodness and Love partly
Antecedently (to man's Actions) and as a free Benefactor; partly consequently,
according to the order of his Laws. So that as his Attributes are inseparable,
so are (herein) the operations of them. And the same Benefit is ut quid
productum the effect of Gods Omnipotency and Dominion; and ut Bonum and
Beneficium the effect of the Benefactors Love; and yet quoad ordinem conferendi
it is Pr^mium a Rectore adjudicatum. And between all these there is no
repugnancy.

3. We grant that God Rewards no man now, according to the Law of Innocence,
(for that condemns every sinner.)

4. Nor according to, or for the works of the Mosaical Jewish Law.

5. Nor for any sincere obedience to the Law of Nature, or any other, without
Redemption by Christ.

6. We are agreed that the Reward is now doubly and eminently a free gift, and
the reward of Christ's merits. It is not only free as all Benefits from God to
man are, as to commutation: but also after forfeiture freely given to sinners;
and it is procured by the merits of Christ, who was freely given to be the
Savior of the world; and it is given us by Christ as free gifts are, upon
condition of Acceptance; and an Accepting Will is Gods free gift; and they that
have it not, want it because they refused Preparatory grace, which they were
able to have better used o^ submitted to.

So that the Reward is only such as a free gift, which quoad ordinem
conferendi, and rations adjudicandi is given by God as a Father; who at once
uses Power, Love and paternal Justice, according to the tenor of his own Law
of Grace, which is founded in Christ's perfect merits, and is Christ's own Law.

VIII. and IX. 1. That quoad eventum the good Angels grace was effectual, and
Adjutorium quo as well as sine quo non, he grants* (And Adams till he fell.)
Let us find out the difference then. To say that yet They could have sinned, is
a doubtful speech: If [could] signify P^t^^^iam naturalem, it is no^ for want
of Natural Power that Christ himself sinned not; but because perfection caused
the right use of that Power. To be able to sin, or not to believe, or not to
love God, if it signify any more than the Natural power which men abuse, is an
improper speech* for sin is from moral impotency, (or indetermination,) and not
an va^t of (other) power. But a Logical Possibility of any event but what ^ame
to pass, Gods very foreknowledge will exclude, (and so his Decree.) And if the
question be Whether Adam could not have stood when he fell, it is agreed that
he could.

It seems then that our Controversy lies plainly* ^^ these two things, 1.
Whether any man now (Holy or unholy) have any help from. God by Christ by which
he is truly able to do any one good action more ^^^^ other than he does, or to
forbear any more evil? 2. Whether all Divine causation or operation ^e such, as
of it self alone will infer the ^^^tainty of man's Volition as the Effect? We
g^ant that Divine prescie^^^ does infer it, e^ ^^oessitate infallibilit^^^^.
Divine Volitions some think are ever efficient of all that is willed, and that
God has no other operation but Volition (as Bradwardine and others.) Others
deny this, (...) that God has Power operative as much distinct from Volition
a^ ^^tellection is, and also that God wills more than he operateth or totally
causes. And of this opinion must Jansenius needs be, because he held that the
free will of Adam before his fall, and of the good Angels caused more obedience
than God caused as to the totality of causation: And yet ^ethinks he should be
loath to say that it was more than God willed or decreed. However the former is
but a wordy strife: For if God operate only Volendo, yet his will as Immanent
and a mere will (as man's,) must be distinguished from his will as transient and
efficient by operation. So then the thing in question is, Whether Gods power or
will so far only as it is operative be so total a cause, as that hac posita ex
vi causandi necessario sequitur effectum (viz. fidem, charitatem humanam)
secuturum? And we grant that as ex perfectione Intellectus, it follows, Deus
praesc^t hoc futurum, ergo futurum est: so ex perfectione Voluntatis, and summo
Imperio, and foelicitate Divina it follows, Deus vult hoc futurum esse; ergo
futurum est: and that ex necessitate existentiae, no doubt it is a good
consequence, Deus hoc fecit, ergo factum est: But Whether from his mere
adjutorium, or prime efficiency, limited by his own will, it be a good
consequence, [God gives as much help as is of necessity to man's volition;
ergo, man will consent or will?] is the doubt. He grants that in Innocence it
would not have followed, but he thinks that now it will.

We grant that God gives not only the posse velle, but the ipsum velle to
those that have it: His giving it being but a causing their faculties to Act:
And we grant that wherever God absolutely wills that his Help shall be
successful, it is so: And also that whereas all the effect comes from our
natural Power, and Gods grace conjunct, God is the cause of both; And is ever
the total cause quoad effectum, that is, totius effecti. And we grant that Gods
causing Impress on the will is such on some, (and perhaps on all in the act of
special sanctification) as ex vi causae will infer the effect, and is
unresistible, and does not only determine the will, but so determines it as
overcomes all moral power or disposition to the contrary.

But yet that there is a Grace or adjutorium of Christ, which gives a power
either not necessitating the act, or when the act follows not, such as he
calls sine quo non, I think for these reasons:

1. Because else no man can do any more good or less evil, than he does: which
I believe not.

2. Because else All men that perish are damned only for original sin, and its
consequents which they had never power to avoid: which is quite contrary to the
tenor of the Scripture.

3. And then God would judge them only by the Law of Innocence: whereas he will
judge them by Christ and by his Remedying Law, for rejecting the remedying
grace.

4. And then the Conscience of the damned, would have nothing to torment them
with, or accuse them for, but original sin, and its unavoidable consequents:
And it would give them this excuse and ease, God never made it Possible for me
to do otherwise.

5. Because it teaches men great ingratitude to say, I never had any help of
Christ.

6. And so it teaches them impenitently to extenuate their sin, if they do but
find themselves wicked, and to say, I never sinned against any Grace of Christ.

7. And it feigneth God to give men all that reprival, and mercy which the
reprobate have, from some other Cause and not by Christ; And so to make a kind
of grace common in the World which the Scripture knows not, nor is according
to the Covenant of Innocence or of Grace.

8. Because God is Immutable, and too gross mutations are not without proof to
be imputed to his Laws and Government: Therefore it seems to me an injurious
fiction to say as Jansenius, that God had such Laws as supposed man's
self-determining will, and governed so as to use sufficient Grace or adjutorium
sine quo non, to man and Angels, at the first, and tha^ now he has no such at
all, but only a moving efficiency. I should sooner yield to the Dominicans and
Hobbes that no other than necessitated Volitions are possible or ever were,
than to hold as he, that there were other before the fall, and none ever since.
For as to his great argument (vitiated nature) I answer it, 1. Man is man
still; And therefore God rules him as man; And that in via. And if then man
and Angels were supposed to have a self-determining free will, that could do
this or not do it, we have reason to think it is so still. Why is not grace
merely sufficient as consistent with Lapsed as Innocent nature? (supposing that
it is not the same help that is now sufficient to salvation as then.) 2.
Consider the great difference between perfect Innocence, and some one commanded
act: And 3. Consider that the helps afforded by grace are very great, and that
Habitual Grace does in some measure heal lapsed nature, or else what is it? He
that is Habitually Prompt to Love and duty, has some cure, and some ability:
For to be prompt is more than to be able. And therefore it is an incredible
thing, and a reproach of habitual grace, that Adam was more able to live and
persevere without any sinful thought, word, or deed, than a Holy soul is to
think one good thought, or speak one good word, or restrain one blasphemy or
other sin. Therefore it is as credible that Christ's repairing habitual Grace
enableth godly men (and his commone^ grace common men) to think or do somewhat
better than they do, as that Angels and Adam had no other grace, and could
without other, live without any sin.

Therefore I take Jansenius to do well in opening Original pravity, and the
power of Gods grace, and his special intent to save his chosen. But I think he
so earnestly studied for that side alone, that he injuriously overlooketh the
whole frame of sapiential Government, and the common grace which is presupposed
to the special, and greatly wrongeth Christ and his grace, by denying him to
give to men in common, that which our experience assures us they possess.

Ad X. When he makes uneffectual Velleities to be Christ's unresistible grace,
either he thinks that men are saved with such only, or not; (for he speaks
not his mind plainly in that that I can find:) If yea, then he abaseth the
grace of Christ, to think that many are saved by it, that love a Whore or any
sin much better than God and Grace and Glory. If not (as I think he held) then
he holds that most that have the effectual grace of Christ are damned, and
had no possibility (properly) of escape. And why does he make so harsh a thing
of men's asserting a sufficiency of some uneffectual grace, and say to what
purpose is it; and yet assert that to most men the grace of Christ had not so
much as any sufficiency to save them, nor put them into any true possibility of
life?

Ad XI. I. It seems to me a contradiction to say (as in the second branch of
his distinction) that Homo potest Velle, and yet that aliud adhuc adjutorium
necessarium est ut de facto velit. For necessarium est sine quo res esse non
potest: Therefore the non potest is present wherever the necessarium is
wanting. But if they talk only of a passive or obediential power, and say, [Man
can believe because God can make him believe,] and so denominate man Able to do
that, which they mean God is able to make him do, this is but to play with
words.

II. His saying that now there is no sufficient grace, is before disproved, and
by him not proved. That it is the same with that of the state of Innocence, is
vainly said: It is the same in general, as man is the same; and Intellect and
will the same: But to be able to live without sin, and to be able to forbear
one sin or to hear a Sermon, or do one commanded act, are not the same. And to
hold none but this with Pelagius, is not all one as to hold this with a more
special grace.

And that it is pernicious to the lapsed is rashly said: For in the reprobate
it does them no harm but good; and in the elect it tends to higher grace. And
he mistaketh in saying that it supposes nature sound: For if it were proved
that nature without grace has no good inclination, yet why may not unsound
nature, receive grace ad posse? Is not that grace some cure of its unsoundness?
and tends to more?

III. But as to his saying that the more men have of it the more miserable they
are, and the more damnable, and that no man ever used sufficient grace or will
do, I answer, 1. The good man it seems forgot that all the same may be said
as truly of his special Grace, both in them that come short of faith and
Justification, and them that apostatize from it (as he holds many do.) 2. But
it is not true, that having it makes them damnable any more than having life,
health and riches; but it is the abusing it. 3. That never any used sufficient
grace, by his leave and the School-mens, is unproved: viz. that no man since
the fall ever did any good, or forbore any evil, obediently, by such grace as
left him able to have done otherwise in the instant before the act, or as
inferred not his volition as necessary exviillius causae. 4. And that all that
which comes short of the effect, is none of the Grace of Christ is unproved,
unless he mean only the adequate immediate effect. The Law does make Duty, and
so has its effect; And Gods motions make their various Impressions on the
soul, and so have their effect: But whether a Godly man's will could not by that
same motion have produced a better effect in his will than was produced by it,
he must better prove.

Ad XII. I. Whereas Paul opposes the Law of works, and the Grace of Christ, he
opposes, or too far distinguishes the Law of Christ and the Gra^e of Christ;
Just as Sir H. V. in his Meditations. He takes all spoken and written precepts
or Laws, to be the Law, which is distinguished from Grace, which is mere
Alteration of the soul. But this is confusion, and subverteth true Theology.
For the Law is the instrument of signifying Gods mind, and the Spirit works
with and by it on our minds: And both go together both before the fall and
under Christ: And both are Grace now even as body and soul are one man: The
Gospel is often called Grace in the New Testament: It Is true that a Law merely as
a Law may be distinguished from the Spirits operations on the soul: And so Paul
and Augustine often show that the Jewish Law as a Law could not make men
righteous without grace. And we deny not but the Law of Christ merely as a Law
is insufficient without the Spirit^ Grace. But to conclude hence that this is
the difference between the Old ^ovenant, and the New, and the Righteousness of
each of them (of men under them), that one is obedience to a written Law* and
the other is the effect of the Spirit, is not sound: For under each Covenant
there was both Law and Spirit, though with difference. Adam had Grace as
Jansenius confusseth: And the Fathers before the Flood had Law and Spirit. And
the Godly ^ews had Law and Spirit: And all Christians are subject to Christ
their King, and obey his Laws, though by the Grace of his Spirit: And it is not
two Righteousnesses that relate to Law and Spirit, but one as an effect of two
concauses; The doctrine of faith and Law and promises of Christa^e the Means
which the Spirit uses in operating our Faith, Love and Obedience. And it is
not two Covenants that give these two: but as soul and body make one man, so
the Word of Christ and his Spirit make up one total cause of our
sanctification. The Spirit causes us to believe that which the Word reveals,
and to love the good which it proposes, and to obey the Precepts of the Word:
Therefore the Gospel is Grace, and the Spirit is Grace, that is, a free gift of
God to miserable sinners for their recovery, and inward holiness is the effect
of both. And to feign that all obedience as it is performed to Christ's Law upon
its proper motives is therefore not of the Spirit, or is our own Righteousness
opposed to Christ's, because our own reason and free will is exercised in it, is
Phanaticism, and subverteth the Gospel, and the Prophetical and Kingly Office
of Christ.

II. God never gave a Law, no not to the Jews, only to convince them that they
could not keep it; but to be the Rule of their obedience; And the Just did keep
it in sincerity. But the Law of Moses as separated by the ignorant Jews from
the promise and grace of Christ could not be kept by any to Justification. To
say that Christ's Laws now have no higher end than to tell us that we cannot
keep them, is Antichristianity. Are we commanded to repent, believe, love God,
only to tell us that we cannot do it? It Is true, that without the Spirits help,
we cannot. But it is as true, that the Command is the Rule of our duty, and all
the Gospel and Covenant of Grace, is the means of exciting us to our duty, by
which the Spirit works in us faith, repentance, love and obedience. But,
says Jansenius, the Law of Christ is to humble men in the sense of their
disability, and drive them to seek to Christ for his grace. I answer* 1. Is not
humbling men, and driving them to Christ, a good effect? If so, then his Law is
the means of all that good. 2. Were the Gospel and all the Apostles Epistles
written only to drive men to Christ, and not to edify them and make them
perfect to salvation? Were not the Precepts of Love and Holiness means of
working Love and Holiness in men? Is not the Word the seed that begets men
to eternal life? and is not the receiving of this seed into good and honest
hearts, made by Christ the cause of holiness and salvation? Were not the
Disciples clean by the word that Christ spoke to them? and does he not say,
that his Word was spirit and life, as being the concause of the Spirits
vivification? He that never received more benefit by Christ's Doctrine, Law and
Gospel, than to be convinced that he cannot believe, repent, obey or love God,
has not yet the benefit which they are principally intended for.

But suppose that by Law he had meant the mere penal part or threatening (as
some words would make a man suspect:) 1. It Is a strange description of a Law,
to exclude the precept and premiant part, and include only the penal part which
is the last and least. 2. As it is the same Man that has Love and Hatred, Hope
and Fear, so it is the same Law of Christ which has precept and prohibition,
promise and penalty: And it is the same Holiness, or New Creature which is a
conformity to all together. Of which more anon.

III. He can never prove, that all unbelievers have no Power to ^^e any means
which tends to ^aith, by a preparatory grace; nor that the use of all such
means is Impossible to them.

XIII. His distinction of Natural and Moral Impotency is good* But then that
Moral Impotency it self must not be made the same with the Natural: else there
will be the same reason for excusing sin by it. If man's Will had been made by
God such as could not possibly love him or holiness, it would not have left a
man unexcusable in judgment, that his enmity was Voluntary: It is reason
enough for a man to kill a ^oad or Serpent as malum sibi natural, because it
is a hurtful creature; But this is no Moral Evil in them, nor is their death
their punishment: nor yet in any ravenous creature, which preyeth on the rest
that are innocent. And so would it be with bad men, if God had made them bad*
Indeed if Adam have made them all bad, and God have given no Savior* Grace or
Remedy, they are con^emnable and unexcusable, as they were virtually in Adam,
if judged only by the Law of Innocence as made to Adam: But they are excuseable
if judged by Christ by the Law of grace, which condemns no man merely as not
innocent, or a sinner, but as a rejecter of grace. These things are so plain
and weighty, that Ja^senius should not join with the Antinomians in opposing
them.

XIV. While he confesses that Christ so far dyed for all, as to procure them
all the mercy which he gives them, I have no further quarrel with him, but to
prove that a Condition pardon of sin and grant of Life eternal, with much means
and help to make men perform the Condition, which is but a suitable Acceptance,
is indeed mercy.

XVI. That Christ's grace is Love, or Complacency in good, is a truth which I
highly value: but with all these exceptions to his doctrine. 1. It is the Heart
of the new Creature, and that which must communicate it self to all the rest,
or else they are lifeless and unacceptable: For the will is the man in Gods
account; And complacency, or love, or appetite is the first act of the will;
which is it that he calls with Augustine Delectation: Grace lies principally
in a Placet. But the man has more parts than his Heart: And all other parts of
sanctification are graces of Christ* in their several places, and not love only.

2. Though no man is to love himself as God, nor instead of God, nor above God,
nor as the noblest ultimate object of his love* yet all men are necessitated by
nature to love themselves; and therefore to desire their own felicity in loving
God, next to God as the final object of that love; And so our end is finis
amantis vel amicitiae which includes mutual complacency and union, though not
in equality. And to such an end, grace causes us to use the means: And Christ
is proposed to us as our Savior, and all his grace as for our good, and all
Gods commands as necessary for our happiness, and sin is described to us to be
hated as our o^^ evil and destruction, and against our good as well as against
Gods will and honor. And with us this is denied scarcely by the Antino^ians
themselves: Much less by any judicious Christians.

3. It is past the reach of any of us, to prove that our actual love is the
first effect of the sanctifying Spirit on the soul. I mean not only, Whether
some other acts (as Intellectual perception, and belief) be not in order of
nature before it, and in time with it, and real parts of the same new creature,
but also, Whether a^ Alvarez and others say, there be not such a divine motion
or Impulse on the soul tending to this love, and antecedent to love it self, in
nature, (love being an effect of Gods will and m^^s,) which J^^s^nius denies.

But 4. If it be not so, but really love be the first effect of God on the
soul, then the controversies are all at an end, about the difference of
suffici^^t and effectual, equal and unequal grace. For then it would be as
Ja^senius says, and there is no grace but the effect it self, and so there
would be no question, but Whether all men love God, and all alike. But I yet
believe that there is so preparatory grace of Christ which tends to the love
of God.

XVI. I believe that the will is the prime seat of Morality, and that love or
complacency is as the spirit of all saving special grace. But yet it is ill
said, that Christ's grace is necessary only to love or delight. For the soul of
man has three faculties, which must be conjunctly sanctified, viz. Vital
active power, Intellect and Will; and sin is in all; And the Spirit renews
them by a threefold effect, Vivification, Illumination and Conversion (or
love.) And hatred of sin, and fear of sinning, and of God, are graces of Christ
also, (as are obedience, patience, etc.) though below love.

2. There is an Analogical good that is done by self-love and fear, which has
a tendency to man's recovery, though not such good as is true holiness and has
a promise of salvation.

XVII. I. Here we come to a difficult case: 1. Whether indeed any ungodly man
or Infidel, do love God sincerely amore amicitiae and propter se: The doubt is,
because to love him less than sinful pleasures and the creature, seems to be
a loving him as less amiable or good. And to love him as such, is not to love
him as God, nor indeed to love God, but an Idol of the imagination. I think we
must say, 1. That no man loves God adequately; for no man has an adequate
conception of him. 2. But yet that there are some essentials of such true love
as is necessary and suitable to our dark and weak condition, which all must
have that will be saved (either distinctly or confusedly): As to know and love
him as the Infinite Spirit the first cause and last end of all, most powerful,
wise and good, our Owner, our Ruler and our Benefactor and chief good: Father,
Word and Spirit; the Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier; the Author of Nature,
Grace, Glory. 3. That no wicked or unholy person truly loves God thus, viz. As
his own Governor to make him holy, and save him from the Flesh and World: and
as the Author of those holy Laws, by which he governs, and a righteous Judge
according to those Laws. 4. Therefore Jansenius's little sincere Love in
sensual men is but a love of aliquid Dei, somewhat of God, and not properly of
God as God: speaking of God as the object of love it self. 5. Yet the same
person may have all the ^or^said Notions of a Deity, and may notionally call
them all good and laudable; but his Practical Judgment is not such of God as
his holy Governor, Judge and End, as to bring him truly as such to love him.
6. Yet this may be called a Love of God analogically, as he is said to love the
King who loves him as great and good to the Commonwealth, though not as a
governing restrainer of his lusts. By this I would have that explained which I
have said of this subject in my Saints Rest.

II. But here I am at ^ further loss. Did he mean that this love called
sincere, is in none but those that are saved o^ not? As I said before, If he
did, then a common Drunkard, Adulterer, etc. may have this love and be saved:
But I suppose he meant Negatively: And if so, methinks hence all his opposition
to sufficient Grace turns back upon himself: And to him it may better be
said, Why do you feign Christ and the Holy Ghost to give men such a Grace, such
a Love to God, as no man ever was or will be saved by, without more? Is it any
more dishonor to Christ, to give men some such Power to do some more good ^han
actually they do, as Ad^m had to have continued innocent, than effectually to
give so many persons sincere love which shall never save the^? (Whether these
be they that he will adjudge to Purgatory I know ^^: If so, he will stretch the
rank of Venial sins to those that other men call Mortal.)

III. But yet my greatest difficulty remains: I am in doubt Whether he that
denies common sufficient grace, and extends the grace of Christ seemingly
but to few, do not really either make it the same thing with Nature, or extend
it to all: For I suspect that all or almost all men on earth, (till they have
sinned themselves into diabolical desperate malignity) have this which he
calls Amor amicitiae and sincere imperfect love to God and Justice. For
Intellectus est Entis and very intellectus, and Voluntas est Boni. Good
apprehended such, is the Wills necessary natural object. And a simple
complacency in apprehended good, is the wills first necessary act. Nature
tells man, that there is created goodness; and that the Creator who gives
it, must needs have more than all his creatures: And nature tells men, that the
World, or millions are better than one person; and their good to be preferred:
And how can it be then, that he that takes the World to be so much better than
himself, and God to be better, that is, more amiable than all the World, should
not have the least simple complacency in thinking of him* All men take Wisdom
and Goodness, and Beneficence for amiable: And they that believe that God has
most of these, must needs have some Love to him, not only as good to them, but
as most excellent in himself: Insomuch that as Adrian the sixth before cited
says, in some sort a bad man may love God better than himself; and he is
scarce worthy the name of a man, that would not rather be annihilated, or wish
that he had never been born, than that there were no World, or no God, (if per
impossible he supposed he could live without them.) And if you tell every man
that he has that sincere love to God which is Gratia Christi, who has the
least love to God and Justice propter se, though he have more love to his
fleshly interest and sinful pleasures, I doubt you will not much differ from
Pelagius, and will have no way left but to say, that it is not of Grace by
Christ that Nature is reprieved and supported: Or at least that this is of a
common sort of grace. We may presume of many things as received from our
Teachers: but it is hard to prove, that Adam the next moment after his sin was
totally deprived of all degrees of love to God, and goodness, and so was
privatively as bad as Devils; or that all mankind are naturally so: Though I
believe that it was of grace, even Gods first pardoning act as our Redeemer,
not so totally to execute the Law, nor take away his grace, and leave man to
the utmost penalty of his sin, but to keep nature from being as bad as else it
would have been. But sure Man is Man still, and not a Devil: And I speak with
few or none that seem not to have some liking of God and goodness, or Justice
as such; though they love not God or goodness, as contrary to their fleshly
lusts, nor love God as their Sanctifier and Ultimate End. And thus the Carnal
Mind is Enmity to God, being not subject to his Law, though this be consistent
with loving him secundum quid.

IV. I believe him that there is a faith, such as the Devils, which may be
without Justification, both in habit and act: But that the same Faith which
after justifies, can be many years Habitually before Justification (that is,
Sanctification as he means it) I believe not: Seeing God has promised that
all that believe (thus) shall be justified and have his Spirit.

V. Jansenius seems to me to set too light by Habitual Grace, as if it were
some common thing in comparison of the Act: Whereas I take a Habit of love to
God to differ from an act, either as a Spring or Rivolet from a drop, or as
Honesty from an honest act, or Learning from a learned exercise, or as a fixed
friendly Inclination which is like to Nature, differs from a friendly action,
and to be more excellent than a particular act.

XVIII. His judgment of the Matter of the Reward (that it is but God himself
seen and perfectly loved for himself) is of great use: But yet it is both
lawful and ex individuationis principiis and ex natura humana necessary that we
take and desire this as our own felicity, and so under God intend our selves.
And quoad rationem praemii it is the Reward of a Rewardable state or work, and
therefore of the free act of a creature not merely necessitated: It may be a
gift without Respect to our Liberty and Obedience, but not a reward: But it is
both a gift and a Reward.

XIX. That Fear and its effects are good, and yet not of Christ's grace; that
they are of Gods Spirit, but not the Spirit given by Christ, but the grace of
some other Providence; All this I take for unsound and injurious to Christ and
grace. Where does the Scripture tell us since the fall, of any grace given to
the World but by the Redeemer, who is Head over all things to his Church? If
you say, that God can give men the grace to fear him and depart from evil
without a Savior or Mediator* how can you prove, that he may not do so by the
rest? Either he gives this grace as Rector according to his Laws or not: If
not, then on the same reason you may feign that most men are not his subject;,
nor under any Law of God; and so sin not, nor are punishable: If yea, then it
is according to the Law of Innocence, or of Grace, (For if Moses Law as Jewish
be called a third, it is nothing to our case.) If it be by a Law of grace, it
is Christ's Law, either of the first Edition, called the Promise, or of the
second, called the Gospel: The Spirit and grace (in various measures) given by
both, are of Christ. It Is a dangerous assertion, that there is any, yea, so
much grace, which is not Christ's: It prejudiceth me against Jansenius's
Opinion, that it should cast him on such absurdities, as to deny so much of the
grace of Christ, while he pretends to honor it, and to set up such a feigned
way and sort of grace without a Savior, and yet speak so hardly of the
Pelagians as he does for wronging grace.

2. As Fear is one of man's natural passions, though but subservient to love: so
the sanctifying of it is one part of the Work of Christ's Spirit.

3. I am sure Christ himself commands Fear, Luke 12. 4, 5. Heb. 4. 1. and 12.
28, 29. and passim. And is it our own Legal Righteousness to obey the commands
of Christ? Indeed if Fear were all, or had no conjunct hope and love, it would
be Legal, and show the Spirit of bondage, from which Christ delivers us by
the Spirit of Power, and Love, and a sound mind, which are the fruits of the
Spirit of Adoption: For Moses Law separated by the Infidel Jews from the Law of
Grace or Promise of a Justifying Mediator, could have no better effects than
Fear: But Abraham that believed and foresaw Christ's day, rejoiced in that
Faith, and yet had a Law of obedience which had its penalty; and so has the
Law of Grace which we obey.

XX. Of Free Will I have said enough before: Natural Liberty as distinct from
the Moral freedom from sin and ill disposition, is sure more than mere
Voluntariness: And I think if God gave Satan or man power, to take away from a
Saint all his Habitual and Actual love of God and goodness, whilst
antecedently the person did hate such a change and pray against it, by making
him willing of evil, and making a Devil of him remedilesly, he would take away
or cross the Natural as well as the Moral Liberty of his will, though it were
Willingness that were caused. If any think otherwise, remember that it is but
de nomine, for de re we are agreed, that such a change would be our great
misery.

XXI. I take it to be the commendation of Jansenius, that he renounceth the
Dominicans Physical Efficient Predetermining Premotion, as naturally necessary
to all actions natural and free. But his habitation, converse and worldly
interest tempted him factiously to calumniate Calvin, lest he himself should
become odious with his own party, and so miss of his expected success; which
has prevailed also with Gibieuf, Arnoldus and most other Papists to do the
like, when they differ from their Brethren.

XXII. He well says, that Permission of the first sin is no effect of
Reprobation: But his ordination of Gods acts into [this Before and that After]
and so his differencing the Election of Angels and men, I fear has somewhat in
it presumptuous and unproved.

In conclusion, I much mislike in Jansenius, 1. His contempt of the Sacred
Scriptures, as being not properly Christ's Laws, but some odd occasional
Writings, his Laws being only in the heart and tradition.

2. His slighting of Habitual Grace comparatively, which yet is indeed Christ's
Law and Gods Image in the heart.

3. His ^eigning a new or odd sort of grace (fear) which is none of the grace
of Christ, no not preparatory to his higher work, but a grace of some other
Providence.

4. Consequently that there are men (yea, most) who are no subjects of Christ,
nor under any Law of grace by Christ, and yet not under the mere Law of
Innocence; and therefore are under some other Law (who knows what?) or lawless.

5. His damning all that perish merely for Original Sin, and its necessitated
consequents, which no man had ever the least power to avoid.

6. His asserting that Angels and Adam had sufficient Grace, and Free Will, by
which the Angels did, and Adam could have persevered in Innocence and never
sinned: And yet that since the fall, no ungodly man has such help and
free will to any one better act than he does, nor the holiest person to any
better than he does; but the best Saint is less able to do one better act, than
Adam was to keep all the Law.

7. And so his consequent, that it is properly impossible for any man in the
World, good or bad, to do any better than he does.

8. That all they love God sincerely amore amicitia who love God and Justice
propter se as amiable in himself, though they love their filthiest sins so much
better, and all their fleshly worldly interest, as that they have but an
uneffectual wish that they could leave them.

9. That we must not say, that Christ gives men either a Power to do better
than they do, nor yet that Grace of Fear which they have, (as being below him);
And yet must say that he gives multitudes this uneffectually sincere love,
which never saves them.

10. That a Habit of true faith may be many years in a man before i^ justify
him: when as the word [true] must mean some other faith, or else that same will
never justify him which did not justify him so long.

11. His Antinomian or Phanatick distinguishing Law and Grace, as if Christ had
no Precepts or Laws, but Operations; or else his Gospel and Covenant in signis
were no part of his Grace.

12. And thence his fiction that all that which is done by any Grace ad posse,
and in obedience to Christ's written Law, is a Legal Righteousness of our own,
and no part of Christ's Righteousness.

These with what else I have before disclaimed, I dislike in Jansenius his way:
And yet think that a man that can well distinguish words from things, and will
not be deceived by ambiguous terms, may show that even he and his adversaries
are not so far disagreed as they seem. E. g. Whether Christ dyed for all? They
are agreed that he dyed to procure for all so much Grace or Mercy as he gives
them; and that among these a conditional Pardon, and Gift of Christ and Life,
is one, etc. And they agree that he dyed not with any absolute intent of giving
them any more than he does give them. What remains then, but the Controversy
de nomine, Whether this much be fitly called, his Dying for all? which
Scripture puts out of doubt. The like I might say of many of the rest of the
differences.

. VIII.
I Conclude with this summary determination of all these Controversies to
satisfy sober minds.

1. GOD our CREATOR is the Causa prima, the spring and Master and end of
NATURE; and accordingly having antecedently made the creature in such variety
as pleased him, 1. He Actively affords them all that general Influx by which
the Being given them is supported, and they are sufficiently furnished for
their several motions, operations or receptions.

2. And his Infinite Goodness and blessed Will is their common End in which
they are all finally terminated; but variously thereby felicitated according to
the variety of their capacities.

3. And as the Governor of the Universe he sapientially orders all things,
and conducteth them from their Beginning to their End; but variously as they
are various.

II. So GOD our REDEEMER, having in Christ made all necessary preparations, and
Redeemed mankind as to what belonged to a Savior to do in Person upon earth,
and having antecedently made an Universal Law of Grace, 1. Does Reveal his
Mercy to lost sinners, commonly, but in various degrees as he pleases; And
does concur with his Gospel, by vouchsafing a Common Gracious Help, which has
an aptitude and tendency to the recovery of lost sinners.

2. And as the final Infinite Good he felicitateth all that are by Grace
conducted to him as their end; and on the rest will have his absolute will
fulfilled, and will not be frustrate of his End, though sinners may be
frustrate of theirs, and be unhappy.

3. And as Rector he sapientially conducteth man in the way to this
felicitating End, antecedently by the Gospel, which is the same in it self to
all that have it: and consequently as Judge by his Rewards; In which supposing
his foresaid commoner preventing Grace, he consequently gives men such further
degrees of cooperating grace or help and spiritual mercy, as in the use of
former grace, they are fit to receive: and justly and penally denies that to
others which they have made themselves immediately unapt for, or incapable of
in the way of this ordinary common operation.

But withal as a free Owner and Benefactor who may do with his own as he list,
(as he diversifieth the works of Nature, though Nature keep a constant course,
except in Miracles, so) he freely diversifieth the gifts of his Grace (external
and Internal;) though as Rector and the common Benefactor of lost sinners, he
alter not the terms and means of Grace, which he at first determined of. And
the equality and constancy of his Rectoral and Judicial distributions, is no
way inconsistent with the diversity which as a free Owner and Benefactor he
makes either in his Decrees or Gifts.

So that he is the Cause of All Good, though not every way equally to All, to
make All Good and happy: And he has made man capable of Improving his Gifts,
to return him his own with Usury, which he will require. But he is the Author
of no evil of sin; nor punishes any but for sin, and as a means to that Good
which is better than the Impunity of the sinner: But he rules and causes the
Effects of sin, when he causes not the sin it self.

The Order of his Productions may be much perceived by man, and are fit for our
observation. Of his own Knowledge and Volitions of them, we know no more, but
that It is not formally the same thing as Knowledge and Will in Man; that It is
most perfect and incomprehensible; that It is his Essential Intellect and Will
variously named as variously connoting the effects and objects: that To dispute
of any other internal order, priority or posteriority in God's Knowledge, or
Will, (as if he had particular Thoughts, Ideas and Volitions as man has, or
any thing in Him were Caused by the object,) and to vex the Church with
contentions hereabout, is a presumptuous arrogance and profaneness, which God
will punish, and good and sober men should tremble at and hate, and not become
parties, in such daring medlings with the Consuming Fire.

Notes on some passages of Mr. Peter Sterries Book of Free Will.
. 1. IT is long since I heard much of the name and fame of Mr. Peter Sterry,
long Chaplain to Robert Lord Brook, and after to Oliver Cromwell when he was
Protector (as then called.) His common fame was, that his Preaching was such as
none or few could understand: which incensed my desire to have heard him, of
which I still mist, though I often attempted it. But now since his death, while
my Book is in the Press unfinished, a posthumous tractate of his comes forth
of Free Will: upon perusal of which I find in him the same notions (for so far
as he meddleth with the same subjects) as in Sr. H. Vane, and somewhat of what
Dr. Gibbon seems to deliver in his Scheme; but all handled with much more
strength of parts and raptures of highest devotion, and great candor toward
all others, than I expected. His Preface is a most excellent Persuasive to
Universal Charity: Love was never more extolled than throughout his Book.
Doubtless his head was strong, his wit admirably pregnant, his searching
studies hard and sublime, and, I think, his Heart replenished with holy Love to
God, and great charity, moderation, and peaceableness toward men: In so much
that I heartily repent that I so far believed fame as to think somewhat
hardlier or less charitably of him and his few adherents than I now hope they
did deserve. Hasty judging, and believing fame is a cause of unspeakable hurt
to the world, and injury to our brethren.

. 2. But I find that it is no wonder that he was understood by few, For 1. His
sublime and philosophical notions, met not with many Auditors, so well studied
in those things as to be capable of understanding them. It is a great
inconvenience to men of extraordinary discoveries and sublimity, that they must
speak to very few. 2. And though he cloud not his matter with so many self-made
names and notions as Behmen, Para^elsus, Wigelius and some others, yet those
few that he has, do somewhat obscure it* 3. But above all the excessive
pregnancy of his wit produces so great a superabundance of Metaphors or
Allegories, that (about the description of Christ especially) they make up
almost all his style; so that to any ordinary Reader his matter is not so much
clothed in Metaphors, as drowned, buried or lost: And though I confess my wit,
being to his, but as a barren Desert to a florid Meadow, may be apt to
undervalue that which it attaineth not; yet I do approve of my present
judgment, in thinking, that (seeing all metaphorical terms are ambiguous,) he
that excessively uses them befriendeth not the Truth and the hearers
intellect, but while he is too much a Rhetorician, he is too little a good
Logician: and as he is hardly understood by others, I should fear lest he
feduce his own understanding, and can scarce have clear mental conceptions of
that matter, which he utters by a torrent of ambiguous Metaphors, if he think
as he speaks, and his words be the direct expressions of his mind. I had
rather be instructed in the words of the most barbarous Schoolman, adapted to
the matter, than to be put to save my self from the temptation of equivocations
in every sentence which I hear, and to search after that Truth (which is known
only naked) under so florid a disguise and paint.

. 3. But I cannot deny, that though my temptations before were very great, to
doubt whether the Doctrine of Universally-necessary Predetermination, as
delivered by Bradwardine, the Dominicans, Dr. Twisse, Rutherford and Hobbes,
were indeed to be rejected, the Reading of Mr. Sterry increased my temptation;
not by any new strength of argument which he has brought, but by the power of
his pious florid Oratory, by which, while he entitleth God to the necessitating
causation of all sin, and misery, he seems to put so honorable and lovely a
clothing on them, from their relative order to God, to the Universe, and to
their End, as that I felt my hard thoughts of both to abate, and I was tempted
to think of them as part of the amiable consequents of the Divine Love, and of
the Harm^nious order caused by the manifold wisdom of God.

. 4. And by this I see, of how great importance it is in the world, not only
what Doctrine is taught, and with what proof, but who speaks it, and in what
manner. For as I found the same things reverenced in Dr. Twisse and Rutherford,
which were not so in Alvarez, or Jansenius, or Thom. White; so I found the same
Doctrine of Predetermining Necessitation almost commonly brought into greater
dislike by Hobbes and Benedictus Spinosa's owning it, and applying it to its
too obvious uses, than all In Tract. Polit. Theol.
argumentations had ever before brought it; And I see it as likely to recover
its honor by the pious and florid dress put upon it by Mr. Sterry, as if some
new demonstrations for it were found out.

. 5. If I should recite Mr. Sterries mind in his own Metaphors, the Reader may
not understand it; If I Epitomize him and change his words, some may say that I
misunderstand and wrong him: But I will not do it willingly; and if I do it
necessarily, his style is my excuse. He that would be seen must come into the
light.

. 6. The sum of that which I am now concerned in, in Mr. Sterry's Treatise is,
That the Freedom of all things is to act according to their natures; and so is
that of the will of man; and that in God and man, Necessity and Liberty
concur, and that whatever we do or will, we do or will it necessarily, as
being moved to it by the first caus^ and a chained connection of necessitating
causes; by which all things in the world are carried on: That a will not
determined by God, but left to a self-determination without Gods predetermining
causality, is not to be asserted, as contrary to Gods Goodness, Wisdom, power*
etc. That sin is a privation formally, and all that is positive in it is
directly and not by accident of Gods positive causation (else with the
Manichees we must hold two first causes;) And that the formal privation is from
the wi^lidrawing of necessary Divine causation of the contrary, and God is the
Negative necessitating cause of it: Even as he causes Light by the shining of
the Sun, and causes darkness by its setting or not ^hining: or as he causes
substances and shadows, Life and death; And that all sin thus as necessarily
follows Gods not giving the contrary, or his leaving the defectible Creature
to itself, as the darkness fol^oweth the Lights removal; And this was the
entrance of sin into the world; the Woman being Necessarily deceived,
necessarily sinned; and all good and evil is thus (as to necessity equally) to
be resolved into Gods causing and not causing Will; what he will cause cannot
but be, and what he will not cause cannot be: And this is the beautiful variety
and harmony in the Universe: In God himself is nothing but perfection, but the
Greature being the shadowy Image of God, defectibility and imperfection is
essential to it: so that he reduces Morality to the frame, and necessity of
physical motion, and makes Moral Good and evil to be indeed as much natural
good and evil and of the same kind (except as in another subject) as Summer and
Winter, heat and cold, day and night, health and sickness, life and death,
animate and inanimate, the unavo^dable diversifications of the will and work of
God; And that every permission of his will is accompanied with a positive
volition of the thing permitted, (And yet that Will is not properly in God, but
so called after the manner of man:) That sin is considered as related to the
Principle of action, which is God, and so it is good; or as in the terminus
Man, and so it is horrid, devilish, odious, evil, as blindness, death,
darkness, caused all by Gods desertion, or not operating otherwise than he does.

. 7. To the quieting of the mind that cannot digest this, but thinks God is
thus dishonored, being made more than Satan the cause of sin, and misery for
sin, which the Scripture contradicts; and that man is excusable at the bar
of Justice that could no more (in innocence) forbear to sin, than to make a
world; To them that think it hard that no one in all the world could ever
possibly do more or less Good or Evil than they do, but that is all done, by
physical motion as in an Engine, etc. he has a great deal to say, and more
than ever I elsewhere met with, and with great modesty proposed.

. 8. As to the Law (whose transgression is sin) he supposes, that Whatsoever
imposes on us any thing to be done by us, as an antecedent condition to any
consequent good, is the Law opposed to the Gospel. Page 173.
Yea that the proposal or pressing of any Truth or Goodness on us, in a literal
or moral way only, or the word as written in Letters, is the Law; and the
spirit operating the thing it self on the soul is the Gospel; the first is the
old Covenant and the second the New: That the proper and next ends of the Law
(or letter) are sin, condemnation, death and the Divine wrath: To let in sin,
and heighten it that it might abound; and to bring on us spiritual death; These
flow not from the Law of it self; but by accident, from the weakness of the
flesh and crea^ure: But both Law and sin are brought in ultimately for good;
viz. God having a design which he intended to enrich with the fullest, the
highest glories of his Godhead, brings forth in the course of this design, a
dark scene of all evils, sin, death, wrath; The evil in this scene is carried
on to its utmost extent and height; Thus the variety becomes more full in the
whole design, and the chief design is heightened in its greatest Glory; God in
his Infinite wisdom so brings in this scene of sin and evil, that himself is
perfectly pure and good in the contrivance and conduct of it. He sets up a
Law, good, holy and spiritual, but such that sin inevitably may take occasion
from it through the frailty of the flesh and of the creature, to spring up as
an overflowing flood, to display it self over all things in its fullest foulest
birth. This Law is to convince us of the frailty and mutability in man's
primitive state, etc. (viz. that he is a creature.) For Page 175, 176.
man is composed of the light of God, and his own proper darkness; These two
the Schools call the Act and Potentiality, the form and the matter, being and
not being, which constitute every Creature; The darkness or nothingness, which
is the Creatures own, is the proper ground of sin -- The Law comes and
distinguishes the Light from the Darkness -- Page 177.
(so that to see sin is to see that we are Creatures;) -- God withholds his
Page 178.
Divine presence, appearances and influences from man, -- and so the darkness
discovers it self in man, and predominateth and captivateth him entirely, and
becomes his choice and Lord. (so that sin is but an Imperfect Creature, and the
Law to cause and show it.)

. 9. Page 113, 114, etc. He says [The Immediate cause of the first change made
in the understanding at the fall, was the Divine Glory withdrawing or
withholding it self -- Darkness is the privation of Light: Privations have no
proper Causes, but accidental only. Thus the Divine Glory retiring from the
understanding, or ceasing to shine in it, is by accident the cause of the
darkness there; as the Setting or departing of the Sun is the cause of Night;
which is not a blemish to the Sun, but its glory, that in its presence are all
the beauties and joys of light, in its absence all the disagreeableness and
melancholies of night and darkness: Page 115. All evil is from the absence of
God, etc. P. 117. The fault in man is the deficiency which arises from the
defectibility or nothingness of the Creature, in its shadowy state, in the
purity of its first Creation. Page 122. The fall springs from the Harmony of
the eternal design in the Divine mind, being comprehended in it as a part of
it.]

. 10. And yet he makes man Guilty and unexcuse^ble, and God just i^ this;
because [Guilt is but our being really bad: And he that cannot deny himself to
be bad, is unexcuseable: And the opening of this causes shame: And Justice is
to Judge and use all creatures as they are.]

. 11. To be short, he maintains, that man can have no freedom from
necessitating predetermination; If he should it would cross the nature of God,
of the creature, of the soul, and the unity and harmony of all things; But that
God causes all sin negatively as necessarily, as he causes darkness, or any
natural privation: But then he does with a torrent of Rhetoric so Praise Gods
design in it, and the beauty and harmony of all things made up of good and
evil, unities, varieties, diversities and contrarieties, and shows so largely
the glory that comes to God by sin, and the good to the Universe, and that
it is but our narrowness and weakness of sight that makes us take it to be any
other than a part of the glory of the universe, though bad in and to the person
that sins, that I confess I never found my self more tempted to Love sin, or
to cease my hatred of it, than by his florid Oratory.

. 12. And withal, as he resolves all the rest of Morality into Physical
conceptions, so he seems to judge suitably of Hell and of Redemption,
supposing that all this darkness that God brings on sinners, is but to prepare
for their resurrection to a life of unity and glory; and that it shall go well
with them in the end.

. 13. And as to the work of Redemption, his notions are too floridly or
ambiguously delivered for me to undertake with confidence to unriddle: But this
seems the sum: 1. That God is the fountain of Being by Emanation as the Sun
of light: And that his eternal Wisdom is Jesus Christ in the first instant or
nature. 2. That the first ^reature that he made (or emaneth from him) is a
perfect universal mind, the platform of all the rest of the Creation; (such as
the old Philosophers called the soul of the world, or an universal
Intelligence:) And that this is Jesus Christ in his second nature and notion:
which Arius knew, but did ill deny his divine nature. 3. That this Universal
Spirit or Mind, makes all the world besides, and is in them all: And so the
whole Creation else was Christ's first shadowy Image, (or body.) 4. That the
Angels are the noblest parts of this, and that the Deity first, and Christ's
superangelical nature next, is one in them all, and they one with him, as the
beams with the Sun, and as the lower part of the Sunbeams with the parts next
the Sun. 5. That the soul of man is the next part of Christ's shadowy Image,
into which he descended. 6. And so into all Bodies. 7. And as into a special
Branch, into that Body born of the Virgin Mary. 8. And in that, and in other
Bodies, he dies, and descends to his lowest state; and 9. Then, as the Sun,
does rise again, and bring all back to the state of pure spirituality in his
superangelical nature, whence all sprang: And this is their Redemption; which
is most floridly set forth.

. 13. This doctrine seems to reconcile Philosophy (or Gentilism) and
Christianity: For what is it almost but names that are left in difference? That
which a Philosopher will call an universal Intelligence, or soul of the world,
he calls Christ: And if such a soul there be, no one will deny but that it
flows into all particular souls and bodies, and is united to them, or is to
individuals as the soul in the head to the soul in the hand and foot.

. 14. And if I did believe that sin, death, hell; and holiness, life, Glory,
are in the world but as Winter and Summer, Night and Day, and, as Origin, that
the wicked are but in a state of Revolution, and shall come about again into a
state of hope; or, as he here seems, that their sin and misery is but like
the dying of a flower in the fall, that shall in the Spring again be as before,
(or rather another in its stead;) and that it is but the retiring of Christ
from the Creature, as the spirit of the Tree in Autumn from the Leaves, I
should then be ready to receive his Necessitating Predetermination to sin, and
fit all the rest of my opinions hereunto.

. 15. There is (among many others) one Joh. Jessenius a Jessen Doctor and Eques
Hungarus, who in a Tract. de Anima and Corpore Universi has written much to
the like purpose, save as being a Peripatetick he differs from the
Platonists; viz. The world is one Animal and has one soul and body, which all
Creatures are parts of: That Stars are Intellectuals, or Angels, and all
intuitively know each others minds, loving the good, and hating the evil here,
and are our chief friends and Keepers: That Death befalls only us lower
Creatures; Mors continua singulis, nulli tamen aeterna: Nam post longissimum
temporis excursum, quem Plato triginta and insuper aliquot annorum millibus
determinare ausus est, removebitur, facta iterum aliqua secundum naturam
solutione, redintegratione. And the Intellectus Agens he describes as Mr.
Sterry does Christ in his second or middle nature, page 165. Intellectum
agentem substantia primae atque Dei fulgorem esse; Non accidens, sed
substantiam Intellige^tem; quaeprimo proprieque Intellectus dicitur agens: --
Primae substantiae adhaerens, ab ea excurrens, indivisus and indivisibilis, non
aliter ac Lumen a Lucido emanat: and so in many other particulars.

. 16. To all this my short time will allow me to give you but these short
observations following: 1. The doctrine of Redemption is so much of mere
supernatural Revelation, as that we must not easily receive that concerning it,
which is not in the Scriptures; And where Christ's person has such a
description in Scripture as he gives, I am not satisfied: (e. g. in page 232.
where he thus says [The Word made flesh, is the whole Tree of Being, Uncreated
and Created, the Root, the Body, with all the Branches, putting forth
themselves into one little top branch, now withering, that through its death,
they may renew all to a fresh and flourishing spring.] I am loath to say that
the Universe is Christ: that his Divinity is the soul, and the world his body,
and every Man and Beast and substance part of it, and that he dies in all that
dye, and that his body born of the Virgin Mary, was but one top branch of the
Tree, which Christ thus animateth, and so that all other bodies are as truly
personally united to the Word, as that.

. 17. I will not deny that the Opinion of a Threefold nature in Christ, looks
very plausibly; viz. that the Divine eternal word (the first nature) produced
and united it self to the prime created superangelical Mind (the second
nature:) and that this second nature in the fullness of time produced and united
it self to the humane (third) nature. 1. There are many texts which seem to
countenance it. 2. It seems to give Christ the greatest honor, as being the
most excellent of all Gods Creatures; which is not so easily believed of him as
Man. 3. It seems to expound those texts of the Old Testament, which mention
such appearances of God to Adam, Abraham and others, which many of the Ancients
say was Christ: And it seems to some more probable that some pre-existent
created nature should assume a body, than the Divine nature only and
immediately. 4. And it smileth on us as an opinion likely to reduce and
reconcile the Arians, (once too great a part of the Christian World, (as called
Christians) as not only Philostorgius, and Saudius show, but also Petavius de
Trinit.) who holding the prime-created super-angelical nature, and denying the
Divine, it is like would the more easily be brought to acknowledge the Union of
the Divine Nature with the super-angelical, if the super-angelical it self were
first granted them; For they might the sooner be convinced that the eternal
wisdom or word, which made that first creature, was intimately united to it. I
know some pious worthy persons who upon such reasons incline to this opinion of
a threefold nature in Christ; (Though some of them think that this second
nature, was the humane soul, assuming only a body, and others, that it assumed
both soul and body.) I am not forward to take men for unsufferable Heretics,
that differ from me, or hold that which seems to me hard and strange; But I
must say, 1. That I see no cogent proof of this super-angelical nature: 2. That
seeming congruities and conveniences must not embolden us to take up a doctrine
which is new and strange to the Church of Christ, in so great a matter as the
Natures and person of Christ are. 3. And were it never so true, if it be not
sufficiently revealed to us in Gods Word, it cannot be necessary to our
salvation. 4. Yea presuming too boldly to conclude of unrevealed things, (so
high) seems to me dangerous temerity, curiosity, and profaneness, like the
Bethshemites or Uzzah's meddling with the Ark, and the Sons of A^r^n offering
false fire. Let them therefore here thus proceed that dare. For I dare not.

. 18. But this much I easily concede, 1. That as all Being is originally from
God, so there is a continued divine causation of them, without which they would
all cease or be annihilated: which some call a continued Creation, and some an
Emanation; and some a continued Action or operation ad rerum esse. And it is an
intolerable error to hold that God has made the World or any part of it
self-sufficient or Independent as to himself, as to Being, Action or
Perfection. We grant therefore that all the world is so far United to God, as
to depend on his continued causality: And that the Beams do not more depend on
the Sun, or Light; heat and motion on the Sun and other fire, nor the branches,
fruit and leaves more depend on the Tree, than the Creature on God.

. 19. 2. I grant that thus far the world may be said to be one, as all things
are united in one first cause from which they flow, and by which they are.

. 20. 3. But yet all these are no parts of God, as the fruit and leaves* are of
the Tree, and as the beams are of the Sun's But they are Creatures, because
Gods emanation or causation is creative, causing the whole Being of the effect:
And it seems likest to the Sun (or fire's) causation of Motion, Light and
Heat as they are in the Recipient, distinct ab essentia and action Agentis qua
tuli.

. 21. 4. I grant that (though as to proximity of essence God is no further from
one Creature than from another, being intimate to all, immediatione essentiae,
yet) he uses one Creature as a second Cause to operate on another; and that
the Higher and Nobler, operate on the lower and more ignoble: And in that sense
we may conceive that some Creatures are first from God or nearest to him, that
is, of the highest nature and use. And so we deny not, but that it is like that
in the Creation God made one nature existent, (e. g. the highest Intellectual)
as more excellent, powerful, pregnant, active, and perfect than any of the
rest: that there was in the wonderful diversity, some one that was Best, and
above the rest.

. 22. 5. I grant that it sounds probably that the first and noblest Nature in
specie should be found but in one Individual; But of this there is not the
least certainty to us mortals: viz. Whether from one God first flow one perfect
Created Intelligence of Spirit; or, ab uno plures, two, three or millions in
the first order flow from one God? Though in nature we see that from the trunk
of the Tree few great members first arise, and multiplicity is in the
extremities. And we grant that the greatest multiplicity appears where things
dwindle to littleness or baseness: One sound Sheep i^ better than a rotten one
that has a thousand* Worms in his Veins and Intestines: And a man that has a
thousand Lice on his Head is not the Nobler: And when the one soul has left a
Garkass, it may turn to thousands of contemptible Vermin: And a Looking-glass
broken into an hundred pieces is not the better because it will make an hundred
images of the face. But yet we are strangers to Gods unseen works, further than
he reveals them, and therefore must confess our ignorance.

. 23. 6. We grant that all Gods works have some Union, Concord and Harmony
among themselves; which yet consists with numerical diversity: And though Men
and other Animals walk about with Bodies that touch not one another, (and
therefore the ignorant conceive of them as totally incoherent, and think that
though Pears, Apples and other Fruit on the Tree, and Trees in the Earth, be
both Many, and Divert, and yet parts of one Tree, and of one Earth, yet it is
not so with animals* because the union of spiritual beings in invisible:) yet
indeed it is not probable that the souls of Animals have no dependant coherence
with noblet supriour Spirits. Though (because we know of no nature above the
Intellectual) it is utterly uncertain to us, Whether Humane souls depend on any
proper superior Cause of their Being but God alone immediately; For God
causes the highest Natures, without any mediate second Cause: Though as to
ORDER and helps of action and well being they may depend on others, as the
several Wheels or parts of the same Watch or Clock, or as the Sheep upon the
Shepherd.

. 24. Augustine de Anima is put to it, whether he will hold 1. That souls are
Many and not One? 2. Or One and not Many? 3. On both One and Many? The two
first he rejects: The last he confesses hard to defend, but seems most
inclined to: But what Union he meant, is hard to conjecture; Whether that they
were all the spiritual Parts of one Universal, or one Greater soul (if souls
may be Parts?) or Whether distinct products of one such soul (either
Universitatis or hujus systematis)* or Whether One Relatively and Politically,
by making up one society; or Whether one because emaning from one spring or
Causa prima? The two last are certain: The two first are far otherwise.

. 25. 7. If he could prove, that there is one First, Best, Universal created
Intelligence, or super-Angelical Spirit, which God made the chief of all second
causes, by which he created and governs all the rest, and that this is Christ
in his second Nature, we would not deny, but that Christ as the Mediator of
Nature (as Mr. Sterry calls him) is in all other Creatures as the Cause is in
the being of the effect; But it would not follow, that the Essence of Christ
(or this Universal Intelligence) is any Constitutive Cause (or part) of each
creature: For as God causes them by Creative Emanation, and not as a
Constitutive part of them; so we should rather hold, that (under God, by a
Power of producing Entities received from him) this Universal Spirit did the
same in a subordinate second place.

. 26. But his Opinions which I am now most concerned to renounce, are those
about Gods Moral Government, his Laws, Justice, our free will, sin, guilt, and
Gods Redemption, Judgment and Punishment of man; all which I think he much
subverteth.

. 27. And I. I take the root of his error to be, his overlooking and
undervaluing Gods Design in Making and Governing free Intellectual agents, by
his Sapiential Moral Directive way: He supposes this way to be so much below
that of Physical Motion and Determination, as that it is not to be considered
but as an instrument thereof: As if it were unworthy of God to give any
creature a Mere Power, Liberty, Law, and Moral Means alone, and not to
Necessitate him Positively or Negatively to Obey or Disobey. And this looking
only at Physical Good, Being and Motion, and thereby thinking lightly of
Sapiential Regency, is the sum; as of his, so of Hobbes, Spinosa's, Alvarez,
Bradwardines, Twisses, Rutherfords, and the rest of the Predeterminants errors
herein: And had not I other thoughts of this one thing, I should come over to
their Opinion: For I confess the case to be of very great difficulty.

. 28. I think that as the Divine Life and Power glorifieth it self eminently in
the Causation of the Being, Motion and Life of the creatures; so the Divine
Wisdom eminently glorifieth it self in the Order of all things, and in the
Moral Directive Sapiential Regiment of Intellectual free agents. And that Gods
Laws and Doctrine are the Image of his Wisdom, and an admirable harmonious and
beautiful frame: And that all would think so, and be wonderfully delighted in
them, were they completely printed on our Minds and Hearts.

. 29. II. And accordingly I think, that the glory of his governing Wisdom, and
Punishing and Rewarding Justice, is a great and notable part of that glory
which man must give him now and for ever. And that this Justice is not his
physical using all things according to their physical aptitude only: But his
Judging and Executing according to that moral aptitude commonly called Merit,
by Punishments and Rewards: And that to deny God the glory of all this, is no
small error in a Philosopher or Divine.

. 30. III. Accordingly I think, that God made man a free self-determining
agent, that he might be capable of such Sapiential Rule: And that it is a great
Honor to God, to make so noble a Nature, as has a Power to determine its own
elections: And though such are not of the highest rank of Creatures, they are
far above the lowest: And that God (who we see delights to make up beauty and
harmony of diversities) does delight in the Sapiential Moral Government of this
free sort of Creatures: And though man be not Independent, yet to be so far
like God himself, as to be a kind of first-determiner of many of his own
Volitions and Nolitions, is part of Gods Natural Image on Man.

. 31. IV. Accordingly I take Duty to be Rewardable and Laudable; and sin to be
odious as it is the Act of a free agent: And that the Nature of Moral Good and
Evil, consists not in its being the mere effect of physical premotion, but in
being a Voluntary Conformity or Disconformity to the Sapiential Rule of duty,
by a free agent that had Power to do otherwise.

. 32. V. Free Will then is not only the same with willing it self, or a mere
agency according to Nature, by the premotion of the first determining
necessitating Mover. It is not only such a freedom as Fire, Water, Beasts, and
every moved thing has, (to be moved according to the first Moyers action)
which is in the, will of man; But it is a Power to be a first determining
Specifier of its own acts as Moral: Not that it is never predetermined, but
that it can do this.

. 33. VI. Accordingly I judge of Guilt, and Shame, and the Accusation of
Conscience; which will not be a bare discerning what God made us do or be; but
what we voluntarily did or were, when we could do otherwise.

. 34. VII. And I am past all doubt, that he grossly mistaketh the nature and
distinction of Law and Gospel: 1. To think that Gods Law, when it is not
accompained with physical predetermination, is but to show us that we are
creatures, that cannot but sin.

2. Yea, hereby he wrongeth the glory of the Creator, that made no creature
with a power to do any thing but evil, unless predetermined physically thereto.

3. It Is gross to say, that all the Doctrine of Redemption, and Faith, and
Justification by Christ, as a mere signum, Letter or Law, is the Law or
Covenant of Works, and so that every Command is the Covenant of Works, and
Physical Efficiency of Good in us is the Gospel or Covenant of Grace. For that
which we call the Gospel is not true, if this be true: For this Gospel is a
preached word spoken by man's mouth, which some believe, and some believe not,
but reject and disobey, and therefore perish: Matthew. 4. 23. and 11. 5. and 24.
14. and 26. 13. Mark 16. 15. Luke 4. 18. 1 Cor. 9. 14, 16, 18. Heh. 4. 2. 1
Pet. 1. 25. 1 Pet. 4. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 10, 11. Matthew. 13. 10. Acts. 13. 7. It
is a Law by which men shall be judged to life or death, Romans 2. 16. Mar. 16.
15, 16. 2 These. 1. 8. Romans 10. 16. John 3. 19, 20, 21. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. It is a
word which some pervert, Gal. 1. 7. and many sin against, Gal. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 4.
17. The rejecters of it are to speed worse than Sodom and Gomorrah, and they
cannot escape that neglect so great salvation. Whereas by his description, 1.
No man ever yet sinned against the Gospel or Covenant of Grace: For it is not
that Covenant or Gospel further than it is a physical effect on the soul. 2.
And every Heathen that has any good effect on his soul by Common Grace has so
much Gospel; 3. Yea, why is not then all Gods Creation, being a physical
effect, the Covenant of Grace; if that he does be it, and all that he
commands as such be the Law of Works? 4. And how then can the Law of Works
and Grace be two, if every proper Law be the Law of Works? For a Law is sub
genere signi, and a produced event is another thing. 5. And what sense will be
found throughout the Scripture, if we must hold, that It is the Covenant or Law
of Works which tells us, that the Law of Works is abolished, and calls us
to believe in Christ for free Justification, and not to expect Justification by
the Works of the Law, and offers us pardon and life in Christ? etc. But I
will add no more, seeing the plainness of the matter makes it needless.

. 35. The truth is, he distinguishes between the Law and the effect of the Law
and Spirit of God, and calls one the Law of Works and the other the Gospel:
whereas the Scripture only makes it the excellency of the Gospel, that by it
the Spirit effectually works on the soul more usually and more excellently;
and no mere Law (of Works or Grace) will renew us without the Spirit.

. 36. VIII. And if Redemption be nothing but Physical efficiency by Christ,
(who as a creating Mediator first gives all creatures what they have, and next
fails them and leaves them in darkness, as the Sun sets, and then Rising
again revolveth all things into his original pure spirituality, like the
revolution of day and night, Summer and Winter,) it is sure another thing than
the Scripture describes it, which makes it a noble part of that Sapiential
frame of Moral Government which some despise.

. 37. IX. But let it be noted, that we hold, that as the Almighty Father is the
glorious Creator, Motor and Life of Nature, and the Eternal Wisdom, Word and
Son, the Glorious Ordinator, Rector and Redeemer, so the Eternal Love, and the
Holy Ghost is the final Perfecter of believers, even of Gods Elect; and that
this Sanctification and proficiency, is by more than Moral Sapiential Regiment,
even by the Real shedding abroad Gods Love upon the soul, or by a Quickening,
Illuminating, felicitating Communication of Divine Life, and Light, and Love,
which yet makes not the Sapiential Regiment vain.

. 38. And as to Free Will I further say, that we are far from holding that it
is a state of man in which he is Above God, or Independent and as a God to
himself, or that God is any way a defective or idle (as they call it) Spectator
of man's sins, or free acts: But that this rank and state of free agents is Gods
own wisely-chosen work in which he is delighted. And that he does truly attain
his ends in all.

. 39. Therefore as Mr. Sterry magnifieth the harmony which a^^seth from Moral
Good and Evil as designed and necessitated by God, so we first admire the
harmony which arises from Natural and free agents and their works; which must
not be dishonored and left out.

. 40. And more than so, we doubt not but all Gods works are perfect, it being
their perfection to be suited to his own will. And the difference between us
and Mr. Sterry, Dr. Twisse, etc. is not* Whether God be Glorious in all his
works, or they be perfect: For we say, that though man's sin be found upon Gods
works, and that sin be none of his works, nor any means (properly so called) of
Pleasing or Glorifying him, nor at all willed or caused by him, but hated and
punished; yet he loses none of his complacency or glory by it, but
notwithstanding its malignity, shines gloriously in the perfection of all his
works.

. 41. Yea, more we say, that men sin under his Disposing power, and that he
will make use of their evil unto Good, and sin shall become an occasion of that
Glory to God (as sickness to the Physicion) of which it is no Cause or proper
Means, nor of it self cond^ceth thereunto. Yea, and that no Act as an Act, how
sinful soever, is done, but by Gods causation as he is the fountain of nature,
and prime Motor: Yea, more; that all the Effects and Consequents of sin that
are not sin it self, are under the Causal Government and disposal of God, who
will attain his Ends in all.

. 42. Therefore we differ but in this, Whether God get not all that glory which
Mr. St. floridly describes, notwithstanding sin, or on supposition of it as
barely permitted (negatively, but with a Decree or Volition of all the good
consequents occasioned by it,) rather than by sin it self, as a willed,
designed effect of his own necessitating* Negations, and in the positive part
of the acts as circumstantiated, of his determining premotion? Whether man's
permitted sin, be any of Gods works? And whether Gods glory be not rather non
obstante peccato, and also by occasion of it, supposed to be man's work only;
and by all the good consequents caused by God, than by the sin it self as a
Means conducible, or a Cause?

. 43. For we deny not, that God could have *prevented all sin if he had so
resolved, and yet we believe not that such a permission is equivalent to a
necessitating Motion, or Privation, as Mr. Sterry would persuade us: To make a
creature no better than such as can do good if he will, and can be willing,
(with a decree to make many willing,) is much different from making the
creature bad, and then condemning him to Hell for being so, as an act of
Justice. Yet we doubt not, but the Divine Light will shortly give us all a
fuller discovery of that which shall vindicate the Wisdom, Goodness and Justice
of God, in his Government of man, than yet the wisest mortals have.

. 44. Either you suppose that God does all that he can do, or not. If yea, then
you suppose that he cannot (nor ever could) make any one Creature, Worm, or
Grass, more or less, greater or smaller, sooner or later, or otherwise, than he
does: which few will believe: (It being not for want of Power, but through
perfection of Wisdom and freedom of Will that he does no more.) But if God can
make one creature more, or one Motion more, and yet does not, I ask Whether you
dare call that non-agency by the name of Idleness or deficiency? If not, why
should the Non-causation of sinful Volitions in specie morali, or the leaving
free will to its own determination, be so called? Not to make more creatures,
or more physical motion, or not to give more Grace and Glory, is as much a
non-agency as not to determine a sinning Will.

. 45. As to all Mr. Sterry's Reasons against Free Will, they are so
Rhetorically rather than Logically delivered, that I think it not meet to
trouble the Reader with any further answer of them, or to suppose them to have
any more strength than those that other men plainlier have delivered.

. 46. I conclude with this repeated profession, that I am fully satisfied, that
all the rest of the Controversies, about Grace and Nature, and Predestination
and Redemption, as they stand between the Synod of Dort and the Arminians, are
of no greater moment than I have often expressed in this Book, nor worthy any of
that stir and contention, which men that sufficiently difference not Words,
Methods and Matter have made to the mischievous injury of the Church: And that
the true life of all the remaining difficulties, is in this controversy
between the defenders of Necessary Predetermination, and of Free Will; that is,
(not, What free will sinners have left, but) [Whether ever in Angels or
Innocent man, there was such a thing, as a will that can and ever did determine
it self to a Volition or Nolition in specie morali, without the predetermining
efficient necessitating premotion of God as the first Cause?] or as Hobbes
speaks, Whether ever a created will, did act, without a necessitating
premotion? And whether to will and to will freely, be all one? And whether the
will (except as to the kind of action) be not as much necessitated to will or
not will, as my Pen to write or not write? are we call not its acts Contingent
or free, either because they are what they are (Volitions,) or though
Ignorance, because we see not the moving Causes?

. 47. And if this hold, for my part I must confess, that I think the Religion
which agrees with it, must neither be so good as Dr. Twisses, Rutherfords,
Bradwardines, or Alvarez's, nor yet so bad as Hobbes's, or Spinosa's; but just
such as Mr. Sterry's or the old Platonic or Stoic Philosophers: I mean not
such as Mr. Sterry's was, (for I hear he was an excellent person;) but such as
his Book (though obscurely) intimates. And if any of that judgment have a
better or worse, it is not in consistency with his own principles.

FINIS.
Catholic Theology: The Second BOOK. The SYNODISTS and ARMINIANS CALVINISTS
and LUTHERANS DOMINICANS and JESUITS
Reconciled: OR, AN END OF THE CONTROVERSIES ABOUT GODS DECREES and GRACE, and
MAN'S FREE WILL, MERIT, etc. If men are willing. A RETREAT TO THE MILITANT
DIVINES, WHO HAVE TOO LONG WARRED ABOUT WORDS, and UNREVEALED THINGS; and KEPT
THE CHURCH OF GOD IN FLAMES, and DRAWN CHRIST'S MEMBERS TO HATE, REPROACH and
PERSECUTE EACH OTHER FOR THEY KNEW NOT WHAT. In a Dialogue between C. (a
^alvinist) A. (an Arminian) and B. (the R^conc^ler): and others. By Richard
Baxter.

Tim. 2. 14, 15, 16. Of these put them in remembrance, charging them before the
Lord, that they strive not about words, to no profit, but to the subverting of
the hearers. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a Workman that needs
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth. But shun profane and
vain bablings; for they will increase unto more ungodliness: and their word
will eat as does a Canker. LONDON: Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Princes
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1675.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Book.
The first days Conference, about Predestination.
THe need of conciliatory endeavors, p. 1, 2. What this undertaking is, p. 3.
Predetermination to Sin excluded; the case briefly opened, p. 4. The first
Crimination by the Arminian: Of eternal absolute Reprobation, p. 6. Whether a
thing not existent may be a Moral cause; or God's Acts have Causes, p. 7. How
far Gods Decrees may be said to have extrinsick Causes, p. 8. The second
Crimination, Of God's decreeing Sin; either to predetermine it, or the event,
or his permission, p. 9. The third Crimination: Necessitution of Sin by
Negative decrees. Negation of decrees opened, p. 11. The fourth Crimination;
The pure Mass whether the object of Predestination, p. 12. Decrees
distinguished, p. 13. The fifth Crimination; Do the Decrees proceed according
to the order of Intention, or of Execution, p. 14. The sixth Crimination;
Denying all Conditional Decrees, p. 16. The seventh Crimination; Of absolute
Election, p. 17. The eighth Crimination; Leading men to presumption hereby, p.
18. The ninth Crimination; Setting necessity and fate, p. 19. The tenth
Crimination; Making God a Respecter of persons, by unequal Decrees, p. 21. The
eleventh Crimination; Making God and Ministers Dissemblers, p. 22. Crim. 12. Of
a vain power given, p. 23.
The second days Conference, The Criminations by the Calvinist.
What good this conciliatory attempt may do, p. 24. The first Crimination,
Denying election uncomfortable. The second Crim. An election of Things instead
of Persons, p. 26. The third Crim. Denying a decree of the first special Grave.
The fourth Crim. of Scientia Media, p. 27. The fifth Crim. Denying Absolute
Reprobation. Reprobation opened, p. 29, 30. Whether God will Sin, p. 30. or the
Act, p. 31. How far man can cause his act undetermined, p. 32. Pretenses for
Gods causing Sin, answered. How God causes the effect and not the Volition, p.
85, etc. What God does about Sin, p. 37. The sixth Crim. Of Conditional
decrees, p. 38. The seventh Crim. Of foreseen Merit, p. 39. The eighth Crim. Of
making many Elections, p. 40. The ninth Crim. Ordering the Decrees according to
Execution, p. 41. How God does Velle finem. The Case opened, p. 42. The tenth
Crim. denying an eternal cause of futurition, p. 45. Whether futurity be any
thing, and have any cause, p. 48.
The third days Conference, Of Universal and Special Redemption.
The first Crim. Of the Armin. denying Christ's office to the world, p. 50.
Calvinists for universal Redemption, what all agree in, p. 54. To which I here
add the Church of England Homil. li. 2. p. 185. [God so loved the world that he
gave his only Son, etc.] But to whom did he give him? He gave him to the whole
world, that is to say, to Adam, and to all that should come after him! O Lord,
what had Adam, or any other man deserved at God's hands, that he should give us
his only Son? We are all miserable Sinners, damnable persons, justly driven out
of Paradise, justly excluded from Heaven, and justly condemned to Hell. See a
Learned Gentleman's Reasons for Univers. Redemp. (yet living) Mr. Polehill, of
Gods Decrees.
Did Christ die equally for all, p. 55. The second Crim. Denying express
Scripture, p. 57. The Synod of Dort vindicated, p. 59. The third Crim. They
deny the Gospel Covenant it self, p. 61. The fourth and fifth Crim. Making an
impossibility, or falsehood the object of faith, p. 62. The sixth, seventh, and
eighth Crim. Disabling Ministers to Preach, leaving most men remediless;
teaching Infidels impenitence, p. 63. The ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth
Crim. Exempting men from Hell torments; justifying Ingratitude; denying
Christ's Kingdoms; tempting men to Infidelity, p. 64, 65.
The fourth days Conference.
The Calvinists first Crim. Making Christ dye in vain, for them that he knew
would perish, p. 66. The second Crim. An imperfect Savior, p. 67. The third
Crim. Dying for men in Hell, p. 67. The fourth Crim. To die for those whom he
would not pray for, p. 68. The fifth Crim. Making Christ not to purchase faith,
p. 69. The sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Crim. Uncertain conditional
Redemption; no more for the saved than the damned: Christ's sheep to know him
before he know them; Pardoning Original Sin to all, p. 70. Crim. 10. To die for
the Seed of the Serpent, p. 72.
The fifth days Conference, Of Man's Sinfulness, and Impotency, and of
Free Will.
The Armin. Crim. 1st. Denying all free will, they deny all Morality, p. 73.
What Liberty is here meant? largely discussed, to p. 79. What Liberty we hold,
p. 79. Does Original Sin necessitate all evil, p. 82. The second Crim. Denying
Power to believe, p. 85. What [Power] [can] and [cannot] mean, p. 86. fullier
opened, p. 87, etc. Questions hence answered, p. 96, etc. The advantage of some
by denying Habits besides Power and Acts, p. 99. Habits proved, p. 100. Crim.
3. Making all men utterly and equally bad, p. 101. Crim. 4. Infants, Heathens,
and most men made and necessitated to sin and damnation, p. 103. Of Infants
remedy, p. 104. Parents sin defiles them, p. 105. Of Heathens Case, p. 106.
Crim. 5. That none can do more good or less evil than he does, p. 107.
The sixth days Conference.
The Calvinists Crim. 1. Denying original sin, p. 109. Original sin opened, p.
111. Crim. 2. That men can use their Naturals to prepare for Grace, p. 113.
What man can do, further opened, p. 114. Crim. 3. Holding free will to good, p.
121. A manifold Liberty evinced by many Questions, p. 122. Whether any that use
it not have liberty to believe, p. 124, 125. Crim. 4. That men are not dead in
sin, p. 125. Crim. 5. That man is not merely passive in his first conversion,
p. 126. Crim 6. None damned for Adam's sin only, p. 128.
The seventh days Conference, Of Sufficient and Effectual Grace.
Crim. 1. Of the Armin. Denying sufficient Grace they damn men for mere
Impossibilities, p. 130. Had Adam sufficient Grace, p. 132. Of the 13th. Artic.
of the Church of England, p. 133. How God wills men's Salvation, p. 134. Crim.
2. Making Grace unresistible, p. 136. How far they do so.
The eighth days Conference.
Crim. 1. Of the Calv. They assert universal sufficient Grace, p. 139. Queries
evincing Common Grace, p. 139. The greatness of their error that deny it, p.
141. Does this satisfy, while God that can save men will not, p. 143. What
Grace, and what sufficient Grace is, p. 145. Whether the same measure of Grace
called merely sufficient, be ever effectual, p. 148. What the Grace in that
question is. Whether a vis impressa? Of determination by God, and by the
Intellect, p. 151, 152, 153. Crim. 2. By Grace they mean Nature as Pelagius, p.
156. What Nature is? Grace, how far supernatural, p. 158. Crim. 3. Making Grace
but a Moral swasion, p. 160. Physical operation what, p. 162. Crim. 4. They
hold faith to be acquired and not infused, p. 162. What acquired and infused
means, p. 163. Dr. Twisse about this noted, p. 167, etc. Crim. 5. They hold
Grace given according to works or preparation, p. 169. Crim. 6. They make the
Will to have no sin or Grace, p. 171. Crim. 7. They make Grace resistible, p.
172. The case further opened, p. 173, 174, etc. Is there any universal second
cause of Grace under God, (as the Sun in Nature) which works resistibly (and
God by it) ad modum recipientis? p. 177. Christ how far such, ib. Crim. 8. They
make man's Will to make himself to differ, etc. p. 180. What differing is? what
the causes? as to believing, ib. How far God works by universal Grace, p.
185. Who made thee to differ, opened, p. 186. Crim. 9. Man's will makes Gods
Grace effectual, and not Gods, p. 186. Whence Grace is effectual, p. 189.
Differencing Grace what, p. 192. It not all the question of the Divine Impress,
p. 193, 194. The case summarily opened, p. 196.
The ninth days Conference, Of Perseverance.
The Arm. Crim. 1. They make fear and care to be folly, p. 198. Crim. 2. They
cherish all sin, p. 200. Crim. 3. Their Doctrine is uncomfortable on pretense
of confuting, p. 200, 201. Both sides charge each other thus. A middle way
about Perseverance, avoiding both, p. 204. Crim. 4. They dishonor Gods Image
making heinous sin consistent with it, p. 204. Crim. 5. Immodesty and
singularity contradicting all the ancient Church, p. 206. Crim. 6.
Contradicting express Scripture, p. 207.
The tenth days Conference. The Calv. Criminations about Perseverance.
Crim. 1. They overthrow the comfort of believers, that deny Perseverance, p.
208. What comfort may be had by such, p. 211. Crim. 2. and 3. They make God or
his Covenant mutable, p. 212. Crim. 4. They deny the Promise of Perseverance,
p. 213. Crim. 5. They infer a second Regeneration, p. 214. Crim. 6. They go
against the Doctrine of Augustine, etc. p. 215. The just extenuation of this
last controversy, p. 215.
The eleventh days Conference, with a Libertine (called Antinomian) vindicating
sound Doctrine against diverse accusations.
Chap. 1. Whether we must call men to come to Christ without Preparation, p.
220. Chap. 2. Of denying our own Righteousness, p. 223. Personal Righteousness
necessary, p. 224. Of Reward and worthiness (or Merit) p. 225. The truth
largely opened about merit and reward, p. 230. Reasons for it, p. 232, etc. Chapter
3. Whether our own Righteousness conduce to our Justification? Or we are any
way justified by it, p. 238. Chapter 4. Whether the Gospel be a Law of Christ, p.
243. Chapter 5. Whether Christ (and not we) be the only party in Covenant with God,
p. 245. Chapter 6. Whether the new Covenant have conditions, p. 247. Chapter 7. Whether
justifying faith be a believing in Christ as Teacher, Ruler, etc. or only a
receiving his Righteousness, p. 251. Chapter 8. Of Faiths Justifying
Instrumentally, p. 251. Chapter 9. Whether Faith it self be Imputed for
Righteousness, p. 252. Chapter 10. Whether it be a change in God to justify the
(before) unjustified, p. 256. Chapter 11. Whether a justified man should fear
becoming unjustified? ibid. Chapter 12. Of man's power to believe: and our calling
the unregenerate to Duty, p. 258. Chapter 13. Of the witness of the Spirit, and of
Evidences of Justification, p. 261. The Conclusion.
The twelfth days Conference with a (learned) Lutherane.
Whether the difference among Christians about Merit, be as great as some think
it, p. 263. Some Protestants (and the late Lecturers) Reasons against Merit
proposed, p. 265. and the case opened. Of the Doctrine of the Council of Trent,
p. 266, etc. Of condignity, p. 267. The Doctrine of Vega, Scotus, Waldensis,
Eckius, Marsilius, Bellarmine, Greg. Armin. Durand. Brugens. Cusanus,
Stapleton, Bradwardine, Soto, Bonaventure st. Clara, and all the Schoolmen as
he judges, Carthus: Cassander, p. 270. Holiness and Glory a greater gift than
Glory without holiness, p. 271. Aquinas judgment. His confusion occasioned by
his opinion that the new Law is that which is in the heart, and not written,
viz. the Spirit (as the Quakers hold) ib. Vasquez denies Commutative Justice
in God, with all the School Doctors, (17 of them cited). He confuteth it (even
as to Christ). He denies proper Distributive Justice also in God, citing
Bonavent. Scotus, Durand. Palud. Gabriel, Alexand. Aquin. etc. p. 272, etc.
Aquinas sense, in Carbo's words, p. 275. Many Schoolmen deny as much as Legal
or Governing Justice in God. Ruiz cites for this Argent. Bassol. Suarez,
Pesant: Suarez says, God's promises are but naked Assertions declaring his
Will. Durand. that promises signify not obligation: Greg. Armin. That the
Crown is no Debt, but of free Ordination. Marsil. That God is no Debtor, but
free Giver: Scotus, Major, Ricard. deny God to be a Debtor by his promise, but
hold that Merits are such by Promise. Ruiz says (against Suarez) That Promises
are more than Assertions, but that God's obligation is to himself, p. 276.
Medina against Meriting Remission, p. 277. Against Preparation, p. 277.
Contarenus judgment. Fisher's of Rochester, p. 278. The words of Tolet, p. 280.
The thirteenth days Conference, with a Sectary.
Of the great errors, sin and danger which many Ignorant Professors fall into,
on the pretense of abhorring and avoiding Popery, p. 283. The sins of such as
Calumniate sound Teachers as favoring Popery, p. 285. Errors vended by some
Protestants through an injudicious opposition to Popery, p. 287. It Is necessary
that we mention them and repent of them, p. 288. Wherein these Sectaries agree
with the Papists while they over-oppose them, p. 289. The great mischief that
is done by railing at Truth as Popery, and calling good things Antichristian,
and prating thus before they understand, p. 289. More of such mischiefs, with
Counsel to the Guilty, p. 291, etc. Horrid Lies of Papists against Protestants,
instanced out of Tympius, should warn us that we imitate them not. More
Objections answered, p. 296, etc.
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A. (an Arminian) and B. (the Conciliator.)
THE First Days Conference ABOUT PREDESTINATION.
A. I perceive by your Writings, that you would make men believe, that the
differences between the Arminians and Calvinists, are matters of no such moment
as they are commonly judged to be, Ista quae nullus in dubium vocant,
Christianis omnibus me judicie sufficere deberent absquo ulteriori and
curiosiori investigations, tum intimae naturae, libertatis humanae, tum modi
qu^ gratia in nobis operatur, and quo ejus efficacia cum arbitrii nostri
liberate concilianda est, de quibus nulla diserto, clara, and expressa extant
in Scripturis or acula. But if they will needs be meddling, he wishes them
modesty and moderation. Le Blank de distinct. Great. These. 83.
and that the distance is very small, if men understood themselves; and you
would have it thought that you are the man fit for so great an undertaking, as
the conciliation of these differing Parties is. But to deal freely with you, I
take it to be but the effect of your own Ignorance, not understanding the
Controversies; and of your Pride, in overvaluing your own Parts and
Apprehensions: Or else you would never dream that you can come after such wits
as Augustine, and Pelagius, and Celestine; such as Aquinas, Scotus, Ockam,
Gregory Armi. Durandus, and their Followers; even such as Cajetane, Bannes,
Zumel, Alvarez, etc. such as Suarez, Vasquez, Molina, Fonseca, Ruiz, etc. such
Conciliators as Ariba, Gibieuf, Guil. Cameranius Scotus, Pennottus, Petr. a St.
Joseph, Ludov. a Dola, Jansenius, and his Followers, with abundance such, and
do that which none of these could do. But you are not the first Undertaker that
has miscarried.


B. If I have been guilty of vain boasting, cite my words, and I will retract
them: If not, these expressions speak but your prejudice. But, I pray let us
spend no time upon such Impertinences, but speak that to the matter which
tends to edify, that one of us may become the wiser at least. I first desire
you to tell me, Q. Whether the ending or narrowing this difference be not
exceeding desirable, could it be attained?


A. Yes, there is no man doubts of that.


B. Q. 2. And is not despair the enemy of all endeavors, and will any thing be
done without some hope?


A. And it is as true, that vain hopes cause labor in vain.


B. The worst then will be but the loss of my labor: And I will tell you of
what moment I judge the work.

1. In regard of the sinfulness of the Contentions: 2. In regard of the
Calamitous consequents.

1. The sinfulness I take to lie, 1. In the matter. 2. And in the manner of
prosecution.

I. Th^^e things I judge to be sinful in the ^atter ^ 1. That many differences
are pretended to be* where indeed are none. 2. Differences about wo^^^s* and
second ^otions, and ration^ En^^ties ar^ pretended ^o be differences about real
Doctrines. 3. Little Differences are aggravated into great ones. 4.
Unsearchable things are disputed, which no mortal man can understand.


^. As to the manner^ it is done* 1. Preposterously, prefer^ing these Disputes
before the greater business of the Ministry. Read in Procli Analect. page 646.
the Epistle of Cyril Alex. to Proclus against the censuring of Theodor.
Mopsuest. and his works, lest it tend to division and tumult in the Churches,
Et Ep. 7. ibid. Joan. Antiochini ad Cyril. It would make one ashamed of humane
nature, to read how basely the Dominians and some others (Alvarez de Aux. Disp.
115. p. 468, 469. and saepe Zumel, and many more, and Jansenius, Arnoldus, etc.
yea, Gibieus, etc.) do abuse Luther and Calvin, merely to make other Papists
believe, that they differ from them where they do not. And all through a carnal
factious fear of losing their interest in their own Popish Party; as if we
differed not enough, but must persuade the world, that we differ where we do
not. See but Alvar^z. l. 12. Disp* 121. page 492. where he cites six Errors of
Calvin's, as differing from him; whereas the ^our first are but one lie
variously worded, and the two last no better* for in all of them Calvin says
not one jo^ more in sense than the D^minican^ do, whatever harsh word he may
find in him; and the generality of the Calvinists (as they are called by
scorners) say much less.
2. Perversely, wasting abundance of time and study about them, by which the
Church might have been better served; and writing so many great Volumes of
them, in crabbed Scholastic style, I as must needs tempt multitudes to a
lamentable loss of their precious time, before they can come to know that they
lose it. 3. And, by sidings, and factio^s, and sharp reflections on each other,
quen^^ing Christian Love, and destroying Concord, and weakening the Church.

II. The calamitous Consequents are, 1. The long, and yet unhealed alienation
of Contenders minds. 2. The foresaid time and toil which those Volumes cost. 3.
The abundance of idle talk, and lost studies about them, by the generality of
Students. 4. The dangerous Factions made by it in the Churches. 5. The tempting
each Party to confuse, slander, and blot the Names of one another. 6.
Multitudes of Prelates and Pastors have been tempted by it into Persecutions.
7. Yea, wars and bloodshed in more Countries than one has followed ^^^tly by
this incension. 8. And hereby the poor people on each ^^^e are kept in bitter
uncharitable thoughts of one another; and especially of those Pastors who are
against their mind.

And because things nearest us are first discerned, begin at home, and try
whether all this be true or not. 1. Hearken to the Ministers and people on each
side. Do you not hear that it seems enough to them to slight each other with
uncharitable alienation, when it is said, O such a one is a Calvinist, or such a
one is an Arminian; yea, perhaps the Jesuit shall come in. Read over the many
writings about Mountague's time, on his part, and against him, by Yates,
Carlton, Watton, Burton, etc. But especially read Peter Heylin his writings on
this Subject, and above all, his Life of Archbishop Laud, where he persuades
us that this very Controversy was a grand part of the difference, which on
both sides was prosecuted, till it brought us to our doleful War.

2. Go but to the Low Countries, and see what work it has made there, from the
days of Arminius to this day* especially between Prince Maurice and the States,
at the death of Barnevelt, the imprisonment of Grotius, etc. The Synod at Dort,
and all the strife and discontent before and after it.

3. Peruse but the Volumes written on one side by Suec^nus, Arminius,
Grevinchovius, Corvinus, Tilenus, Episcopius, Curcellaeus, Grotius, etc. with
many Lutherans; And on the other side by Gomarrus, Lubbertus, Macchovius, etc.
Molinaeus, Amesius, Dr. Twisse, Rutherford, Spanhemius, etc. and think how sad
such Combats are.

4. Think what a lamentable distance to this day is kept up between the
Lutherans and Calvinists in all Countries, and much upon the account of these
same Controversies: And what bitter Books the Lutherans have written, comparing
the Calvinists to Papists, Turks, etc. and how little Mr. Ducy by forty years
Labor did to reconcile them; and how small success all other Reconcilers have
had, though excellent learned judicious men; such as Calixtus, Johan. Bergins,
Conrad. Bergins, Ludov. Crocius, Mat. Martinius, Isleburg, Testaidus,
Amyraldus, Placens, Capellus, Dallaeus, Blondel, Davenant, Hall, Carlton,
Abbot, Morton, Preston, etc.

5. Think of the great Conflicts in France and Flanders, between the Jansenists
and their Adversaries; and the multitude of elaborate Volumes between the
Dominicans and the Jesuits: And of how many Ages continuance those contests
have been.

6. Then rise up to the Time and Case of Faustus Rhegiensis, Cassianus, and the
Massilienses, and their Adversaries; and the hard Characters left by those
controversies on the names of worthy men.

7. From thence ascend to Chrysostom and his Reproaches, and Austin's Censures
on the other side, with all the Conflicts which he and his Abettors, Prosper
and Fulgentius had with the Pelagians and Semipelagians of those times.

8. And lastly, read and pity almost all the Fathers, especially of the Greek
Church, whose Names are now blotted with the censure of speaking too like our
Arminians and Jesuits; and after all this, you will sure think this Contention
was a very ill work, if it be proved causless; and you will think that it is
time to end it, if it be possible. To which end, an attempt is not
discommendable, if it should prove lost as to the greater part of men. And
some, I doubt not, God will bless it to, at least to increase their love of
peace.


A. I pray you tell me what is your Undertaking, and in what measure it is that
you think this Work may be accomplished?


B. My Undertaking is this, [To prove, that in the points of Predestination and
Redemption, there is no difference between moderate men of each Party, Eadem
enim difficultas fuit semper donationis in tempore, and praefinitionis aut
praedestinationis in praescientia. Cum ergo in tempore detur nobis (prima
gratia) sine ulla causa ratione, aut condition sine qua non, sic etiam
praedestinatur. Neque solum negari debet ratio, cur unus praedestinetur, alii
ver^ non, ut quidam dicebant, sed etiam quare aliquis praedestinetur nulla
facta comparatio^^, siquidem nulla ratio esse potuit ob quam Deus dederit
primam gratiam, nisi per modum sinis. Vasquez. in 1. Them* Disp. 91, c. 7. You
see how much a Jesuit grants.
but what is resolved into the points of Grace and Free Will; and in the points
of Grace and Free Will there is no real difference, but what is resolved into
the question of the degree of Gods cooperating influx, compared with man's
agency, and with it self as on several Objects; which will prove either no
difference at all, or else about a thing past man's Understanding: And, that
only in the point of perseverance, there is a real perceptible difference; but
such as is not worthy to be insisted on, to the breach of Charity, or the
Churches peace, but must consist with toleration and mutual love.]


A. I know not whether this great Undertaking look more smilingly on the Times
to come, or frowningly on the Times past. For if this be true, what thoughts,
what names do we deserve for troubling the Christian World, so perniciously and
distractingly, with a feigned difference. But, I pray you, tell me in general,
how you will manifest all this?


B. 1. You must give me leave to tell you who they are that I undertake this
Reconciliation of. 2. And then, how I shall perform it.

I. It is not every violent Contender, that runs into such palpable Errors
as the common cause needs not, and will say any thing rather than agree, that
I am speaking of. About these matters, there are two Parties that stand on each
extreme, who are not to be called Calvinists and Arminians; but by other Names,
for their other Opinions. These I intend to confute distinctly, instead of
reconciling them, which i^ impossible, but by reforming them.

1. On the one side, I undertake not the Reconciliation of the Predeterminants,
who hold, That [Free-will is nothing but will a related to Reason, Lubentia
juxta rationem; and that all its acts are as truly necessitated by the
efficacions premotion of God, as is the motion of a Clock, or other Engine, or
of a Bruit (though they will needs call them free, because they are Volitions,
as if willing and free-willing were words of the same signification:) and that
is deifying of man's Will or any Creature, to say, that it can move or determine
it self to this Object rather than another, without a Physical perdetermining
efficient premotion by God, at the first total Cause, notwithstanding God
should uphold its natural power, and ^^ the cause of Nature afford his
necessary universal Concourse; and that to think that a Will thus predetermined
by God could have forborne its act, it to deifie it also.] They that think that
God cannot make a Creature, whose Will can determine it self without his
predetermination to that act as circumstantiated, though God uphold all its
powers, and all natural concurrent^ else, and that a self-determined, not
predetermined by premotion is a God, or a Contradiction, I am to confute, and
not to reconcile.


A. How will you confute them?


B. That is to be the work of a Disputation on that Point. It shall now suffice
to mind you, that it seems to me very plainly to subvert Christianity, if not
all Religion. For when Adam's sin, and all the sin in the World of Men or
Devils, is resolved into the absolute unresistible Will and efficiency of God,
as the first total Cause, and that it had been as impossible to have done
otherwise as to be Gods, or to Conquer God; it is easy to perceive whether God
^ate such sin, and whether Christ died to signify his hatred of it; and
whether he will damn men for not being Gods; and whether he that is said
unresistibly to predetermin^ by immediate efficiency the thought, will and
tongue of every Liar to every lie that ever was spoken, can have any word,
delivered by man, which we can be sure is true. In a word, if this Opinion
hold, it will allow no other Religion in the World, but this much, [To believe
that moral Good and Evil are but like natural Good and Evil, which God does
cause a^ a free Benefactor, differencing his Gifts in various proportions, as
he sees meet; as he differenceth Stars from Stones, and Men from Dogs, and
equally causes the wisdom of Man, and the poison of the Toad or Serpent; and
so will make such differences in this World, and the next (if there be any) as
pleases him, as he does here between one Horse that is pampered, and another
that is tired out with labor.] Well may they cry down the Doctrine of Merit
and Demerit that go this way. It has pleased God, by permitting Hobbs to
reduce this Principle of the Wills necessitation unto its proper practice,
thereby to cast more shame upon it in our Times for this Authors sake, than we
could have expected, if none but such excellent persons as Alvarez And more
plainly, yet Bradwardine who makes the necessitating cause of Sin and Hell,
that God will have it so, and none can resist him.
and his Brethren, Dr. Twisse and Rutherford had maintained it. But as Davenant
well says, It is an Opinion of the Dominicans, which Protestants have no mind
to own.

And there are two sorts that thus subject the Will to absolute caused
necessity: 1. Those aforesaid, the Dominicans, who assist the predetermining
premotion of God, as necessary to every act natural and free. 2. Those that
make the Will as much necessitated by a train of natural second Causes, which
is Hobbs his way, (and alas, the way of great and excellent healing C^mero).
For they hold, That the Will is necessitated by the Intellect, and the
Intellect by the Object ^ and God made both Will, and Intellect, and Object,
(and Law). And so Camero has nothing to resolve the necessitating cause of
Adams sin into, but the Devil. But who necessitated the Devil to sin? This will
be all one, when it is discussed. And if self-determining freedom of Will in
Man be impossible, it will be impossible in the Angels; for they are not Gods.

Therefore I now deal with none but those who confess, that God made Man's Will
at first with a natural self-determining power and freedo^, suited to this
earthly state of government; and that Adam's Will by that same measure of Grace
which he had, could have forborne his sin, at the instant when he sinned.

II. The other extreme which I reconcile not, but confute, Yet I am not
^^^tating the old way of ana^^^^a thing all the hard sayings or opinions of
others, that being it that I write this against, of which course the Epistles
of Joan. Antioch. 5. 6, etc. and of cyril. A^ix. to Pro^^^s against his so
using Theoa^^. Mops. in Pro^^^ ^^^^ are worth the rea^^ing. besides the fore
named.
It Is* the Pelagians, who deny Original Sin, and acknowledge not the pravity of
vitiated nature; and consequently must deny the need of Grace in the same
proportion, and so far the need of a Savior and a Sanctifier. And how far this
also subverteth Christianity, you may perceive.


A. But both these Parties have a great deal of very plausible reason for their
Opinions, as you may see in the Dom^n^oans on one side, and Hobbes against
Bra^hall, and in Dr. Jeremy Tailor, his Tre^^. of Repentance, on the other; and
therefore are not to be so slighted.


B. I do not slight them, but confute them. I confess that the cases are not
without difficulty, yea not a little. But I am surer that Religion is not to be
renounced, than they can be of the truth of their Opinions. And do you think
that if one of them had written for the Cause of ^^* li^n, Porphyrie or Celsus
against Christ, that they would not have spoken as plausibly, and made the case
seem as difficult, at least to be argumentatively answered as they here do.


A. Now let us here your way or terms before mentioned, what they are?


B. II. I suppose every sober man will allow me, 1. To distinguish Names and
Words from Things, and Vas^u. in 1. Tho. q. 2^. a. 3. d. 4^. c. 1. Bona pars
huju^ controversi^ (an reprobationis detur causa ex part^ reprobi) d^ v^ce est.
nominal Controversies from real; and to that end to open the a^biguity of
words as I go along: And to ^^ew when it is an arbitrary Logical notion, or an
en^ ration^^ only that men contend about, instead of a reality. 2. I may be
allowed, when confusion lapeth up many doubtful questions in one, to
distinguish them* that each may have its proper answer. 3. I may be allowed to
^ast by, as unfit for contention, all those un^evealed and unsearchable Points,
which none of the Contenders know at all, nor ever will do in this World. 4.
And I will take leave to lay by the rash words of particular Writers, as not to
be imputed to any others, nor to the main Cause; or as that which I am not
obliged to defend, reconcile, nor at all to me^dle with. 5. And when all this
is done, you shall see what A^to^^ the remaining differences will prove.


A. Begin then with the first Article of Pr^d^stination.


B. Remember my ^ndertaking, that it is not to justify every ^^^^ words that
has written on the Point; and therefore I will not lose time in citing or
defending Authors: But produce you all your Acc^sations, as against the Cause
of the sober moderate Cal^^^ists, and suppose me to be the person with whom you
have to do.


The first Crimination.
A. 1. My first Charge is, That you hold that God does from eternity Decree to
damn in Hell fire the far greatest part of men, without respect See the
conclusion of the Canons of the Synod at Dort, where this very Charge is denied
with detestation. And can you tell better what men hold than they themselves.
Episcop. Justit. Theol. l. 4. Sect. 5. cap. 6. p. 412. Col. 2. 52. Sect. 2.
Statuitur, Deum cos secundum ^perasua judicare -- and ^b. rebellionem and
contumaci-am little dolere, irasci, etc. dam^are, etc. cum tamen non modo
absolute eos perir^ and peccare voluerit, sed and originario tali labe infectos
nasci fec^rit, unde omnia ista peccata scaturire ac fluere inevitabiliter
necesse erat. Quod quid aliud esse potest, quam histrionica quaedam and sc^nica
actio?
to any foreseen Sin, or cause in them, but merely because ^^^^ pleases him
to do it: This is your Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation.


B. That words may not deceive us, let us in the beginning on^^ for all know
what you mean by the word [Decree.]


A. I mean the resolution or purpose of his Will de event^, tha^ this shall be.


B. And, I suppose, we are agreed; 1. That Gods Will is nothing but his Essence
denominated with respect to some Good as its Object. 2. And there was no Object
really existent from eternity but God himself. 3. That Understanding and Will
are not univocal terms spoken of God and of man, nor of the same formal
Conception. And 4. That our formal Conception of Understanding and Will is only
of them as they are in man, and not as in God; and so this to us is the prius
significatum. 5. And therefore that God does not understand or will in our
sense formaliter, but only eminenter. 6. And lastly, That Mortals know not just
how Gods eminent Intellection and Volition differ from the formal in Man. All
this you must grant me, or be singular and ignorant.


A. All this is past denial; but proceed to the Case.


B. Do you differ from us de eventu, whether there be a Hell, or yet of the
number of those that are damned?


A. No: or if we do about the Case of Heathens, that belongs not to this
Point.


B. Do you differ from us about the Cause of men's Damnation? We say that God
damneth no man, but for Sin; yea, for Sin impenitently continued in to the
last, against all the mercy which tended to their Cure.


A. So far we are agreed: But it is not the cause of damnation which I speak of,
but the cause of the Decree.


B. Do you not hold that what ever God does, he wills to do?


A. Yes, God does nothing without a will to do it, at least consequently.


B. Do you think that God wills any thing to day, which he willed not
yesterday, and so from eternity?


A. No, we do not with Vostius make God mutable.


B. Good still: you grant then that God damneth men; that he damneth them for
sin; that he does it willingly; that he willed it from eternity. And do you
think that from eternity here was any thing but God?


A. No.


B. Then can that which is not be a cause; was there any thing but God himself
to be the Cause of Gods Will from eternity?


A. Not in esse reali, but there was in esse cognito.


B. So: now the game begins: Thus the World is chea^ed and troubled by Logical
Notions, and mere words. Is that esse cognitum any thing or nothing? If
nothing, it is no Cause; If any thing, is it God or a Creature? It can be no
Creature, because it is eternal: If God, you do but say, That God caused his
own Will.


A. It is Gods foreknowledge of Sin, which causes his Decree or Will.


B. 1. Even foreknowledge it self, say the Schools, is but the same with
knowledge, and spoken (say they) but to the respect and sense of man. There
being neither pri^s vel postori^s, before or after in eternity. But this I now
insist not on. 2. It is commonly taken for blasph^my, to talk of a Cause of
God, or any thing in God. If Gods Will be his Essence, it has no Cause. He
causes not himself, being no Effect. 3. If this were so as you say, yet still
you make but God himself the Cause of his own Will by his knowledge. Vasquer in
1. The. d. 91. says of the Cause of Gods Decree, Divine voluntatis non solum
nullam esse causam finalem and motivam, per modum objecti, sed etiam nullum
esse objectum creatum quod possit Deo esse ratio volendi aliud, sed solam suam
bonitatem: Posse tamen unum creatum objectum esse rationem and causam alterius:
and italicet Deus non velit unum objectum creatum propter aliud, velle tamen
unam rem creatam esse propter aliam, quia ^na est causa alt^rius. Non erg^ ^^^^
mus an aliud ^^^^ ratio ^^tiva Deo per modum ^^^^ ut velit nos pr^d^stinare,
praeter suam bonitatem nihil enim esse potest.

Id. ib. disp. 91. c. 4. Respectu voluntatis Dei nihil creatum est id cuj^s
gratia, and ratio nolendi aliquid; sed propter quod c^tera esse vult Deus.


For Si^ f^re-seen is no Sin, and nothing is no Cause; so that you your self
resolve all into God. And indeed, what can be a cause of the first Cause, or
any thing in him?

Use not tergiversation, and vain words now, and tell me what you have to say.


A. A thing not existent, but foreseen, may be ^ moral Cause, though not a
physical; and so foreseen Sin may be to God.


B. 1. Yet dare you talk of a Cause of God. There is nothing in God but God. To
be a cause of his Will, is commonly said to be a cause of his Essence; And
shall so base a thing a^ Sin cause God? 2. We are still at the cheating Game,
of playing with ^rbitrary Notions. What mean you by a moral Cause? If a true
cause of moral Being* that is one thing: If any thing that is not physically or
properly, but by moral imputation only a cause of any event, that is another
thing. The first you dare not own, as if any thing which is nothing (Sin not
existent) were a Cause of Gods Will. The second Cause is called Cause
metaphorica: It is really no Cause; but that, for which the Agent shall have
such praise or dispraise as belongs to one that ^^^^ equivocally a Cause* 3.
Therefore if you use not the word [Cause] equivocally, your rule is false.
Nothing is no moral Cause. You will instance in good destr^d, in fine nondum
existente, etc. But I answer you, Good and amiable are Accidents or Modes,
which are never found but in an existent entity or subject. A negatione
subjecti ad negationem accidentis, and a negatione est secundi Adjecti ad
negationem est tertii, valet argumentum. That which is not, is not good or
amiable: Therefore that which existeth not is no Cause. But if we will let go
the toy, and come to the matter; It is no other good, but the desire of good,
or the apprehension of the ^^^^rity of good which causes; so that all the
Cause is in the Agent. 4. The common reason of man must acknowledge, that when
any m^n says, That sin which is no sin, and nothing as foreseen is the moral
cause of Gods Will, he must needs mean no real cause; Because to be a cause, is
tertium Adjectum, and presupposes to be* That which is not, is not a cause;
much less of God, or of his Will.


A. I can show you, that you overthrown the Christian Religion by your Logic:
For if this hold true, then the fore sight of Christ's Incarnation and
Sufferings, etc. was no moral true cause of Gods Will to pardon Sin, and save
Souls, to those under the Promise before the Incarnation.


B. Your diversion turns us from the matter, but advantageth you not at all.
Would you bring it to deny so evident a Principle as this, that nothing can do
nothing, nor cause nothing. It was not Christ's Body or actual Suffering, not
yet existent, that caused Gods Will t^ pardon Sinners. Nor had Gods Will any
proper cause: But seeing God willed one thing to be the means of another, he
willed that Christ's Incarnation and Death should in the fullness of time
demonstrate his Justice, and make it agreeable to the ends of his Government to
dispense with the Law of Innocence, and to pardon Sin: And therefore (not
Christ's Death it self, but) God's Decree of the Death of Christ Incarnate, was
the cause of the Promise, and of the New Covenant made with Adam, and of the
Salvation of Believers then. Which Will or Decree is called by some the
interpellation or undertaking of the eternal Word.


A. But at least Sin foreseen is causa sine qua non.


B. Call it by what name you please, as long as you confess it to be no Cause,
(for causa sine qua non, is called Causa fatua, and is none) But it is not Sin
which is Causa sine qua non; for it is no sin from eternity.


A. It is the futurity of sin that is Causa sine qua non.


B. Yet more notions! what is futurity? any thing or nothing? nothing
certainly: For quoad ens, it is terminus diminuens; and nothing is no cause.
But it is Gods knowledge that Sin will be, which is to be called the Cause of
Gods Decree, as sine qua non, if any be. But I must deal most about futurition
with the Calvinists, when I come to save you from Dr. Twisse his Ferula.


A. I pray you then open me the matter as it is your self.


B. I will make your Cause better than you have made it; But not by making
other men's worse, but by opening the reconciling truth. 1. I shall tell you in
what sense Gods Will and Decrees may and must be said Predestinatio nihil ponit
in praedestinato inquit Aquin. 1. q. 23. a. 2.
to have an extrinsick cause, without change in God. 1. Know therefore that
Gods Essence is his Will, but not as Essence. To say that God is God, and that
God wills this or that, are not terms of the same signification. 2. Gods Will
is his Essence denominated from some amiable good as the Object; and so there
is ever quid respectivum in the notion of Will. 3. As God wills himself, the
Act being perfectly immanent, his Will is called himself much more properly,
than his Will of things extrinsick (which is ever either effectively, or at
least objectively transient;) Because it is God that wills, and that is
willed or loved, (which made many Ancients say, That this was the third Person
in the Trinity.) 4. But as God wills things ad extra, though it is his
Essence that so wills them; yet it is unfit to say simply, that this Will is
God; e. g. that to will Peter's Salvation is God, because the name Will here
includes the thing willed. 5. And therefore when we speak of Gods Will in the
universal notion, as abstracted from all particular Objects and Acts, it is
less inconvenient to say simply, that this Will is God, than when we speak of
his Will in act ad extra. By this time you may see, that though Gods Will, as
his Essence, has no cause; yet his Will as denominated extrinsecally from the
Object, may have some kind of Cause that is Alvarez himself says, that by a
Cause he means also any objective condition or reason of the Act.
Objective, which is quasi materia actus, and the terminus sine quo non; that
is, Gods Will is not denominated a complacency in Christ existent, or in Peter
regenerate, This is all that Ruiz his Reasons prove De Vol. Dei disp. 115.
Sect. 4. p. 102 Who says, that there is more than extrinsick denomination; Et
relatio rationis ^um realis formalitas. But he does but show by his quodammodo,
that he knows not what to say.
or his understanding, a seeing that the World was good, before any of these
things did exist. So that by extrinsick denomination, without any change in
God, he may and should be said de novo to know things to be existent, to be
past, to will things as existent with complacency, or will them with
displicency: But not to will the futurity of men's damnation de novo; but yet
his Will of the futurity of men's damnation has several degrees of the
Objective Cause, from whence it is denominated: As in esse cognito, the person
who is the Object is in order of nature first a man, a subject, and then a
Sinner, and a Despiser of Mercy, and then a damnable Sinner. And so these are
indeed conditions in the Object, or Causae sine quibus non, or Objective
material-constituent causes; not in themselves, but the foresight of them; not
of Gods Will as his Essence, nor of his Will as a Will, but of his Will as
extrinsecally denominated, a Decree to damn Judas; e. g. because no otherwise
is Judas an Object capable of giving such an extrinsick denomination to Gods
Will.

II. Both you and I hold, and must hold, that God decrees to damn all that
shall be damned. Vasquez in 1. Tho. q. 23. a. 3. p. 709. Conclusio (quod Deus
aliquos repro^at) est de fide constat ^nim ex scriptura multos a Deo reprobari.
Vid. Ru^z de pr^de fin. Tract. 2. per totum.
But it is false, that we hold that he does it without any respect to foreseen
sin. For 1. He fore-seeth this Sin as the only meritorious cause of their
damnation; what he does in time, that is it which he decreed to do from
eternity: But in time he damneth no man but for Sin; therefore from eternity he
decreed to damn no man but for Sin: For sin, I say, as the cause of damnation,
which Dr. Twisse does frequently profess. 2. And though this Sin can be no
proper efficient cause of Gods Volition or Decree, yet it is a presupposed
necessary qualification in the Object, as foreseen in the Mind of God, and so,
as aforesaid, is an Objective Cause as foreseen.

III. The execution of Justice, and glorification of it, and Gods Holiness
thereby is good, and fit to be the Object of Gods Volition or Decree. But in
the word Reprobation is in most men's sense included much, which we hold not,
which is to be opened further anon.

IV. And as to the absoluteness of Gods Decree to damn those that are dammed; I
think you will not deny it your self, supposing them to be foreseen finally
impenitent Sinners. God does not only will, that all the finally impenitent
shall be damned; nor only that, e. g. Judas shall be damned, if he be finally
impenitent; But also that Judas as foreseen finally impenitent, shall
certainly be damned. So that when the condition is foreseen in the Recipient
or Object; it is no longer a mere conditional Decree, but absolute, supposing
that condition. In all this we are agreed.


The second Crimination.
A. II. But that is not all; But you hold, That God eternally decreed men's sin;
yea, all the sin of Men and Devils; some say, That he decreed to predetermine
men insuparably to the forbidden Act; and the moderatest, that he Vid.
Episcopii Resp. ad qu. 64. qu. 33. page 32. ^bi dicit, Deum decrevisse ut
Judaei Christum e medio tolleren, ex praescientia quod id liber^ voluntate,
facturi essent, atque inde praedictiones certas natas esse.
decreed the event, that Sin should come to pass ipso permittente quamvis non
efficiente; or at least, that he decreed his permission of it.


B. I. The first sort are those few, whom I in the beginning renounced; of whom
the Dominicans, and good Dr. Twisse, and Rutherford his Follower (de
providentia) are the chief. I easily confess to you, that God made the Law, and
God made man, and God makes the Objects, and God causes the Act as a natural
Act in genere, by a natural general concourse: And if it could be also proved,
that God were the chief efficient Determiner of the Will, and that by
necessitation to this Act or Object comparatively rather than to that, (e. g.
that David willed the Acts which were Murder and Adultery,) I could never deny
that God is the chief Author of the Sin. For the formal reason of Sin is
Relative, viz. Its disconformity to the Law of God. And the Relation resulteth
without any new Act or Agent, Posito fundamento and omni absoluto: And neither
God nor Man do or can do more to cause the Relation. And Dr. Twisse and
Rutherford so far saw this, that the up-shot of all their Vindication is; 1.
That God causes not sin as sin, but as a means to his Glory. 2. That God is
under no Law, (as we are) and therefore can be no Author of Sin. But, to the
first I answer; It Is one thing to will Sin as Sin, and another thing to cause
Sin as Sin. We charge them not, with inferring that God wills Sin as Sin; but
Nullus est Catholicus qui ignoret peccatum non esse effectum praedestinationis;
etiam si praedestinatus occasionem ex eo saepius capiat suae salutis. Nam cum
Deus causa peccati esse nequeat, efficitur ut Deus peccatum nulla ratione
praedestinare possit. -- Neque actus ipse peccati secundum esse natural, non
est effectus praedestinationis, quamvis sit hoc modo effectus divinae
voluntatis, Vasquez in Tho. 1. q. 23. cap. 2. disp. 93.
if he will it and cause it for another end, he causes the formal nature of
Sin, (that we may not play with the ambiguity of Quatenus) and that is as much
as man does. For Sinners do not all, if any, will sin as sin under this formal
notion, as it is a breach of the Law of God, and displeases him; but as it
brings them some seeming good: And by doing evil for that good, they are
Sinners.

To the second, we do not charge the Dominicans with making God a Sinner: But
with making him the chief cause of the sin of man, even in its form.

II. But this is nothing to the Calvinists in general. Therefore, I say, that
your selves hold the same that they do in this point. Q. 1. Do not all the
Jesuits and Arminius hold, That God is the Decreer of what he is the Author
of. And that God is the Author of the Act as an Act natural, in the general.
See but Rob. Baronius his Metaphysics, and Bellarmine whom he follows.


A. That is nothing to the moral specification of the Act.


B. And Dr. Twisse has often enough told you, where Arminius says, That God
would have Ahab to fill up the measure of his Sin.


A. That is not that he willed the sin, but that Ahab having made himself
wicked, God decreed not to stop him, but let him go on.


B. Either you mean, that the Object of Gods Decree was but his own permission
(as the Arminians use to say) or else, that it was the Sin it self (matter and
form) permitted, (not because it is sin or evil, for so man often wills it not
at least, but) as an occasion of Gods Glory. Arminius his words import the
latter: And then you go as high as Dr. Twisse or Rutherford. But if you say,
that it was but a rash word of Arminius, which you stand not to; to make plain
and short work with you, I am so far from being liable to your charge, that I
charge you as presumptuous, if not erroneous, in saying, that God decrees or
wills to permit Sin. And I assert.

1. That God does not Decree the form of Sin as Sin. 2. Nor yet the event of
that form for any good end (For, Ut peccatum eveniat, is but peccatum futurum;)
and what is it to decree Sin, but to decree that it shall be? Nor 3. Has he
decreed, that this Act which is the Sin, shall come to pass in its comparative
circumstantiated state, from whence it is, that Sin in its form resulteth. And
so Augustines saying so much decantate by Dr. Twisse and others, As Bradwardine
who also tells us, That if God damn the Innocent, his Will is the rule of
justice and equity: But I think they that so describe his Justice, do rather
think that none are damned, than that the Innocent are; or may be, as an act of
Justice, whatever a mere Proprietor may do.
is not found, that nothing comes to pass but what God wills, either
effecting it, or permitting it. It comes to pass without Gods willing it or
decreeing it; so that he permits it, but decrees not that it shall come to
pass. Not that it is against his contrary absolute Decree; but as Lombard from
other places in Austin tells you plainly, God neither wills that it shall
be, (because it is sin) nor properly and simply wills that it shall not be,
for his Will is not overcome. 4. Yea, he cannot be proved to decree his own
permission; Because to permit, is but not to hinder, which is nothing but a
negation: And we have no ground to feign, that God has Volitions or Decrees of
nothing, or of negations.

So that I say, that Sin comes to pass without Gods Decree of the event, or of
his permission. (Though not without his Decree of the good which comes by it;
of which more, when I speak to the other extreme.) And of this also more anon.


The third Crimination.
A. III. You make God necessitate men's sin and damnation by your negative
decrees, as well as others by their positive: For you hold, That no man can
believe and repent, but such as God decrees to give Faith and Repentance to:
And no man can do any more good than God decrees that he shall do. And some
say that God decrees, Not to give men any more Grace than he gives them
(which is a Decree objectively negative de non dando); And you and others say,
That he does not Decree to give them more. And so as a stone is not culpable
for not flying, no more are Sinners, not elected, for not believing and obeying
God. Note what Vasquez. grants in 1. Tho. q. 23. a. 5. disp. 92. c. 2. Certum
est praedestinationem gratiae, and ipsam primam gratiam (quod idem est) non
esse in nostra potestate, sicut and praedestinationis and ipsius gratiae nullam
causam aut occasionem ex nobis praecedere.



B. You wholly mistake and misreport us. If we differ from you, it is by going
further from the matter of the Objection than you do your selves.

1. We hold, that God gives many men power to do more than they do: And
consequently that he decrees to give it them. Men do not do all that they can
do. Indeed we hold, That no man can do any thing, which God does not give him
power to do, and decree to give it him. And dare any of you deny this. There is
no power but of God.

2. I hold not, that God has any Will or Decree in proper sense, Not to give
Grace, not to give Faith, not to give Repentance, Help, Means, etc. But only
that he does not decree to give it, where he gives it not indeed; But as
Lombard afore-cited, says, He neither Wills, nor Nilleth Aquin. de Repub. a.
3. q. 23. ad 3. Reprobatio Dei non subtrahit aliquid de potentia reprobati.
Unde cum dicitur quod quod reprobatus non potest gratiam adipisci non est
intelligendum secundum impossibilitatem absolutam, sed conditionatam.
it. My Reasons are, 1. Only Good is the Object of Gods Will, and Evil of his
Nolition. But nothing is not Good, nor Faith, Repentance, etc. nor Grace, evil:
Therefore God does not will nothing, or nill the said good.

2. Frustra fit per plura, etc. It is presumptuous to feign needless Decrees
and Volitions in God: But the Decree of nothing (of not giving Grace) is vain:
For nothing will be nothing, without any Decree or Volition of God, as well as
without any efficiency. If God neither make, nor will more Worlds, more Sons,
more Men, there will be no more, though he have no Will or positive Decree that
there shall be no more.

3. No man knows where to bound the Doctrine of Decrees de nihilo; And to
make them infinite or boundless, sounds so presumptously and profanely, that
common reason does disclaim it. It is possible that there be as many more
sands, pebbles, straws, etc. made as are: It is possible to make every stone,
or sand, an Animal, or the choice of a thousand other things: It Is possible to
give each man and Creature the choice of a thousand other names, places,
circumstances: And must we feign in God a positive Will or Decree of every one
of these possibles that they shall never be? That this Sand shall not be a Man,
nor that Bird a Stone, Id. ib. ad secundum, Praedestinatio est causa and ejus
quod expectatur in futur^ vita a praedestinatis, scil. Gloriae and ejus quod
praecipitur in praesenti, scil. Gratiae: Reprobatio ver^ non est causa ejus
quod est in praesenti, scil. culpae, sed est causa derelictionis ^ Deo, est
tamen causa ejus quod redditur in futur^, scil. poe^ae aeternae.
etc. It is enough to conceive that Gods infinite Wisdom knows what is
fittest to be, and that all that he wills shall be; and that he wills no
more; and therefore no more Creatures will be. But he wills to give power to
free Agents, to do or not do certain acts in specie; and therefore they can do
more than he decrees they shall do.

2. And as to the necessity of men's sin or misery, you lay as much of it upon
God as we; that is, no causal necessity at all, (as Rob. Baronius
distinguishes it well in his Metaphysics.) To omit all the Distinctions of
necessity which Hereboord, and many others give us, that we need not, it is
here sufficient to distinguish between mere Logical necessitas consequentiae in
order of argumentation; and Physical or causal necessity in order of Being.
God's foreknowledge (which you deny not) infers the former: For it is a
good argument (what ever God fore-knoweth will come to pass: But God
fore-knoweth the sins of all that sin; Ergo they will come to pass). The major
is a necessary proposition, and so is the minor; therefore so is the
conclusion. But yet God's knowledge causes not sin; nor is it necessitated in
any. Dr. Twisse, who goes as high as predetermination, does yet grant
Arminius, that it is only necessitas consequentiae, and not consequentis, which
Gods Decree or Will does infer as to men's sin and misery; and professes, that
all the Schoolmen say the same; and blames Arminius for pretending that we
infer a necessitatem consequentis: And the other Arminius owneth. And are they
not then agreed whether they will or not? I doubt not but predetermination
infers necessitatem consequentis causally, though this be denied by them
that hold it. But so does nothing which we assert.


The fourth Crimination.
A. You will make either the pure mass, or man as man, or the corrupted mass,
to be the Object of Predestination, (Election and Reprobation). And so make God
desert most men in Adam's sin, as he did the Devils in their sin, without
remedy, or hope. Vasquez holds in* 1. Tho. q. 23. a. 8. d. 9. q. 4. c. 2.
that Christ merited our Election out of the corrupted mass; not as Election is
in God, but in the Effect: And that Paul, Ephesians. 1. [Elegit nos in Christo, etc.]
utitur nomine electionis, quae est separatio illa a massa perditionis in qua
multi relicti sunt.



B. These are words of confusion, which, when opened, will appear nothing, and
that we are all of a mind.

Either you will distinguish Gods Decrees by the Objects, or not. If not, you
must not distinguish between Election and Rejection, willing and nilling,
loving Peter, and hating Judas, etc. If yea, then you must not take up with the
unexplained words, Reprobation and Election. 1. By Reprobation is meant either
Gods Will to punish men. 2. Or his Will to give them no special saving Grace.
3. Or his not-willing to give it them. For the first, I told you before that
the Object of God^ Will to punish men in Hell, is a Sinner foreseen finally
rejecting Mercy. 2. The Object of his Will to punish men with positive temporal
punishments, is the Sinner foreseen in his immediate capacity for them. 3.
Whether punishment by not giving that Spirit for Faith, Repentance, and
Holiness, be decreed (being nothing but a not-giving) is before discust. But if
it could be proved, yet the Object of Gods denying further Idem d. 95. 1.
Ferrariens. plane indicat Deum neminem damnare, aut rejicere a regno suo
voluisse, quod ipse appellat deserere, nisi pravisa culpa.
mercy and help, is evermore one that has abused former mercy, or refuses
that as offered to him. 4. But Gods non-Volition to give Grace i^ no act, and
has no Object. But we judge that all mankind are now from under the mere
Covenant of Innocence, and that none perish but for the abuse of mercy, which
had a tendency to their recovery (The case of Infants must be spoke to in its
place once for all.) But all this belongs to the Case of Grace and Free Will.

How Augustine distinguished Election to Justification and to Glory. See him,
lib. 1. ad simplic. q. 2. Et quae de ^o habet, Vasquez in 1. Thom. disp. 89.
cap. 6.
And 2. As for Election, we say that 1. The Object of Gods Will to glorify
men, is man sanctifying and persevering in an immediate capacity for Glory in
esse cognito. 2. The Object of Gods Will to give the Grace of perseverance, is
a foreseen sanctified person in the next capacity. 3. The Object of Gods Will
to justify, sanctify, and adopt, is a foreseen Believer. 4. The Object of
Gods Will, to give special Grace, which shall effectually cause men to repent
and believe, is ordinarily a foreseen disposed Sinner prepared by his common
Grace; but sometimes an unprepared Sinner, whom, of his free will, he will
suddenly convert, as it pleases him freely to distribute his benefits (all
being unworthy.) 5. The Object of Gods Will, to give the highest degrees of
common Grace, external (in the purest preaching of the Gospel, and other
mercies,) and internal (in greater helps of the Spirit) is sometimes a Sinner
in esse cognito, who has not grossly rejected lower helps, and sometimes freely
the worser sort of Sinners, who have abused former mercies. 6. The Object of
Gods Will, to give the first common mercy which has a tendency in its use to
men's recovery and Salvation, is all mankind fallen in Adam: For all are under
the New Covenant of Grace made with Adam, Genesis 3. 15. in some degree, (and with
Noah) and all have much mercy tending to Repentance; and none are left as the
Devils in despair, without any offered remedy or help. 7. The Object of Gods
Will to give man the Covenant of Innocence, was Adam foreseen as mere man. 8.
The Object of Gods Will to create man, was nothing in the sense that we now
take an Object in; that is, for the materia circa quam. But if you will call
the intended effect the Object, then the Object of Gods Will here (and in the
rest) is the thing willed. But if you will needs presume to seek one higher in
the Mind of God, Man knows by Reception, and so has Ideas: But God can be no
Recipient.
you must say that it was man as conceived fit to be, as well as possible. For
we can think no otherwise of the Divine Conceptions and Volitions, but as we
are led by the analogy of humane acts. And so we must say, that 1. Gods Power
makes it possible for all things to be. 2. Next God knows them possible. 3.
He knows what is convenient or fit to be made, to his unsearchable ends. 4.
He wills that they shall be, and man among the rest, and so on. If you will
needs have the order of Decrees, this is all that we can say of them.


A. All this pleases us well: but it will not please your own Party, or the
Calvinists; that you make so many acts of Election, which they tell you is but
one entire thing, as mentioned in Scripture: Nor yet that you lay every Decree
or Will upon foresight.


B. You are mistaken: No moderate considerate man of them will deny any thing
that I have said. For 1. As to the Scripture use of the word Election, it is
not the mere name that we are now opening, but the matter in question: Nor is
it the expounding of particular Texts that I am upon: And if I were, no man
will deny but that the word Election is variously used in the Scripture:
Sometime for Gods eternal Will to make us Christians of Infidels, and to save
us by Christ; and sometime for actual choosing us by converting Grace in time;
and sometime for actual choosing men in time by Vocation to some office or
special work, etc.

2. And as to the distinguishing of all these Volitions of God, no man will
deny the effects to be distinct; undoubtedly these are various effects of God;
1. To make man. 2. To give him the Covenant of Innocence. 3. To give him the
Covenant of Grace, with all the common mercies of it. 4. To give some Persons
and Nations the Gospel, and other mercies above the greatest part of the World,
with answerable helps of the Spirit. 5. To give men special Grace, effectual
for Faith and Repentance. 6. To give men Pardon, Adoption, and Sanctification.
7. To give men Perseverance. 8. To give them Glory. And if these are various
works, either you will distinguish of Gods Will by his various works, or not.
Sive secundum nostram rationem distinguamus illud decretum in plura, five
dicamus esse unicum, non est multum curandum: Certum enim est apud omnes, Deum
omnia and singula volutsse unico simplicissimo acta suae voluntatis: Est enim
ipsius voluntas, and voluntatis operatio idem quod sua essentia simplex and
individua si aliquis contenderet esse etiam nostro modo intelligendi esse
unicum actum simplicissimum voluntatis, ego non cur abo. Vasquez in 1. Tho q.
14. a. 13. disp. 65. And is not this a short end of many Controversies.
If you do not, our whole Controversy about the Order of the Decrees is
quickly at an end (and I am content with the abreviation): For where there is
no Distinction, there is no Order. And when I distinguish them never so much, I
say, as well as any, that they are all one in regard of the one Will or Essence
of God that wills them. In God there is no real diversity; but his Will is
thus variously denominated extrinsecally from its respect to the various
objects to which it does transire, and of the various effects which it
produces. And thus do all men talk of God. Else they could not distinguish his
saving Will from his damning Will; nor Election from Rejection, in his Decree.
So that no man can tell how to differ here.

3. And as to foresight, you as much mistake. For 1. I say not that God
fore-seeth any good in any man, but what he gives him, and wills to give
him; But we speak of the Order of those Volitions, in the way of execution.
Alex. Ales. is noted by Vasquez and others, as singular, for holding that
Predestination to the first Grace was upon foresight of the future good use of
that Grace as the cause: But he denies that the first Grace is actually given
on the same Cause: Therefore Vasquez thinks he changed his mind.
2. And all men that ascribe Intentions, Volitions, or Purposes to God, do and
must make the Object of them as such to be Quid cognitum, or something which
some call an Idea in the Mind of God; It is not a prius Volitum qua tale that
is the Object of a Volition, but bonum intellectum. And therefore nothing but
foresight or apprehension of the thing, needs to be put in the description of
the Object.

Nor do I deny, but that we must in our ordinary Discourse speak
comprehensively, and denominate Election eminently from the noblest parts: For
as our full Salvation includes all, or almost all, so our Conversion and
Glorification presupposes all that antecedeth. And therefore as we may and
must talk of Salvation in general, and not always stand to mention all the
parts of it; so must we eminently talk of Election to Salvation, as
comprehending the rest, and not always stand to distinguish of the parts. But
when you will make a Controversy of the Order and the Object of these acts or
parts, we must distinguish.


The fifth Crimination.
A. But you make Gods Decrees to proceed according to the Order of Intention,
Vasquez, in 1. Tho. q. 23. disp. 89. c. 7. says, That the duplex ordo alter
intentionis, alter executionis, non s^nt in mente artificis sed alter in mente
and consultatione illius, alter in re ipsa. But in man I suppose it must be
said, that both may be in mente, the first circa rations operandi; the second
circa ordinem operandi vel effectum. For the mind it self says, I will do this
first, and that next. But in God we know of no such Order, except Relative and
Connotative from the effect, because there is nothing in God but God.
De fine and mediis; and so you feign God to Decree men's damnation; yea, and
the denying them Grace; yea, and their Sin, ^ub ratione medii, as a means to
his Glory: And so he first decrees to damn them, and then to leave them in sin
to that end.


B. All this is your mistake: what any particular men say, I now mind not: But
that which we hold is this; 1. I have told you, That not to give men Grace,
Faith, yea, and Heaven, is nothing: And nothing needs no Volition or Decree:
Though both the Threatening and the Sentence of these Privations is something,
and those are willed or decreed.

2. I have told you, That God decrees no man's sin at all: It is no capable
Object of Gods Volition; unless as circa quod, as he wills what use to make
of sin presupposed.

3. Sin is no means of the Glory of God; and therefore is not willed as a
means: otherwise it should have the rationem boni qua medium, and be elegible.
But it is an evil presupposed; the curing or punishing of it, and not it it
self, being the means of Gods Glory: And therefore God does not will it as a
means.

4. Do not you your self say, 1. That God does glorify his Justice in the
damnation of the Wicked? 2. And that he willed from eternity so to do? 3. And
that he fore-knew who would be wicked? 4. And that he could have cured and
saved them if he would? 5. And that he had no absolute Will or De^ree
eventually or effectually to cure and save them, but only in tantum, to do so
much toward it, which he knew would be uneffectual through their fault? 6. And
that therefore the Decree of damnation, upon this foresight, did pass upon the
individuals, and not only on the Wicked and Impenitent in general? All this you
hold, and must hold; and what hold we more?

5. For as to the Order of Gods Decrees, we further hold as follows:

1. That though when there is need, we must distinguish them by their Effects
and Objects; yet we dread the presumption of feigning those Orders in the Mind
of God, which we know not of, and cannot prove. He had need to be better
acquainted with the Divine Acts, that shall venture to tell us in what Order
they lie in the Mind of God, than Mortals are, except where God has plainly
told us. Vasquez in 1. The. q. 23. d. 94. c. 1. says Scotus iu ^* d. 19. q. 1.
Hac ordine instantia ratione in Dei pr^scientia and providentia dispon^^* In
prime Deum seipsum intellezisse, in secunde intellexisse omnes creaturas; in
terti^ quosdam ad gloriam and gratiam praedestinasse circa alios vero se
habuisse negative: in quarto vidisse eos casuros in primo parente, in quinto
providisse illis remedium per Christi passionem, etc.


2. We hold, that God does not intendere finem, or eligere medi^ thereto, in
the sense as man does; because he wants nothing, and therefore does not velle
desideratum, nor seek any thing which he wants. But that improperly God is
said to intend an end, when he does but will to produce an effect, or else
still perfectly enjoys that which is improperly called His end. And in the
first sense, every Creature is his end; that is, the terminus or effect of his
operation. And in the other sense, He himself only is his own end; that is, the
complacency of his own Will.

3. Therefore to undertake to delineate the Order of Gods Volitions or Decrees,
according to the way of mental intention de fine and mediis, is a work unfit
for us to meddle with, as being beyond our reach.

4. But those that will needs meddle that way, can go no further than to say,
That God is his own end, (or the fulfilling or complacency of his Will) and
therefore that God first wills the complacency of his own Will, and then
wills all Creatures as the means thereto. And what is this to any of our
Controversies? For the glorifying of his Justice, is but the means of the
complacency of his Will. Or if you will say, that his Glory is his end, it is
no created thing that you must mean by his Glory. For nothing created can be
Gods Ultimate End. Or if you could prove that Scholastici omnes uno ^re
fatentur nullam causam realem Divinae voluntatis posse assignari, non solum
efficientem, materialem aut formalem (id enim satis compertum est) sed neque
^in^lem non solum inter object^ creat^ sed ^^c su^m bonitatem, Vasq. 1. Tho. q.
19. d. 82. c. 1. (But by his leave, that which has no caus^ formati^ ^^
nothing.) But cap. 2. he maintains that Gods own goodness (only) is his Ratio
volendi, sed non causa, which is held also by Al^ns. 1. p. q. 28. ^. ^. q. 3.
Gabri. 1. d. 14. q. 1. a. 1. Henric. quod, l. 4. q. 19. Dried. de concord. 1.
p. cap. 4. ^d ^.
a created Glory were Gods Ultimate End; that is, the appearance or refulgence
of his Image or Likeness on the Creature: yet you must confess, that it is the
Glory of God in his Conjunct Perfections, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and that the
Glory of his Punitive Justice must be either taken as a means to that; or else
that God has his End continually in the Glory which is upon every Creature,
and every man and act of man.

5. Though Dr. Twisse so frequently inculcate, Quod prius est intention,
posterius est executione; he says, that it is but de fine and med^is, and not
de medii^ inter se; and that no medium is properly Gods End (and then nothing
but himself is his End); and he glories as the discoverer of this Truth, that
all the means are one to God, and therefore have but one Decree; so that he
reduces all Gods Decrees to two, 1. Of his Glory as his End* 2. Of all the
means thereto as one.

6. And other learned men's Writings I have seen, who come after him, and seek
to prove that the Decree de fine and mediis are but one, and consequently that
there is no such order to be feigned among them.

7. The plain truth is, Gods Will is the beginning and end of all: And all the
World are the means of accomplishing and pleasing it: And it is always
fulfilled and pleased, though not always by the same means: And God loves no
Creature finally for it self, but for Himself, as his Perfection shines in it,
and as it fulfilleth his Will. And to feign any other Order of Intention and
Election de fine and medii^ in God, is presumptuous; much more to lay our
frames of them, and tie God hereto, and trouble the Church with contending for
such Models. But the Order of Execution is intelligible (in part) to man: And
we are sure that God eternally intended to execute his Will in that Order in
which in time he does it. And therefore this is the only necessary and the
sufficient method of Gods Decrees, which man can investigate.

8. We deny therefore that God decrees or wills to damn any before he
fore-seeth their Sin; or that he decrees to damn any, but as impenitent
Sinners; or that the damnation of any man is his End; or See this question
handled by Vasqu. 1. Tho. q. 19. d. 82. c. 4. and 5. and 6. that instantia
secundum ^rdinem objectorum inter se assignanda sunt, and non ex sola Dei
voluntate.
that he decrees any man's sin; or that he decrees not to give them Grace; or
that Sin, or not giving Grace, or not believing, etc. need a Decree, being
nothing; much more that these are decreed as means to Gods Glory. But if you
speak de fine, 1. As that which man is bound to intend, 2. Or as a mere effect;
so no doubt all things have their relation, use, and order to each other.


The sixth Crimination.
A. You deny all conditional Decrees in God, and so make them all absolute, and
consequently arbitrary, merely because God will do it.


B. Do you think we differ in this? You dare not profess your dissent L^g.
Twiss. Vind. Great. li. 1. Digres. 1. de Elect. p. 151.

Et Episcopii Instit. Theol. li. 4. Sect. 6. cap. 6. page 412, 41^.


from any of this following explication of our sense.

1. Gods Will is the Cause and End of the whole Creation: And what ever
pleases him to do he does; whatsoever it pleases him shall come to pass, it
shall come to pass; and what ever he is pleased to make our Duty by a Law, is
made our Duty. All that God does and commands is Arbitrary: His Wisdom indeed
and his Will concur; but his Ends are within himself; and his Will is the end
of his Will, so far as it may be said to have an end. Arbitrariness and
self-willedness is Gods Perfection, which is man's Sin and Usurpation. If you
will stretch to that impropriety, as to say that He wills it, because his
Understanding sees it fittest to be willed; and so make Causes and Effects in
God; yet must you add, that the fitness or goodness so understood, is the
Aptitudinal congruency to his Will.

2. We affirm that God has many Decrees which are conditional in respect of
the thing decreed. Inquit Twissus Vind. Great. li. 1. de elect. Dig. 3. p. 163.
Aquinas diserte asserit, Deum velle hoc esse propter hoc; sed non propter hoc
velle hoc, p. 1. q. 19. ^. 1. c. and ad primam voluntatem Dei rationabilem
esse, non quod aliquid sit Deo causa volendi, sed in quantum vult unum esse
propter aliud, Et q. 23. ^. 5. c. Eodem mod^ produxi^u^ Bonavent^ram, Scotum,
Durandum, conspirantibus animis ^adem per omnia quod ad hunc apicem attin^t
p^ofitentes. Vide quae addit ex suare sio ibid p. 164.
So Dr. Twisse frequently tells you. He makes one thing a means and a
condition of the event of another. And we say that God has conditional
Promises and Threatenings; [If thou confess with thy mouth, and believe in thy
heart, etc. thou shall be saved]. And we believe that Gods Will made these
Promises and Threats, and that they are the true signs of his Will: And that he
will fulfill them. And so far he has a conditional Will, and conditional
expressions of his Will.

3. But as to the Act of Volition, we believe that his Wills are eternal, and
have no proper condition of their existence, or not existing; because being
existent, they are Necessary necessitate existentiae; e. g. God never had such
a Will as this, [If thou repent, I will purpose or will to pardon thee if thou
repent, or to make the pardoning conditional promise;] But [If thou repent I
will pardon thee, and whether thou repent or not, I will conditionally pardon
thee, or make that Covenant which says, I will pardon thee if thou repent,]
our Acts are the Conditions of Gods Gifts and Acts, but not of his Will, as
suspended on those Acts.

4. Sure this is your own sentiment: For you deny not that God knows from
eternity whether the condition of each Event will it self be or not; And if so,
it must be only the condition of the Event, and not of his Decree: For he that
e. g. wills absolutely that all shall perish that repent not, and knows
certainly that Judas will not repent, does thenceforth absolutely Will that
Judas shall perish, though only that he perish conditionally. For that Will is
no longer suspended on a Condition, but it is the Event only that is suspended.
At least you must say, that it is passed into a certainty, equal to an absolute
Will.

5. But we will come as near as truth will lead us. If by a Condition you mean
only that Condition of the event which is not a suspender of Gods Decree, but
only a constituent qualification of the Object; so I grant to you, that though
Gods Will as it signifies his Essence, or his essential Principle of
operation, in it self, have no cause or condition; yet as it is extrinsically
denominated, the Volition or Nolition of this or that, the Object has its
Conditions; that is, qualifications, without which Gods Will is not so
denominable. And so Gods Will has its Conditions of complacency or displicency
in the Creature, without which he cannot truly be said to be pleased or
displeased in them; yea, I told you, that these may oriri de novo, without
change in God. And whether his judicial Will to condemn men as Judge, have the
same conditions, we shall enquire further hereafter. I have already manifested,
that the Objects of it have their proper qualifications.


The seventh Crimination.
A. At least you make Election absolute, if not Rejection; and say, that God
electeth men to Salvation, without respect to any goodness in To the question,
An electio ad beatitudinem praecesserit praedestinati^nem meritorum. The
affirmative is held by Cajet. and most Thomists, by Scotus, in 1. d. 41. q. 1.
Durand. q. 1. n. 8. Aegid. ibid. q. 1. a. 2. Major. 1. d. 4. q. 2. Sotu^ in
Ro^. ^. Cordub. li. 1. q. 56. ^pin. ^. inquit Vasquez in 1. Tho. q. 23. disp.
89. c. 1. But Vasquez holds the contrary, with Os^rius, Turrian, and many
others, maintaining that Augustine held, Electionem ad gloriam esse e^ meritis
gratia pr^visis. And no doubt but God decreed Glory to be given per modum
praemii, if that be all.
them.


B. I have said enough to this already; 1. Do you think that men are good
before they are elected? when they are not men? You do not certainly. 2. Do you
think that God fore-seeth any good in men, when he wills to them their first
good? no doubt you do not. 3. Do you think that God fore-seeth in men any
second, third, or following degrees of goodness, before he intend to give it
them? what need he purpose to give it them, if he foresee that they will have
it without his Gift? 4. Do you think that God fore-seeth any power to do good
in men, but what he intends to give them? or any good act, but what
proceeds from that power which he gives them, and from his concourse, or
cooperating influx? I dare say that you do not. 5. And do you think that we
imagine that God gives, or purposes to give, any following mercy to him that
has not the necessary antecedent mercy? As to glorify any that is not
justified, or to justify any that is not called. 6. You see then that it is
necessary, if you will quarrel, that you distinguish of Election as before
said. Though Gods Will in it self, as was now said, have no proper suspending
condition; yet, 1. The effects of Gods Will have. 2. And the Objects of Gods
Will have their necessary qualifications. 3. And some of Gods Volitions are
thence extrinsically denominated conditional.

Now, 1. God gives Salvation to no Unbeliever, but on condition of Faith. And
God actually glorifieth none but penitent persevering Believers: And both these
he accordingly decreed or wills. And can you say then that Election has no
respect to the persons goodness. It has not only respect to the good intended
him, but to that good which is a necessary qualification found in him; that is,
necessary to the benefit to which he is elected. God decrees to give glory to
none but persevering Saints, nor perseverance to none but the Holy, nor
justification to none but Believers.

But I will confess to you, that we hold, 1. That God absolutely willed to give
Christ and the New Covenant to the World; 2. That he absolutely wills or
decrees to give the Gospel and common Grace in a greater degree, to many a one
that is no more worthy of it than others that are past by, and to give it to
none but the unworthy. 3. That he absolutely decrees to give Faith and
Repentance to many that have long resisted him, and are as great Sinners as
those that have them not, and to none but the unworthy in proper sense. And
dare you deny any of this your self?


The eighth Crimination.
A. Thus you bring presumption into the World, and encourage men to Marlorate,
as from Calvin, says, in Joh. 15. 2. Certum decretum Dei a nemine infirmari
posse: Stat igitur firma sententia, Quemcunque Deus ante conditum orbem
elegerit, cum non posse perire: Quem vero rejecerit, cum non posse salvari,
etiamsi omnia sanctorum opera fecerit. (An ill supposition) which Episcopius
cites with distaste.

But Brentius ibid. cited by the same Marlorate, says, Haec sententia occurrit
c^riositati carnis, quae s^let arg^te magis quam reveren^^r de praedestinatione
disserete, and pro suo ingenio colligere, nullum a domin^ ad vitam a^^rnam
electum posse damnari, eti^^si pessi^^ vivat: nullum item a Domin^ ad ignem
aeternum deputatum posse salvari, eti amsi optime vivat: s^ i^aque velle pro
sua libidin^ vivere.


sin: If once they be elect, let them do what they can, they are sure to be
saved; for they are certain that Election will not change.


B. 1. You are leading us toward the question of Perseverance, before the time.

2. Do you think your self that Election changes? Is not this as much
imputable to you as us? or do we differ here? Do not you say that God
fore-knoweth who will be saved? And can God be deceived? or shall not all
certainly be glorified that are so fore-known? Nay, do you not say that, at
least, upon that foreknowledge, God decrees each persons certain Salvation
that shall be saved? And can that Decree which is upon foreknowledge be
frustrate? Do not you then as much encourage presumption by a certain
unchangeable Election as we.

3. It is factious perverseness (reflecting on your selves as much as us) which
puts in that word, [Let them do what they will, or live how they will, or sin
they never so much;] For it falsely intimates that God electeth men to Glory,
that live impenitently in wickedness; according to our Doctrine. Whereas we
say, 1. That if the word Election be taken partially, for the act of Gods
Decree to glorify them, none but foreseen persevering Saints are the Objects;
And a wicked Saint is a contradiction. Or if it be taken for Gods Decree to
convert a man, we say that this is true, that let the World live never so
wickedly, God does decree to convert some of them from that wickedness, but not
all: Do you question this? 2. But if the word Election be taken
comprehensively, then men's Holiness, Repentance, and Faith is part of the
Salvation But Brentius ibid. cited by the same Marlorate, says, Haec sententia
occurrit curiositati carnis, quae solet argute magis quam reverenter de
praedestinatione disserere, and pro suo ingenio colligere, nullum a domino ad
vitam aeternam electum posse damnari, etiamsi p^ssim^ vivat: nullum item a
Domino ad ignem aeternum deputatum posse salvari, etiamsi optime vivat: se
itaque velle pro sua libidine vivere.
which they are elected to: And to say that God absolutely electeth Peter to
live and die a Saint, let him (after Conversion) live and die never so
wickedly; this is a putid contradiction, such paultry dealing faction causes;
what do you differ from us in all this? Vid. Episcop. Instit. Theo. li. 4.
sect. 5. cap. 7. page 415. col. 1.


4. But as to presumption hereupon, I answer you, 1. That there is no mercy
which Satan will not tempt men to abuse, even Christ, and the hopes of Heaven
it self. 2. As long as wickedness is that evil which Election decrees to
deliver us from; he that is wicked may be sure that he has not the benefit nor
mark of Election, and cannot have the least assurance that he is elect. 3. And
while he that is truly godly knows that he is no further elected to Salvation
than he is elected to persevere in godliness; this is no rational inducement to
him to forsake godliness, any more than to renounce Heaven, but rather to
conclude, I am decreed to persevere in holiness, therefore I must so do. 4. And
to pass by the Controversy of perseverance till we come to it, it is as all
confess, so few of the Elect that are certain of their own Election, that this
Objection can extend but to a few. 5. Lastly, None are certain of their
Election, but such as have strong clear active Grace and evidence; that believe
firmly, and love God much, and obey him carefully: And such as these are fit to
improve assurance, and to live in the fruits of love and gratitude. Did you
ever know what love, and thankfulness, and delight in God, and holiness are,
and yet can you think that they are the way to sin? You know nothing in
Religion, if you know not, that they are the life and soul of true Religion,
and the most powerful principles of Obedience and Perseverance. Nor do you
understand the Gospel-design, if you know not, that the greatest manifestation
of the love of God, is the greatest means of love, and thankfulness, and
desire, and delight in God and goodness, unto man.


The ninth Crimination.
A. At least thus Suetonius says Tiberius was a neglecter of Religion, because
he thought that all things were ruled by fate.
Fate is set up in the World, and all things are under necessity, and
unavoidable.


B. You had this Objection about necessity before, and to the answer of it I
refer you further, 1. Immutable Election does set up but a consolatory
quietting certainty in the World, without which man's mind must still be in
troublesome, unquiet, if not tormenting terrors. Is it a wrong to you, if you
can be sure to be saved? Had you rather live and die under these apprehensions,
[I know not whether I shall be in Heaven Kipping Philonatur. l. 9. c. 11. p
431. voluntas ista absoluta hominem cum effectis suis ineluctabiliter
necessitat hoc est ad unum oppositorum necessario constringit and determinat
omnia ejus acta and eventa, ut non aliter evenire queant quam eveniant: where
he confuteth Piscators Arguments for such necessitating Decrees, p. 432, etc.
or Hell for ever?] If you have not certainty, or a hope that is somewhat near
it; I think this conclusion, if you be awake, and in your wits, must needs make
your life a constant bondage, and the fear of death your constant misery, and
must blast all the pleasures of your fulest Prosperity. Thank God that his
Foundation stands sure, and the Lord knows who are his; and see that you
keep his mark upon you, professing Christ, and departing from iniquity. And do
not cry out as if you were fatally carried to Heaven against your wills.

2. As for the word [Fate] it is ambiguous: Some by fate, mean but the
certainty that God's Predictions shall be fulfilled; Quod fatur eveniet. Some
mean only the certain connection of Causes and Effects under Gods sapiential
Government of the World. (As Campanella makes Necessity, Fate, and Harmony, to
be the result of Power, Wisdom, and Love; but not accurately enough.) And some
say, (but how truly I know not) That the Stoics took Fate for some primary
necessitating Cause, which did necessitate all Acts of the Gods and Men. It is
a word that we have no need of; they that will play them with it may.

3. But as to Necessity again, I say, 1. Election makes no man's sin or misery
necessary, nor tends to it. 2. It makes no man's Salvation Thus Fewrbornius
in Fascicul. Disser. de termino vitae uses 17 Arguments, contra sententiam
Calvinianam de fatali and simpliciter necessario termino vitae, (quasi Deus ex
absoluto and simplici decreto and absque ullo ad causas secundas physicas, and
voluntarias respectu, c^ique hominum genus and horam mortis praesixerat.) And
all upon the encouragement of some ill and unsound words of Piscator, who is
most extreme in this: whereas this is none of the Calvinists sense commonly,
who hold that sin is only foreseen, and not decreed: but all true means are
decreed with the end in one Decree; therefore respected as decreed.
necessary against his will in sensu composito. 3. The more it makes our
Salvation necessary, that is, certain and insuperable, the greater is Gods
mercy, the greater our happiness, and cause of gratitude and Joy. The Saints in
Heaven are not offended at the certainty of their persevering blessedness.

If you shall Object, That it necessitateth the perishing of all others,
because none can be saved who are not Elect. Remember that this was your third
Crimination, and is answered before. I say again, 1. Necessity and
Impossibility are either Logical in ordine probandi; or Physical in ordine
causandi. The first sort follows upon your own Doctrine: He that God
fore-knoweth shall sin and perish, it necessarily follows Necessitate
consequentiae; and it is impossible but it should follow, that he will sin and
perish, but not by Gods foreknowledge.

Causal necessitating either takes away the true power of escaping, or
depriveth of such power by prevention: But so does not the Election or Decree
of God.

2. Though we hold such absolute Election as has been opened to you, and that
God decrees to cause men to believe, before he fore-seeth that they will
believe, (in order of Nature, according to humane Conception;) yet we hold as
you do, that Reprobation does not so proceed, but that God decrees men to Hell
only on foresight of final wickedness, which he never caused or willed. And if
in this we agree with you, you must accuse your selves as much as us.

3. God does both Decree to give, and actually give men power to do more than
they do; And his decreeing that another man shall well use that power which he
has, does sure take away no power from you.

4. Yea, Gods not decreeing to cause you to use your own power well, does take
none of it from you; But includes that such power you have: much less his
Decree to do more for others.

5. All the World acknowledges, that a Benefactor as such is free to give his
own benefits as he pleases, unequally. And giving more to one takes nothing
from another. Suppose that God had for 4000 years, till Christ's Incarnation,
but willed and given his mercy equally to all the World, even so much as might
leave the matter merely to their wills; and after that had given greater mercy
to the Christian Churches, taking nothing from the rest: Had this been any
injury or diminution to the rest? Suppose now God should fetch half the damned
out of Hell, is this any more hurt or wrong to the rest than if he had
delivered none.

But all these things are here anticipated, and cannot be fully answered till
we come to the Article of Grace; where we must show how God does differ his
Operations on men's Souls: For none can deny, but as he differenceth them, so he
decreed to difference them, and no otherwise.


The tenth Crimination.
A. At least you make Gods Decrees and Ways unequal, and make him a Says
Vasque^ in 1. Tho. ^. 2^. ^. 3. d. 95. c. ^. Nullam dari causam Reprobationis
ex part reprebi, dicunt Durard. in 1. d. 41. q. 2. ^. 14. Greg. Armi. q. 1. a.
2. con. 1. and 5. Mars^l. 1. q. 4^. a. 2. con. 4, etc. Dried^ 1. p. de concord.
c. 3. con. ^. and 3. Adam in c. 9. ad Roman. Ferrar. 3. cont. Gent. c. 161.
Aquin. 1. q. 23. ^. 5. ad 3. ^x his tamen Doctoribus T^om. Driedo and Durand.
non dicunt absolute, Reprobationis nullum dari causam ex part reprobi: sed
nullam esse causam ob quam hic potius quam alius reprobetur, aut quod idem est,
cur hic praedestinetur et discernatur a mossa perditionis, ille vero in ea
relinquatur and reprobetur, vid. Laetera.
Respecter of persons, as decreeing to save one, and not another; or to give
^^re Grace to one than to another, of equal demerit.


B. You may show your ignorance about this your self; but this is no difference
between the parties. For, 1. No man can deny but that God standing toward us
in a threefold Relation, as our Owner and the Lord of all, as our Ruler, and
as our Benefactor, so he is free in the first and third Relation. A Proprietary
may do with his own as he list: And a Benefactor may unequally give his
benefits as he sees meet: For he is supposed to give only that which is no
man's Right, till he give it them (by promise or collation). But as God is a
Rector, and governs Mankind by a Law, which has Rewards promised, and
Punishments threatened to promote Obedience, and as he is Judge according to
that Law, and as he is a Benefactor already obliged by promise; thus God does
keep an equality in his Judgments and Executions, and ever proceeds according
to his Word or Law. He will in just equity and equality forgive, justify and
adopt all penitent Believers, and no others, how great soever. He will glorify
all persevering Saints, and no others, just according to his Word; Because his
Law is Norma judicii, or that which he will observe in judging. If God forgive
and save one penitent Believer and not another, you may say that he rules not
in equity and equality. But in cases of other disposals and benefits, which no
man has right to by any Law or Covenant, the case is otherwise.

2. And full experience tells us this. God made not every Man an Angel, nor
every Stone a Star, nor every Star a Sun, nor every Beast a Man, nor every Toad
a Bird, nor the Dirt and Water Fire. Wonderful is the Variety of his Works
through all the World: No two Birds, Beasts, Men, Stones, Trees, are perfectly
equal and like. No two men's Faces, Constitutions, Parts, Dispositions, Virtues,
are perfectly equal. With what various temperaments come we into the World? And
is God a Respecter of persons for this? or are his ways unequal? As a free
Owner and Benefactor he will diversifie his Gifts, and do with his own as he
list, though Sinners quarrel at it. You dare not say that God gives his
Benefits equally to all, that are of equal demerit.

3. The sin of respecting persons belongs to a Judge, obliged by rules to
equal distribution: By a Judge, I mean any judging and executing Governor, or
obliged distributer of Rights. And it consists in partiality and injustice,
because of something in the person, (as Greatness, Riches, Learning, Relation,
Flattery, etc.) which is no just cause of that inequality. But this is nothing
to God, who regards no man's person for any such thing, nor denies to any man
his proper due.


The eleventh Crimination.
A. Both sides charge this on each other. Malderus, 1, 2. q. 111. a. 3. p. 519.
Vocar^t illusorie Deus si talem gratiam sufficientem solum ideo daret quia non
est efficax, etc. It is profaneness thus to venture on blasphemous charges
against God, if (...) done by him ^^^^.
You make God play the Hypocrite, to send abroad Ministers to entreat men to
repent and be saved, when he has decreed that they shall be damned, and not
repent. And you make all the preaching, and means that are used for such men's
Conversion, a mere mockery.


B. No more than you do; For there is no difference as to this. 1. Do not you
say that God fore-knoweth from eternity that Judas, e. g. will not repent, or
be saved? yea, that upon such foreknowledge he has decreed before he was born
to damn him? And does this make God play the Hypocrite, or his Word to be a
mockery? We say but the very same of all that perish.

2. To help you to rescue both your selves, and us from this accusation,
consider, that Gods Decree has several parts. As, 1. That the lapsed World
shall have a Covenant of Grace, and be entreated to be saved. 2. That Judas,
one of this world, shall have his part among the rest. 3. Whereas Judas will
not receive this offered Grace, for rejecting it he shall be condemned: These
are the material parts of Gods Decree; And is there any hypocrisy or mockery
in this? God decreed not to condemn Judas, but for rejecting offered Grace: And
this presupposes the offer: He cannot reject that which never was offered him.
What would you have had God rather say, [I foresee if I offer Judas Grace,
that he will not accept it, and therefore I will offer him none, but condemn
him, because he would have refused it, had it been offered.] By this rule, the
sin of all the World against mercy and means of life, should have been
prevented by offering them no means or mercy; and yet men perish and be damned
for that which they never did, because God foresaw that they would have done
it. Are not these ways unequal, in comparison of Gods, which vain men quarrel
with.

2. But again, I tell you that your feigning to hold, that God decreed that
Judas should not repent, is not true of those that you now talk with: It is
enough that God did not decree that Judas should eventually repent.


The twelfth Crimination.
A. The Jesuits themselves as well as the Dominicans deny as much as a
possibility or power to unbaptized Infants (of being saved); And in their case
are for as absolute arbitrary Reprobation as the highest, not only Calvinist
but Antinomian, vid. Ruiz. de praedes. Tr. 3. disp. 15. sect. 1. p. 202, etc.
And this upon the irrational Doctrine, that for want of baptism the Children of
the holiest persons shall be condemned, though the Parents did their best to
procure it, and so there is no will or sin the Cause: And yet godly persons
have Merits to spare for souls in Purgatory, and none for their own Children.
Though you say that God decrees to give men more power than they use, yet you
add, that none of that power will ever be well used, unless he fore-decree it;
For you say that God absolutely wills or decrees every good Act, as well as
the Power. And so no such Act follows any Power, where God decrees it not:
And what good does that Power do them.


B. Still you anticipate those Controversies which belong to the point of
Grace. But I answer, 1. You must answer this for your selves first, for it as
much concerns you as us. For you teach that what ever Power God gives men,
it will never be exercised, unless he foreknow that it will be so: Yea, unless
upon foreknowledge of man's due cooperation with God, it be decreed. For you
say that God fore-knoweth all the Acts of Grace and Power that will be
exercised; yea, and decrees them on the said foresight, as your Doctrine de
scientia media infers.

2. By this Objection there is no way to reconcile you to Gods Providence,
unless he will be ignorant of all men's future sinful Omissions, or unless he
will not be beforehand willing of all the good that is in the World, or at
least not decree it, and be the Author of it; Or else unless he will cause all
men equally to use their powers, and do good alike. Now you dare not say, that
ever any of these shall come to pass. You see and confess that all men do not
use their power equally, nor do good alike. And you know God will not be before
ignorant of it. And you shall never abate Gods goodness so, as to keep him from
willing and working too all the good that is the world. And will you therefore
be unreconciled to him?

3. And where you say, what good then does such power; 1. I pray you mark that
you confess that we hold, that they had power. And if they had power to do
good, they could have done it. For what else is power, but that by which I can
do the Act. 2. The power given was a proportionable demonstration of Gods
Power, Wisdom and Mercy, and therefore it did good. 3. That it was not used to
their own Salvation, was their own fault for which they suffer. And in all this
we are agreed.

And now I appeal to your considering Reason, whether there be any difference
hitherto left in the point of Predestination between you and me? And I again
mind you, that were it not for the importunity and prejudice of contenders, all
that I have said of this had been needless. for it is obvious, that while we
are all agreed of these generals, 1. That God decrees to give all men just so
much Grace or Mercy as in time he gives them. Apud veteres ecclesiae patres
eadem omnino suit controversia, de causae gratiae, and Praedestinationis ex
part nostra. Vasquez in 1. Tho. q. 23. a. 5. disp. 9. page 658.
2. And that he absolutely decrees not to give them any more but what he
gives them. All this Controversy of Decrees or Predestination, depends on the
Controversy of Grace, how much it is that God gives unto men.


A. I confess that you have indeed proved your self reconciled to me; But that
is because you are an Arminian, and do not know it: For you grant me all that I
can justly desire. But the Calvinists will not be therefore reconciled to you,
or give you thanks.


B. Except the few Predeterminants afore-excepted, and some odd words that drop
from passionate or injudicious men; I am past doubt that the generality of
sober moderate Calvinists will stand to what I say, or may do it I am sure, in
consistence with their main cause. And I am confident that these are the
healing-terms that must unite us. And remember, that you confess, that thus far
we differ not.

Had you but this following Doctrine from one of the greatest Jesuits, V^squez
in 1. Tho. q. 23. disp. 91. c. 11. p. 659. it might put you to your study to be
able to disagree. Catholica sententia est nullam causam, nul^^ve initium, aut
occasionem ex part praedestinati excogitari posse, ob quam De^s aut in tempore
gratiam ipsi donaverit, aut in praescientia dare decreve^^. Doctrina haec non
solum intelligenda est de initio fidei, orationis, aut See all this largely
proved by him to the end of the 18th Chap. ibid.
^oluntatis consequendi salutem; vel de aliis operibus quae circa Deum
versan^ur; qualia sunt religionis; verum etiam de quovis opere moralis
virtutis, ^^od in ipsum solum bonum honestum referatur. Et non solum excludimus
initium, quod sit meritum condignunt, sed etiam meritum congruum seu
impetratorium, aut dispositionem, and quamlibet causam and occasionem, ob quam
Deus huic potius quam alteri gratiam donaverit, aut donare praefinierit; Ita ^^
totaratio praeparandi huic potius gratiam quam illi, fuerit beneplacitum
divinae voluntatis, nihil autem vel minimum ex part praedestinati. Ita Thom.
Marsil. Gregor. Armi. etc. And yet must we disagree.


THE Second Days Conference OF PREDESTINATION. Between C. (a Calvinist) and B.
(the Conciliator.)
C. I hear of your undertaking to manifest the smallness of our Differences in
the long controverted Articles of Predestination, Redemption, Grace and
Free Will. Le Blank de did. Great. These. 80, 81. Tanta varie^as sententiarum
and opinionum circa naturam and essentiam gratiae efficacis and rationem ac
modum, quo in animis hominum operatur quae a tot jam seculis scholas
Christianas exercet, arguit rem esse perplexam, obs^uram and quae undique
multis difficultatibus scatet: Nec spes est fore contentionum ^inem, nisi
curiositati modus aliquis statuatur, and omittantur qu^stiones arduae and
nonnecessariae. Ac profecto long consultius foret, and paci ac pietati
Christianae conduc^b^lius in totum ab ejusmodi quaestionibus abstinere, quam
sine fine rixari de rebus quae difficultate sua ing^nium humanum obruunt, and
in quibus vix quisquam sibi potest satisfacere.

Praesertim quaestion^s illae apud plebem Christianum in homiliis and
concionibus non tantum nullo cum fructu, sed maximo saepe cum damno
proponuntur, dum simplicium animis injic^untur varii s^rupuli, quos
disputa^ionum ars and eloquentia satis postea discuter^ non potest.

And he mentions the things which he would have us take up with, which we are
agreed in, viz. Quicquid boni ^obis ^nest, and a nobis fit, Divi^ae gra^iae
deberi: Deun^ esse qui omne bonum in nobis operatur sine Christo and spiritus
illius a^xi^io in ^^s quae aeternam salutem promovent n^bil nos qui^quam posse,
etc. D^um ^amen si^ per grat^am suam in nobis operari, ^t libertati nostrae
ni^^l decedat ^mp o q^i male agunt null^m occasionem habere a^ Deo quae^endi,
etc.


But these Reconcilers do but hal^ between two Opinions; and while they will be
of neither side, they are like^ and loved by neither.


B. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children o^ God.
We will seek to please all men for their good to edification; an^ yet seek to
please no man before God, nor in sin, nor place any of ou^ happiness in their
favor, nor think much to bear their displeasure o^ contempt: For if we (so)
seek to please men, we are no longer the Servants of Christ. If Gods favor
were not enough for us, he were not our God.


C. I am afraid your study of Syncretism or Concord will tempt you to war^ and
turn half an Arminian, and forsake the Truth.


B. I thank you for your care of me, and I wonder not at your fears^ as long as
you mistake one another as you do. As all persecution o^ Gods Servants is
raised by mis-reports, and misapprehending them to be very bad and dangerous
persons, and as all sinful Schisms and separations in Churches arise from men's
thinking one another to be very bad and unfit for communion; Even so these
factions, and Church-dividing Contentions, come from a false conceit that each
side is so dangerously erroneous, as that all good men must stir up their zeal,
and with all their disputing-skill and contending-fervency must arm, to defend
the Truth against them, and to save the Church and the Souls of men from the
infection of their Error. Since I saw the nature of these present
Controversies, it fills me with shame and pity to think, what fierce and
fiery work^ there has long been, what hatred, slanders, scorns, persecutions;
what volumnious Contentions, what Snares laid for young Students; what factious
Oppositions to each other among Pastors and People, throughout much of the
learned part of the Christian World; and all in a dream, for the most part
about mere names and words, or things, that none of them at all understood, nor
ever will do in this World. O subtle Tempter! O foolish men! even wise and
learned men! O lamentable Churches! O miserable World!


C. I pray you tell me what good you look for by this attempt? Do you no^ know
how many such have come to nothing?


B. I Will tell you what good I expect. I expect that here and there an impartial
sober Divine should search into and find pacificatory truth: And that diverse
Students, not yet engaged in any Faction, should discern it: And that most of
the idle, ignorant and factious, who find it most for their interest, ease and
honor, to be servent for the Opinion which that party holds, with whom they
do embody, will reproach my self and these attempts, and call me a Calvinist or
an Arminian, or one that holds dangerous Opinions, and self-conceitedly
over-valuing my own apprehensions, do trouble the Church, and strengthen the
Adversaries by pretended Reconciliation. But I look that those that receive the
Truth, should themselves be saved from the guilt of all that uncharitableness,
faction and injury to others, which is caused by men's mistakes: And also that
they should be a seed of Peacemakers, to propagate Truth to Posterity, till
the Age come when God will heal the Churches, and banish contentious Error from
among them. And in the mean time, I look for peace of Conscience in the Service
of God, and in his approbation. And it will be reward enough to live out of the
fire of Contention my self, and to escape the Fever of that zealous Wisdom
which is earthly, sensual, and devilish, and with envy and strife does bring in
confusion, and every evil work: And to feel the sweetness of some of the Wisdom
from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, etc. J^^. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17.

And I am the more resolved not to omit my Duty through despair, for the
experience which I have already had. I remember the time when in the Country
where I lived, Sacraments and Discipline were neglected, through the distances
of the Episcopal, Presbyterians and I^dependants, about the way of
Administration, and we looked strangely at each other. I thought it our Duty to
join in love and practice so far as we agreed, and pass by the rest till we
could better see our way. But many years I thought I should be but scorned if I
attempted it, and so for bore it in despair. But at last attempting it, almost
all consented with whom I did endeavor this way of Concord, and I found no
conderable opposition, and many other Countries began to follow our example.

After this I saw that whilst Ministers only preached publicly, and spoke but
now and then occasionally with the people personally, they were ignorant of
their own Flocks, and edified them but little, and occasioned Disputes about
examining them before a Sacrament, and many other inconveniences; And I
earnestly wished that they would set up the course of Catechizing and familiar
Conference with all, from Family to Family in order through each Parish. And I
thought that if a few Ministers should attempt this without the consent and
concurrence of the rest, they would but be contemned by the people: But if all
the Ministers of Reputation would consent, it might happily go on: But to
motion such a thing I thought as vain, as to attempt that which seemed next to
an impossibility. But when I did attempt it at last, I found little or no
opposition; but the Ministers readily consented, and other Countries began the
like; In so much that some Ministers of Helvetia sent to me their desires, of
setting on foot the same course there. These instances confute despair, the
great Enemy of all good, and make me resolve to do my part in any good Work,
and leave the issue to God. I confess, and its too well known, that some
attempts since these for concord between Church contenders in England, were
without success: But they have afforded my Conscience that peace, which does
abundantly compensate all my sufferings. When I pray, Thy will be done on Earth
as it is in Heaven, I mean, Let us with the most holy alacrity perform thy
preceptive Will and do our Duty; and then with confidence expect, and with
complacence rest in thy disposing Will, what ever be the event.


C. I have read your Undertaking, and what you have said to A. before, and I
think you favor them too much, and make their Errors to seem smaller than they
are.


B. Do you follow the same method that he did. Begin with the same Point, and
suppose me an Arminian for this time, and tell me the worst that you have
against their Opinions, (not meddling with the Pelagians, who deny Original Sin;
nor with the rash or odd sayings of particular men,) and let us try how wide
you can prove the difference here to be, and whether all be not resolved into
the Controversies of Grace and Free Will.


The first Crimination.
C. I. They destroy the comfort of the Faithful, by Episcop. ubi postea, p.
414. Nullo modo sequitur quod ad gloriam prius fuerant electi, quam crederent.
denying that God did certainly and immutably elect individual persons to
Salvation.


B. You mistake them: They hold that he did certainly and immutably elect
particular persons to Salvation. They hold that he foreknoweth what motions
means and circumstances will eventually take with men's Wills, without such
necessitation as is inconsistent with their liberty; and that to certain
persons he immutably decrees to vouchsafe them all those means and motions;
and that he then fore-seeth that De certo numero electorum and salvandorum and
de hoc opinionem Catharini and Thomistarum, etc. vide in Vasqu. in 1. Tho. q.
23. d. 101. c. 1, 2, 3.
these will prevail, and that they will believe, yea decrees that they shall
thus prevail, and so decrees that all those persons shall be justified: And in
like manner that he fore-seeth what means and motions will prevail to their
perseverance; and that he decrees to give them those means and motions; and
that by them they shall eventually presevere, and shall infallibly be saved.
The moderate Jesuits, and Arminians, and Lutherans do maintain, and will grant
all this. And all this is from eternity. And is not here then an eternal
ascertaining immutable Election of individuals.


The second Crimination.
C. II. Qui habet gratiam efficacem ad conversionem aut fidem praeordinatus est
ad conversionem et fidem. Malderus, 1. 2. q. 111. a. 3. p. 519.
They feign an election of Vid. Episcop. Instit. Theol. li. 4. sect. 5. cap. 6.
p. 413.
Things, instead of an election of Persons; and say that Election is Gods
Decree to make Faith the condition of Salvation: And so they bring in an
indefinite Election of Universals or Species of persons; that God decrees to
save Believers, and damn Unbelievers.


B. Does any Christian deny any of this? Restat ergo ut voluntates eligantur
sed voluntas ipsa nise aliquid occurat quod delectet, atque invitet animum,
moveri nullo m^do potest: Hoc autem ut occurrat non est in bominis potestate,
August. lib. 1. ad Simplician. q. 2.
1. That God has de facto, made Faith the condition of life, is visible in the
Gospel: And what God did in time, from eternity he decreed to do. Therefore he
decreed to make Faith the condition of life.

2. That God has in his Covenant made a Deed of Gift of Christ and Life to all
true Believers, and of Heaven to all that so persevere, and that he has
promised to perform this Covenant, is visible in the Scripture. Therefore God
decreed to do this from eternity, even to justify Believers, and glorify
persevering Believers. Make not the world believe that any of us question this.

But if you mean that they deny all other Decrees of Election, and extend it
not to individual persons, you mistake them. Read but Molina, Suarez, Vasquez,
Penottus, and other Jesuits, and you will see it: And so you may in Arminius
himself. They hold an Election of Individuals, as I last described it, in the
way of their scientia media, besides the Election of Believers in general. See
also our Playfaire on the Point.


The third Crimination.
C. III. They deny any Decree or Will of God to give men the first special
Grace, effectually to make them believe and repent, but only that he decrees
to give them sufficient Grace, which their own Wills must make effectual. They
commonly acknowledge a preventing operating Grace, ^quam Deus in nobis sine
nobis operatur.

But the Ratio efficaciae is controverted among them.





B. Did not I tell you that all the Controversy of Predestination is resolved
into that of effectual Grace? Such Grace as he gives men, such he decreed to
give them. This all consess. But what it is that denominateth Grace effectual,
we are to consider in its proper place. Only let me here tell you, that all
will grant you (of whom I now speak) that God decrees to give men that special
Grace which shall cause them to repent and believe. But on what terms, and in
what manner it so causes it, is afterward to be handled. See Ruiz de praedef.
d. 6. sect. 4, 5. proving Faith, Perseverance, etc. to come from Gods Decree.



The fourth Crimination.
C. Their Doctrine de Of this see more in the first Book.
scientia media on which they ground their Opinions of Gods Decrees, is many
ways injurious to God; and is a fiction not to be made good.


B. 1. I doubt all sides are over temerarious in their distribution of Gods
Decrees and Volitions. But, 1. All are agreed that ex part Dei Volentis, there
is no real difference in his Volitions; nor ex part Dei scientis, in his
knowledge: For so his Knowledge and Will are his Essence. 2. All agree, that ex
part objecti cogniti and decreti there is a real difference. 3. All must
agree, that in Gods Intellection and Volitions as denominated ab extra, viz. ab
objectis, there is a relative or denominative difference. 4. Ex part objecti,
there is no man can question, but that this Proposition [If John have such and
such means and helps, he will believe,] does differ from this Proposition, [It
is convenient and good that John shall believe] and from this, [John will
believe]. 5. If you are against mincing Gods Knowledge into such scraps as
these various objective Propositions do infer, you must be against the old
distinction, into scientiam simplicis Intelligentiae, and scientiam purae
visionis. For no doubt but God knows all things, how various soever, un^
intuitu, with one simple knowledge, ex part sui, though it be by our weakness
denominated many, even innumerable, ex relatione objectiva, vol terminatione
rei in quam transit. Does not God with one Act know Convenients, Desirables and
Futures? And cannot I here copiously thetoricate against you for your first and
second sort of Divine Knowledge, as well as you do against them de scientia
media. 6. It is agreed that God knows all things to be what indeed they are*
and not otherwise. 7. It is agreed that God knows not as man does, by Names,
Propositions, or Syllogisms; And yet that God knows all Names, Notions,
Propositions and Syllogisms, with their modes; as they are the measures, organs
or actings of Humane Understandings. 8. I refer the Reader to Blank, de
Concord. lib. cum ^ecretis 1. These. 25. etc. where by citing their own words at
large, he proves that the most famous and resolute Antiarminians were for this
scientia media conditionata, viz. Fr. Gomarrus (Arminius's chief Antagonist) in
Mat. 11. -- 21. Antonius Walaeus loc. com. de sctent. Dei, page 160. Paulus
Ferrius Scholast. Orth. vindic. p. 203, 209, 210. Besides Rob. Baronius Metaph.
sect. 12. disp. 2. number. 55, 56. (who in his last days was nearest to the
Arminians, as appears in those Metaphysics.) And Jo. Strangius, l. 3. c. 13.
p 675. names also Lud. Crocius Dyodecad. dis. 7.
It is therefore undeniable to all Christians, that the thing which they call
Could Alvarez and his fellows well prove, that the permission of the first sin
is an effect of Reprobation, as the word is used (in a fit and ordinary sense)
they would do more to overthrow the Doctrine de scientia media circa malum,
than is yet done. But they fail in their attempts of proving this: Of which
after.
scientia media, is as certainly in God, as is the scientia simplicis
Intelligen^iae and Purae visionis; that is, [that God knows the truth of all
true conditional Propositions, and knows what would be done, by such and such
causes, or upon such and such alterations, if they were put]. Does any
Christian doubt of this? 9. Whether this should be called scientia media is a
question de nomine, and that of no great importance, and not at all de re? 10.
Whether it be of any necessity or use in this Controversy, is a question only
about the order of argumentation, as long as the thing it self is confessed to
be true. 11. Some that cashier it as an useless Engine in this matter, do go as
far from you as the Jesuits and Arminians who use it; As you may see at large
in Ludov. a Dola, and Durandus himself. 12. I am one that fear Presumption both
in their and your distributions of the Knowledge and Decrees of God, and dread
the taking of his Name in vain; And one that think that we need not the notion
of scientia media for our satisfactory explication of these matters. But as the
truth of the thing is confessed, so if it be applied only to the Doctrine of
Reprobation (as it is commonly called) and not (at least always) to the
Doctrine of Election, I see no untruth that it infers, nor no real
difference that it will prove between us.


The fifth Crimination.
C. They deny absolute Reprobation at least, and say that God reprobateth no
men, but upon foresight of sin; And so that he has no Decree that men shall
sin, nor that he will permit them to sin, nor that they shall do the act in
particular which is sin: As if God had not decreed the hardening of Pharaohs
heart, the sin of Sihon, of Rehoboam, of the Jews in killing Christ, etc.


B. 1. I told you before, Reprobation is a word that signifies several acts:
You dare not but grant them, that God decrees or wills to damn no man but
for sin, and as a Sinner: And this is the same thing that they mean.

2. If by Reprobation you mean Gods Decree to give them no Faith or Repentance.
1. You must prove that God has such a Decree or Will, for a mere negation,
where not-decreeing or not-willing to give them Grace, will do as much. 2. All
Christians must needs confess that God made a Covenant of Grace with fallen
Mankind in Adam and Noah; And that no man is now under the mere Obligations of
the Law and Covenant of Innocence, which says [Be perfect and live, sin and
die for ever]: And that there is some common mercy extended to all the World,
which obliges them to repent in order to Salvation. He subverteth Scripture,
and all experience, that denies this. Therefore all must grant, that God
denies no special Grace to any, but the abusers of this common Grace. And he
decrees to do but what he does. Thus our British Divi^es at D^rt, in their
suffrage on Ar. 3. at large.
Therefore the persons whom he decrees to deny special Grace to, are none but
the abusers of common Grace, or the rejecters of that special Grace, when
offered.

3. If by Reprobation, you mean Gods Will or Decree to permit them to sin and
perish wilfully; 1. You can prove no such Decree or Will: Because permission
being a negation or nothing, needs it not, but will be as certainly without it,
upon a bare not decreeing to hinder them from sin. 2. And you mistake in saying
that Arminius denies it: For he Arminius himself expressly professes, that in
case God permits a man velle p^ccatum, nec^sse est ut nullo argumentorum gene^e
persuadeatur ad volendum: Exam. Perk. page 153. Dr. Twisse against Hoord, li.
1. page 70.
says with you, That God decrees his own permission. 3. You must take the
pains to distinguish between negative and privative Unbelief, and between
negative and privative not-hindring Sin, or not-giving Faith. Negative Unbelief
is mere not-believing: And so none of us did believe from eternity, or before
we were born: He that is not, believes not; nor yet in the first instant that
the Promise and Law of Faith was given us. Our unbelief is not sin, or
privative, but on supposition that we are men, and have reason, and have a Law
and Object of Faith. And Gods permitting us in this negative Non-belief is not
to be called a privative, but only a negative permission. For God did from
eternity so permit me to be no man, and no Believer, and yet this was not
Reprobation. So God did negatively not hinder Adams first sin, but not
privatively; because not penally for any evil done, nor yet by denying him any
thing that was naturally or morally his due: Therefore this was not an Act of
Reprobation. But when the New Covenant of Grace, and the common Grace of the
Covenant are once given men, and they are obliged to believe, then sometimes
God penally denies them Grace, and that is all which the Ar^inians put against
absolute denial, because this denial is only for men's foregoing sin. But he
also still negatively only, and not privatively or penally denies some Grace
to some, yea to all; And that is only such Grace as is neither morally their
due, nor naturally due or necessary to them. And the denial of such is no Act
of Reprobation.

4. If by Reprobation you mean merely Gods Preterition; that is, his
^^t-willing or not-decreeing to give men Grace. 1. Not to Will or Decree, is
nothing; And how can you call nothing absolute or conditional? These are the
modes of Acts, and not of not-acting, or of nothing. All grant that Gods
non-agency, non-volition, not-decreeing has no cause, much less a cause in
man, least of all in man when he is no man.

5. The word Condition, either respects, 1. The thing or event willed; 2. Or
the Will as relatively denominated with respect to that event; 3. Or that Will
radically considered in it self. I opened this before, but think of it again;
for the reason of the distinction is very plain. And, 1. God damneth no man but
for sin, (nor privatively denies any necessary Grace, but for sin.) Therefore
the event no doubt is beforehand conditional; that is, depends on a
condition: God decrees to damn them if they live and die impenitently, and not
else. 2. The Act of Gods Will as denominated from the said Effect or Object
particularly, may be called, A conditional Act or Will. But if any think
otherwise it is but de nomine. 3. The radical essential Will or Act of God as
in himself can have no cause or condition. [Though sin be acknowledged to be
the cause of the Will of God in Reprobation quoad res volitas, that is, in
respect of the punishment willed thereby, this hinders not the absoluteness of
reprobation quoad actum reprobantis: And unless we understand the Fathers thus,
we must charge them with an Opinion, which Aquinas is bold to profess that
never any man was so mad as to affirm, etc.] Twisse against Hoord, li. 1. page
49.

But, 1. The actus reprobantis as really distinct from the effect, is nothing
but Gods Essence. And who says that sin causes Gods Essence? 2. And the
effect of Reprobation, as it is said to be a Decree not to give Faith or Grace
is nothing: and therefore that nothing cannot aptly so much as extrinsically
denominate Gods Will or Essence as an Act. Is not here then a fair agreement?

Ruiz. de praedef. d. 9. p. 150. Quantum ad negationem electionis and quantum
ad permissionem peccati finalis, praed^finitus suit reproborum numerus.


Dr. Twisse denies none of this.

6. That God wills or decrees not sin formally, all the Christian world
almost confess. And what loveliness is there in that only odious thing, that
should tempt good people to father it on God, or attribute the being of it to
his Will, or to be zealous Reproachers of those that say otherwise?

7. And if God will and decree the Act not only as an Act in general, but with
all its modes and circumstances, he undeniably wills or decrees the form of
sin, or the immediate necessary cause of it; which in the case of efficiency
will more evidently appear.


C. God wills not the Form, that is, sin as sin, and yet he wills the Act
with all its circumstances.


B. I have told you before that a wicked man may will sin in matter and form,
and yet not will it as sin. To will it as sin, is to take the form of sin as
such to be good, and so to be the ratio volendi; which few if any Sinners ever
do. But to will both matter and form in one, not as the formal reason of
Volition, but making total sin, the matter chosen as a means to some other
desired end, this is possible for a very wicked man to do: But I think the
ordinary case of Sinners, is not at all to will the form of sin, but cast that
by, and to will the matter of it, for the carnal pleasure or inferior good
which it seems to tend to. Now this excuses not their will from wickedness,
that they will not malum sub ratione mali, or sin because it is sin, but for
another end. And shall we charge God of willing sin as the wicked do?


C. God wills it to a good end, and they to an evil end.


B. As evil must not be done, that good may come by it, so neither must it be
willed to that end. Man may need such a Sure Arminius grants enough, and that
which ^the^us and many Schoolmen deny, and for my part I cannot grant, when he
says, [At per accidens bonum est ut malum siat, propter Det saptentiam,
bonitatem and potentiam, secundum quam Deus expeccato materiam gloriae
suaeillustrandae sumit. Est ergo peccatum isto respect^ non medium per se
illustrandae Gloriae Divinae; sed occasio tantum, non data in hunc finem neque
natura sua ad illum accommodata, sed a Deo arrepta, and horsum mira art and
landabili abusu usurpata.] Armin. exam. Perkins. page 508. An occasion it is
indeed: but I will not grant that ex peccato God setcheth matter for his Glory;
nor that by accident it is good ut fiat.

Caeterum peccata etiam secundum rationem malitiae moralis, objecta sunt seu
materia circa quam divina praedestinatio versatur: ^o modo quo versatur
poenitentia, Vasqu. in 1. Tho. q. 23. a. 5. d^sp 93. c. 2.


means to his ends, but so cannot God. Yea, men have often good ends for evil
Acts: Many lie to glorify God, and sin for his Cause and Church, and for their
own and other men's Salvation. Much of the Blood, and Cruelties, and
Superstitions in the World, have had good ends; which yet excused not the
things from sinfulness.


C. God is under no Law, and therefore cannot sin: But man is.


B. 1. That proves God no Sinner; but not that he causes or wills not the
sin of man. 2. Gods natural essential Perfection is his Law, and more than a
Law to him: And from that Perfection all Laws in the world, that are just and
good, have their Original; that is, Gods own Laws are the expressions of his
holy perfect Will and Nature; and Man's Laws are authorized by, and subservient
to, and derived from the Laws of God, in Nature and Scripture: So that when the
Apostle would describe a man best and likest unto God, he says, That the Law
is not made for the Righteous. 3. If Gods Holiness and Wisdom make man a Law,
forbidding sin on pain of Hell, the same Wisdom and Holiness, with his Justice
and Mercy, will not will the sin so forbidden, nor cause it; nor consist with
so doing.


C. It is not the form or essence of sins that God wills, but the existence,
and futurity or event; not sin, but that sin be.


B. I many a year studied thinking to prove that true: But I doubt it is but a
game at words, and groundless distinguishing, for a false conclusion. For, 1.
Sin is a Relation formally; even a disconformity of an Act or disposition, and
so of the person to Gods Law. It can no otherwise be caused, but by making the
Law, and causing the Act in the circumstances disconform. God makes the Law,
and God makes man and his faculties, and God causes the Object, and God
permits the tempter: If God also cause the Act in the prohibited
circumstances, he does all that can be done in the causation of sin: And so of
his Volitions or Decrees. As for the essence of sin in notion, without the
existence, more may be said that God indeed is some cause of that, without
culpability, yea by his Holiness and Power. For as the Relations of Curvitude
and Dissimilitude result from the Relate's fundamentum, as compared to the
Correlate, or terminus; so he that causes any of them, has some hand in
causing the Relation as a Relation: And so God by forbidding Adultery, Lying,
etc. by his Law, does by Institution make those acts to be sin; that is, He
lays down the rule from which they are so denominated when committed. That
Adultery is committed is long of man: that it is a sin when committed is long
of God and man; God by his Law, and man by his Act. So that when you say God
causes not the essence, but the existence or futurity, you are so far out, as
that less of causality is to be ascribed to him, as to the existence, than the
essence.

2. But what is the existence but the essence existing, or extra causas? And
what is it to cause sin, but to cause it to exist? And what is it to cause it
to exist, but to cause it, or give it a being? And what is it to will that sin
shall exist, but that the essence of it shall exist? And what is it to will the
event or futurity, but to will that sin shall be? And what more can man will or
do about it, to show himself to be bad, (as Estius and others fully manifest.)


C. I cannot but think that God may will that Act which is sin, so he do not
will it Twiss. Vind. li. 2. Digress. 4. p. 201. Falsum est peccatum fieri ab
homin^ ut est peccatum. Licet sit peccatum ut fit ab homine, non tamen fit ab
homine ut est peccatum, hoc est sub ratione peccati. Quanto minus in divinam
voluntatem cadit, -- cum hoc ^^ in humanam voluntatem competat.
as sin, (and so may cause it) Quod peccatum, but not Qua peccatum.


B. Here are three things before us: 1. The common substratum or ^atter of the
sin, which is the Faculty, and the Object, and the Act only in genere act us,
or as not clothed with the forbidden circumstances. 2. The Act thus
circumstantiated. 3. The Relative form of sinfulness. 1. No doubt but God does
cause all the first, the Faculty, Object, and the Act as an Act; e. g. In
David's Adultery and Murder, and Peter's denying Christ, God gave them the
Faculty by which they did it: He ^pheld their natural power; and as the
Fountain of Nature concurred with it in and to the Act as an Act; But, 2. The
Act as thus circumstantiated he neither caused nor willed, but permitted only;
that is, that David should hic and nunc lust after her that was another man's
wife, that he should vitiate her, that he should choose out Uriah to the Sword,
that Peter should speak those particular words, etc. In the first sense, God
wills the Act which is sin, and the Faculty which is sinful; but not in the
second as sinfully circumstantiated.

And as for your Qua peccatum, I tell you again, few Sinners, if any, will it
qua peccatum.


C. What say you to this undeniable Argument: If God will not that Act which is
sin, he wills almost nothing that men do; For we sin in all someway or other.
And so God has little to do in the world.


B. The last answer fully serves to this. If we sin in every Act, yet all that
is in every Act, is not sin, or prohibited. All that is good in the Act is of
God, and willed by him. But it is the prohibited circumstances of the Act,
which God does not cause or Will, which morally specify it as sin. As when I
pray, I sin in praying coldly, unbelievingly, with wandering thoughts: God
causes not these, though he cause the Prayer. Or to come from compound Acts to
simple: Those wandering thoughts are not my sin as they are thoughts, but as
they are upon an undue Object. A lie is not a sin as it is a word, but as this
word which is false; And so in all others.


C. But some Acts are simply forbidden in themselves, and not only in their
circumstances: Therefore if God there cause the Act, he causes the Sin.


B. No Act as an Act is forbidden, but as circumstantiated, by Object, Time,
Mode, Place, etc. Mr. Capell Lib. of Tempt.
chooses lying only as an instance of prohibitum per se. But I answered
before, that all the Act in lying is Volition, Intellection and Speech; And
these as such are not forbidden: But only these particular words which are
false. The common instance is Odisse Deum; But here hatred in it self is not
the sin, but ^s unduly terminated on God as the Object. And this God wills
not.


C. By this you deifie man: For you make him the cause of something which God
is no first cause of. And so man is made a first cause, that is a God. For the
particularizing of the Object, and the circumstantiating of the Act, is
aliquid, something, and must have some first cause.


B. The truth is, this one Objection is all that is considerable in the whole
cause of the Dominican Predeterminants: Which I have answered in due place; and
here briefly tell you, 1. That when two Objects are before me, a commanded and
a forbidden one, there is I have noted after, that Dr. Twisse says, [Non
necesse esse ut Deus sit effector omnis Boni in genere conducibilis; Vix enim
datur aliquod peccatum quod non est alicui conducibile -- neque necesse esse ut
Deus sit Auctor omnis Boni jucundi, magis quam ut sit author peccati:] And
these have as much entity as Bonum vel malum morale, Armi. dic. Great. li. 1. p.
1. sect. 7. page 133.

It is true that the Will is free ad actum utile and jucundum, in many
instances: And God makes the Object, e. g. Honey, or Eves fruit; and God
makes the Appetite: so that by making Nature God antecedently makes the
jucundity; that is, that if thou will eat Honey it shall be sweet or pleasant
unto thee: But whether thou will eat it, he has left free: so that if God also
caused that determinate act, he caused all. And so it is confessed that God
makes the Law, the Object, and the man: and thereby makes, that if thou will
cause such an Act, so disordered, it shall be thy sin and misery: so that if
God would as much cause the Act also he did cause all in sin. And they that
ascribe the Act in suo modo to him, ascribe all to him. But as to Bonum utile,
he ill names it Bonum conducibile: For it may be Conducibile ad malum and
interitum. But it is not utile, unless it be conducibile ad bonum, yea ad fin^m
ultimum. For all is not profitable that accomplisheth a man's ends or will. And
God is the Author of all true profit to us.


no more true natural entity in my choosing the forbidden one, than in my
choosing the commanded one. To hate God, and love sin, has no more natural
entity, than to love God and hate sin: To speak an Oath or Lie, than to speak
Truth and Holily: To will a forbidden Act, than to Nill it, and to will a good
one. So that it is no deifying man to make him a first cause, of that which
has no natural entity; that is, of an Act, not as an Act, but comparatively as
rather this way than that way exercised. And Dr. Twisse hence says, That moral
specification of Acts, is no true specification of them; And it is true that it
is not a Physical specification.

2. If you say that we have a Liberty ad exercitium as well as of
specification, or of Contradiction as well as of Contrariety; Even to will or
not will, do or not do: And in this case to do or will when forbidden, is more
than not to do or will; I answer, 1. The Soul is naturally an active vital
power, and it is as natural to it to be in act, as to a stone to lie still; And
the Cartesians will tell you, that Action needs no more cause than Rest: But
I rather say, that God never forbids Action in general to the Soul; but only
this or that Action upon this or that Object, at an undue time. So that no man
ever sinned by mere Action as such, whether Vital, Intellectual or Volitive.
The Action which God commands he wills: The Action which he forbids is
but this or that upon an undue Object. Adam had this liberty of contradiction,
to will or not to will this particular Act, of eating the forbidden fruit; but
not to will or not will simply. Now for Adam to will to eat that fruit, instead
both of nilling it, and of willing to please God by nilling or refusing it, had
no more natural entity in it, than if he had not willed it, but willed somewhat
else at the same time.

3. An Action it self is not properly Res, but modus Rei; and if any should say
that God is not able to make a Creature, that supposing God the cause of its
Power continued, shall be the first cause of its own Act or exercise of that
Power, he says that which no mortal man can prove. The Glory of Gods Works, is
their likeness to Himself; And as Intellection and Free Will are parts of this
likeness, we know not just how far God can go in such Communications. I see no
contradiction in it, to say that a faculty maintained by God in its natural
force, with necessary (though not determining) concurse, can determine it self
without any more causation. And if it be not a Contradiction, God can do it.

4. But this is all prevented by considering, that man's Soul is never out of
Act. Its active force is never idle; though it act not always the same way, nor
with the same extension or intension: so that to reduce it into act, is not to
reduce it from a mere potentia in actum, but from a power acting one way, or
slowly, to act another way, or more intensly.

5. Yea, this is all answered by considering, that as I said, while God
continues the Soul in its nature, it continues a naturally active force or
power; inclined essentially to activity: So that though, I say* that Action
needs more cause than non-action, that is, here done, in God still causes
the active disposition. But supposing that upheld, I say, that there is often
more need of other causality or strength to keep it from Action, than to cause
it to act. Whatever the world talks against Durandus, they are never well
able to answer a Dola (though in sense they that factiously oppose him mean the
same as he.) And if a Rock hanged in the Air by something that might be cut off
or removed (as a thread), supposing God to continue the nature of it, and all
things else, there is more strength and causality needful to hold it from
falling, than to make it fall, when the thread is cut. It was a work of Gods
Power to keep the fire from burning the three Confessors, Dan. 3. and the Lions
from devouring Daniel, Dan. 6. and the Sea from flowing on the Israelites, and
the Sun from moving in Joshuah's fight.

6. And yet consider that it is not so much as an Action, which is but modus
rei, that is in question, but only the comparative circumstantiating of that
action; so that it is but modus modi rei.

7. And lastly, The denial of the matter of our power and liberty in this I
have elsewhere proved, overthrows the certainties and fundamentals of all
our Religion. Now whether any man should deny all our Religion, and certain
necessary Truths, for such a metaphysical uncertain notion as this, that God is
not able to make a Creature, that can cause a modus modi, in determining its
active nature to this Object rather than to that, without Divine
predetermination, let sobriety be judge.


C. But thus you make man the specifier of his good acts, without Gods
determination, as well as of the evil.


B. Jansenius is in the right in this: we have more need of Divine help to the
willing and doing of good than of evil. We cannot do evil without his natural
support and concurse: But we cannot do good, especially spiritual saving good,
unless we have moreover his medicinal special Grace. To the specifying of good
actions, there must ever concur Gods natural help, Gods gracious help, and man's
free will or self-determination. It is not two or three determinations of the
Will, which are made by these several Causes; but one determination. So that
under God, man is the specifying determiner of his Will to good; or else he
were not a Believer, nor rewardable or punishable. And that he cannot determine
his Will to good as well as to evil, proceeds not from the Original nature of
the Will, (for with that such a determination was consistent) but from its
Pravity or Corruption. But how Grace and Free Will concur is after to be
handled.


C. Dr. Twisse Vindic. Great. lib. 2. p. 190. (Vol. minoris) has a full
digression (4) to prove that [God wills that sin shall come to pass, he
permitting it, and says, Nostri Theologi affirman^: Arminiani ^ontificii
negant.] This Digression of Dr. Twisse is answered in the first Book. His
Friend Alvarez de Aux. li. 11. disp. 110. p. 442, etc. discusseth the Qu. An
detur ex part nostra causa reprobationis: and concludes that [Reprobatio qua
Deus statuit non dare aliquibus vitam aeternam, et permittere peccatum eorum,
non est conditionata sed absoluta, nec praesupponit in Deo praescientiam
demeritorum ipsius reprobi. 2. In Angelis qui ceciderunt nu^la datur causa
reprobationis ex part ipsorum quantum ad integrum effectum, etc. 3. Et ita de
reprobatione parvulorum comparativa: and ita de adultis. 4. Non solum
comparative, sed etiam absolute loquendo, nulla datur causa reprobationis
quantum ad omnes effectus.] Where note, that he grants that there is in man a
cause of Reprobation as to some effects, viz. punishment; For by a cause he
means any prerequisite condition: For no doubt there is no efficient cause of
any thing in God. And all his stress is laid on this, that the permission of
the first sin, is the first effect of Reprobation, and this permission has no
cause in man: Ergo Reprobation quoad omnes effectus has no cause in man. But
the truth is, 1. A man may put such a sense on the word Reprobation, as to
include what he please. But it is usually taken for Gods Decree to damn men, and
to deprive them of somewhat necessary to their salvation; and so is, 1. A
positive Act as a Volition, 2. And privative, objectively, and 3. Some unfitly
extend it to that which is objectively negative and not privative; 4. And some
most ineptly extend it to that which is negatio actus, no Act, that is, to
nothing. And so a man that will play with words, may say, that 1. Gods
non-agere, non^igere, is an Act. 2. That his non-impedire is an effect, which
is nothing, and therefore no effect: And Alvarez utterly fails i^ this proof,
either that non-eligere is an Act, or permittere vel non impedire an e^^ect; or
that it is fitly called Reprobation, which has ^^ privation but a negation for
its Object; e. g. that Judas shall not be an Angel nor i^^eccabil^; but have
natural free will, is no act of his Reprobation: And so of the permission of
the first sin. Arminius himself exam. Per^ins. page 568. says, [Vole^et Deus
Israelem punire, and Achabum mensuram scelerum suorum implere -- Propria,
^mmediata and ad^quata causa cur permiserit, ut Acha^ i^^^ cadem perpetraret,
est illa quam dixi; mens^ra s^elerum implen^^ erat. ^^^^ D^^^ ^^tra peccatum
hominis, per aliam ^^em Nabothum ad se evocare.] Which Dr. Twisse uses through
all his Writings against him ad hominem, in stead of argument. ^^-thinks this
concession should seem enough which is too much. And I conjecture, that
Arminius wrote it by oversight and wo^ld have said, that God permitted Ahab to
kill Naboth, because he would ^^^^ him to ^^^^* up the measure of his sin:
making permission the res Vo^^ta. But all their assigning Causes of Gods ^^^^
are ^^^^ ^^ld; God being above all cause^.



B. I wonder not that Dr. Twisse holds that God wills it, when he holds
that he efficiently premoveth and predetermineth the Will to every forbidden
act, clothed with all its circumstances. That which God causes, he must needs
will. But when he says, Nostri Theologi affirmant, he must mean but some few,
such as Maccovius, Spanhemius, Rutherford, (and perhaps Piscator or Beza,) of
his own mind. But the generality of Protestants either are against him, or
meddle not with it. He that will read Davenant, and such others, shall find the
difference. I remember but few English Divines at all that own it, besides the
forenamed and Mr. Norton. But having written both an answer to this Digression
of Dr. Twisse, and to his and Alvarez, and other men's Doctrine of physical
predetermining premotion; I may pretermit that here.


C. But by this they make God an idle Spectator of sin in the World, and so
deny a great part of his Providence or Works.


B. 1. This belongs not directly to the Point of Reprobation, but of Gods
Works. 2. Take heed of such unreverent words of God: Who will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain. Dare you reproach God as Idle, if he do
not all that your shallow thoughts will cut out for him?


C. The blasphemy is theirs that give the cause by their unsound Doctrine, and
not mine that do but denominate their consequents.


B. Let us try that. Do you believe that God does as much as he can do? that he
made the World as soon as he was able, and could have done it no sooner? or
that he is able to make no one Man or Beast, or Plant or Atome more than he
has made? nor to do any one action more than he does?


C. No: I hold no such thing: For God is Omnipotent and Free.


B. I pray you then study it, and tell me, if God be not to be blasphemed as
Idle, for such a total Non-agency or Free-suspension of his own Acts as to all
such possibles; why should you call him Idle, if by the same Wisdom and
Free Will he only suspend some degree of his cooperation with man in the case
of sinning? And if God freely decree that man shall be made a free Agent, able
(by Gods common generical concurse as the cause of nature) to determine or
suspend his own Volitions, without any predetermining efficiency of God. If God
will delight himself in making such a Creature, will you dare to say that he is
Idle, because he moves him not in another manner? you will not so reproach a
Watchmaker, for not moving the Watch all day with his finger.


C. I confess I cannot answer that: But how then is God the Governor of the
World, if so much sin be done without his Will and Operation.


B. The Work of a Governor, as such is only, 1. By Legislation, to make the
Subjects Duty. 2. And by Judgment to try and decide the case of each Subject,
whether he do that Duty. 3. And to see to the execution of that Judgment. But
not to be the determining cause of all the Subjects Volitions and Actions.


C. It is so with man, because he can do no more: but not with God.


B. Indeed God governs all mere Naturals and Bruits, by physical motion, as
Engines are moved (as a Clock or Watch) by natural necessitation: And so he does
the mere naturals of man; (As his Concoction, Pulse, circulation of Blood,
generation in the Womb, etc.) But God having made man an Intellectual free
Agent, rules him as such, agreeably to his nature; even by moral Agency, by
Laws and Judgment: And this is that Regency of which we speak. If you believe
not that God is thus the moral Ruler of Mankind, or King of the World; you deny
him to be God, and overthrow all Religion and Morality.


C. But what say you to all the Texts that tell us, that God willed and caused
that which wicked men did; as in the case of Pharaoh, Sihon, Rehoboam, Absalom,
the death of Christ, and many others.


B. One of the greatest over-sights of them that thus Object, is, that they
distinguish not between the sin, and the effect of the sin; or the forbidden
Will and Act of the Sinner as of him, and the reception of this Act in passo,
in the recipient. God can many ways concur to the causing of the reception and
the effect, without causing the Volition or Act as Agents by a specifying
determination. Especially when Custom comprizeth both in one name; dull wits
are easily here deceived* As the words, Murder, Theft, Adultery, Drunkenness,
etc. do signify both the Volition and Act of the Agent, and the Reception or
Effect. Now God can many ways make the sinful Volition and Act of every such
Sinner, to produce that effect which the word Murder, Theft, Adultery,
Drunkenness, etc. connoteth or includes, without causing the Volition or Act
forbidden determiningly.


C. I pray you show me how?


B. 1. He can by Providence order or set the Object in their way. 2. He can fit
the Receptive disposition of the Patient to the effect: Most of the wonderful
Varieties in the World are a diversa recipientium dispositione. That Act will
produce an Effect on a disposed matter, which will not on another. 3. He can
rule the Sinners Instruments of Action. 4. He can remove other Objects out of
the way. 5. He can remove Impediments. 6. He can put in some good thought or
desire into the Sinners mind, which shall determine the Effect. 7. He can
suspend some concurse of his own, which will tend to this effect rather than
another.


C. Give me some Instances to make it plain.


B. You need no other than the instance of the Murder of Christ: 1. When his
time was come, he that before often retired into the Wilderness, and lived in
Galilee, came up to Jerusalem in their way. 2. He was willing himself to die
for man, and so did not avoid it. And he went into the place where Judas could
find him. And he spoke the words which he knew that they would call Blasphemy,
etc. 3. God directed the Soldiers Spear to the Region of Christ's heart, which
their intent or aim alone else had not done. And he provided a Cross, and a
Simon to bear it, etc. 4. God did not open to them effectually those Reasons
which should have moved them more to desire the death of Barrabbas. 5.
Abundance of Impediments God could have set in their way (as the peoples
tumult, Pilate's resistance, etc.) which yet he did not. 6. God put into their
minds (by moral means at least) the true apprehension of the probability that
the Romans hearing of a King of the Jews, would turn their jealousy and fury
against them, and take away their place and Nation. 7, He suspended that
preserving operation by which he could have kept Christ alive on the Cross, and
healed his Wounds, and caused him to come down from the Cross, when they
promised him then to believe in him; and he restrained the Soldiers from
breaking his bones, etc. And in all this, there is no Decree, Volition or
Causation of their sinful Wills or Deeds.

So in the case of Absalom's Incest (or any sinful Generation,) 1. God ordered
it so, that his Fathers Concubins were just in his way. 2. They had an inviting
pulchritude; and an impotency of resisting. 3. The state of his affairs was
such, as that the action had an appearance of tendency to his ends, by making
him seem unreconcileable to his Father. 4. And for Achitophel and Absalom to
know the truth of this, was no sin. 5. Other diverting Objects and occasions
are kept out of the way, etc. Yet in all this God neither wills nor causes
that Will and Act of Absalom in specie; but the effect.


C. But by all this you do describe God as plotting and doing the same thing
that they do. And (but for different words) this comes all to one.


B. 1. If you think this enough, why does it not satifie you? while it is
granted by them that you oppugn. 2. It is not the same thing. Is it the same
thing for Christ to be killed, and for the Jews to will and perform his Murder?
Is man's Will and Act, and Christ's Death the same thing? 3. God did foreknow
their sinful Will and Action, and permit it only, but did not cause it, but was
a concause of the Effect.

So God may to a Drunkard, 1. Cause strong Drink or Wine to be in his way. 2.
And remove some smaller Drink, that would have satisfied him. 3. And remove
Disswaders and many impediments. 4. And give him money, and facility of
obtaining it. 5. And cause him truly to know that the Drink is pleasant to the
taste, exhilerating, spiritful. 6. And cause it when he has drunk it, to make
him drunken. And none of this is quid prohibitum, or sin in man: But his sinful
Will and Act, which are forbidden, are presupposed or foreseen.


C, I cannot see but that it comes all to one, for God to permit that which he
fore-seeth, and could easily hinder if he would.


B. 1. Your conceits that it comes all to one, must not overruled our certain
knowledge of Gods Holiness, and his true and holy Word, and all the certainty
of Religion in the World. 2. We are sure that God is Holy, a hater of all sin,
and a righteous Judge, etc. And are you as sure that it comes all to one? And
must all men else say that they are sure of it too, or else be back-bitten, and
called Arminians, Jesuits, etc. 3. Do you consider what Gods permission is? It
is far from a full permission. He does all that belongs to a Rector to hinder
it. He strictly forbids it by Laws: He opens the malignity of it. He
threatens misery here, and everlasting damnation hereafter to them that will
not forbear it or forsake it. He promises all blessings in this life, and
endless Glory in Heaven hereafter, to them that will. He sends his Ministers,
first with Miracles, after with sealed Doctrine and Gifts, to proclaim all this
to the World, and to persuade them: He gave his own Son to condemn sin in the
Flesh, on the Cross, and by his holy Life, and Doctrine, and Suffering, to
declare the malignity, and hatefulness, and hurtfulness of it to the World: He
sets up all his Ordinances, Magistracy, Ministry, Sacraments, Worship and
Discipline to this end: He warns the World by many Judgments; and especially
by the Messengers of each man's death; and the constant Afflictions which are
the fruits of Sin: He obliges them to Obedience, by multitudes of Mercies: He
sets Heaven and Hell before them daily; and is this permitting it? He does
indeed in this sense permit it, in that he does not all that he can against it,
or does no more than as aforesaid. 4. If this permitting be all one as loving
or causing it, then when God made man a free Agent, and resolved to rule him by
moral means, and leave Adam to his own Will, it was a loving and a causing sin.
And is every King or Parent a lover of Vice, who does not all that he could do
to restrain it?


C. We do not hold that God loves sin, though he will the event, and cause the
act circumstantiated.


B. I know you say that neither God nor man loves sin as sin: But whether Dr.
Twisse and Rutherford say not in equipollent terms, that God is the greatest
Lover of Sin in all the world, judge by their confuted words in the former
Book. 1. They deny not (nor can do) that Love and Voliti^^ in God are all one.
Gods Love is not a Passion, but his Will. 2. They say, that God wills that
sin exist. 3. And that as sum and unice conducible to his Glory. 4. And that
this great conducibility is a great good. 5. That God is pleased finally in
what he wills antecedently. 6. And that as God is infinitely above man in his
Being, so is he in the greatness, and power, and efficacy of his Volitions. 7.
And that man loves not, nor wills not evil as evil, or sin as sin; but for
inferior good infinitely below Gods Glory, for which he wills its existence.
And is not this to say that he is the greatest Lover of it that is?


C. Yet it sticks with me, that God should be the Omnipotent Governor of the
World, and all Sin which is the common work of the World, should be without or
against his Will: Providence is wronged by this.


B. You mistake the matter: 1. That he decreed to leave any men ordinarily to
their Free Will, under moral Government, was not from impotency, as if he could
have made man no better, or more necessary an Agent: But of his Wisdom and
Freedom, by which he made the Bruits without Reason, and Stones without Sense.

2. All sin is done against the Law or commanding Will of God, which
determines only of Duty, and not directly of Event. But it is not done against
his absolute Will de eventu: For God is not overcome nor frustrate of his
Decrees.

3. I pray you once for all remember what I have told you in the first ^ook,
that Gods Providence does about man's sin, and then you will ^ot say that he is
Idle, or neglects his Government, unless he cause Sin.

I. It is God that made man an Intellectual free Agent in his own Image, and
the Lord of his own Acts, as a Creature morally governable by Laws: And so all
his free power is of God, who still upholdeth it.

II. As God is the Fons Naturae he is the Principium motus, and he concurreth
as the first cause to all Action as Action in genere, and so to all that has a
physical entity and reality in sin: And I do not believe that Aureol^^, Dura^d,
or Lud. a Dola thought otherwise, though they differ in expressing the mode of
concurse.

III. God gives men all the mercies which they turn to sin, and is the cause
of all those Objects which they inordinately love and abuse.

IV. God himself concurreth with Sinners, in causing the same effects which
they cause also by prohibited Volitions and Actions (as in generation, etc.)
even when custom gives one name to the sin and the effect: And that by all the
ways forenamed, and many more.

V. God as the Worlds Governor and Benefactor, makes men's sins the occasions
of much good, and orders and over-ruleth all Wills and Events, so as not to
miss of any of his ends: But will attain all his ends, while the Sinner seeks
his own.

VI. All this that God does he decrees to do. And all that Sinners do he
fore-knew. And neither his Wisdom, Goodness, or Power, is ever overcome by
sin, or defective in any thing about it. And is not all this enough for you,
but yet God must be the chief willer of sin.


C. I confess that God can govern the sinful World by this much.


B. Take in but one thought more, which I afterward suggest. Ockam laboriously
endeavors to prove, that the outward Act has no peculiar sinfulness in it
self distinct from that of the Will. I have told you my Opinion of his tenet:
But this is granted him, that no outward Act has any sinfulness, but secondary
and participative, as animated by the Will: and that sin is primarily in the
Will alone. Now in abundance of the Scripture Texts alleged by Dr. Twisse and
Rutherford, it is not the Will of the Sinner that God is made the Author of,
but seemingly of the Act, (indeed of the Effect.) Now God cannot be the cause
of any man's sin, unless he cause the sinful Volition.

But I have anticipated our Dispute of Providence in all this, because it is
here usually handled as the matter decreed. And therefore when we come thither,
you must excuse me from repeating it, or pardon what you put me to do.


The sixth Crimination.
C. My next offense against them is, that they make Gods Will and Decrees
conditional, and so make God dependent upon man.


B. This is opened in the Second Book. Vasquez in 1. Tho. disp. 91. c. 1. [Cum
quaeritur an divinae praedestinationis detur causa? qu. non est de actu divinae
voluntatis, quatenus est ipsa essentia divina, and res increata: sic notant
scholastici omnes -- clarum enim est divinae praedestinationis hoc modo non
esse causam sed est de effectibus. Et perinde est quaerere causam
praedestinationis ex part nostra, atque causam aliquam totiu^ effectus
praedestinationis in nobis quae effectibus illis non sit annumeranda. Nam si
quidpiam ponitur effectus praedestinationis nequit illud ulla ratione esse
causa totius effectus. -- In Deo, 1. Ipsa essentia Dei. 2. Respectus rationis
ad res cognitas et volitas: Hic nascitur ex objectis: Ejus igitur possunt esse
causae.
Indeed they differ not from the Synodists (or Dr. Twisse himself, I think,) in
this. That is, 1. They hold that God has made conditional Donations, Promises
and Threatenings in his Word. 2. And that God may truly be said to Will and
Decree his own Word, and all that is in it, with its conditional mode. 3. And
as Aquinas and Twisse, and all say, Deus vult, hoc esse propter hoc; sed non
hoc vult esse, propter hoc. Gods Will does not depend on the Condition; but
Gods Will is, that the Effect or Event shall depend on the Condition. When the
Condition is performed, it is not a medium of Gods Volition, but of the Effect.
4. But yet this all must confess, that as to the bare extrinsick denomination
from the Object, as Gods Will is variously denominated from things past,
present and future, so it may be from absolute and conditional Grants and
Promises: which you will not deny but God has made. 5. And in case of sin and
damnation, sin foreseen is an objective condition, disposition or
qualification sine qua non, of such as Gods velle damnare is immediately
terminated on (as they confess at the Synod at Dort, and Molinaeus there
opens in his judgment at large.)


C. But this decreeing upon foresight of somewhat in man, makes God to follow
the Creature, and depend upon it.


B. It makes him no way dependant at all: For the Creature neither causes any
Act of God, nor hinders him from any thing which he would do. It is his own
Will that this shall be the Order. But as to Gods Acts or Volitions following
man's, 1. They no way follow man's but as Objects; which Objects in their natures
and qualifications, relatively terminate, or by connotation denominate Gods
Volitions. 2. And do you or any man deny that? Does not Gods Knowledge
Praeteritorum and Existentium suppose the preterition or existence of Objects.
Does not Gods complacential Volition of the holiness and glory of his
Creatures, presuppose that holiness and glory? Does not Gods hatred of past or
existent sin presuppose it?


C. But what can God fore see in man, till he first decree to cause it, or at
least decree that it shall exist?


B. Sin: He decrees neither, and yet fore-seeth it, (of which, lib. 1.)


The seventh Crimination.
C. Aliqui scholastici minus caute de gratia Dei loquuntur. Patres negarent
^mne meritum causam and occasionem ex nobis praedestinationis nostrae, ut
oftender ent gratiam in tempore omnin^ gratis sint aliquo horum nobis donari,
Vasq. in 1. Tho. qu. 23 disp. 91. c. 10.
But some of them say, that the Gospel it self, yea and the first special
Grace, is given to men upon merit of congruity, though not of condignity, and
so is decreed on that foreseen.


B. 1. We mind not what some odd persons say, but what the moderate and sober
say, whom we are reconciling. 2. But I pray you wherein do you differ from
these? Is it in words, or sense also.


C. In both: I hold no such merit, foresight, or decree.


B. Do you hold that there is such a thing as common Grace, distinct from
special?


C. Yes: so do all Protestants.


B. Is it not every man's Duty to make a good use of the common Grace or Mercies
which he has, as in order to his Repentance and Salvation?


C. Yes: He that had but one Talent should have improved it.


B. Is not a man that does this as far as common Grace will go, more disposed
and prepared to receive special Grace, than one that has long abused it, and
derideth God and godliness?


C. Yes, no doubt some such are not far from the Kingdom of God.


B. Have not Doct. of Faith.
Mr. Jo. Rogers, Mr. Tho Hooker, Mr. Rob. Bolton, Instruct. for Comfort. Consc.

Read Vasq. i^ 1. Tho. qu. 23. a. 4. disp. 9. throughout, proving that
Predestination to the first Grace is not upon foreseen Merit, no nor upon any
foreseen Cause sine qua non, no nor Condition sine qua non, etc. and against
Cassianus, and the Massilienses, and the Greek Fathers, that the initium primae
gratiae and praedestinationis is not from our free will: Yea, c. 10. opposing
Scotus, Grabri^l, Cajet. Richard. Durand. Pantus. etc. as coming too near the
Massilienses: Yea, and all that hold that facienti quod in se est ex viribus
naturae, Deus non denegat gratiam.


and abundance of other Protestants written much of Preparation to Conversion?
And is it not our common Doctrine?


C. Yes: but what is that to Merit of Congruity?


B. What do you think they mean by it more than you by Preparation?


C. They mean such Merit as it is decent for God to reward.


B. The greater part, I think, by far of the Schoolmen say, That the first
special Grace is not given upon any Merit at all. And the learned and sober
that thus talk of Merit of Congruity and Decency, mean no more but this, 1.
That God who commands men such use of his common Grace, as a means to
special, does command no Duty, and appoint no means in vain. 2. That such
prepared persons are fitter for special Grace than the unprepared, and
malignant Enemies of it. 3. That it is Gods usual way to prepare men by common
Grace, before he give them special Grace. 4. And many say that we cannot prove
that God uses to deny special Grace, where he gives the highest degree of
preparing common Grace. And which of these are you against?


C. But does not God give special Grace also without such preparation?


B. 1. Our foresaid practical Protestants seem to think not (to men at age.)
For they often say, that it cannot be conceived that a man can value Grace, and
come to Christ truly, that has no preparatory sense of sin and misery. 2. But
I find not that the Papists usually deny it, but that God may give special
Grace to the unprepared on a sudden. 3. But Papist's and Protestants are agreed
that this is not his ordinary way. And where do we differ in all this?


C. But we say not that there is any Merit in all this.


B. Phy on that word Merit! I thought it was but the name that we differed
about. 1. And many of themselves dislike the name, and say, It is unapt: And I
think so do the Lutherans and Arminians more commonly. 2. And others say, that
by Morit they mean nothing but a moral aptitude for Reward. And they say, that
they can find no one fitter name for that than this, which all Christians
without known opposition used for many hundred years after the Apostles. And
that the Scripture word (...), worthy, is the same in sense. 3. And they
usually say, that special Grace is called a Reward to the prepared, (if not
unaptly, as many or most say, yet) but in a lower Analogical sense, and not as
Heaven is the reward of Holiness: Because, of the latter, there is a flat
Promise, and premiant Law or Covenant made by God; but of the former they can
say no more than as aforesaid, that God appoints no Duty and means in vain.


The eighth Crimination.
C. They make many Elections or Decrees where God makes but one. These are but
contentions de nomine; as Vasquez truly says about Durandus Opinion, who 1. d.
41. q 2. n. 11. concurring with other Schoolmen, that the question de causa
praedestinationis, is meant only ex part effectus, and de toto effectu, an
scilicet totius effectus detur aliqua causa opposes Ockam and Gabr. therein,
on the supposition that glorification is no effect of Predestination, but the
means to it. And that because Predestination is as prudence in a man, which is
only circa media, which says Vasque^, dis. 91. c. 4. non tam rei, quam vocis
quaestio est.

So also Bonaventure and Jave differ from others, and say, that
Praedestinationis (quoad effectum) datur meritum congruum ex auxili^ gratiae.
But its a mere strife about a word, while they take Predestination as reaching
only to Justification, Perseverance and Glorification; and others take it as
extending also to preparatory Grace, as Vasqu. also notes, disp. 91. cap. 5.


As an Election to Glory, and another to Justification, and another to Faith
and Conversion, and another to have the Gospel, and another to be redeemed by a
sufficient satisfaction of Christ, and another to be made men. And so vary the
Objects.


B. Some of these are Decrees of common Grace, and not called Election by any
that I know of, except, as some say, God chose Man and not Devils to have a
Savior. But all that I speak of are agreed with you, that Gods decreeing Will
is his Essence, and that it is but one God or Will in the notion of Essence or
Principle, or Act as it is merely Agentis: But they say, that if we distinguish
not Gods Decrees by connotation of the various Effects or Objects, our
Controversies are at an end. And I ask of you, Do not you distinguish them when
you dispute of their Order, Priority and Posteriority?


C. Yes: There is no Order without distinction.


B. Will you not distinguish Election from Reprobation?


C. Yes: Though both be Gods Decree.


B. Will you not distinguish the Election of Peter, both from the Reprobation
of Judas, and from the Election of Paul?


C. Yes, as connoting various Objects and Effects.


B. Is there not then the same reason for distinguishing Gods Vo^^tio^^ about
one and the same person, as to various effects? As Gods Will that Paul be born,
that he be redeemed, that he be endured in his sin, that he be converted, that
he suffer, persevere, be glorified?


C. Yes: But though these be various Decrees, yet not Elections.


B. These names and words are our unhappy Difference. 1. Remember then that you
agree to call them diverse Volitions or Decrees; and, I think, no sober man will
fall out with you for the name Election* 2. But what reason is there in the
nature of the thing, why you may not as lawfully and decently say, that to
choose David to be a Saint, a King and a Prophet; to choose Paul to be a
Christian, a Preacher, and a Marty^, ^^e various Elections, as well as various
Decrees? 3. But my own Opinion is, that the denomination should follow the
Object: And therefore where the Objects elected, or the Termini of the Relation
are various* we may call them various Elections: But when they are diversified
but as parts, we should call them various acts and parts of one Election. And
no doubt but our election to have the Gospel, to Conversion, to Justification,
to Perseverance, to Glory, to the Ministry, to Martyrdom, etc. may in several
respects be named many, and parts of one Election.


C. I confe^^ I am convinced that it is a shame to make a quarrel of this:
because it is about ^ word, and really there is no difference. But why make
they various Objects in one man of these Decrees?


B. What is it but diversity of Objects that does diversifie them? In the
execution the case is plain. Paul uncreated and creandus was nothing, or no
man. 2. Paul before he heard the Gospel, was a Pharisee that had not heard it.
3. Paul before Conversion and convertendus, was a persecuting Infidel. 4. Paul
jam justificandus was a Believer. 5. Paul jam vocandus ad facrum Ministerium
was a Christian. 6. Paul persevering, and ready to overcome finally, was a
faithful holy Christian and Apostle. 7. Paul jan^ justificandus per judicem
finaliter and glorificandus, was a persevering overcoming Christian, Saint and
Apostle.


The ninth Crimination.
C. Bannes in 1. q. 23. a. 2. page 264. Jaciendum nobis est fundamentum
necessarium, viz. quod in divinis omnia sunt simul and nihil prius aut
posterius in aliquo genere causae, nihilque realiter ab alio distinctum, ubi
non obviat relationis oppositio. At quia non simplici conceptu sed multis and
imperfecte nos cognoscimus, necesse est distinguere, you may see a multitude of
Authors and Reasons to prove that Gods Will to all Objects is but one most
simple Volition, in Ruiz* de Volunt. Dei disp. 5. sect. 6. p. 34.
But that is my next offense: that they order Gods Decrees according to the
order of Execution, and not according to the order of Intention: when as Quod
prius est intention, posterius est executione.


B. Dr. Twisse has that word, I think, many score, if not hundred times: But
it is no fit matter for contention. Do you believe that in God himself there is
Priority and Posteriority of Decrees?


C. Not in time: but in order of Nature or Intention.


B. How can there be difference of Order, where there is no diversity?


C. Though in God there be no diversity, yet you confess there is the Relative
connotation and denomination from the Objects?


B. True: Therefore the Order also must not be denominated from any feigned
diversity in God, but from the Order of the diverse Objects, as one is first or
last, in time, or nature, or use. That which is first, God decreed should be
first: That which is propter aliud, God decreed should be propter aliud: And
that which is the end of another thing, God decreed should be its end.


C. But even in God himself, we must, as men, conceive, that his velle ^^em,
and velle media are not all one, but must distinguish them.


B. As men, we must not judge falsely of God, when we know that it is false. If
velle finem and media be certainly one without any diversity in God, saying
what is in the connoted Objects, and the relation or denomination; how can we
without sin destinguish where there is no difference? But I pray you tell me,
what mean you by Gods intendere ^^^em?


C. I mean that as every wise man does first will an end, and then do all for
it, so does God.


B. We call nothing to man an end, but something which he wants, ^^ at least
is without: But God wants nothing, nor is ever without his ^^d, or the
accomplishment of his Will. But of this I crave leave to refer you to the first
Book, where I have fully showed that God wills an ^^^^ improperly, and not as
man does. But tell me, what take you to be strictly Gods end?


C. His Glory.


B. What mean you by his Glory?


C. Our Knowledge, Admiration and Praise of his Perfection.


B. Constat totius effectus praedestinationis non esse causam per modum finis
aliquid ex part praedestinati, cum Gloria quae posset esse sinis inter
effectus annumeretur, Vasqu. in 1. Thom. disp. 91. c. 4.
These are Acts of men, and can man's Acts be Gods chief ^od?


C. I know some say, It is the objective Luster, or Demonstration of Gods
Perfections: Take that if it please you better.


B. That Luster or Demonstration objective is a Creature: And can a Creature be
Gods Ultimate End?


C. No: God who is the Beginning is the End alone.


B. God is no efficient Beginning of himself or any thing in himself: For in
God there is no Cause or Effects; how then can he be his own End or final
Cause? If any man will say, that to be generated, and to proceed in the second
and third persons, are effects, I account it presumption to enter into a dispu
^ of it: But it is certain, that nothing in God is effected by a a Creature, nor
his Essence by himself.



C. He is neither Beginning nor End, efficient nor final Cause of himself; but
of his Works or Creatures only.


B. Therefore not of his Volitions, or Decrees which are himself, not of any of
his Actions merely as Agentis; because they are himself: but as they are in the
effects. But how can God be the Creatures end? The Creature is no means, either
that God be God, or that he be perfect, or that he be glorious in himself, or
that he be just or merciful: It is the highest blasphemy to say it.


C. You know all our Divines say, That Gods end in decreeing, is the Glory of
his Mercy in the Salvation of the Elect, and of his Justice in the damnation of
the Reprobate. Bannes's order is thus, 1. q. 23. a. 2. page 266. [Actus q^os
nos possumus imaginari esse in mente divina tam communes quam proprio^ circa
praedesti^atos hi sunt: Cognovit Deus omnes homines possibiles; ex quibus
quosdam dilexit quantum ad esse naturae, and hos voluit creare: ex quibus adhuc
quosdam dilexit ad finem supernaturalem, quae divina electio dicitur; quatenus
ex aliis quos creare volebat is^os seperavit sibi; and denique hos electos
praedestinavit; hoc est, providet and ordinavit ut per quaedam media
supernaturaliter efficaciter pervenirent in finem supernaturalem].

That nothing but God himself can be the objectum formale of Gods Volition, see
Ruiz de Vol. Dei disp. 15. sect. 6. p. 165. Ruiz de V^l. Dei disp. 22, 23, 24.
pretends to more accurateness than others in ordering Gods Decrees, and other
Acts. Denying with others all real distinction, but asserting a distinction
secundum rationem ratiocinatam, and would persuade us that he knows what that
is (what the fundamentum in re is) he refuteth many others Opinions de ratio
ordinis (Molina's Vasquez, Zumel, Dried^s, etc.) especially Aureolus, and
concludes (sect. 5.) that inter divinas operationes ordo prioris and
posterioris ex eo est, quod ^nus actus sit requisitus ad alium, vel sit,
alterius ratio vel conditio: He confesset^ all these to be fictious, and that
there is no real diversity, (and disp. 11. sect. 1. on the qu An in Deo sit
proprie libera Volitio effi^ax) dicit (Nullius animus tranquilla pa^e qui^scit
solutionibu^ hac usque inventis, nec aliis se satisfacisse put at, qu^ nec sibi
satisfecerit.) Yet against Ockam he would have these fictions thought to be of
very gr^^^ use: when as all his profane tremendous presumptions are but
enquiring after a cause of the first cause, under the name of Ratio vel
conditio, while he denies that indeed there is any cause. Their question is,
why Gods Will is terminated on this Object rather than on that? And is not this
to ask a cause of it (of the first cause); say but that Deus volitione ^nica
vui^ diversa diver si m^de ordinata, and you have said enough? Had they meant
only the Ratio receptiva increatis, and ratio constitu^iv^ alli^^^m divi^arum
ut in effectis vel p^sso and ^^ extrin^e^u^ denominat^rum, it had been sense.
But in God himself there is diversitas rationum volendi.





B. Here are a multitude of Errors or Ineptitudes together. 1. That the name of
the means (Salvation and Damnation) is put into the end. 2. That one little
parcel of the means only is put, as if it were the whole. If we must speak so
low, as to ascribe an End to God, we must say, that Ultimately he has but one:
And that one must needs be more than the glory of his Mercy and Justice toward
man. Is all the rest of the world Angels and Men, Heaven and Earth, and Christ
himself, no means in which he will be glorified? 3. That quid creatum is made
Gods Ultimate End: For this Glory of his Mercy and Justice is no other, but a
created demonstration or apprehension of it. 4. And why are Mercy and Justice
only named, as though the glory of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness it self were
here no part?


C. If you like none of this, tell me your own sense of it.


B. 1. I suppose that Intendere finem is spoken of God only in a transcendent
sense, and not at all as it is of man. And, 2. I suppose that Gods Being has
no Beginning or End, nor any thing in him. 3. I suppose that Gods Free Will, by
communication of Essence, and of Perfections, is the Original free Cause of all
things. He necessarily is what he is: but he freely made what he made. 4.
Therefore I suppose that the same Will which is the Beginning of all, is the
End of all: So that Gods Will as efficient is the Beginning, and Gods Will as
fulfilled and pleased is the end of all his Works. 5. This may be called finis
Dei improperly after the manner of men, but tollerably and with the least
impropriety, and such as we must use. 6. This is more properly the commanded
and appointed end of the Intellectual Creature, and analogically the end that
all things tend to. 7. God is never without his end: For his Will is ever
fulfilled and pleased; For pro hic and nunc he wills nothing but what is. 8.
But there are degrees of Perfection in Gods Works, and the narrow Creature has
lower ends besides the Ultimate, inseparable from it. And so man must intend
his own felicity, and above that the perfection of the Universe, and above that
the complacency of Gods Will. 9. And because all the parts are to contribute to
the perfection of the whole, and so all the parts of the means do make up one
perfect Universe, in the state of Glory, and there and then the whole world
shall bear the liveliest impress of the Divine Perfections, this Impress or
objective Splendour and Image of God, together with the active Vision, Love and
Praise of the glorified (which is part of the said Image or Impress) is called
Gods Glory: which shines in part in every part, and perfectly in the whole
perfected world. 10. So that in a word, the perfection of the Universe being
the medium completed, is called Gods End in the lower material notion: And the
fulfilling and pleasing of his Will in the perfected world, is called his End
in the formal and higher notion. And we can say no more of Gods Velle finem.


C. I confess your explication of Gods End and Intention seems to be most
agreeable to the Principles of Theology.


B. And do you think that it is wise and Christian-like dealing to fill the
Church with Contentions, and make others odious to the people, about the Order
of Gods Decrees secundum intentionem, while men know not whether God do
Intendere finem or not? or what his End is? or what his Intention is? or while
they mistake all?

Will you make as many fines operantis and Intentions in God, as there are
fines operis, and as the means or Creatures are made for one another as an End?
or will you assign to God one End alone?


C. You know that in that our Divines do differ. Some that write of the Order
of the Decrees, make Gods Glory the end of Salvation and Damnation, and these
the end of Grace and permitted Sin, and these the end of Creation, etc. But Dr.
Twisse writes against them (even Perkins and Beza, etc.) maintaining that God
has but two Decrees; one de fine, and the other de mediis; and that his End is
but one.


B. If you are no better agreed, bear with others that differ from you. But
either you diversifie Gods Decrees by their connoted Objects, or as diverse
intrinsic real Acts in God. If you say the latter, your own Party, and all the
School-Divines, will say you blaspheme, by making God divisible or compounded,
and will call you Vorstians. If the former, how innumerable must you make Gods
Decrees? And why may not the Order as well as the species and number of them be
so denominated from connotation? And then you will say that God first intended
to make man as the end of inferior Creatures, and after decred to make them for
man. And he first decreed that there should be fruit, and then that there
should be a Tree to bear it, and then that this Tree should be rooted in the
Earth, and then that it should be planted, and then that there should be Earth
and Water to nourish it, etc. And if poor man be but a little part of Gods
Creation, unless we could anatomize the whole frame of the Universe, how should
we know just what place and order our own interest has in such a frame among
so many millions of millions of Creatures, of which Angels and the superior
World are nobler than we? Is he to be numbered with the Churches Friends, who
will make us such work, and lay men's love and peace upon it?


C. But what have you against the simpler way of two Decrees?


B. In God those are not two but one: But I see not, but speaking after the
manner of men it may pass, as the safest distribution by connotation and
extrinsick denomination, if he had but rightlier described those two. Of which
I said enough before.


C. How would you then denominatively order the Decrees according to the order
of Intention?


B. According to Dr. Twisse's own rule and method, all that you can by that
Order infer, is but this, that the infinite Creator first intended the pleasing
and fulfilling of his own Free Will as his Ultimate end, and next decreed to
produce all things as he produces them to that end, and so is pleased in all
things in their proper time and place; but further to bring all this Universe
finally to perfection, and in that perfection his Glory or Image shall be
perfect, in which he will finally be pleased: And the glorification of man is a
little part of that Perfection. And what will this do to the promoting of your
Opinions?

But I further ask you, Is it not certain that God decreed to make all things
in the Order in which he makes them in time?


C. Yes: If you speak of the Order of Execution.


B. And is not this Order of Execution needful to be observed?


C. Yes, no doubt.


B. And is not this Order of Execution easier to be understood?


C. Yes; for we are little disagreed about it.


B. If then this Order be plain, and sure, and needful, and that which we are
all agreed in; and your Order of Intention be either none, or uncertain, and
past the reach of mortal man, judge you what Order we should treat of, and who
are the wise and peaceable men?


C. Yet the Schoolmen before us have treated of that Order.


B. Davenant tells you, That Scotus was the first Artificer of that Invention.
Whether that be so or not, it is sure that you use to declaim against the
School-mens profane curiosity and audacity: And where (except about the
Trinity) has it been greater than in this? And you know that few of them that
give you the ordinem signorum, as they call it, do agree in the same Order; (As
I have showed in some instances, lib. 2.) And if you will condemn your selves
in condemning them, why should we think that you have hit of the right Order
any more than they? We have seen Beza's, Gilbie's, Perkin's, and we have seen
Twisse's (much better,) and we have seen the Lutherans and the Arminians, and
we see little agreement. Do you think that the Synod of Dort, that leaves out
such things, was not as wise as any of you all? Or was not Davenant as
judicious as any of you in these Controversies, who openly and largely
professes, that he is not one of those Privy-Counsellors of God, who know in
what Order things lie in his Mind, and can assign each Act its proper place;
but he thinks this Order of mental Intention in God to be utterly
unsearchable, and the Order of Execution only fit for us to treat of. See his
Dissert. de Praedest.


The tenth Crimination.
C. They seem to err much, in that they deny the eternal Cause of eternal
Vasqu. 1. Tho. q. 14. d. 65. c. 4. vainly says, Ens quod in universum est
objectum intellectus non tantum est praesens, s^d etiam futurum, preteritum and
possibile and quod futurum est aliquid, contrary to common reason: For these
are all termini diminuentes as to ens reale: That which only was or will be, Is
not indeed, 1. The Idea in a man's mind de futuro, and de praeterito is
something. 2. And so is the Proposition, Hoc suit, vel erit. And hence men
falsely say, that futurum is aliquid; when it is only an assertion that aliquid
erit.

So also Aquinas says, 1. dis. 38. a. 4. and de verit. q. 1. a. 8. That quae
non sunt actu, aliquo modo sunt, in potentia Dei vel creaturae sunt, vel sunt
in potentiae opinandi vel imaginandi, vel quocunque modo significandi: which is
but to abuse men with words, and play with the equivocation of [sunt]. Posse
vel potentia, opinio, imaginatio, etc. are something: But must nothing
therefore be something? His question is, Utrum scientia Dei sit non-entium: And
if he had no better way to prove the affirmative, than by saying that nothing
is something, it is equal to silence.

Vasqu. ibid. confesses, Intellectui Divino secundum se, nunquam res objicitur
nisi sicuti est: Unde quod non est, non objicitur sicuti esset.

And here the Schoolmen contend, An Deus cognoscat actu infinita possibilia
and futura: Aquin. Cajet. Ferrar. Bonav. Richard. Waldens. Vasqu. etc. affirm
it. Durand. Almain. and many later deny it. Blank de concord. lib. and decret.
1. n. 58. well noted that futurity may be with out a Decree to predetermine the
Agent: For sin is so, e. g. hating God, blasphemy. And that Dr. Twisse ill
makes Gods Decree the sole cause of futurity. As to the presumptuous question,
how God knows future things, besides that there is no time to measure Gods
Acts by, there need no other answer than that Gods infinite Understanding
knows all that is intelligible. But futures as such are intelligible. -- Quid
divinus intellectus infinitae ^^^tutis est: quicquid intelligibile est
necessary deb^t amplecti and intelligere: At futura contingentia
intelligibilia sunt, ^o quod sunt determinatae veritatis, Vasq. 1. Tho. q. 14.
d. 65. cap. 4. But whereas he himself also defends that futures are known in
decretis divinis, he is forced to say that sin is known in Gods Decree of the
materiale peccati: where yet in his Doctrine of Simultaneous Concurse, he
makes Gods concurse to be but part of the determining cause, which would not
without man's free co* operation do it. Therefore the Decree of a half causation
is not enough to infer the effect.


futurition; (while they make sin that is eternally future, yet not to be
eternally willed or decreed by God to be future.) How can things pass without a
cause enumero possibilium, in numerum futurorum?


B. Alas! what men, and what Engines must the poor Church suffer and be
tortured by? sure Paul foresaw these things, when he fe^red lest as the
Serpent beguiled Eve, (with a promise of being as God in Knowledge) so he
should draw us from the simplicity that is in Christ. And when he warned us to
beware lest any beguile us with vain Philosophy, according to the rudiments of
the world: And when he tells us of a Wisdom which is foolishness with God;
and of some who professing themselves wise, became Fools.

Your Doctrine sounds so unlike to Christ's and his Apostles, that I must
crave your Interpretation of it, that we may understand before we wrangle. I
pray you what is it that you call Futurition?


C. The name tells you what it is. You know what we mean by it.


B. I know that it is Grammatically a Noun Substantive, but does it signify
something or nothing?


C. It signifies that something will be hereafter.


B. Now you turn it to a Verb: But is futurity anything or nothing?


C. Suppose, I say, It is something?


B. If it was eternally something, it is God: For nothing else was eternal.


C. Suppose, I say, It is nothing?


B. If it be nothing, it is no effect, and therefore has no cause, and
therefore no eternal cause.


C. Suppose, I say, that it is neither something nor nothing: You know there
are five sorts that Burgersdicius places between Res and Nihil, and futurity
may be one of them.


B. Five sorts of what? You cannot tell. If you take Ens or Res limitedly for
less universal than Aliquid, or a Species of it, you may say that Datur medium
inter Rem and Nihil. But sure esse and non esse are contradictories. And taking
Aliquid, Ens or Res in the most universal notion, it is a contradiction, and a
denial of the first principle of Knowledge, to feign a medium: Burgersdieius'es
five Non-entia quae non sunt nihil, are Privatio, Denominatio externa, ens
Rationis, Relatio, modus entis. And all this comes from the pitiful
narrowness of man's mind, that can know nothing at all by one simple Conception,
but by parts; And then it frames several names, according to all its
inadequate Conceptions, as if they all signified several somethings. 1.
Privatio is it self a compound notion, including, 1. The absence of the form.
2. The debitum inesse. 3. The matters capacity of it. The first is Nothing: the
second is a Relation (of which after): the third is the nature or mode of the
matter, which is an inadequate Conception of Ens.


2. Denominatio externa, signifies, 1. The Denominabilitas. 2. Or the actual
denomination. The first is considerable, 1. Qua talis. 2. Or in causa
velratione. Denominability in se is nothing else but an inadequate Conception
of ens rationis: For I can call nothing by a Name. But the Ratio denominandi
may be something; and as now intended is Relation. 2. And the actual
denomination is Res, that is, Verbum vel mentis veloris.

3. Entia Rationis taken effective and subjective are confessed to be real
Entities: but objective it is denied. All Objects are so called, 1. As
aptitudinal. 2. Or actually apprehended. 1. As aptitudinal they are not entia
rationis, but something antecedent. 2. As actual, they are quid reale: For they
are conceptus humanus inadaequate expressus, sub ratione materiae. A thought or
conception is an Act which is quid reale: And every Act consists of the modus
agentis and the Object, which as such is quasi materia, and is essential to the
Act: so that even Genus and Species, as in man's thoughts are quid reale. And
out of man's thoughts, they are Relation or nothing.

4. Relation is a something or nothing, which keeps an exceeding room in all
our Sciences. But when anatomized, it is considerable, 1. As in extrinsick
Objects. 2. As in the mind of man considering them: 1. In the Object there is,
1. Quid absolutum, that is, the subject, the terminus, the fundamentum, cum
ratione fundandi. 2, The formal Relation. The first is quid reale, as is
confessed. The second is nothing besides the first. It is nothing but rerum
comparabilitas: And that comparability is nothing, besides the quid absolutum,
or thing it self. When an Egg is new laid at the Antipodes, an Egg here is
newly related to it ut simile: But nothing is added to this Egg; But only now
the mind of man can compare it with that at the Antipodes, and consider, that
in quantity, figure, color, etc. they are like: which likeness as in ovo is
nothing besides the same quantity, figure, color, etc. themselves. But by
those Realities, it is capable of being compared, and the mind can raise an
universal notion of both, as compared. 2. But this comparing Act of the
Understanding is quid reale. So that Ockam in his Quodlibets has well proved
in many questions, that Relation is nothing besides the quid absolutum in re
and in mente humana. And though his Gregor. Armin. at large dispute that
non-entia may be related, yet it is on this supposition, that non-entia may be
imagined, and be the matter of a thought or conceptus, and as such they are
entia rationis realia; that is, that conceptus is quid reale. But besides that,
the Relatio non-entis is nothing but nonens, and a mere nihil.

Yet I confess that Rerum ordo is the sum of Relations and of morality; and
that this Ordo is existent whether we think of it or not: But this Ord^ is
nothing distinct ab absolutis and rebus ordinatis, cum omnibus suis modis and
circumstantiis realibus. Things are wonderfully diverse by diversity of
quantity, quality, distance, etc. But this diversity is nothing besides the
said absolute quantity, quality, distance, etc.

But I must not write a Logic for you: I am by this much remembered, that, as
David says, man walks in a vain show or Image; when multitudes of nothings
go for somethings, and fill up so much of his thoughts and life, and constitute
so much of his Learning which he glories in.

C. But you have said nothing yet of the fifth, which is Modus Entis. And
futurition may be reduced to that


B. A true modus entis is quid absolutum and reale, and the same that we call
an Accident: And Gassendus chooses to call Accidents, Modes or Qualities: And
they are not really distinct from the ens cujus modi sunt, if they be
intrinsical Modes or Accidents, (as quantity, quality, action, etc.) But they
are small inadequate conceptions of the thing modified: not conceptions of its
constitutive chief denominating part, but yet conceptions of quid entis, so
that an entire perfect conception of the thing, would comprehend or include the
conception of the Mode or Accident. So that they that deride the name of Pars
accidentalis as put for Accidens, speak not always so good sense as they think
they do.

But such Accidents or Modes as are extrinsical to the thing, (as Clothes to
the Body, Servants, Lands, Riches, Honors,) are not properly Modes and
Accidents at all, but Adjuncts.


C. Apply this to the point in question, (of Futurity.)


B. If Futurity, as is said, be an eternal Being, it is God: If nothing it has
no cause. If it be called Quid medium, the very Quid is a contradiction to it.
To begin backward, 1. If it be Modus Entis, from eternity, it must be Modus
Dei: For there was no ens ab aeterno but God: If it be Modus Dei, it is Dens:
For all in God is God.

2. If it be Relatio, it is absoluti alicujus relatio. If so, either of some
real Being, or of nothing. If of a Being from eternity, it must be a Relation
of God to the thing future, in that he either willed or fore-knew ^. For
nothing was eternal but God. And if so, that Relation of God to the thing
future is something or nothing. If something, it is God himself, and so has no
cause. If nothing, it is no effect, and so has no ^^^^. But if it be the
Relation of nothing, viz. of the thing future, (to an Intellect possible or
real that could know it future) than it is nothing it self: For the Relation of
nothing cannot be something, a real accident without a real Subject.

3. If futurity was from eternity ens Rationis, it was Rationis Divinae; for
there was no created Reason ab aeterno: And if so, either Aptitudinal or
Actual. If Actual, it was God: For all his Idea's and entia rationis (for I
suppose you one of the bold men that affirm entia rationis to be in God,) must
needs be God himself, and so have no cause. If Aptitudinal, and not yet in
mente divina, but objecta possibilia; either they were something or nothing. If
something, then there was something eternal besides God, which is not said by
any of us. If nothing, to call them future, signifies no more, but that Gods
infinite knowledge extends to things that are not as if they were, which is
true: But futurity it self being nothing, has no cause.

4. If you say that they are extrinsical Denominations, it is something or
nothing that is denominated future. I know you will say, It Is nothing. If so
quatenus extrinsical to God, it was from eternity nothing, which you call a
Denomination. But if you mean the Act of God denominating, it was quid reale,
that is God himself, who has no cause. But yet this is the true foundation of
the notion. Because Gods Knowledge of all things, and his Will of all good
things, extends to all intelligible and amiable Objects to all eternity;
therefore we first justly denominate God to be an Intellect that knows what
will be, and a Will which wills all that he will do; And thence we say that
the thing was future from eternity. And so from an extrinsick Denomination of
Gods Mind and Will we run on to give names to numberless nothings, and then
talk, and write, and make Sciences and Disputes of them in our dreams, as if
they were somethings. And this is the work of the fantastical World. And then
we confound poor Scholars with the names of Entia Intentionalia, and Species,
and Entia rationis, and Universalia. And with Aristotle, Themistius, etc. say
that the Intellect is all things that it knows, etc. O what work have vain
notions, and be-fooling Philosophy made not only in the World, but in the
Church, and among those that call themselves Orthodox, and cry up the
sufficiency of the holy Scriptures! (The notion of Privations, I need not here
apply.)


C. But things future are future, whether any one think of them or not.


B. And some men will trouble and deceive themselves and others, whatever is
said to them. It is certain, that possible and futurum are termini diminuentes
and negantes quoad existentiam. That which only will be is not. Therefore the
name signifies nothing, but that the thing will be without any connotation of
any cause of it; but it implies that there is some fundamentum vel ratio,
which might warrant any perfect existent Intellect to say, It will be. And
there needs no more to that, but the eternal perfection of Gods own Intellect.
But I have said more of this lib. 1. and thefore here will add no more.


C. But how is it possible for God to foreknow that sin will be, unless he
first Will or Decree that it shall be (by his permission)?


B. I abhor the question and supposition. That such worms as we, who know not
what Gods Intellect or Will is, should presume to conclude that he cannot
foreknow sin, unless we can understand how he fore-knoweth it; yea, unless it
be by a way that a man could foreknow it. When it is a wiser way of arguing,
to say, [This is the way that man knows by, and that man can comprehend: Ergo
it is not like to be the way of Gods foreknowledge.] But remember one thing,
that here you plainly make God to will the form of Sin as well as the matter?
For is not the form future?


C. Yes.


B. And is not Gods Will his Love?


C. Yes.


B. And do you not make God then to love the very form of Sin, which yet you
say that no wicked man loves?


C. No: It is but the existence of the form that he wills or loves.


B. O excellent distinguishing! He wills not the form of Sin, but only
wills that it be, or exist. The form is the Essence: He wills that the
Essence exist; but wills not the Essence, which is nothing, but as existing!
But do wicked men will any more, or so much, as that the form exist?


C. Dr. Twisse says, No.


B. And if it were but the Act that existed, does not Gods Law make it sin, by
forbidding it, and so cause the Essence?


C. Yes.


B. And if you say that God wills the existence of the form of Sin, why say
you that he does not cause it? Is not his Will effective? or is it any more
contrary to his Holiness to cause it, than to will or love it?


C. He causes the existence, but not the form or existence.


B. What juggling is this in such tremendous matters? 1. What is it to cause the
form, but to cause that it exist. To cause it to be, is all the causing that it
can have. 2. And you confess that Gods Law, by forbidding it, makes it sin in
specie when it existeth. Remember that you say that it is not only the matter,
but the form of sin, which God wills and causes to exist. And is it not a
contradiction to call it evil, and yet say that God wills it? when his Will
is the Rule of Goodness?


C. It is not evil to God, but to us.


B. So Dr. Twisse says: And to be evil to us (even man's sin or damna^^^n) is
not evil to God. And so God is the great Lover of Sin and Damnation. But why
then is he said to hate it? And is it not an Enemy to God, and contrary to his
Holiness? Why did Christ die for that which God so loved?


C. Sin is nothing, and therefore God causes it not.


B. 1. Relations and Privations have their Causes, and so has Sin. 2. Else man
cannot be condemned for causing it.

The Synod of Dort and Reformed Churches teach no such Doctrine: But it ^^ such
as you that tempt the Arminians to revile them, and say, that you describe God
in the shape of the Devil, and much worse, as loving and causing sin and misery
more than he: that so the love of God may be extinguished.


C. I think we must leave these Mysteries to God.


B. But, good Brother, though I have stopped your mouth and censures of your
Brethren, in this and such matters, do you expect that every ^onest Christian
must be able to discuss all your Logical Fallacies, or else go with you for
unsound and heterodox? And have you dealt fairly by the Church of God, to
borrow from the Schoolmen such snares for men's Consciences? And must every man
be persuaded that God is the greatest lover and willer from eternity of every
wicked Act, that is not able to answer your smoaky Sophisms about futurition
and its eternal cause, with such like. I tell you the Serpent has beguiled us
as Eve, and turned men from the simplicity that is in Christ.


C. I pray briefly give me the sum of what you drive at.


B. The sum is, That though every Party, and almost every person of each Party,
have odd notions of his own, and peculiar weapons, to wound his Brothers
Reputation with, and militate against Love and Concord, and manifest the Pride
of his self-conceited Understanding; yet all sober Christians, I think, are
agreed in all this Controversy of Gods Decrees, in all that is truly necessary
to our brotherly love and peace. That is, All grant that God decreed to do all
that he does, and to give all the Grace and Mercy which at any time he gives,
whether to all or some. And that he absolutely and properly decreed no more.
(But improperly he may be said to will an event in tantum, when he wills only
to do so much, or so much which naturally conduces toward it, though he know
that it will never come to pass.) But what it is that God actually does or
gives in time is all the controversy, which is to be spoken of in the third
Chapter. And were it not for your tenaciousness of contentious notions, I
needed to have said no more than these few words here of Gods Decrees.


THE Third Days Conference (With an ARMINIAN of Universal and Special REDEMPTION
A. The second Article of our Difference is so fundamental and ^omen tous, and
our distance so great, that I cannot believe that you can say any thing
sufficient to reconcile us.


B. They that study Controversy as such, are apt every where to fin^ matter of
Quarrel, and weapons of Contention; but they that see^ peace do find out the
terms and means of peace, as sure and easy in them selves, which Contenders
cannot see.

Tell me, in a word, Are not all Parties agreed, that Christ by his Merits and
Sufferings, procured for men all mercies which he gives them ^^^^ and no more,
(but as he may be said to procure them that which he offers and brings to
their choice; which is properly to proc^re them that offer, or the benefit as
offered?)


A. Yes, I think both sides will grant this, that he purchased all that he
gives, and absolutely or fully no more.


B. Why then all the Controversy is, what he gives men: and that belongs to
the third and fourth Articles: And so I might dismiss this at the beginning,
but for your expectations.

But what is it that makes you think the difference so great?


The first Crimination.
A. 1. The Calvinists and Synodists deny Christ's very Office, as he is the
Savior of the World, and the second Adam, the Redeemer of Mankind, and the
Mediator between God and Man. And all this they confine to a small part of the
World. Malderus in 1. 2. q. 111. a. 3. d. 5. m. 1. p. 487. Non existimo
opinionem illam Calvinisticam, quae negat pro omnibus and singulis Christ^m
mortuum esse, tolerandam esse: nec inter studiosos varitaris debere obtinere
locum opinionem qui non perinde admittunt quod omnibus in Adamo lapsis --
iterum sit via (salutis facta possibilis per Christum and quod habeant per
Christum in actu primo paratum, vel in actu secundo datum sufficiens auxilium
gratiae, quo saltem media'e salvari possint, etc.



B. Have you never read what Musculus has written in Loc. Commun. and
Bullinger in his Decades for universal Redemption? Have you not read the plain
words of Calvin, cited by Amyraldus in Defens. Doct. Calvin. (though Petavius
rail at him for it most furiously)? Have you not read the writings of Joh.
Bergius, Conrad. Bergius, Lud. Crocius, Calixtus, of Camero, and his Followers
at Saumers, of Testardus, Dallaeus, Blondel's Preface, etc. for Universal
Redemption? Have you not read in the writings of Bishop Rob. Abbots, Bishop
Carelton, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Hall, Dr. Sam. Ward, etc. their judgments
for it? Have you not read Bishop Davenant's excellent Dissertation for it, de
morte Christi? Know you not that it was the judgment of Dr. Preston, Mr. W.
Whateley, Mr. W. Fenner, and many excellent Divines among us? Know you not that
Dr. Twisse himself, I believe twenty, if not forty times over in his Works,
says, That Christ so far died for all, as to procure and give them Pardon and
Salvation, on condition they will repent and believe; but he died moreover for
the Elect, to procure and give them Faith and Repentance also? Know you not
that Paraeus in his Irenicon says, That the Sins of all the World lay on
Christ on the Cross, as the cause of his Death? Know you not that it is the
commonest Doctrine of the Protestants, That Christ died for all men as to the
sufficiency of his death, but for the Elect only as to the efficiency of
Salvation? And what can you say more or less than those few words signify?
Know you not that the Synod at Dort it self says, That Christ's satisfaction
is of infinite value and price, abundantly sufficient to expiate the Sins of
all the World; and that the Promise is, That whosoever believes shall not
perish. And this is to be preached to all. And, that many yet repent not,
believe not, but perish, is not through any defect or insufficiency of Christ's
Sacrifice; but by their own default. Musculus his words for Universal
Redemption, are (Loc. Commun. c. de Redemp. Genesis hum. p. (mihi) 326. etc.)
[Redemptio est generis humani: Ge^^s humanum Complectitur non unam aut alteram
Gentem, sed mundum ^niversum, omnes viz. totius orbis nationes, cunctos homines
a primo usque ad novissimum. -- Generaliter est omnium. -- Scimus non omnes
Redemptionis hujus fieri participes: Verum illorum perditio qui non servantur,
haud quaquam impedit, It seems there were but few in Bradwardin's days, who
were of his mind, in confessing the antecedent natural impossibility of any
ones Salvation, or any good act, which comes not to pass; seeing (li. 3. c.
29. p. 735.) he answers them that say, [why should the Opinion of a few,
trouble the Church, and the far greater number that is against it], by
referring them to the paucity of wise men and Believers, and saying that truth
must be preached for the few (Elect) that will receive it. And p. 737. tells us
how Aristophanes, contrary to the six Judges, appointed by Ptolomy; did adjudge
the Crown to that Poet that the people liked worst.
quo minus Universalis vocetur Redemptio -- Resolutio illa telluris qua passim
omnia ad germinandum astate solvuntur, recte Universalis dicitur, etiamsi
multae arbores -- non germinent -- etc. Anno Jubil^o Generalis omnium servorum
liberatio erat, etiamsi multi in servitute ma^^^tes, gratiam liberationis
respuebant. Ad eum modum habet and Redemptio istageneris humani -- Quod illam
homines reprobi and deplorate impii non accipiunt, neque defectu fit Gratiae
Dei, neque justum est ut illa propter filios perditionis Gloriam ac titulum
UNIVERS ALIS REDEMPTIONIS amittat, cum sit parata cunctis, and omnes ad illam
vocentur, etc. -- sic cuim cavebimus ne Catholicae Gratiae Gloriam obscuremus
and in arctum Constringamus, vel cum phanaticis hominibus neminem prorsus
damnari dica^us -- ]. Bullinger --


A. You may spare your labor of citing Bullinger and Musculus, or Melanchthon,
or Bucer, or such moderate men: But what are they to the rigid Calvinists? --


B. Calvin says, in Romans 5. 18. [Communem omnium gratiam facit, quia omnibus
exposita est: Non quod ad omnes extendatur reipsa: Nam and si passus est
Christus pro peccatis totius mundi atque omnibus Indifferenter Dei benignitate
offertur, non tamen omnes apprehendunt.]

And in 1 Cor. 8. 11. [Dictum memorabile quo docemur quam (Chara) esse debeat
nobis fratrum salus; nec omnium modo, sed singulorum, quando prounoquoque fusus
est sanguis Christi.]

And in 2 Pet. 2. 1. [Non immerito dicuntur Christum abnegare a quo redempti
sunt, -- ].

And in 1 John 2. 2. He says, That qui dicunt [Christum sufficienter pro toto
mundo passum esse, sed pro elect is tantum efficaciter,] say true, and that
which commonly obtains in the Schools, though he otherwise expound that Text.


A. You need not cite Calvin: Grotius said truly that he had his Lucida
intervalla; and though Amyraldus seek to defend him from selfcontradiction,
Petavius calls him all to naught for it: But what can you say for your high
Antiarminians, such as Paraeus, Molinaeus, etc.


B. Paraeus, (let all mark it) says, Irenic. cap. 24. page 142. [Quod Christus
pro solis electis satisfecit, (...) est, vel falsa accusatio: Omnium peccata
Christus portavit, dissolvit, expiavit, si magnitudinem pretii, seu (...)
sufficientiam spectemus: Non omnium sed tantum fidelium, si (...), efficaciam,
fructum, applicationem.] To which he cites Ambrose, Innocent, Lyra, adding
[Juxta hunc intellectum nulla est dissensio.

Art. 6. itidem (...) est vel falsa accusatio. Promissiones Gratiae sunt
Universales, pertinentque ad omnes, quoad praedicationem, invitationem, and
mandatum credendi.]

And on 2 Pet. 2. 1. [Erant Redempti respectu sufficientiae (...), etc.]

Molinaeus Anatom. Arminianis. says, cap. 27. sect. 8, 9. [When we say that
Christ died for all men, we take it thus, that the Death of Christ is
sufficient to save whosoever do believe; yea, and that it is sufficient to save
all men, if all men in the whole World did believe in him: And that the cause
why all men are not saved, is not in the insufficiency of the Death of Christ,
but in the wickedness and incredulity of man. Finally Christ may be said to
reconcile all men to God by his Death, after the same manner that we say the
Sun does enlighten the eyes of all men, though many are blind, many sleep, and
many are hid in darkness, etc.]

That most methodical acute Divine, Georg. Sohnius, says, Tom. 1. These. de
Justific. (mihi) page 104. [Satisfactio illa and justitia pro omnium temporum
hominibus, and omnium hominum peccatis, and peccatorum omnium cum culpa tum
poena sufficit, quia ab infinita persona dependet, Matthew. 18. 11. and 12. 31.
Romans 5. 18. and 8. 32. 2 Cor. 5. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 6. 1 John 1. 7. and 2. 2. Tit.
2. 14. Errant igitur qui Christum pro omnibus hominibus passum esse negant.] --


A. But such violent men as Zanchy (the grand Patron of the impossibility of
falling away) talk not at this rate.


B. Zanchy says, (These. Vol. 3. fine, These. 13. 16. de Volunt. Dei) Eadem de
causa dici non potest Dei voluntatem proprie and simpliciter fuisse, ut
Christus pro salute omnium moreretur, id est, ut omnis per ejus mortem
servaretur, ac proinde Christum secundum propositum patris pro salute omnium
mortuum esse; sed tantum, ut loquuntur, sufficienter. -- Caeterum damnari etiam
illi non possunt, qui spectata revelata voluntate Dei docent, and Deum velle
omnes homines salvos fieri, and Christum pro salute omnium hominum mortuum
esse, and neutrum velle peccatum; cum haec omnia sint verissima.

And de Relig. Christ. fid. cap. 12. These. 2. [Credimus (Mar. 16. 16.) licet
omnibus hominibus per Evangelii praedicationem Gratia Redemptionis, salus ac
vita aeterna a Deo dispensanda serio proponantur, (quod enim permulti hujus non
siunt participes, ipsorum sit vitio and culpa reipsa tamen non communicari nisi
-- electis, vocatis -- ]


A. What ever these hold, I am sure your English Calvinists hold otherwise.


B. Have you not read Bishop Usher's Tract, for Universal Redemption? Have you
not read Davenant's Dissert. de morte Christi, so often mentioned? Have you not
read the Life of Dr. Preston, and how in the Dispute with Dr. White he
maintained Universal Redemption? Mr. William Fenner in his Hidden Manna brings
in Cain saying, [Christ died not for me, etc.] and answers, [Mentiris Cain,
Christ died for thee.] It would be too long to cite all.

D. Rob. Abbot de Verit. Great. Christi, page 35, 36, 37. [Huic disputati^ni
dabit initium -- Ambrosis Sententia in Luc. c. 7. l. 6. [Etsi Christus pro
omnibus passus est, specialiter tamen pro nobis passus est -- ] Quibus verbis
aperte significat ita Christum pro omnibus mortuum, ut tamen in morte Christi,
hand omnes pares existimandi sunt. Communiter quidem pro omnibus mortuum --
viz. pro omnibus satisfacere voluisse dignitate pretii -- esto Christum in
promiscuo sensu generis humani, se aliquo modo pro Judae dedisse, etc. -- Neque
enim Christus qua homo partitionem hominum vel discretionem ullam instituit ut
quemquam dici possit a mortis suae beneficio excepisse, qui hac quidem ratione
pro persequentibus and crucifigentibus promisono patrem rogat, nostro quod sit
exemplo -- Quod certe dolere non potnisset, nisi pro illis quoque quantum ex
homine, crucem obire statuisset -- ]

I told you before what Dr. Twisse says twenty times over, That [Christ died
to purchase Pardon for all if they will believe (conditionally) but for the
Elect to purchase them also Faith it self.]

The Annotations called the Assemblies, say, on Heb. 10. 29. [Sanctified by the
Blood] [By which their sins were pardoned in regard of that meritorious
sufficient Satisfaction purchased by it.]

Abundance more I could easily cite.


A. But they do but juggle and cheat the World with the Vizor of a Doctrine
that cannot endure the Light: For by sufficiens pretium some say they mean but
sufficiens si pretium fuisset, and no price at all.


B. Those be but a few odd conceited persons, driven by you into extremes: They
profess that Christ has sufficiently satisfied for all, and purchased them
effectually a conditional Pardon. They call not that a sufficient price and
satisfaction which is none at all.


A. But we agree not as to Gods intent of the benefits to all.


B. 1. That concerns the Decrees. 2. The sober [Quod ad magnitudinem and
potentiam pretii, and quod ad unam pertinet causam generis humani, sanguis
Christi est redemptio totius mundi: sed qui hoc seculum sine fide Christi and
sine regenerationis sacramento pertranseunt, Redemptionis alieni sunt* Cum ergo
per unam omnium naturam, omnium causam a Domino nostro in veritate susceptam,
redempti recte omnes dicantur, non tamen omnes captivitate sunt eruti
Redemptionis proprietas haud dubium penes illos est -- qui sunt membra a
Christi.] This of August. Rivet approves of disp. 6. de Remp. p 100. But it is
clea^ that by Redemption in the last part. August. means actual liberatition
from Captivity, which no doubt is proper to the Elect.
Papists agree, and say just the very same as the Synod. See Estius in 3. Sent.
d. 19. sect. 3. Tapperus, Art. 6. Malderus Antisynod. p. 23, 24. Fr. Sonnius
demonstr. Relig. Christ. l. 3. c. 19. Vid. Vasquez To. 1. in 1. disp. 97. c. 2.
and 3.
Rivet cites these, Disp. 6. de Redempt. And he himself makes Christ's death
even partly effectual for all. And will you be more contentious and violent
than all the sober Papists and Calvinists?

Know Says Vasquez in 1. Tho. q. 23. a. 8. d. 95. c. 3. Cum omnes simul
essemus eodem modo in primo parente damnati and eandem sententiam, subituri,
non omnes sed quidam ex illa co^^uni massa fuimus separati, gratia congrua and
efficaci usque ad finem vitae: ergo quidam fuimus prae aliis electi: sed gratia
qua fuimus separati ne cum aliis damnati maneremus suit per Christum: ergo per
Christum a communi massa electi sumus. Quod si ita in ^^^pore factum est, nemo
ambigat in praescientia ^odem modo fuisse decretum,

Neque vero ut quispiam sit causa eligendi aliquem ex multis damnatis, apus est
ut ipse ita sit causa relinquendi alios obnoxios poenae, etc. -- Christus causa
suit nostra electionis, ut non-nulli potius eligerentur quam alii: Quia
peculiari ratione merita sua ipsis applicavit, and pro eis oravit -- ex iis qui
post incarnationem ejus fuerunt ego non dubito Christum peculiari oratione and
voluntate merita sua illis applicesse qui predestinati and electi fuerunt, ac
propterea eos potius quam alios electos and predestin^^os fuisse.

De quibusdam hoc certissimum est Luc. 22. Christus oravit pro Petro, etc. Et.
Joh. 1^. Non pro mundo rogo, sed, etc. Quis autem ^^^ are audeat Christum hac
oratione vere meruisse Apostolis gratiam congruam and efficacem, qua usque in
finem perseverarent, etc.


you not how excellently our British Divines in the Synod of Dort have opened
this, and as well the three Breme Divines, but above ^ll, most clearly and
briefly the learned Matthius Martinius there? But I will name no more, when it
is the whole of the famous Dallaeus his Apolog. Cont. Spanhem. Part. 4. To. 1.
to show the consent of Protestants herein: And when his whole Second Tome^ is
to cite the very words of an hundred and twenty Fathers and Councils, for
Universal Redemption and Grace, (Theophylact being the last) and sixty three
Protestant Churches and Writers that speak for it, to whom I could add many
more.


A. If this be so, how comes it to be a Controversy?


B. A few particular men on each side that run into extremes, when once engaged
run on further, and make a great noise, while sober men in silence pity them;
And so with some the greatest and the lowdest are taken to speak the common
sense. And thus Spanhemius, Maccovi^s, and a few much inferior to them in
learning here in England, have kept up the Contention. And several of the
Jesuits, Lutherans and Arminians, have run out into the contrary extreme; and
so the difference has been made and maintained. So that with most Christians,
the controversy is not whether Christ be the Savior of the World, or died for
all men; but how far, and in what sense he did so, that this Article may agree
with the rest of our Theology.


A. The sense is all: If we agree not in sense, we agree in nothing.


B. The few extreme Contenders agree not in sense: But the generality of
Christians, much more may I say Protestants, do, in all that is necessary to
our common concord. If really you differ, tell me your self, What do you hold
that Christ purchased for all men, more than the Synodists do? Name me one
benefit if you can.


A. You would persuade me that we differ not indeed. 1. We hold that Christ
procured and made the first Covenant of Grace with all Mankind in Adam and
Noah: and so do not the Synodists.


B. I think you can name few Protestants that deny it. Beza himself in that
Edit. of his Annot. in Ephesians. 2. 12. which H. Stephanus printed 1588. says,
[This Covenant was made in the beginning, Genesis 3. 15. with Adam, and all that
should be born of him; and afterward, Genesis 9. 10. with Noah, the other Parent
of Mankind; as we have elsewhere noted,] plainly, they say that it is made to
all men as a Law, then promulgate to Adam and Noah; even a Law of Grace, which
Mankind was put under; And as an offered Covenant, and conditional Promise: But
as, 1. A mutual Covenant. 2. And as giving right to Life, it is made, only with
Consenters. Tell me whether you differ from this sense?


A. No; this sense is according to the Scriptures. But moreover, 2. We hold
that the second Edition of the Covenant also is made to all.


B. It Is granted you, that it is made to all that hear it, as far as aforesaid;
and that Ministers should do their best to preach it to all: And do you hold
any more?


A. No: But, 3. We hold that this Covenant pardons all men's sins, on
condition of Faith and Repentance, and not only the Elect.


B. So do they, unanimously: I told you Twisse twenty times over says the
same. No man can deny that which is the very plain scope of the Covenant it
self, to pardon all if they will repent and believe.


A. 4. But, We hold also that Christ purchased for all men sufficient Grace to
enable them to repent and believe.


B. I told you that is the Controversy of the third and fourth Articles; what
Grace Christ gives all, he procured for all, which is not here to be
anticipated, but opened in due place: And if I then manifest that in that point
also you differ not, I shall prove that you differ not at all in these Points
of Christ's Death and Universal Grace.


A. But they say, That Christ died only for the Elect, effectually and with a
purpose to save them, and purposed to save no other.


B. You carry back the Controversy to Gods Decrees, which we dispacht before.
Tell me, 1. Do you hold that all are saved by Christ?


A. No; that is none of the Controversy.


B. Why then quarrel you with them that say, He died but for the Elect
effectually, when they mean but that he saves no other?


A. But his death effected something for them; viz. the new Covenant and common
Grace, though it effect not their Salvation.


B. Who denies any of this? not the Synod of Dort. But, 2. Do you hold that
God absolutely purposed to save any by Christ that never are saved?


A. No: but conditionally he purposed it.


B. Have we not before proved, that your quarrel about conditional Decrees, is
but a strife about words in the dark.


A. But they say Christ died not equally for all.


B. Do you, or dare you, say otherwise your selves? 1. You confess that his
Death does not equally save all: 2. You confess that from eternity God
fore-knew who would believe and be saved, and who not. Now the question is of
equality of benefit (before denied) and equality of Intention: And can you
think that Christ, as God, at the time of his Death (or before) did equally
intend or decree to save those that he fore-knew would neither believe nor be
saved, and those that he knew would believe and be saved? You cannot, you do
not imagine this.


A. We do not: But we say that as to Gods antecedent Will, he both elected and
redeemed all alike; and the inequality is only in his consequent Will. But the
Synodists say otherwise.


B. 1. If you understand the distinction aright, they say the same as you: that
is, If you thus distinguish only of the Will of God as Rector, or his governing
Will, and by the Antecedent Will mean only the Legislative which making our
Duty, goes before our doing or notdoing it, and by the consequent Will, mean
only the judicial which follows Duty and Sin. God deals equally by all men
in the first, (as to the tenor of his Law, though the different promulgation
make a difference of Obligations,) but unequally in the second.

2. And if you distinguish thus of his eternal Decrees, either they respect
Damnation or Salvation. And by his Antecedent Will, you mean that which goes
before the foresight of man's Will, and by the consequent, that which follows
this foresight. Now, 1. Have I not said enough to convince you that as it is
Actus Agentis in God, we cannot prove any diversity or priority? But only ex
connotatione objecti. 2. And as to Damnation, I have proved that they commonly
agree with you, that God decrees not Sin, but fore-seeth it, and decrees
Damnation only as for foreseen Sin. Whatever Piscator and a few more say,
this is the common Doctrine of Protestants and Fathers. 3. But as to Election
dare you say your self, that God decrees to change no man's Will, but upon
foresight that the person himself will first change it? Vasqu. and many
Jesuits profess, that Gods first Grace is given without any cause, condition or
occasion in man. And says Malderus in 12. Tho. q. 110. a. 1. page 469. Deus
non. praesupponit in creatura bonum, quo ad ipsius dilectionem moveatur, sicut
voluntas hominis benefactoris: sed bonum creaturae provenit ex voluntate Dei,
qui vocat ea quae non sunt tanquam ea quae sunt. That is, Gods efficient Will
of Beneficence is first, and then his final Will of complacence; first God
makes us good, and then loves us as good.
If man change it first, God need not to come after to change it: If God change
it first, then he decreed first to change it, and did not first foresee it
changed.


A. Neither: But he fore-seeth man's concurrence or not-concurrence with his
changing Act of Grace.


B. But can you think that he equally operateth on all, and that all the
inequality is in their concurrence? Does he do as much on every Persecutor
(equally prepared) as he did on Saul? Does he call all to follow him as
effectually ex part sui, as he did Peter, Andrew, etc. who presently left all
and followed him? Did Christ himself preach to all Nations? or only to the
Circumcision? Were not the sins of the Jews as much aggravated as those of Tire
and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah? or the Indians? why else should it go worse with
them in the day of Judgment? and why else would Tire and Sidon have repented if
they had but had their means, were they not then as much prepared for mercy?
Does God equally send the Gospel to all Nations and Persons equally unworthy?
Can you confute St. Paul? Romans 9. Or can you give any reason why God must show
equal mercy unto all?


A. Yes: because else he is a respecter of persons. Ruiz a Jesuit confesses
de Vol. Dei disp. 20. sect. 6. p. 226. That according to Augustine Christ so
died for all, as that he had a special intent of saving his Elect, for whose
sake as being among the rest, it is that he died and prayed for all in common:
Aug. in Tract. 31. in Joan. c. 7. Non debebant desperare, pro quibus Dominus in
cruce pendens dignatus est or are: videbat quosdam suos inter multos alienos.
Illis jam petebat veniam a quibus adhuc accipiebat injuriam: Non enim
attendebat quod ab ipsis moriebatur, sed quia pro ipsis moriebatur. He that
would know Augustines mind herein, may find it fully in Jansenius, or in the
Trias Patrum de gratia, etc.



B. I fully confuted this before, 1. Respecting persons is the fault of a
Rector as such, especially as Judge: And so God deals equally; his Law being
Norma officii and judicii as to all. But no man ever yet took either, 1. A
Proprietor (Dominus absolutus); 2. Or a Benefactor, to be obliged to equality
to all. Must you needs use all your Grounds, Trees, Goods, Cattle, etc.
equally? Must you needs make all men equally your bosom-Friends, your Heirs,
your Beneficiaries, who are equally worthy in themselves? Must you needs give
equally to all the poor, that are of equal need and merit? All this is contrary
to the common sense and usage of Mankind.

2. And in a Judge, respecting persons, is the vice of them that deal unequally
with men for some by-respect unworthy of such a difference; As for Birth,
Beauty, Wealth, Power, Eloquence, Parts, Wit, Kindred, or any selfish interest,
to pervert Justice, or deal partially. But God makes no difference on such
accounts. Yea a Judge himself, or a King, when he acts not as a Judge, but as
a King above Laws, or as a Benefactor, may reprieve or pardon one Thief rather
than an other, yea and choose that which is the most learned, strong, wise, and
capable of future Service to the Commonwealth.


A. This seems a wrong to the rest that are not so used?


B. Would it do the Thief that is hanged any good, to have the other
unpardoned? Would it ease their pains in Hell, to have the company of all those
that be in Heaven? If it be no wrong to them to suffer themselves, nothing but
envy can call it a wrong to them, to have others escape. Had they love to
others as themselves, it would be some comfort to them to think that others are
in Joy and Glory?


A. At least this is a real difference between the Parties.


B. 1. The Schoolmen and many learned Jesuits (as I have proved, Lib. 1.)
make it not a difference. And will you called Arminians or Lutherans go further
from your Protestant Brethren, than the learned Papists and Jesuits themselves
go? Are you not ashamed of this?

2. The Papists can bear with one another in these Points, and live in
communion in one Church, (though the Jansenists Case has had more than
ordinary heats and stirs;) And yet the Dominicans go higher and further in the
Controversy of Predetermination from the Jesuits, than the Synodists do: And
are you more fierce or unpeaceable than they?

3. But remember here once for all, that you were not able to name any one
benefit which Christ's death procured for all, other than the Synodists hold as
well as you: But only you charge them as asserting more to the Elect. They give
more (you say) to some, but not less to all.

4. And all this lies in the point of Intention and Divine Decrees, which was
sufficiently reconciled before.

But you have by all this entised me to mingle various Controversies, and to
anticipate that of Grace and Free Will, which is to be handled by it self in
due place.

But I have a word more to give you, by way of caution, if you will think on it.


A. What Is that?


B. What will you say if Episcopius, Arminius, Corvinus, are the men that deny
most Universal Redemption, while the Synod maintains it? How can Christ die
for the sins of any Infants in proper sense, if they have no sin, and deserve
no punishment? Or be a Savior to save them from sin and punishment that have
none?


The second Crimination.
A. By denying common Redemption, they deny the express words of 1 John 4. 14.
(...) guish of the phrase of dying for us, that we may not cheat our selves by
confounding things that differ. To die for us or for all, is to die for our
benefit, or for the benefit of all. Now these benefits are of a different
nature: whereof some are bestowed only conditionally, (though for Christ's sake)
and they are the pardon of sin and Salvation: These God does confer only on the
condition of Faith and Repentance: Now I am ready to profess, and that, I
suppose as out of the mouth of all our Divines, that every one who hears the
Gospel, without distinction between Elect and Reprobate, is bound to believe
that Christ died for him, so far as to procure both the pardon of his sins, and
Salvation, in case he believe and repent: But there are other benefits that
Christ merited for us, viz. Faith and Repentance, etc. Twisse against Hord, li.
1. p. 154.
Scripture, which says, That Christ tasted death for every man, Heb. 2. 9.
That he is the Savior of the World, Joh. 4. 12. That he is the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the World, Joh. 1. 29. That he died for all, that
they which live, should live to him that died for them, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. That
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. That he
is the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. That
the Grace of God which brings Salvation to all men, has appeared, Tit. 2.
11, 12. That he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but
for the sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. with much more to the same
purpose. And do these men deal sincerely with God and the Scripture, that can
distort all this to their own sense? And do they not use such violence with
Gods Word and their Consciences, as that on these terms they may make their own
Religion, and believe what they list? Do they not plainly show that they take
not their Faith from God, but from their Teachers, and believe as the Church
believes which they join with? Had it been but one or two Texts, or had they
been obscurely uttered, a good man might have thought that he must reduce their
sense to the many and more plain. But to oppugn the plain Gospel it self has
no ex^use.


B. You are sharp against other men's Errors, and other men against yours. But I
have proved to you that the Synod, and the generality of the Protestant
Churches in their Confessions, deny not any thing which these Texts say. They
hold a common Redemption as well as you: our very Children are taught in their
Catechism distinctly to believe, [1. In God the Father, who made them and all
the World, 2. In God the Son, who redeemed them and all Mankind. 3. And in God
the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies them and all the Elect People of God.] This is
the good old Doctrine, plain and true, and that which Austin taught.


A. I am sure many of their Writers expressly oppugn common Redemption; and even
Jasenius the Papist who joyneth with them denies it, and says, that Augustine
denied it: Therefore we stand not to his authority.


B. 1. As for Augustine and some Protestants, they often deny that Christ
redeemeth any but the Faithful, because the word Redemption is ambiguous, and
sometimes taken for the price or ransom paid, and often for the very
liberation of the captive Sinner. And when ever Austin denies common
Redemption, he takes Redemption in this last sense, for actual deliverance.
But he asserteth it in the first sense, that Christ died for all. Yea, he
thought his death is actually applied to the true Justification and
Sanctification of some Reprobates that fall away and perish, though the Elect
only are so redeemed as to be saved. Read your self Augustine, Prosper and
Fulgentius, and you will see this with your own eyes.

2. I have often told you, it is our Protestant Confessions, and not some
singular or private Writers, that you must know their Doctrine by.

3. Even those few Writers differ more from you in terms than in sense. For, 1.
Many of them will confess all the same benefits by Christ to men in common
which you assert. Few of them will deny that Salvation is tendered to all men's
acceptance, and brought to the choosing or refusing of their own Wills. And you
seem to them to say no greater matters as for the Elect. But they say that
Christ purchased Faith it self for the Elect only, of which in due place. 2.
And so with them the Controversy is, 1. About Gods Decree or Intent of saving
men by Christ. 2. And of giving them Faith.

Tell me one word that you except against in the Synod in this Article.


A. I except against sect. 8. where they say that [Fuit hoc Dei patris
liberrimum consilium, and gratiosissima voluntas atque intentio, ut mortis
pretiosissimae filii sui vivifica and salvifica efficacia sese exereret in
omnibus electis, ad eos solos fide justificante donandos and per eam ad salutem
infallibiliter perducendos: hoc est, voluit Deus, ut Christus per sanguinem
crucis, quo novum foedus confirmavit, ex omni populo, gente, tribu and lingua,
eos omnes and solos qui ab aeterno ad salutem electi and a patre ipsi dati
sunt, efficaciter redimeret, fide donaret, ab omnibus peccatis sanguine suo
mundaret, ad finem usque fideliter custodiret, tandem absque omni labe and
macula gloriosos coram se sisteret.]


B. Very good: This is all in the Canons that you can except against. And, 1.
You see that this is only about Gods Intention or Decree: And so you differ not
at all by your own confession, in the Article of Redemption, as distinct from
that of the Decrees.

2. Is it the inclusion of the Elect in this Intention that you except against?
So will no sober Jesuit. Do you think that Christ was resolved certainly to
justify and glorify no man at all? The Semipelagians will not say so. You say
not so your selves. Only some of you say, it is but upon foresight of Faith,
and by the consequent will, of which I have said enough before. But do you
think that Christ when he was on the Cross had no full purpose to save those
infallibly Episcopius in Institut. Theol. li. 4. cap. 5. page 410. confesses
that the opinion of Election may consist with that of universal Grace, which he
propugned.
who he fore-knew would believe, yea and to cause some men to believe? Those
that come to him are drawn by the Father, and Faith is the Gift of God, Ephesians.
2. 8. Who gives us all things pertaining to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3.
Even to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. To some it is given
to believe, Phil. 1. 29. But of this enough before.

3. But, I suppose, it is only the word [Solos] in all the Canons that you
except against. And dare or will you say, that God did absolutely intend and
decree to sanctify and glorify all men by Christ? or any one that is not
glorified?


A. But their meaning is, that all the rest which are most of the World, are
left out of Gods Election, even unto sin and damnation, merely because God
would so have it, and not from any ill desert of theirs any more than was in
the Elect: which appears in that (as Episcopius notes). Instit. Theol. l. 4.
cap. 5. sect. 5. p. 410.
They that say the Fall or Sin is quid praevisum, foreseen in Reprobation, yet
deny that it is any The Jesuits themselves, (as Vasqu^z and many others)
ordinarily say, that nothing in man can be any cause of Gods Decrees.
cause of Reprobation: And then all comes to one, whether God reprobate a
Sinner or an innocent person, as to the cause.


B. You have nothing about Redemption, I perceive, still to controvert, but
about Gods Decrees: If we must go back to them, review your words, and see how
you cheat your selves into distaste of you know not what, by mere confusion, for
want of accurate Scholastic Heads, (I except not Episcopius himself,
notwithstanding men of his own measure think otherwise.)

1. Whereas you talk of [leaving out] either you mean non-Election, or positive
exclusion. If the last, it is false: not only the Scotists, but some Protestants
(as Ferrius in Scholast. Orthodox. and others,) assert but a negation here; And
Davenant and the Synod assert but a negative Decree quoad objectum; which is
but as much as Arminius propugneth, who while he maintains that God decrees
not sin, but only his own permission of sin, (which is the Synods sense) yet
hereby confesses that he wills or decrees that permission. You say then
that he decrees to permit men's unbelief, and this is all that the Synod says
of non-Election, or leaving men out of the number of the Elect.

2. If you yourselves believe all this, with what face can you oppose the same
in others? If you do not, either you believe that none are Infidels and damned,
or you believe that God does not permit it to be so, but it is done by
conquering his Omnipotency, or else you know not what you believe: choose which
you will.

3. Do you really differ (as Episcopius pretends) about the cause of
Reprobation? As to the cause of Damnation, all are agreed that sin is the true
meritorious cause. The question is only of Gods Will or Decree of it. And it is
not of his sententia prolata, or Decree pronounced by Christ in Judgment: for
of that also it is agreed that sin is the meritorious cause. Your often recurring
to your Objections, when they have been fully answered, puts me on the
rediousness of repeating the same Answers. Gods The cause of Gods Will in
reprobating.
Will is considered either ex part volentis essentially, or as extrinsically
denominated from the connotation of the Object. In the first sense, you have
not yet declared your selves to deny the common Doctrine of the Christian
World, that Gods Will is his undivided most simple Essence; and that God has
no cause, and so his Will in it self has no cause; that in God there is
nothing but God. Dare you say that a Creature made God? yea, that so base a
thing as Sin made him? How then does it cause his Will which is himself? Is
Gods Will such a mutuable thing as man's? And is it not the first cause of all
things? And shall men pretending to Learning reproach others, for not assigning
a cause of the first cause, and that Sin, which is baser than a Creature,
causes the Creator?

But if you speak of Gods Will as denominated by connotation of the Object;
mark what we grant you, viz. that as thus only Gods Will or Volitions are
denominated diverse, so are they denominated to be of this or that sort, and
numerically also distinguished; And so they may be said to have a cause, but
not an efficient cause, but only an Arminius and Arnoldus Corvinus frequently
affirm, that Faith is not the cause of Gods Election to Glory, but only a
condition in the object.
objective cause; And what Cause is an Object? To let pass the Error of many
Logicians, it is only (as an Object) a material constitutive cause (at least
here:) And so sin is the objective material cause of that extrinsical
denomination and relation of Gods Will, called Reprobation to damnation. It is
that dispositio objecti which is essential to the Object. And so as Gods Will
may any way be said to have a cause, we will say freely, after the manner of
men, that sin is the objective cause of the Decree of damnation. And speak now
with shame, can you say more or less? Do you or any of us that are sober and
understand our selves, differ at all in this?

4. And you cheat your selves and others more, in saying, [Not from any ill
desert of theirs more than others]. When if you would speak congruously, you
should only say, that when all deserved to be utterly forsaken, [God
effectually prevails with the Wills of his Elect, not for any good desert of
theirs above others.] You would infinuate, that God must punish no man, unless
he deserve worse than every man whom he forgiveth; which is false. Do you not
your selves believe that all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God?
and that God might justly have let them perish? Do you not hold your selves,
that all men are guilty of resisting or sinning against Grace it self as well
as against Nature? and that God may justly withold his Grace from the
Rejecters of it? and if he did so by all he did not wrong them? If God then
leave not all, as he might do, but resolve to prevail with some infallibly, do
you represent this mercy as if it were cruelty to others?

What if it be apparent that you your selves charge God with as much of that
which you call cruelty to all the World, as the Synod does to the Reprobate
alone? (or as many of us do?) For they do but say that God leaves the
Reprobate to their own free Wills: And you say that he does so by all the
World. You say that God gives all men that hear the Gospel so much Grace, as
that they may have Christ and Salvation, if they will; And they say so too as
confidently as you do. Tell me if you can then what Mercy or Grace you plead
for as common more than they? you cannot tell me: And will you wrangle as if
you differed when you do not. Only they say and think that they give more to
Gods Grace as to the Elect than you do, which is to be examined anon.

And then you will quarrel about the Cause of the first Cause, the Will of God,
and dream of it as if it were like the Will of Man, which is an effect and that
of many Causes. Is it not enough for you that sin is the cause of all
punishment, but it must also be the efficient cause of Gods Will which is God?
Yet again I tell you that all sobe^ men will agree with you, that Gods
Volitions of extrinfick Objects, viz. Reprobations, denominate not Gods Essence
as such; (for we use not to say, [God is Reprobation or Election:] but only his
Essence as terminated ad extra.) And (to gratify you to the utmost) we
distinguish an operating efficient Cause, from a recipient Cause; And we
maintain that a Sinner is the recipient Cause of Gods damning Volition or
Reprobation: As shutting the Windows is the cause that my Room is dark, and
opening them is the cause that they are light, not by causing the Sun to shine,
but by receiving (or not receiving) it; so man is a receiving Cause of the
Effects of Gods Will and Operation, and of the Will and Operation it self, as
extrinsically denominated and diversified by the Effects. But this recipient
Cause, is nothing but cause materialis objectiva, which has two parts, the
ipsa materia and the materiae dispositio. Take not on you still to differ,
where you do not.


The third Crimination.
A. Of that Deus vult omnes salves fieri, says Alliaco 1. q. 14. F. 1. Potest
exponi de voluntate signi: vult, id est, praecipit, vel obligat, etc. 2. Si
exponitur de voluntate beneplaciti potest intelligi de Vol. antecedente: 3. Si
de Vol. beneplaciti proprie dicta, debet intelligi, ut dicit Magister, i. e.
nulli salvantur nisi quos Deus vult salvari: 4. Vel de generibus singulorum sed
at singulis generum.
By denying Universal Redemption, they deny that Universal Grace, which is the
very express Covenant of Grace it self, that all men are already through
Christ's satisfaction reconciled to God, and pardoned if they will believe; or
that a conditional pardon is already given to the World. And to deny this, is
to deny the Gospel, and Christianity it self, and to be no Christians.


B. You would make your selves and others believe that they deny that which
they never dreamed of denying. Like him that dreamed that he was wounded, and
called out for something to stop the blood. Do not all Protestaents profess to
believe that Covenant and conditional Pardon as well as you? Do they not preach
it constantly, and administer Baptism in the same terms as you do? who denies
that all are reconciled, if they will believe?


A. But by that they mean only exclusively that all are not reconciled or
pardoned, because all believe not; And not inclusively that all men are
conditionally pardoned already.


B. You mistake and slander them: Do they not read the very express pardon made
already in Gods Word? That [Whoever believes shall not perish,] etc. Joh. 3.
16. Mark 16. 16? Do they not all acknowledge that this is a Law of God, an Act
of Oblivion, Enacted long ago by God? And is not this visible written Promise
or Law of Grace an existent conditional pardon of all? No man of sense, and
understanding, and faith denies it.


A. But they say that in making it Gods secret intent, was, that none but the
Elect should have any saving benefit of it. What say others less? Malderus in
1. 2. q. 111. a. 3. d. 5. p. 486. Cum de Redemptore dando Deus constituisset,
ut secerneret illos quos elegit, -- eum rerum ordinem elegit, in quo certi quos
voluit homines a reliquis discernerentur, cosque pro beneplacito suo ad nullum
bonum usum liberi arbitrii respiciens, ad vitam aeter^am praedestinavit;
talemque it is gratiam decrevit cum qua certissimo and infallibiliter ad regnum
pervenirent: Reliquos autem qui ex illo numero non sunt, reliquit non quidem
sint omni auxilio Gratiae, sicut just potuisset propter Adae peccatum, sed cum
auxiliis gratiae secundi Adae ad ipsos derivandis in ordine ac cursu rerum jam
electo: Et videns scie^tia visionis hos in peccato vitam finire, reprobavit eos
and statuit in aeternum punire and a regno excludere. Thus the Jesuits
ordinarily: And what is here considerably different from the Synod of Do^t? If
the name of sufficient Grace be the quarrel, call it Gratia efficax ad posse,
and all is ended.



B. 1. Still you are returning to the dispatched Controversy of the Decrees;
which is a confession that you disser not otherwise about Redemption. 2. Do not
you your selves hold the same which you quarrel with? 1. Inclusively they hold
that the Elect shall be saved by Christ. And do you deny it? 2. As to the
exclusion of others, they hold that God decreed not any man's Infidelity and
Sin, but foreseeing their Infidelity and Sin, decreed that they should not be
saved by Christ, but perish. And do not you say the same? Away with these
contentious dreams.


A. I am sure I can name you diverse that say otherwise.


B. It is the Synod still, and the common Confessions and Doctrine of the
Churches which you have to do with: Tell not me of singular men.

The Doctrine of the Church of England, I told you out of the Catechism. The
Synods words I recited. And remember (as Dallaeus tells Spanhemius) that
Davenant with the rest of the British Divines, Martinius and the other Breme
Divines, who all gave their suffrages, and writ for Universal Redemption, did
yet all subscribe in the Synod; And therefore undoubtedly understood that no
words of the Canons were contrary to their sense of Universal Redemption. The
later famous Helvetian confession says, [We teach and believe that this Jesus
Christ our Lord is the only and eternal Savior of Mankind, yea and of the
whole world,] (upon which words the English Collector of the Confessions gives
us a ridiculous Observation, that he thinks they meant the restoring of the
world at last; contrary to the context: As if he had not known that Musculus,
Bullinger, etc. were for Universal Redemption.)

But that I be not over-tedious, I pray you peruse in Dallaei Apolog. To. 2.
the citations out of the Confessions and Catechisms, and Liturgies of the
Reformed Churches, viz. Of Berne, August. Bohem. Helvert. Saxon. Anglic.
Palatin. Synod. Dord. Colloq. Torun. with a multitude of Protestant Divines.


The fourth Crimination.
A. They make it impossible for any man to believe in Christ at first, by a
rational and true Faith: For his dying for men, being the Object of Faith, must
be before the Act. And no man by their way can know that Christ died for him
till he is a Believer; and yet they say that our first saving Faith must be a
believing and trusting in Christ, as one that died for us. So that men must
stay till they believe that Christ died for them, that they may have reason to
believe that he died for them. For before the first Faith, or belief of it,
they can have none.


B. You still make the world believe that men hold that which they do not. This
concerns not the Churches, but some singular men. The common Protestant
Doctrine is, That Christ by his Death has procured the universal conditional
Gift of Pardon and Life, contained in the Covenant of Grace, Mark 16. 16. Joh.
3. 16, etc. And that his death was thus far efficient, by which it is
sufficient for the actual Justification and Salvation of penitent Believers.
And that this is it that men must first believe, and so accept of an offered
Savior for Justification and Life, and give up themselves to him in the
baptismal Covenant: which when they do they are justified and adopted, having
right to and union with Christ, and in him right to the Covenant-benefits. And
then Christ's death which was sufficient by its efficiency of Satisfaction,
Merit, and the Covenant-grant, becomes efficient of Justification, etc. And
are not you and they agreed in this? I confess that many singular Divines have
given you this occasion: But what is that to the Churches?


The fifth Crimination.
A. They tell men that they must believe a Lie, or an unrevealed thing, that by
believing it, it may become true, and they may be saved, and ese they shall be
damned. For they say that Christ died for none but the Elect: And yet that
others also are bound to believe that he died for them: And because they
believe not this Lie God will damn them: But if they did believe it, it would
be true: As if the Objective Truth were not before the belief of it.


B. This also is but your quarrel with singular men, and not with the Churches,
unless you wrong them. Their common Doctrine is, that no man in his first act
of Faith is bound to believe that he is Elect, or that Christ died for him any
more than for lost Mankind. But that he must first believe that Christ by his
Death has so far satisfied and merited for Mankind in general, as to procure
the universal conditional Gift of Christ, Pardon and Life; And that they must
believe that this is procured for, and offered to, themselves as well as other
Sinners. And hereupon they are to accept this free Gift, and so it is theirs.
What lie or unrevealed matter is in this? or what difference about it, among
the Churches.


The sixth Crimination.
A. They disable Ministers rationally to preach the Gospel. For if Christ died
for none but the Elect, and no Minister know the Elect, they know not whom to
offer and preach Christ to; For the objective Gift must go before the offer:
And that which is to be offered to every Sinner is, A Christ that has already
died and satisfied for him; and not one that is to die and satisfy for him
yet, if he will believe. Therefore the very offer is as much as to say, [Accept
Christ as one that has satisfied for thee]. And so they make the very
preaching of the Gospel, a lie, to most.


B. I will not answer you as some that say, they tell not men that they are
Elect, and that Christ died for them; but that if they will believe, then it is
a sign that they are Elect, and Christ died for them: And they may offer him to
all, that some may accept him. For I say as you do, that it is a Christ that
has already made satisfaction, and thereby is become a sufficient Savior, who
is to be offered to men. And the being of the Gift is before the offer of it in
nature. But I say again that you fight against straglers, in a Cause which the
Churches are not concerned in: They say that it is a Christ who died for all as
to sufficiency, who is to be offered to men, that he may efficiently save them.


The seventh Crimination.
A. They leave most men in the World as remediless as the Devils, who had no
Redeemer: whereas God judges the wicked at last as Rejecters of his remedying
Grace. If Christ died not for them, what differ they from the Devils in point
of hope?


B. I will not answer you as some, that though Christ died not for them yet
they know it not, and the offer differenceth their Case: For still, I confess,
that none is to be offered to men, but a Christ that was already offered to God
for them, and has made satisfaction. But again I tell you, that you fight with
a shadow, and feign the Churches to differ from you, because some singular
persons do so.


The eighth Crimination.
A. They harden men in impenitency for the most damning sin; even denying the
Lord that bought them: For they tell all the Reprobates that they never sinned
against a Christ that died for them.


B. All this is the old fiction; and concerns only some singular men.


The ninth Crimination.
A. They would exempt the Infidel World from much of the torments of Hell: For
he that in Hell knows that Christ never died for him (especially adding that
God unresistibly predetermined him to sin and unbelief,) cannot rationally have
an accusing Conscience for his not accepting a Gift that never had a Being.


B. I will not repeat the same answer as often as you call for it by the same
false supposition. Let them answer it that are concerned.


The tenth Crimination.
A. They teach the World abominable Ingratitude, and reproachfully deny a great
deal of the Grace and Mercy of Christ, and the fruits of his Death and
Sacrifice. For they teach men, that all the Mercies given to any besides the
Elect, were no fruits of the death of Christ for them, nor were at all by him
purchased for them; yea, that they are no Mercies to them at all, because God
eternally decreed that they should turn them into sin, and suffer the more for
the abuse of them for ever. And so all the rest of the World may say that they
are not at all beholden to the death of Christ, for their Lives, Liberties,
offers of Grace, and all other Mercies.


B. Let them answer you that are concerned in the Charge. The Reformed Churches
hold, That Mercy is to be judged of by its nature and tendency in it self, and
not by man's abuse; and that God decreed no man's abuse of it; and that all the
Mercies given to Mankind, since the forfeiture of all by Adam's sin, are
procured and given by Christ as the Intercessor and Redeemer of the World; and
that wicked men justly are deprived of life for rejecting it, and suffer Hell
for abusing Mercy and refusing Heaven.


The eleventh Crimination.
A. They are Antichristian half-Infidels. For they deny Christ's Kingdom as to
its far greatest part: For when the Scripture tells us, That to this end he
both died, rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living,
Romans 14. 9. And that the Father has committed all Judgment (that is
Government) to the Son, Joh. 5. 22. And given him all power in Heaven and
Earth, Matthew. 28. 18. And that his dying for all, obliges all men not to live
to themselves, but to him that died for them, 2 Cor. 5. And so that he has by
his death acquired a jus Dominii and Imperii over all Mankind; they deny him
his Crown and Dignity, even this Right of Dominion and Empire as Redeemer, and
deny the World to be obliged to subjection to him as their Redeemer: And so
make that Rebellion for which they shall perish (Luke 19. 27.) to be no sin.


B. The Protestant Churches hold all that you charge them with denying. It Is a
pitiful work to caluminate that you may divide: Tell those singular men of all
this, that are guilty of it.


The twelfth Crimination.
A. They make Christ to come on so narrow a design into the World, as if they
would tempt Unbelievers to despise him: Even to die for none in all the World,
for 4000 years, save a very few of the little Country of Judaea, (which was
mostly wicked); and even since the Church was Catholic, but for a few called
the Elect.


B. 1. If you and they differ about the conditions of Salvation, say so, and
tell the World the difference: If you do not, but are agreed that it is Faith,
Repentance and Holiness, what are all these Objections, but fighting by
fictions against Concord and Peace? They never held that none out of Judaea
were saved. And how many in the World are holy Believers, they pretend not to
judge. They believe that all that are holy are saved by Christ, in all Ages and
Nations of the World: And that all the Order, and Government, and common
Mercies of the World, with the offers of Grace and Salvation to them that
wilfully refuse it, are all to be ascribed to the death and procurement of
Christ: And that his common Redemption is presupposed to our Faith and special
Grace. See my Direction to sound Conversion, Dir. 6.


And now if this be all you have to say, review it and tell me, what
disagreement you have found out, about the commonness of Redemption.


THE Fourth Days Conference (WITH a CALVINIST) Of Common and Special REDEMPTION.
B. We are now to try what difference you can find between the Lutheran and
Calvinist Churches, or the Synodists and the moderate Arminians, in the Article
of Redemption by the death of Christ. Name all that you have against them in
this Point alone.


The first Crimination.
C. These Objections are answered by Dall^us, Amyrald, Camero and Davenant,
(Dissert. de Morte Christi) at large. And I have a full disputation on this
Subject by it self.

Lege Ephrem Syri Sermon. de Passione Salvatoris.

Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 8. Sol justitiae omnibus ortus est, omnibus venit,
omnibus passus est and omnibus resurrexit: si quis autem non credit in
Christum, generali beneficio ipse se fra^dat. Ut si quis clausis fenestris
radios solis excludat.

Prosper de Vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 16. Nulla ratio dubitandi est Jesum Christum
pro impiis mortuum, ^ quorum numero si aliquis liber inventus est, non est pro
omnibus mortuus Christus: sed prorsus pro omnibus mortuus est Christus.


They make Christ to have shed his Blood in vain; even for them that he knew
were to perish for ever.


B. How prove you it to be in vain? and that God can have no end in it, but
actual Salvation de eventu to each person for whom Christ died? 1. When the
Scripture most clearly tells us de facto, That Christ died for all, even for
them that perish, and that he bought them that denied him; be afraid of
blaspheming God, by telling him, [If Christ died for any that perish, he died
in vain.] I accuse you not, but ex natura rei warn you. I durst not tell God so.

2. God made man in Adam capable of Salvation, as the very perfection and end
of his faculties and nature, and put him under a conditional Covenant
accordingly. And will you say that God made Adam in vain in this capacity, and
made the first Promise of Life, and the Tree of Life also, in vain; because
Adam, and all of us in him, did sin, and come short of the Glory of God? Nay,
God made not the Devils in vain in a state of blessedness, or the way thereto,
though he knew that they would forsake that state and perish. It is dangerous
reproaching the Counsels and unsearchable Works of God.

3. By your own reckoning it is not in vain: For you say that Gods Justice is
glorified on Unbelievers, and that this is his end. And what is that Justice,
but the punishing of men for rejecting a Christ that died for them, and Grace
that was procured and tendered to them?

4. But if you add all the other benefits and ends, you will see that it was
not in vain. God demonstrated and so glorified his Love and Mercy to lost
Mankind, in the very greatness of the Gift (of Christ, Pardon and Glory,) which
the Impenitent do refuse. And Mercy is glorified notwithstanding the refusal.
God gives the Covenant aforesaid, or the conditional Grant of Pardon and Life
to the World. He reprieved them, and gave them time of Repentance, and
exercised Patience toward them to that end, Romans 2. 3, 4, 5, 6. Act. 17. Romans
1. 19, 20, 21, etc. Joh. 3. 16, 18, 19. He governs the World on terms of
Grace. He gives all men abundance of Mercies and Means of recovery and life.
He keeps the World in order hereby; and makes the wicked serviceable to the
Salvation of Believers. In a word, he will lose nothing by any man's sin against
Nature or Grace. Where then is the vanity of the Death of Christ, if in a
common degree it be for all?


The second Crimination.
C. They make Christ an imperfect Savior; by pretending that he died Cyril.
Hierosol. Catech. 18. Multas aeternae vitae januas aperuit, ut om^es quantum in
ipso est absque impedimento illo potiri possent.
for some, to some lower ends, whom yet he saves not.


B. This needs no other answer than the last. Is God an imperfect God to
Adam, because he saved him not by the way of Innocence, at first made by God
the way of Life? Or was he an imperfect God and Salvation to the Angels,
because they kept not their first Estate? Or is the Holy Ghost an imperfect
Sanctifier, because he gives some but such common and temporary Grace and
Faith, as is mentioned in Heb. 6. 5, 6. Matthew. 13, etc. Or dare you say that no
man that perishes had any Grace or Gifts of the Holy Ghost, when some
prophesied, and cast out Devils in Christ's Name? Must Christ do all that our
muddy brains will dictate to him, or else be reproached as an imperfect
Savior? O take heed!


The third Crimination.
C. They cast that absurdity on Christ, as to die for those that were in
August. de Symbol. ad Catech. l. 2. c. 8. says, Perhaps Christ keeps his
wounds to show the wicked at the day of Judgment, and say, Videtis vulnera quae
infixistis: agnoscitis latus quod pupugistis: quoniam and per vos and propter
vos apertum est, neque tamen intrare voluistis.
Hell when he was dying for them, and to make a Medicine for the dead and
desperate.


B. 1. As you would state the Supposition, it would be as liable to your charge
of absurdity, to say, That he died for them that were long ago pardoned and
saved, and to purchase Heaven for them that had possession of it long before.
2. But when we speak of Christ's Death as a Sacrifice for the Sins of all the
World, we mean no more, but that in esse cognito and volito, the undertaking
was so far for all, as that all should have the conditional Promise or Gift of
Life by the Merits of it. And so as all that were saved before Christ's Death,
had actual Salvation by it beforehand, as undertaken; so all that perished had
a Gift of conditional Pardon and Salvation, and perished for refusing it. But
at the time when Christ was dying, we say that he was not then intending to
offer the second Edition of his Covenant, either to those in Hell or in Heaven:
But only that he purposed to do what he from the beginning undertook, for the
undertaken ends.


The fourth Crimination.
C. They make Christ to die for those that he would not pray for, Joh. 17. I
pray not for the world, but for those that thou have given me out of the world
--


B. He makes himself to die for them. It is ofter and plainer said that he
died for all, than it is, that he prayed not for all. And many plain Texts, yea
the scope of the Gospel, must not be reduced to your feigned sense of one
obscurer Text.

2. But does the Text tell us, that he died not for the world, as it tells us,
that he prayed not for them? Or does it tell us, that he died for no more than
he then prayed for? Or rather are not these your own Inventions?

3. But where does the Text say, that Christ never prayed for any but the
Elect? yea, or that he prayed not at all for the world, though he put not up
that particular prayer for the world? Look on the Text, and you will see that
he speaks there only of the Disciples that followed him on Earth; And that he
prayed not in that Petition for all his Elect only; And therefore he after
adds, verse. 20. Neither pray 1 for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe in me through their word. And what was the prayer? [That they may be
one, and kept from the evil of the world,] which is a blessing peculiar to his
Disciples. But it is manifest, that Christ had other prayers for the world,
even for many ungodly men; yea, for Reprobates. For, 1. On the Cross he prays
for his Persecutors, Father, forgive them: And it is men's own invention to say
that he means none but the Elect: We must not unnecessarily limit where the
Word limiteth not. And Stephen made Christ his Pattern. And it is gross fiction
to say that Stephen prayed for none but the Elect.


C. Does not Christ say, That his Father heard him always? and can you imagine
that he prayed for that which God denied him?


B. 2. My next Answer should have prevented that Objection, which is, that what
God gives to the World for Christ's sake, that Christ may well be said to pray
for; For it is the fruit of his Mediation. But God gives much Pardon, and many
Mercies to the World, for Christ's sake. 1. He gives them an Act of Oblivion
of conditional pardon of the eternal punishment; which Christ purchased, and
therefore prayed for. Ambros. de Paradis. c. 8. Venerat Dominus Jesus omnes
salvos sacere peccatores, etiam circa impios ostendere suam debuit voluntatem:
and ideo nec proditurum debuit praeterire, ut adverterent omnes, quod in
electione etiam proditoris su^, servandorum omnium insigne praetendit -- Quod
in Deo fuit ostendit omnibus quod omnes voluit liberare. Nec tamen dico quia
praevaricationem nesciebat futuram: immo quia sciebat assero. Sed non ideo
pertuntis proditoris invidiam in se debuit derivare, ut ascriberetur Deo quod
uterque sit lapsus. --

Chrysostom. Tom. 3. hom 9. de land. Pauli, [Ipse quidem vult omnes salves sieri;
at non omnium voluntas ejus voluntati obsequitur: neque ab to aliquis cogitur:
unde ad Jerusalem, etc. Deus paratus est ad salvandum hominem, non
involuntarium, neque non volentem.]


2. He gives them much Actual pardon of temporal punishments for Christ's
sake. All the Life, Health, Time, Gospel, Means and Mercies, which ever he
gives them, are such as deserved full punishment would have deprived them of:
And therefore they are all acts of executive pardon of that punishment.

3. And this very Chapter contains a prayer for the World, viz. verse. 21, 23.
That the World may believe, and know that thou have sent me, and have loved
them. -- If you say that by the World here is meant only the Elect; I answer,
1. Your word is no Proof. 2. That they are prayed for, to believe and know,
etc. is no proof: For many did believe that God sent Christ that yet were not
saved. This sounds but as a common Act of Faith. 3. And note, that here the
world is contradistinguished, not only from Apostles, but those
(after-mentioned) that should believe by their word; and it is prayed, That the
world may know that God loves those that believe in him: which may extend both
to the Conversion of such as then are unconverted, and to the conviction of
others, such as are the common members of the visible Church (at least): As the
Spirit is sent to convince the world of Sin, and Righteousness, and Judgment.

4. And it is not to be granted you without proof, that by the World is meant
all Reprobates as such: For Judas is before distinguished from the World (as
one given to Christ) when yet he was a Reprobate: But either it may be the
World of present Unbelievers, whom Christ prays for elsewhere, though not
there: Or the World of final professed Infidels and Enemies of the Church, as
distinct from both Elect and Reprobate in the Church. And several expressions
of Christ's before of the Worlds hating and persecuting his Apostles, seem not
applicable to every Hypocrite, who prophesies and casts out Devils in his
Name, and perhaps suffers for his Truth, and excellently defends it, and
has some love to Believers.


The fifth Crimination.
C. They make Christ to merit only Pardon and Salvation to Believers, but not
to have purchased Faith it self for any man. And by that way, no one that he
died for would be saved; For Faith is the necessary Gift of God: And if Christ
purchased not that, all the rest would be in vain.


B. 1. Let us not here confound the Controversy de nomine and de re: That
Christ died to purchase the Act of Faith for us, is no Scripture Phrase, so far
as I know. If therefore it be only the phrase which they refuse, you may well
bear with them. But as to the matter, they do not deny any of these things, 1.
That Christ is the Author and Perfecter of our Faith, as Faith signifies the
Christian Religion, or the Objects and Doctrine of Faith. 2. That our own
actual and habitual Faith is the Gift of God; (Though the controversies about
the manner of giving it are to be afterward decided). 3. That all that Christ
gives, his Sacrifice procured; and therefore it procured Faith. All this is
commonly granted by most Schoolmen, Papists, Lutherans, and moderate Arminians.

But, 2. It must be considered that Christ did not die to purchase Faith as
immediately, and on the same account, as to satisfy for Sin, and purchase us
impunity or Redemption. The proper direct reason of his Sufferings, was to
demonstrate the Justice of God against Sin, instead of man's own suffering for
it; and thereby to procure Pardon. We may well conceive Christ promising to the
Father as it were, [I will suffer for Sinners, that they may not suffer!] But
you will hardly describe his Undertaking thus, [I will die, if thou will give
men Faith,] or [I will give thee so much of my Blood for so much Faith.] But
because he knew that without Grace no man would believe and accept his Gift,
therefore he whose Sufferings were primarily satisfaction for Sin, were
secondarily meritorious of the means to bring men to the intended and; that is,
of the Word and Spirit, by which Christ causes Sinners to believe: so that
Faith is a fruit of the Death of Christ in a remoter secondary sense. And in
all this Name me any Christian Churches that are disagreed.


C. To bring it only to a man's free will whether he will believe or not, is not
to give him Faith; and to purchase no more is not to purchase it.


B. Do you not perceive that here you divert to the Controversies of the
Decrees, and of effectual Grace? Of the first we have said enough already: of
the other after in due place.


The sixth Crimination.
C. They feign Christ to purchase only a conditional Pardon, Justification and
Salvation, and so to leave it uncertain to the corrupt Will of man, whether any
shall be saved or not.


B. This also concerns the Decrees, and is fully answered before. 1. That
Christ has purchased, and God given a conditional Act of Oblivion, or Pardon
and Life to all, is the very Gospel it self, and to be questioned by no
Believers. 2. None of them all do suppose Christ to die at uncertainties as to
the success: for they suppose that he fore-knew the success from eternity. 3.
They suppose not that the success was undecreed: For they that presuppose
foresight of man's concurrence, yet assert an Episcop. Instit. Theol. l. 4.
sect. 5. cap. 6. Certum est posito decreto conditionato omnes ac singulos qui
vel ad vitam electi sunt, vel ad mortem reprobati, recte ab aeterno
praedestinatos dici posse and debere.
eternal Decree of his Conversion upon such foresight. And it is not on the
foresight of Faith, that they say God decrees to give men Faith; but on
foresight that the will of the Sinner will concur or not obstinately resist
the Spirit that is drawing him to believe. And the Jesuits and Arminians by
their Scientia media do hold God to be the chief cause of men's believing: For
they say, That God foreseeing that man will believe if he have such a measure
of help, and such means and circumstances, does freely decree to give him that
help of the Spirit, and those means by which he knows it will be done. So
that here is no uncertainty, but different thoughts of the ascertaining decrees
and ways. 4. And lib. 1. I have showed you, that not only the Schoolmen, but
Bellarmine, Ruiz, Suarez, and many of the most famous Jesuits, do assert
effectual Grace, to be such both ex voluntate operantis, and ex vi operationis,
absolutely. And where then is this feigned difference?


The seventh Crimination.
C. They make Christ to do no more for Peter than for Judas; for those in
Heaven than for those in Hell, while they say that he died equally for all.


B. Vasq. in 1. Thom. q. 23. a. 8. disp. 94. c. 2. Perantiqua Theologorum
sententia quam ego Catholicam existimo est, non solum Christum nobis meritum ut
a Deo diligeremur, and praedestinaremur per gratiam ejus ad gloriam; sed etiam
ut eligeremur ex massa perditionis electione gratiae suae. Note that he
speaks only of the effect of Gods Decree; and so it is all one as to say,
that differencing Grace is merited by Christ: which is that which you would
have.
Equality here is meant either of his Intention, or of the benefits given:
Those benefits are of several sorts. 1. No doubt but they err, who feign God
equally to decree, and Christ to intend, the eventual absolute Salvation of
all. 2. And they err that say, that he bestows equal benefits on all, even in
this life: yea, antecedently to man's Will. But the New Covenant or conditional
Promise, does equally, as to the tenor of it, give Pardon and Right to Life, to
all.

But who is it that holds this equality of Intention or Benefit? Not the
greater part of the Schoolmen, or other Papists, no not the learned
Jesuits. Not the Lutheran Churches; But some few Arminians that run into one
extreme, as you do into the other. Nay, how can they hold an equality of
Intention, when they confess, that upon foreknowledge of their Unbelief, the
condemnation of many was eternally decreed?


C. Yes: they hold that antecedently to foresight, Gods Intention is equal.


B. 1. That foresight it self is from eternity. 2. Who can frame out Orders of
antecedency in the mind of God, between his foresight and his Will, without
confessing great darkness and impropriety of Speech. 3. And he that first
gives man to believe and will, does not first foresee that he will believe and
will, before he decree to give it him.


The eighth Crimination.
C. They make Christ's sheep to know him, before he know his sheep: that is, to
believe before he decree to give them Faith.


B. This is but the same in sense, with what is before answered; And it
belongs to the controversy of Gods Decrees. They all say that God decrees
to give them sufficient Grace to enable them to believe, before he fore-seeth
their belief: And most say more, as is aforesaid.


The ninth Crimination.
C. Some of them say that Christ's Death did actually deliver Vid. Episcop.
Resp. ad qu. 64. qu. 38. supposing the Salvation of all that die in Infancy.
all men in the World from the guilt of Original Sin, and so that none perish
for Original Sin; because what Adam did, Christ undid.


B. You can name no Church that does hold such Doctrine: And we have nothing to
do with singular odd Persons. 1. Millions were unborn when Christ died, and
were not guilty of Original sin till afterward, and therefore were not capable
of Pardon. 2. The Papists who damn unbaptized Infants cannot be of that
Opinion. 3. What Adam brought upon us, Christ did deliver us from, upon his
terms, and in his way, and by his degrees, but not immediately. He has given
all men a conditional Pardon of Original Sin, as he has done of Actual, and no
other. The Unregenerate are under the guilt of all Sin whatsoever. 4. But it is
certain, that no man, except Infants, does perish for Original Sin alone; For
all men at age have other sins. And it being certain, that God offers all men
a recovery or remedy (mediately or immediately;) it is certain, that Infants
perish not merely for Adam's sin i^puted, as a remediless evil: but that their
non-liberation, or not being pardoned and saved, is long of their Parents
Unbelief, and not entering them into the Covenant of God, who is the God of the
Faithful and their Seed.


The tenth Crimination.
C. They make Christ to have died for the Serpents Seed, against whom the
enmity is proclaimed, when the new Covenant was first made, Genesis 3. 15.


B. 1. If by the Serpents Seed, you mean such as are Gods Enemies, no doubt but
Christ died for them, Romans 5. 1. to 12, etc. What need reconciliation else? 2.
If by the Serpents Seed, you mean Reprobates as such, you can never prove it to
be the meaning of the Text. 3. If you mean foreseen final Enemies and
Unbelievers, Christ died not for them as such, but as in their antecedent
recoverable pardonable sin and misery.


THE Fifth Days Conference WITH AN ARMINIAN Of man's natural sinfulness and
impotency to good, and of FREE WILL.
A. You have hitherto persuaded us, that all the Controversies of the Decrees
and Redemption, between the Synodists and Remonstrants, being resolved into
those of the Execution, we should there expect the solution of all: To this
therefore we are next to come. And first about man's Sinfulness, Impotency and
Free Will; And there all these things following offend me.


The first Crimination.
That some of them deny all true Free Will, and others deny all Free Will to
good, and others to all spiritual good, by which man is made incapable of being
a moral Agent, and so incapable of moral Good or Evil, any more than a Tree or
Beast; seeing Free Will is the seat of moral Virtues and Vices, which
necessitated Natures are incapable of.

B. I hope you are willing to understand your self, and to be understood. Tell
me then, what mean you by Free Will?


A. I know that the true nature of Liberty is much controverted; but I mean
that Qua positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis, possumus agere vel non agere.
Alvarez has these conclusions hereof, de Aux. l. 12. d 115. p. 469. -- [1. Ad
liberum arbitrium necessario requiritur quod positis omnibus antecedenter
secundum ordinom rationis vel temporis, ad actum praerequisitis, possit operari
vel non operari; Ita viz. ut cum iisdem praerequisitis, stet simul in libero
arbitrio facultas and potentia qua possit operari si velit, vel non operari si
velit. (But the question is, de posse velle.) 2. Non est de ratione aut
definitione liberi arbitrii quod positis omnibus secundum ordinem causalitatis,
antecedenter praerequisitis ad operandum talem actum, possit eundem actum non
operari, in sens^ composito; si compositio fiat, inter hujusmodi requisita, and
carentiam talis actus, seu actum contrarium. 3. Legitima liberi arbitrii
definitio, ita se habet lib. arb. est facultas voluntatis, and rationis ad
utrum libet agendum, vel non agendum, and ad agendum unum vel alterum.] But I
suppose his predetermination inconsistent with his potentia ad contrarium in
the first proposition: Because it is antecedent to the wills self-determination
and the Will is not able to determine it self against the predetermining
causality of God, nor as he holds without it neither, and so has no true
power, but on supposition of the premotion of God predetermining.



B. 1. Do you mean by agendum, imperate Acts only, or also Volitions?


A. Both: All moral Acts of Body and Soul.


B. That which is requisite to extrinsick moral Acts, is, that they be
commanded by a determined will: You mean then that it is Liberty for the Tongue
or Hand to be able to Act when the Will forbids it, and not to Act, when the
Will commands it.


A. I mean it only of imperate Acts as voluntary; for it is the Will and not
the executive power that is the seat of Liberty.


B. 2. By Agere what Action of the Will do you mean? you know that man's Soul is
an active nature, and can no more cease all action than cease to be. You may as
well say that fire with fuel can forbear to burn, as a Soul to be active.


A. I mean only moral Acts, of Virtue and Vice.


B. All that a man does by Reason is Actus humanus, a moral Act, either good or
bad; And a man at the use of Reason lives among thousands of intelligible
Objects* necessarily presented to his Intellect by sense; and among thousands
of Objects, good for us, or bad for us, desirable or hateful; And is it
possible for such a sensitive, intelligent Creature, to live continually with
intelligible, amiable or odible Objects, and to suspend all rational
apprehensions, Volitions and Nolitions of them?


A. I mean it not of all moral Action in general, but of this or that singular
Act ^ic and nun^.


B. I will not entangle you with an enquiry; whether he that c^n do every
particular good act, cannot do all universally; and whether he that can forbear
every singular evil (or good) act cannot forbear all, when all is nothing but
all singulars. But, 3. What mean you by [requisitis?] All things of mere
necessity to the Act sine quibus non? Or also all things that can possibly be
put to ascertain the Act?


A. Of the first I am most fully resolved: Of the second there is much
doubtfulness. If I include it, I know you will ask me, whether it be impossible
for God so to determine the Will, as to make the contrary act impossible,
without taking away its Liberty? And whether Christ could commit every sin? or
else was not free? And whether Heaven take away all Liberty, if it make sin
impossible? But briefly I answer you, that the Libertas Viatoris differs from
that in Heaven; and that Ours still supposes a possibility of the Contrary,
but Theirs does not.


B. But if it be their Liberty to be past a posse peccare, why should it not be
ours to come as near it as may be? especially when we have the fore-tasts and
first-fuits of Heaven on Earth, and Grace is the seed of Glory.


A. It is our Liberty to be as far from sin as may be: But this is another kind
of Liberty, and not to be confounded with that which is a mere power of doing
or not doing.


B. 4. But that a man can act positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis is no
wonder; so can a Stone, or Bruit: but how say you potest non agere, when
non-agere is not an effect or exercise of Power? There needs no Power ad non
agendum.


A. Yes; when Nature, or Vice, and Temptation draw us to a forbidden Act, it is
a work of Power to resist them and forbear it.


B. But sure Nature, Vice or Temptation do not so draw us to love God
perfectly, to hate all Sin perfectly, to be heavenly-minded, to consent to
suffer Death for Christ, etc. as that we should need any power to resist such
drawings, or forbear such acts. How then do you make this a part of your power?


A. But when the Spirit of God draws us to love him, it is an act of natural
abused power to resist him. And also in this and the former case I say, that by
[possumus] here, we do not mean a moral or physical power always, but in this
instance only a logical power: And our meaning only is, that we are not
necessitated to Act or not Act; to love God, or to hate him, or not to love
him. As Privations are reduced to Entities, in Descriptions, so are Impotencies
to Powers.


B. The word [Posse] then in your definition is equivocal, and signifies both
Power and No -Power. What a definition is that? But, 5. What makes you call it
by the name of Liberty, to be impotent? or, if you will, to be able not to love
God? not to live to God? not to know God? not to trust God? not to repent of
Sin? not to be heavenlyminded? what Liberty is this? yea, or to be able to hate
God, and Sin, and damn your selves?


A. Arnold. Corv. describes it to be that without which we are not men.
It is not Liberty specifically as it is for sin or against God; and so not
Libertas moralis; but it is only Libertas naturalis, or the indetermination of
the Will with a self-determining power, which is the natural seat of morality,
and may be used to good or evil. Formalis Libertas arbitrii creati, non
consistit formaliter in indifferentia objectiva, neque in indifferentia
passiva; sed in indifferentia Activa ipsiu^ facultatis liberae, quae
indifferenter se habet ad opposita: quamvis adjunctam habeat vel praesupponat
aliquam indifferentiam passivam ipsius potentia and indifferentiam objecti.
Alvar. de Aux. l. 12. d. 116. p. 473. c. 2.



B. Now you say somewhat, and come into the Light; Therefore having thus
prepared the way, I add, that there is Libertas a malo, and Libertas ad bonum;
both properly: But it is improper to say, Libertas a bono (naturali vel morali)
vel Libertas ad malum qua tale. 2. As there may be a threefold Restraint or
Compulsion, Physical, Ethical, or Civil; So there is a threefold Liberty, 1.
Natural, which is a Liberty from natural necessitation from God, or our own
faculties, or things extrinsick, unto any evil. 2. Ethical; which is a Liberty
from vicious inclination, or necessitation by it at least. 3. Civil; which is a
Liberty from the restraining or constraining Laws, of any that would or might
draw us to evil, or keep us from good; and so of penalties by those Laws. To
which is reducible Liberty from the ill commands and punishments of Parents and
Masters, and from the violence of enemies or wicked men. And Liberty is either
from sin, or from misery. But the distinctions about Liberty are so many, that
I have given them you in a Table in the Second Book, and refer you thither,
that we may agree on the state of the question, What Liberty it is that you
mean? But first I shall ask you a few more questions.

Quest. 1. Do you think that Liberty consists in the greatest indifferency of
the Will, when it is merely in aequilibrio?


A. No: For then every virtuous or vicious habit should take away Liberty.


B. I pray you think on it then, Whether if strong habits which do tantum non
necessitare, do not at all abate or take away any part of Liberty, it be like,
that if such a habit were so strong as per eundem inclinandi modum to
necessitate, it would not yet consist with Liberty of Will?

Quest. 2. Do you think that a man is not necessitated to will his own felicity
by a simple Volition? Is he free to desire misery as such?


A. No: This is not an act of Election, and therefore not of Liberty.


B. Do you think that this certain constant necessary act of the Will, is not a
more perfect or excellent act, than that which you call free, which sometime is
done and sometime not done, and is before uncertain? Posse male agere non est
aliquid quod ad Libertatis perfectionem pertineat: sed potius quaedam est
imperfectio libertatem comitans in persona creata, and quae Libertati
accidentaria est: Nam Deus, etc. Blank de lib. in genere, n. 33.
Or, is it not a more excellent state of the Will to be constantly and
certainly well determined, than to be undetermined, and defectible? I would
know as we go on, whether the Liberty which we plead for, be good and
desirable, or evil?


A. I cannot deny but it is incomparably more desirable to be certainly and
necessarily determined to good, than not: But it is better to be free and left
to our own choice uncertainly, than to be determined to evil, or to be so
determined to inferior good, as shall keep down the Soul from the superior. I
do not take this indetermination and free power, for our best state, but for a
middle condition, fit for a Viator that is tried here in order to his end.
Beasts are necessarily determined to things inferior: The glorified Angels and
Saints (its thought and hoped) are necessarily determined to things superior;
and so was Christ: But our undetermined state of Liberty is better than one,
and worse than the other, and fit for our trying life on Earth.


B. You say well. Therefore remember, that our Liberty is no further good, than
as it is a Liberty to good and from evil, Posse peccare non pertinet ad
rationem formalem liberi arbitrii: sed potius est quaedam imper^ectio arbitrii
creati, competens illi, ^o quod factum est ex nibilo: Alvar. ib. d. 115. p.
470. Et hanc rationem assignat S* Augustinus, l. 2. de vitiis and concup. c.
28. and l. 12. de civit. Dei, c. 1. Unde Thom. 1. p. q. 62. art. 8. ad 3. ait
quod Liberum arb. diversa eligere possit, servato ordine sinis, ut hoc pertinet
ad perfectionem libertatis ejus; sed quod eligat aliquid divertendo ab ordine
finis, quod est peccare, hoc pertinet ad defectum libertatis. Idem dicit de
ver. q. 24. art. 3. ad 2.

Voluntas nostra vere libera est, comparatione volitionis aut nolitionis, quam
elicit, quolibet momento, -- non solum quia prius natura quam se determina^et
ad alteram partem, poterat seipsam non determinare ad eandem partem, sed ad
oppositam: nec solum quia potest continuare, vel ac^istere ab operatione, quam
producit in instanti praesentis temporis: sed etiam quia in instanti temporis
quo elicit suam operationem, veram retinet potestatem and facultatem qua possit
eam non elicere, si velit, aut etiam elicere, contrariam operationem: Alvar.
disp. 116. p. 476. Here is a power Volendi si velit. But 1. Is it per candem
volitionem, vel aliam? 2. Has he qui non vult, Potentiam volendi pro hoc
instanti?


not from all determination: but that the nearer we draw to necessary love to
God and goodness, the better we are.

Q. 3. I further ask you, Do we not necessarily will also bonum sensibile,
sensible good as such, with a simple Volition? and so are not at Liberty in
that point?


A. What mean you by a simple Volition?


B. That by which we will a thing by simple complacence, considered as simply
good, before the understanding compare it with any other good, and call the
Will to an Election.


A. No doubt but we have an Appetite to sensible good; but whether it be only
the sensitive Appetite, or always the rational Appetite also? I am in some
doubt.


B. When sense perceives sweetness by taste or smell, light and pulchritude by
fight and fantasy, sensual joy by internal sense, doubtless in an Intelligent
Creature, the Intellect presently perceives suo modo, that these are such
indeed as sense perceives, and also that they are bona sensibilia, and that
bona sensibilia are vere bona in their proper order. And therefore as sensible
good is apprehended by the Intellect, and made volible, so the Will must needs
have a complacency or simple volition of it, though it may refuse it
comparatively.


A. I grant it you: Because I take not any simple complacency to be a free act
whatsoever: but only comparative Elections.


B. It Is true, quoad specificationem actus, vel libertatem contrarietatis: But
how prove you it true quoad exercitium actus, vel libertatem contradictionis?
May not the Will suspend a simple complacency, or displicency, by not acting
therein?


A. Not while the Intellect apprehends the appetible good.


B. But because the Will is principium exercitii, may it not first suspend the
act of the Understanding, either by diverting it, or by its own omission in not
exciting it to cogitation? But, to be short, I grant you, that about sensible
Objects, sense may necessitate the first simple apprehension of the Intellect,
and thereby the first simple complacency of the Will may be necessitated? But,
1. The comparing act of the Intellect. 2. And the very first apprehension of
things altogether insensible or spiritual, are so far under the power of the
Will, that the Will may suspend them. And so the Will has a liberty of
exercise or contradiction as they call it, as to its simple complacency about
things insensible or spiritual, so far as it can suspend the Intellects
apprehension of their goodness (at least.) The arguments of Camero and others
to the contrary I know are considerable; but I must not now digress to answer
them.

Quest. 4. But further, If the Intellect perceive that there is but one means
to a man's felicity, and that absolutely necessary, is it not necessitated to
will that means, by its necessary willing felicity it self?


A. It is commonly so concluded: But I am doubtful of it.


B. And well you may, without limitation. For, 1. Felicity it self is
considerable either in the complex notion, or in the incomplex matter; I do not
think that the first is it that is necessarily desired, but the latter; even
good it self, as existent or desired to exist: 2. And this good that is
felicity is not necessarily known by the Intellect: One takes it to be
spiritual good, and another to be sensible good: One takes it to be God,
another to be the Creature: One seeks it hereafter, and another here.
Therefore the same man may be in doubt of this, both as he doubts of the
Truth, and as he doubts of the suitableness of invisible things: And
therefore though he knew that, e. g. Christ and holiness be the medium unicum
to that end and felicity, which he thinks or believes predominantly to be
the only felicity; yet as he has some doubting of it, so he may have some
desire of a sensible inferior felicity, though not predominant; and these may
also make him the more uncertainly to choose the means to the former. 3. And if
a man's understanding were fully satisfied, that the only true felicity is in
God and Heaven, yet he cannot but both feel (sensibly) and know
(intellectually) that there is also a present sensible good: And therefore he
must complacencially will it: And his perception and will may grow inordinate,
and be entangled by it, by undue adhesion and delight: And so he may be
diverted from things spiritual; yea and oppose the means of his true felicity,
as opposite to his lower beloved good.


A. By this, you suppose that the same man may have two Ultimate ends.


B. 1. If by an Ultimate end you mean that only which a man habitually
esteems, loves and seeks above all resolvedly as his felicity, so no man
has but one. 2. But if you mean that which is his Ultimate end, either in a
lower sense, or as to a particular act, I doubt not but he may have two: That
is, he may sometimes by intellectual doubting waver toward one side to day,
and toward another to morrow, though not equally; And he may also have an
inordinate complacency in things sensible, and so use means to please his
sense, while he knows that other things are better. 3. And the Schoolmen often
say* that bonum sensibile or the pleasing of sense, is often made to be finis in
this sense, in that it is not medium, nor referred to any thing else: As a holy
person when he sins by sensuality, does not love and use that Meat, and
Drink, and Ease, and Honor, and Lust, only as a medium to God and Glory. But
it is not finis, say they, properly, so as that other things are referred to
it. But the truth is that even holy persons, may choose and use sinful means
for their fleshly pleasure as an inordinate end; and Meat, Drink, etc. are such
means: And so their Pleasure is properly an Ultimate end; But not the
predominant chief end, and so not to be denominated finis hominis, quoad vitae
Cursum, but only as to his odd inordinate act: And so Paul says, It is not I,
but indwelling sin.

So that we may say that medium unicum ad unicam foelicitatem vel bonum amatum,
and ubi est omnimoda ratio boni, and nihil repugnat, is necessarily willed;
(For this is no Election:) But otherwise not.

Quest. 5. But I also ask you, Whether you think not that some habits (to evil
at least, if not to good) are so strong and like to nature, as that Fatetur
Arminius, hominem sub statu peccati nibil quod vere bonum sit posse
intelligere, vell^, facere, and binc quidem cum necessary peccare, nisi Den^
istam necessitatem gratiose tollat: sed quia statuit Deum foedere suo gratiae,
quod cum hominibus i^it, ostendisse nolle se homine^ praecise secundum primum
pactum tractare, ideoque neque propter peccatum, originis condemnare, statuit
etiam Deum paratum esse quaod se, tollere istam peccandi necessitatem and ^oc
ipsi declarasse, Arnold. Corv. cont. Tilenum, cap. 11. page 394.
the Will till it be changed by an exterior power, is always, or almost always
determined according to them.


A. Ordinarily it is, as all experience tells us: but not necessarily.


B. You see then that it is but a very little Liberty (from necessity) which is
left in case of such fixed Habits. And indeed, though you may truly say that
they necessitate not by compulsion at all, nor yet by inclination so constantly
to every evil act, but that some evil acts may be avoided where such evil
habits are; yet you never knew the tenor of a man's Will and Life go contrary to
a strong and rooted habit: so that so far they necessarily incline.


A. It suffices that no inclination necessitateth to every act of Sin, nor
from every Duty: For by one good act, they may be prepared for more.


B. 1. It is true that you say, as to your conclusion. But, 2. You mistake the
Antecedent. There is an inclinatio naturalis antecedent to adventitious habits,
which is inseparable and necessitating, yea essential to the Soul (which I am
not now to handle.)

But Quest. 6. I further ask, Do you think that any man is free from Gods
Government, and subjection to his Laws and Judgments?


A. No: His Service is perfect freedom.


B. Quest. 7. Is it freedom to be from under the overcoming power of
heart-melting Love, and infinite attractive Goodness?


A. It is only an unhappy Imperfection, not to be over come by Love.


B. Quest. 8. Is any Creature free from Gods Propriety or Dominion, and from
his disposing Will, by which he does as he list with his own?


A. No: But God as a Governor has told us what he will do with us.


B. Quest. 9. Is the Will free from the directing power of the Understanding?


A. No: Yhat were no freedom, but bruitishness: But it is not determined
necessarily by the Understanding.


B. I will not now dispute that. Quoad specificationem actus in many cases, at
least, it cannot go against it: But supposing the Understanding well informed,
Is not that the most perfect and happy Will, that never goes against it?


A. Yes: For to go against it, is to sin.


B. Quest. 10. Are we at Liberty from under the oversight of Angels?


A. No: That were an unhappy Liberty: But they necessitate not our Wills.


B. Quest. 11. Are we at liberty from the rule and doctrinal Education,
Admonition, Reproofs and Corrections, of Parents, Masters and Tutors?


A. No: All this is our Good, which we are not free from.


B. Quest. 12. Are we at liberty from the Laws, and Judgment and Punishments of
Kings, and their subordinate Magistrates?


A. No: This is Gods Order; and they are His Ministers for our good.


B. Quest. 13. Is any Child of Adam free from Original Sin, and pravity,
inclining them to evil, and making them averse to holy good?


A. What ever Episcopius and Bishop Jer. Tailor say, I must say No: For I will
not side with Pelagius against the Universal Church.


B. Quest. 14. Is any unsanctified man free from the Dominion of this Original
pravity, together with contracted habits of sin?


A. No: For that is the very state of an unsanctified person.


B. Quest. 15. Is any regenerate person perfectly free, from these sinful
Dispositions and Inclinations last mentioned?


A: Not till he attain to Perfection, which is not in this life.


B. Quest. 16. Is any man free from all actual sin?


A. There is no man that has not committed actual sin heretofore; And no man
that will not commit it again if he live long in the world; And no man that is
free from the Reatus culpae; nor yet from the Reatus poenae till remitted. But,
1. There are many that live not in any mortal reigning sin. 2. And there are
some hours in which a man does not actually sin at all: As in a deep and
dreamless sleep, etc.


B. Quest. 17. Is any man (or all at least) wholly free from the crafty and
violent Temptations of Satan?


A. No: but they necessitate us not to sin.


B. Q. 18. Are we wholly free from the temptations of false Teachers,
Flatterers, Tyrants, Persecutors, Enemies, and other wicked men?


A. No: But they cannot necessitate us to sin.


B. Q. 19. Are we wholly free from a multitude of objective snares, of
Prosperity and Adversity even in every Creature and way?


A. No: but neither do they necessitate us to sin.


B. Q. 20. Are we any further freed from the strong temptations of our own
senses, appetites, and fleshly Concupisconce than Orace delivers us?


A. No: But neither do these necessitate each particular sin.


B. Very good! Let us come to the Application. Quod spectat naturam libertatis
non minor est in utraque schola sententiarum varietas -- Quidam docent
libertatem arbi^rii oppositam non esse necessitati, sed coactioni tantum: Verum
quae hic est controversia aut mere verbalis est, aut non magni momenti. Hi enim
concedunt ad libertatem non sufficere immunitatem a coactione, nec libertatem
in ea proprie consistere: sed in ^o quod agens liberum seipsum movet and agit,
ratione agenti intellectuali propia. -- Et agnoscunt agentia libera in
plerisque suis actibus non solum immunia esse a coactione, sed neque esse ad
unum necessitate quadam determinata. Adeoque ex eorum sensu nonnulli eorum
actuum necessarii sunt; sed Plerique tamen contingentes -- Quum autem Libertas
extenditur ad actus necessarios et immutabiles, fatentur illam latiori
significatione sumi: Libertatem vero strictius acceptam versari tantum circa
contingentia -- Qui contra pretendunt libertatem opponi, non coactioni solum,
sed etiam necessitati, concedunt voluntatem suorum quorundam actnum ratione
babere s^ necessario, quamvis plerorumque respectu contingenter -- Et in illis
actibus ad quos voluntas immutabiliter and necessario determinata est esse
quandam libentiam and complacentiam unde pat^t contentionem esse verbalem and
non realem. Nempe utrique consentiunt quomodo res se habeat. Quaestio solum
remanet, A^ actus necessarii, Liberi dicendi fuit? Blank de Lib. absol. These.
8. 9, 10, 11, 12.

And Th. 14. he cites Estius his words, confessing the same of Bonaventure,
that taking Voluntarium for Liberum, it is but a difference de nomine
Libertatis.

And Strangius de Vol. Dei l. 3. c. 14. p. 687. Neque nobis videtur hac de re
litigandum, quia alioqui tantum esset (...) Non ^^i^ negamus, sic vocem liberi
arbitrii recte usurpari, quamquam in alio sensu illas actiones diximus esse
liberas.

See Blank ibid. n. 17, etc. proving also that the quarrel among Protestants
herein, is but about the Names of necessity and liberty, and that they are
agreed of the matter.

And These. 22, etc. That their difference about necessity, and indifferency in
the matter of Liberty is but about the name, and easily reconcilable. And the
same Th. 25. he says of the [Positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis, posse
agere vel non agere.]

And de Lib. arb. in genere These. ^5. he says the same, (with Strangius) that
it is a mere Logomachy between them that say, All voluntary acts are free, and
those that deny it: while they take Liberty in several senses* one pro libentia
secundum ration^m, the other pro indeterminatione and indifferentia, etc.

That Liberty is consistent with necessity, in many Cases many of the chief
School-men-hold. For which let the learned Reader peruse the Citations of them
in Jansenius; and see specially Alex. Al. 2. p. q. 72. numb. 3^ a. 3. and
Aquin. qu. 10 de Potent. a. 2. ad 1. and ejus sequacem Viguerium Institut. c.
3. sect. 3. verse. 1. (Cum plu ib^^ aliis Thomistis) and Bonavent. in 2. d. 7.
4. 3. and d. 25. q. 2. And the Scotists and some Nominals I have elsewhere
cited. Especially Reader; if you would see more on the Subject, Ripalda names
you enough, Expos. Magist. l. 2. d. 5. qu. 12. that go several ways.

But note (with Jansenius de Great. Salv* l. 6. c. 37.) that the necessity of
voluntary acts, as Scotas says, is not previous to the Will, that the Will
should be thought to fall under necessity as impelling it to, and fixing it in
the act: For if it were so, Voluntas ageretur and non ageret: nec staret in
tali actu libertas: sed est necessitas concomit^^^, it a quod ipsa intelligatur
cadere s^b voluntate: sic quod voluntas propter firmitatem libertatis sua, sibi
ipsi necessitatem impo^it, in eliciendo actum, and in perseverand^.


If we are agreed in all these twenty particulars; and that in some of them we
are under necessity, and in some next to it, and in others are under no small
dangi^, and that none of all these denied is the Liberty of Will which you
contend for, we are very unhappy, if we do not all agree of the necessity of
Gods Grace, and if yet there remain any other sort of Liberty about which we
must needs contend.

I pray you now tell me, What Liberty it is that you accuse your Brethren for
denying? Is it a Liberty to good, or unto sin?


A. Both, 1. They make man's Will necessitated to sin; and good to be impossible
to it. And, 2. They make Gods Grace to work so irresistibly as to take away the
liberty of sinning.


B. 1. What necessity is it that you mean? Is it more than in all that
aforesaid your self has granted. 2. And who thinks that man obeys Grace,
and forbeareth resistance, or commits sin, for want of either Power or
Liberty? O that we could be so happy as to take away our own and other men's
Liberty to sin, and to resist God, and to undo themselves!


A. Tell me first what Liberty of Will you maintain, and then I shall best tell
you in what in we differ: even as I have told you what Liberty we deny.


B. The method is convenient, I. We grant that we have a Will which is
naturally a self-determining Principle, and Lord of its own acts, able to
determine it self with due Objects and helps, without extrinsick predetermining
physical motion either of God or Creatures.

II. We grant that this Will has the command of other faculties, respectively;
that is, of some politically (as they use to say) and indirectly, or
imperfectly, and of others despotically or directly and more perfectly.

III. We hold that this Will is directly and properly subject to none but God.

IV. For instance, neither Angels or Devils can determine it antecedently to
its own self-determination, to its hurt, though Angels may help it, and Devils
may tempt it.

V. No men by the greatest Power or Violence, nor by the subtilest Oratory or
Deceit, can necessitate or predetermine it, though they may do much to induce
it to self-determination.

VI. No Objects (though they necessitate the sense and appetite, and the first
apprehension of the Intellect,) can necessitate the Will to Election, or
comparative self-determination; nor do Objects carry us by necessity as they do
the Bruits.

VII. Neither our external or internal senses, or imagination, can predetermine
or necessitate the said elective or comparative Will.

VIII. Though our passions and motions of the Spirits may much molest and
hinder the Will, they cannot necessarily predetermine it in the said election
and comparative acts.

IX. Though the Intellect may direct it to that which it will determine it self
to, (in some cases necessarily ex principiis naturae, and in others not
necessarily;) and being it self deceived, may mislead it to mischoosings and
refusings, yet is it not the commander of the Will, but the guide, (as the eye
to the Body, which causes us not to go, but to go the right way): And being it
self under the Wills command quoad exercitium, does not efficiently
predetermine it, nor can necessitate it to sin or misery, unless it be first
the culpable, unnecessitated cause it self.

X. And as none of these can necessitate the Will originally to evil Acts, so
much less can they necessitate it to any evil habits, or inclinations, nor take
away those that are good.

XI. I hold that this Free Will is joined with necessity (not constrained, but
convenient, by its nature or inclination.) 1. In the specification of simple
Volition of our own felicity. 2. In the specification of simple Volition or
Love to sensible good as such. 3. In the specification of the Volition of that
which is fully perceived to be the only means of our only felicity, and to be
only good. But that it is separated from natural necessity, and such
necessitation as is before denied. 1. In its subjection and love to God as its
Creator or first efficient of good. 2. In its love to and simple Volition of
God, as our Ultimate end. 3. In the election of any end, where diverse things
are Competitors to be our end (besides our felicity), whether God or the
Creature. 4. In the election of means, where diverse are offered. 5. In the
exercise of the act of intending our end. 6. In the use of the means, and
commanding the imperate faculties therein.

XII. I hold that this Liberty of the Will is of three sorts (though but two
are commonly held.) 1. Contradictionis, vel exercitii; viz. Velle aut non
velle, nolle aut non nolle. 2. Contrarietatis seu specificationis, quoad Actum;
viz. Velle aut nolle hoc. 3. Competitionis, vel comparationis, i. e.
Contrarietatis seu specificationis, quoad Objecta, viz. Velle aut hoc aut
illud, nolle aut hoc aut illud, vel hoc potius quam illud.

XIII. Out of all these freedoms of the Will it self, resulteth the Liberty of
the PERSON, usually called, largely, Liberum Arbitrium, or Free-choice: which
is, 1. That no man can be compelled to moral good or evil against his Will. 2.
No man can deserve Rewards or Punishments of God, against his Will. 3. No man
can be happy against his Will, nor unhappy unless it be the Cause.

XIV. All this that I have hitherto named is but man's natural liberty as a man,
which all men have, and is part of that common natural Image of God, which
differenceth us from Bruits, and is mentioned Genesis 9. 6.

XV. Besides this there is a political or civil Liberty, according to which no
Man or Angel has power to command us to sin against God, or to cast away our
Innocence or Happiness, or undo our Souls.

XVI. And God as our Governor does not only give all men leave and liberty to
be holy, but offers them Life, and gives every man his choice whether he
will repent and live, or refuse Grace and perish; And much more then Liberty he
gives them, by Commands, Threatenings, Promises, Mercies, Means, Helps,
Entreaties, Afflictions, etc. urging them to repent and live.

XVII. And this political Liberty contains a freedom from all punishment from
God, to those that cause it not by wilful sin: And more than so, a certainty of
the Reward of Glory.

XVIII. Besides these forementioned Liberties natural and political, there is
also an ethical or moral Liberty from sinful Habits and Acts: And of that we
hold, that every man is delivered from these sinful Habits and Acts, so far as
he has and uses Gods Grace: And so that the sanctified are delivered from the
reign or servitude of sin.

XIX. And we hold that yet the habits of Grace do not necessitate this or that
particular act of Obedience or Love, but it is too possible to sin by Omission
or Commission notwithstanding these habits.

XX. And we hold that the ordinary habits of Vice in the wicked do not
absolutely necessitate them to this or that sinful Commission in particular, at
least not to very many sins, but that it is possible for them to do some
Duties, and forbear many sins, notwithstanding Original and superadded pravity.

XXI. I add to the XI. Sect. before as an instance, that man's Will is not by
any natural necessity, determined to will its own felicity by the comparate
electing Act of the Will; but has Power and Liberty to refuse or nill it. This
many will think strange, but I am sure that it is true. For man was made and
redeemed, and is sanctified for a higher End than his own felicity; yea more
than one, even the Glory and Pleasing of God, and the common Good. And reason
tells me undoubtedly that I ought to love that best which is best in it self,
and that if my annihilation would conduce to the saving or happiness of the
World, or of one Kingdom, or of thousands of Persons, I ought to consent to it
for such ends; yea were it but to keep the Earth from perishing, and the Sun
from being useless to this World. And though God in mercy has so united my
felicity with his Glory and the common Good, that there never will be use for
such an option or choice, yet it follows not thence that I may not say, that
hypothetically (if I were put to it) such a thing is possible and would be due.
And as Paul said, I could wish my self accursed from Christ for my Brethrens
sake, the Jews (not I do wish it, but would this save them, I could wish it,
because the salvation of thousands, and their Service to God, is better than
Ours;) even so may we. Annihilation is inconsistent with Felicity: But
Annihilation might and should be chosen before the Annihilation of the World,
or the perdition of millions, if God had called us to it. Yea Christ that
says, [It were good for that man that he had never been born,] implies, that
a damned man would choose it as a minus malum; yea many a one that I have known
my self, desired it. Therefore it is a thing that the Will may do.

XXII. And as another Instance, I need not prove, that the bonum sensibile
which is necessarily loved or willed by some complacency or simple Volition, is
not necessarily chosen, but may freely be rejected. Otherwise no sin scarce
could be avoided.

All these sorts or Acts of Free Will we hold, and are agreed on. And are we
yet unfit for concord and coalition for want of acknowledging the freedom of
the Will?


A. I must confess that you have acknowledged much.


B. And I confess that so have you on the other side. I pray you now tell me,
where lies our disagreement?


A. You overwhelm me with Distinctions and numerous particulars, so that I
suspect you do but by this dust intend to blind our eyes. A man may make any
thing good by such minute distinguishing, and atomizing matters to make them
imperceptible. Did you deal plainly, I could answer you.


B. Is this an answer fit for a learned or ingenuous man? Is confusion
plainness with you? such plainness too many plani have deceived the Church
with, and set well-meaning Christians together by the ears; so that the
Christian World has long pleased the Devil, and found him sport, as
fighting-Dogs and Cocks do to men, and all by the cheats of ignorant confusion;
Kingdoms and Factions fight about words which they never understood. Like the
consulting Physicians who could not agree, whether their Patie^ts Ischury
should be cured by Succinum, or by Electrum, or by Carabe, or by Ambarum, and
the poor man died because they could not consent.

If I distinguish vainly or falsely sine differentia, cannot you show where the
vanity or falsehood is? How can you tell it is false or vain, if you know not
where the falsehood or vanity is? Will you say, It is somewhere, but I know not
where? Let that answer from others then to all your reasonings seem sufficient,
[Your reason is false, and your argument naught, but we know not were the
falsehood lies.] A ready confutation, fit for our Church-troublers. I have
purposely in the First Book, given you all the distinctions about Liberty which
I use, in an orderly Table, that you may easily understand them by seeing them
together: so that if there be falsehood or vanity in them, they are open to your
easy search and view.

Tell me what freedom is denied you, or else for shame contend no more.


A. They hold that Original Sin does necessitate all the unregenerate to do
evil, and to forbear good, so that they cannot possibly forbear Sins of
Commission or Omission. II. They hold that Grace does irresistibly ne^^ssitate
the Elect to believe and love God, and forbear Sin, so that they cannot do
otherwise.


B. I. Stay a little. 1. You must distinguish of several sorts of Good and
Evil: 2. And of several sorts of Necessity.

1. I hope you will not think it false, vain or curious, to distinguish
between, 1. An ungodly course of Life, and some one particular act of Sin: 2.
The omission of the predominant Love of God, and a course of holy living, and
special saving acts, and the omission of this or that commanded act.

2. And I hope I may advise you to distinguish between, 1. A constrained
Necessity against our Will, and a voluntary Necessity, of diseased vicious
inclination. 2. And between a necessity in sensu composito and in sensu diviso.
3. And between an uncurable and a curable necessity. And then I answer.

I. We hold that an ungodly man by his Original and superadded pravity, is so
strongly and fixedly inclined to a sensual ungodly life, that in sensu
composito, while he is such, he will certainly live such a life in the main
course of it. And do not you think so too? I pray you tell me?


A. It is an idle question: For that is but necessitas existentiae. He that is
ungodly is necessarily ungodly while he is so.


B. II. We hold moreover that the same man will certainly, all that time, omit
the prevalent love of God and all acts proper to the godly.


A. That Is but the same: else he were a godly man.


B. III. We hold also that yet this man may forbear many acts of sin, and do
many things commanded: and so is not under a vicious necessity of committing
all Sin, or omitting all Duty.

IV. We hold also that his vicious necessity of disposition is curable, and
not remediless and desperate.

V. We hold also that it is not curable without Gods saving sanctifying Grace,
proportioned to his disease or pravity.

VI. We hold also that God has appointed every man certain Duties and Means
to be used in order to his cure.

VII. We hold that he gives much outward help, and some inward commoner Grace
antecedent usually to sanctifying Grace, by which much of these Duties and
Means may be used.

VIII. And we hold that God appoints no means in vain, nor commands any
unprofitable Duty, or which man has not sufficient encouragement to use, with
hope of success, and is not unexcuseable if he neglect.

Do you differ from us in any of this? Or is there any thing more that we must
have to be capable of your love and concord?


A. Though I granted you a necessitas existentiae, that a wicked man's life
while such be wicked in the main, (for that is but to say that a wicked man is
a wicked man), yet I grant you not a necessitas effecti, as if his pravity made
his wicked life unavoidable or necessary as a necessitating cause.


B. His wicked life is considerable, 1. As to his inward actings, or to his
outward: 2. As to the immediate or next Acts, and as to the remote. 3. And the
necessity is voluntary or involuntary. And so I say,

1. He is under no natural or involuntary necessity; but under a Etsi Amor ille
non excedat vires physica^ voluntatis humanae per se spectatae; eas tamen
superat, si spectentur difficultates quae occurant. Unde fit, ut sine speciali
auxilio non possit ad actum reduci naturalis inclinatio D^um super omnia
diligendi. Non potest homo credere mysteria ^fidei ^t oportet ad salutem, sine
gratiae auxilio, etiam quum sufficienter sunt proposita, and probatum a Deo
esse revelatum. Non potest homo servare quoad substantiam ullum praeceptum
affirmativum supernaturale de interno actu, sine auxilio gratiae etiam de
singulis, Pet. a S. Joseph. These. general. de aux. p. 81. 82, 83.
vicious inclination or habit, which will produce some effects certainly, and
others uncertainly.

2. The certain effects of the habitual privation of the love of God, and
enmity to him and to holiness, is, that his Soul will not in statu praesenti
immediately, (nor till it be cured or over-swayed by a superior cause, ^) love
God above all, nor love holiness, nor live a holy life: Because the Soul will
not go contrary to its habitual inclination, without somewhat to overpower
that habit. An effect will not be contrary to the fixed inclination of its
cause.

3. And another certain effect of a Soul predominantly habituated to
sens^ality, is, that it will live a sensual life, constantly as to the bent of
inward Volitions, and ordinarily as occasion serves in outward actions.

4. But being not so necessitated to every Sin, nor against every Duty and
means of Cure, this Soul is not under a necessity of so continuing uncured.

Now if it be the present voluntary ascertaining Disposition which you deny,
then, 1. You must hold that an Enemy of God can immediately love him above all,
and live a holy life: 2. And that there is some cause in a man most habitually
sensual, by which he can forbear both the inward desires and outward acts of
sensuality; which are contradictions to him that knows what a prevalent fixed
habit is. 3. And that all wicked Enemies of God have in them a cause that can
immediately cure all their own enmity and pravity without Gods Spirit of Grace;
or else have his Spirit and Grace immediately at an instant at command. And if
all a man's Original Sin, and contracted habits, be so easily laid by at any
minute, the cure seems much easier than the depravation, which perhaps has
been a long time growing to that strength: which is contrary to all the Worlds
experience: As it is easier to kindle a fire in the City than to quench it, and
to catch the Plague or any Disease than to cure it, or to wound the Body than
to heal it, or to pull down a House than to build it, to drown a Ship than to
make it, etc. So all Ministers, Tutors, Parents, Christians; yea, persons find
how woefully hard it proves to cure one Sin; To cure the Ignorant, the
Unbelieving, the Hard-hearted, the Proud, the Lustful, the Covetous, the
Passionate; much more the malignant Enemies of God and holiness. What need of
the sanctification of the Holy Ghost, or the medicinal Grace of Christ, if the
very depraved Will can do all in a moment of it self, and depose its enmity.


A. You speak to me as if I were a Pelagian: I am not for any of this. But will
rather yield to what you say.


B. II. And as for your second Charge, Vid. quae ha^^t Ruiz de praedefin. tr.
2. d. 8. per tot. de necessitate vaga consistent^ cum liberate secundum quid.
Et a. 9. p. 137. That all good actions are fore decreed of God, proved and
multitudes cited that defend it.
that they assert unresistible necessitating Grace, I pray you leave it to the
Fourth Article, which is its proper place to avoid repetition. But here let me
remember you by the way. 1. That not to love God, not to believe, not to
repent, not to live holily, are no Acts, and therefore no Effects of power, but
a privation.

2. That therefore Gods causing a man to love him, to Believe, to Repent, to be
Holy, is not to deprive him of any power, but to give him act and power.

3. Therefore it is not a depriving him of any true Liberty: For true Liberty
is the Liberty of some faculty or power.

4. But if you will call a voluntary Impotency and Viciousness by the name of a
free-power, then God takes away such Power by giving us Power, and such
Liberty by making us free. But proceed to the next Crimination.


The second Crimination.
A. The Arminians say that God gives a supernatural power, even to the Will it
self, and that by immediate operation, Synod. art. 3. and 4. p. 15, etc. And
they add, [Mente illuminata and voluntati concessa supernaturali potentia
partim per illuminationem, partim per virium immediatam insusionem; Deum quoque
Affectus nostros and partem illam sensitivam corrigere, and bonis desideriis
quorum objecta monstrat intellectuo, actus vero imperat voluntas, afficere:
Quibus affectibus magis magisque correctis, castigatis and in ordinem redactis,
promptior and facilior, ac minus impedita postmodum redditur voluntas ad
exer^endos pietatis actus, non usque adeo ut ante reluctantibus affectibus, and
lege illa in membris belligerante.]

Qui asserunt eum quem Deus movet ad actum bunc necessario aut illum necessario
agere, Alij vero pertendunt nulla proprie dicta necessitate illum ad agendum
impelli.

Verbis quidem discrepant, idem autem reipsa se^tiunt, Blank de Libertat.
Absol. These. 22. See his proof following.


They deny the Unregenerate to have any power to believe, repent or to do any
good: And so they feign God to command men things impossible, and to condemn
men for that as Sin which they could not possibly avoid, and for not doing that
which they could no more do than make a World; and so to put men under a
necessity of sinning and being damned.


B. This is in sense the same with that about Liberty foregoing, though under
the other notion (of Power.) But the truth is, it is the very core and true sum
of all our Controversies, and if I prove this to be nothing but words, I shall
prove them all so, about the four first Articles.

I will here take it for granted that you speak not of any mere Passive or
Obediential Power (as it is called) but of a proper active Power, and that truly
so called, and not only hypothetically on supposition of things to make it up,
which are not existent, nor to be supposed.

I know of nothing in the Soul of man for our enquiry, but 1. The
natural-faculties, or virtues, inclined naturally to their necessary Objects.
2. The right disposition, or adventitious inclination or habits of these
faculties. 3. And the Acts. Tell me first, Do you know of any more?


A. Not that I can remember.


B. It is therefore the Faculties or Dispositions that we differ about, or
nothing: (For it is not the Acts). Tell me then, Quest. 1. Do you ^now of any
that deny all men's Souls to have the three faculties of Active, Power or Life,
Intellection and Volition (which the Thomists say are Accidents immediately and
inseparably emaning from the Essence; and the Scotists better say, are the very
formal Essence of the Soul it self,) without one of which a man is no man?


A. No, none doubt of this in sense, though some number them as three, and some
but as two.


B. Do we differ about the second? Do you believe that a Drunkard has the
habit of Sobriety, or a Fornicator of Chastity, or at least, that an ungodly
man has a holy habit or disposition to love God, and trust him above all, and
to believe in Christ, and repent of Sin, and live in Holiness.


A. No; no man says that he has such a habit: But he has a power to do them,
though not a habit.


B. Is it any thing that you call a power besides the natural faculties, and
their habits or dispositions?


A. No: but the natural faculty is still a power to believe, love God, live
holily, etc. without a habit.


B. Do you not believe that an ungodly man is disposed, yea habituated to the
contrary, viz. To a fleshly and worldly mind and life, and against a life of
Faith and holy Love?


A. Yes: at least some are: And I will not deny Original Sin, and therefore
grant such a dispositive pravity in all, though not so much as in some is
superadded: But yet these ill dispositions and habits are not so strong, but
that the Sinner can for all that believe and repent, etc.


B. No doubt but if he believe not, it is not for want of natural faculties. He
has an Intellect, a Will and a vital and executive power; And these all have
that force or strength of natural activity which is necessary to Faith, Love,
and every holy Duty: For these are the unalterable Essence (or Properties) of
man as man; And if Sin deprived us of them, it should change our Species; And
if Grace gave them, it should restore our Species, and we should be men by
Grace only, and not by Nature. But you confess that these powers want their
right disposition to act.


A. But yet I say that this undisposed ill-disposed Soul, is able to act
contrary to its accidental disposition.


B. I tell you once for all, that the shaming and ending of all the
Controversies between the Synodists and moderate Arminians (or Jesuits) lies
in the true opening of the ambiguity of this one syllable [Can]. And unhappy is
the Church when its Pastors have neither skill nor love enough, to forbear
torturing and distracting it, by one poor ambiguous syllable, not understood by
the Contenders. But to compel you to conviction,

Quest. 1. Do you mean by [Can] or [Able] or [Power] any thing besides the
natural faculty and the disposition?


A. No: I mean the natural faculty as related to this Act or Object now in
question, e. g. believing and loving God.


B. Quest. 2. Is not natural strength or power a thing belonging to man as man,
which Sin destroys not, and Grace restores not. And have not all the
Churches disowned Illyricus Be^a angrily calls him Turpis iste Illyricus, and
Peucer, and Strigelius, and other Disciples of Melanchthon have defended the
moral causation of Grace against him and such Lutherans, who went too much the
other way.
though a very learned, laborious, godly Divine, for making Original Sin the
substance of the Soul it self?


A. All this is granted you.


B. Quest. 3. Therefore if Adam had natural power to love God, and if the
sanctified have it yet, does it not follow that all men have it? Because it
belongs to man as man, and is not changed by Sin and Grace, except in its
Dispositions and Acts?


A. Thus you make all the wicked able to love God.


B. Yes; As to that sort of Ability which is but the natural faculty they are
all able; but there is somewhat else they want.


A. But the Name [Power] you confess your self is Relative to something that is
to be done, or to an Act with its Object; And when the natural faculty is not
changed, but is the same in all men, yet the Relation of [Power] in it may be
changed; as by a change of the Object, Casp. Peucer Histor. Carcerum against
the Lutherans physical motion, asserteth page 720. That Concurrentibus in
conversione his tribus causis, verbo, spiritu S. and volantate hominis,
agentibus suo loeo and ordine viribus in homint, quamqam ex se and natura sua
prorsus invalidis ad spiritualia, rationalibus tamen and inter se
differentibus, eoque ordine quo conditae sun^ a sp. sancto per media verbi and
sacramentorum in ordinato and Legitimo singulorum usu, ut in audit^ verbi cum
attentione and meditatione vir^ute sua efficaci singulis excitis liberrime,
sine coactionis, impulsu and rapt^, and nova luce accensa in mente nova vero
virtute voluntati communicata, etc.

Qui assentiuntur and obsequ^ntur spiritui sancto virtute ejusdem id faciunt,
non tamen sine action, motu and annixu, Id. p. 722. Still note that the Grace
called sufficient is that which gives the Power without the Act: Therefore as
many things concur to denominate us able, so do they to sufficiency of Grace:
Malderus in 12. qu. 111. ^. 3. d. 3. says, [Recte quidam eruditus annotavit,
neque praedicationem, aut excitationem externam, neque internam illuminationem
intellectus simpliciter esse gratiam sufficientem, quamvis in s^o genere
quaeque sufficiens dici potest, etc. sed voluntas per boni affectus
aspirationem supernaturali motione excitanda est.

Our Bradward. shortneth all the Controversy, li. 13. cor. p. 208, 109.
telling us that Gods Will is the cause of every future, (and so of the future
form of sin) and that if there were no God, there would be no Impossible:
Whereas I think there would be nothing but impossibles. For it would be
impossible that any thing should ever be. But there would be no propositions de
impossibili: Nay, he talks of a non-posse esse impossible, and calls this
mirum corrollarium. Adrian Quodl. 3. fol. 16. [Quis duplicitur potest crederese
a peccatis abstinere non posse: 1. Quod non posset sine speciali Dei gratia and
adjutorio and sic non errat. 2. Absolute credendo se non abstinere posse a
peccata, aut non posse ad vitandum peccata a Deo sufficiens auxilium impetra^^,
etiamsi fecerit quod in se est. Et hic error est species infidelitatis opposita
fidei, ad quam obligatur credendo Deum just, pie and miscricorditer mundum
gubernare: Illi-enim manifestissime repugnat, apud nunquemque sanae mentis Deum
homini imputare ad culpam ad quod vitandum nec dedit, nec dare paratus est
sufficientem facultatem; homini inquam facienti totum quod in se est.


medium, helps, concauses, etc.


B. You say true: But remember still that this is from no change in the natural
faculty, as you confess: For it was never in any man a power, e. g. to act
without dependence on God, nor to act without an Object in Specie, nor to act
on an incongruous incapable Object, nor without a due medium, and necessary
concauses. Now if you mean that the change is not on man's faculties, but on the
Objects, Medium, Causes, etc. that men do not love God while unholy, you are
notoriously mistaken. For it is Sin that hinders. And God is the same God,
and Christ the same Christ, and the Word the same, and often the preaching the
same to a Believer and an Unbeliever. So that though outward helps and
hindrances do much, the inward cause is most considerable. And if all were
right within, it were no sin in us to be disabled by outward changes; It is no
sin not to hear without a Preacher, or not to see that which is invisible, or
not to understand that which is not Intelligible, or not to love that which is
not Amiable, or that which is by distance or unfit mediums made no Object of
our Acts; no more than not to touch the Moon, or not to see into the bowels of
the Earth. Therefore though it is true that the Will is related as a power to
capable Objects, and not as a power to things that by incapacity are no
Objects; yet the change that is made on it self by Sin and Grace, does not make
it no power and a power in this natural essential sense. It is one thing that
is called natural power or faculty, and another thing that is called, Aright
disposition or habit: Therefore as to the first, the Soul of every man has a
true natural power to repent, believe and love God, and they omit it not for
want of natural power, but of something else.


A. Call it then a moral power if you will.


B. We must so call it: But you must know what that is. It is not a power of
the same sort with the natural power. The very word [Power] is equivocal or
analogous to them. Else Grace should increase the Essence of the Soul, or make
a man to be more a man, than he was before. And Dr. Twisse derideth the
Arminians for saying that potentia fundatur in potentia, viz. Moralis in
naturali, which were very just if it were powers of the same kind that were
spoken of; but now being otherwise it is unjust: for no doubt but potentia
moralis is in potentia naturali, as health is in the Body.

Quest. 4. But I further ask you, Do you think that any men do now in an
unregenerate state love God above all, and live a holy heavenly life, yea or
effectually and savingly believe, by the mere power of their natural faculties,
till they are changed?


A. No; that is a contradiction; to be unholy and holy. I am none of those
Pelagians that make Grace unnecessary to man's cure.


B. Are you not convinced then that where the natural power is existent,
something is wanting without which the acts of Holiness will not be performed?
Tell me then what that is?


A. That which is wanting to a man that has sufficient Grace, is nothing but
his own Concurrence or Will; For without any special Grace differing from
sufficient he can believe. But that which is wanting to them that have it not,
is sufficient Grace it self for believing, which they want for abusing the
antecedent Grace sufficient for preparation.


B. We speak not now of Grace as efficient, ex part Dei agentis; But of Grace
as it is in us, or an effect of the former: what is it in man that is wanting
to believing? Is it a natural Power, or a right Disposition, or what?


A. Till a man have sufficient Grace to believe, it is proper strength or power
it self that he wants, and sufficient Grace is such a power: But when he has
it, he wants nothing but the Act, which he can excite and does not.


B. I confess I find Arminius, Arnoldus, Corvinus, and others granting, that
all men are unable to believe till Grace enable them, and more than so, says
Arnoldus, There is more strength or power necessary now to believe in Christ,
than was necessary to Adam to keep all the Law, partly because of the
mysteriousness of Faith, and partly because we must first be restored to a new
ability, which requires more power than to keep what we had. (A sly
equivocation, turning the question from the potentia operata to the potentia
operans: If it did require more power in the efficient so to renew us, it
follows not, that he thereby puts more power into us than Adam had: But
Gods Power has no degrees.) But that which I ask you, is, whether this new
power given by sufficient Grace, be of the same Species with our natural
powers, or of some other.


A. What if I say, It is of the same sort.


B. Then (as I have hinted) you must make the Soul to have either two orders of
natural powers of the same Species, one founded or subjected in the other
(which is it that Dr. Twisse derideth;) or else indeed to have two Souls, (For
I have elsewhere at large proved with the Scotists that the faculties are
essential to the Soul;) or else you must make the specific powers of the Soul
to have degrees, and Souls to be augmented, and so that they have more Soul
that have Grace than they that have none, and so Grace is a kind of generation
or augmentation of Souls.


A. What if I say that it is of another Species?


B. Then we must consider what it is. Is it of a superior Species or
subordinate, or coordinate? If you say with some Friars and Fanatics, that it
is the Spirit of God in Essence, or God himself, it would be Omnipotency. If it
be not any created Spirit or Substance, (which would alter our Species, or make
each one two) it must be an Accident (as all confess it is, and therefore not
ejusdem speciei with the faculties that are essential:) And if so, tell us what
this power is?


A. The Soul of man is it self so little known to it self, that we cannot
easily tell what its natural powers be (as the difference between Thomas and
the Scotists shows:) much less can we tell how to conceive aright of the
quiddity of the Accidents of a Soul, who know so little of the Accidents of
Bodies, or of Bodies themselves. Let me hear what your own conceptions are of
the matter, if they tend to elucidate or reconcile.


B. He that will take up with the bare words, [Can] or [Cannot] and confess
that he knows not what they signify, should not with the blind confidence of
too many Contenders, trouble the peoples ears in Pulpits, and set them on fire
against one another, and by raving distract the Churches of Christ, with such
[Can's] and [Cannot's] [Able] and [Unable.] And yet this one poor word is the
Granade or Fire-Ball. If I pretend to understand it no more than you, yet I
will be ashamed to vex and ensnare men's Souls with what I understand not; but
will use the easiest intelligible words. But to answer your desires distinctly.

1. The Soul is, as you say, so little known to it self, that no man living, I
think, has a true formal conception of, that first accident or effect which it
receives from Gods Spirit, nor yet of the true nature of a habit or
disposition following it. He that reads but what our Metaphysics and
Schoolmen have said of Habits, will find this to be true; and that their
quiddity is past his understanding. To say that they are qualities by which we
are prompt to act, is but to name a general notion no better understood than
the quaesitum, (Quality); and to name the effect (promptitude) and not the form
or thing it self.

II. The nature of fire seems to be a kind of likeness to Spirits. And in
this sensible thing we cannot tell what it is that is added by excitation and
incension. And they that talk of generation of fire, know not what generation
signifies: whether the production of a new simple substance that before was
nothing? or the introduction of a new form into a pre-existent substance, by
mixture, or how? or only a new motion? or if they say, It is a generation of
new Qualities, they know not what the word [Quality] signifies. But this much
is apparent, that whether it be done by Collision or however, to kindle a spark
or latent fire into a flame or incendium, is to excite a pre-existent active
nature; And this excitation is by motion. And as we have some (very defective)
conception what motion received is, in Bodies, and how by contact when it
comes from force, motus motum causat, and vis per motum vint quandam imprimit;
so by some Analogy, we may conceive how Spirits move Spirits: and such as is
the (unexpressible) action of one Spirit on another, such is the thing thereby
imprinted and received; A kind of spiritual motus. And as in bodily motion the
first thing received is the very thing moved by contact, qua talis, as it self
in motion, or act; so Spirits sno modo seem, qua agentes and attingentes
transcendently, to be the first received by the moved Spirits; And the second
thing the vis impressa, and thence follows the ipse motus. But if it to this
day (most certainly) surpass the wits of the greatest Philosophers, formally to
conceive what it is that adhereth to the res mota to contiue its motion, and
what that is that is called Vis impressa, and in what subject it moves the
projectum, etc. (For the Cartesian fancy that motus inceptus nunquam cessabit
nisi impeditus, either tells us nothing of the continued cause, or supposes
moveri to be no effect, and to need no more cause than negatio motus, which is
unworthy a confutation), what wonder then if it surpass the conception of all
mortal men to know what that spiritual Vis impressa on a Soul is? But whatever
it is, this much is the best notion that we can have of that which the Divine
Action first communicates, that it is influxus Dei Receptus; vel excitatio
facultatum exe^^ata, as distinct from excitatio Dei excitans; It is passive
excitation, or a spiritual Vis impressa, whence Action follows.

III. But it has also a similitude to the Agent in more than simple motion,
Even as the Sun or Fire does kindle fire on combustible matter (which had also
a latent fire before, or else it is not combustible); which is not (as the
Cartesians feign, by motion alone, but by the operation of a threefold virtue
in the Sun, viz. the motive, lucid and calefactive, producing the same in the
Receiver: so the Spirit of God does in this excitation at once communicate to
the three faculties of the Soul, an impressed force for Vital-activity,
Intellection and Volition; so that the three natural faculties by this received
impress and excitation are suscitated to holy Activity, Knowledge and Love; the
habit of which is holy Life, and Light, and Love abiding.

For it is certain that it is not one only, but all the faculties of the Soul
that are vitiated by Sin, and therefore all that must be repaired by
sanctifying Grace. The Vital-active-power (as it is a faculty of the rational
Soul) is as it were sleepy, dead and impotent, and must be quickened with
spiritual life and strength. The Intellect is dark, and must be illuminated.
The Will is carnal and unholy, and must be turned from the Flesh to God by
mortification and by holy love. And all this the Holy Ghost does by Action, but
not mere Action in genere, but by a suitable communicative Action, quickening,
illuminating and converting, or touching the Soul with love.

IV. The first effect of this received Influx It is a great dispute among the
Schoolmen, whether Grace and Theological Virtues (Faith, Hope and Love,) do
really differ? says Malderus in 1. 2. Tho. q. 110. a. 3. p. 472. [Non
distingui, opinio est magistri -- quem sequ^nt^r Scotus Alexand. Alber.
Richard. Gabr. Durand. Vega, Bellarm. a: ii. Inter quos tamen ea est
diversitas, quod Durandus teneat distingui solo nomine Gratiam and Charitatem:
Alii dicant, distingui sola ratione, non realiter aut formaliter, aut secundum
speciem: Alii dicant formaliter distingui, ut sint species qualitatis diversae;
ita tamen ut non sint duae res -- Realiter autem ut duae res distingui est
opinio Tho^^ae, Bonavent. Valent. Suarez, etc.

Et ipse Malderus opinatur Gratiam esse Donum spir. sancti Charitati praevium:
Et non potentiis sed in ipsa anim^ essentia immediate implantatum: and quod
virtus postea disponet potentias secundum inclinationem naturae: and ita
antequam Charitatis virtute elevetur voluntas stabiliter ad hunc amorem
consentaneum est ipsam animae substantiam prius natura elevari ad ejusmodi
inclinationem per habitum aliquem non voluntati, sed sibi proxime inbaerentem.]
Here is a venturous Conjecture, and such as may tell you that these men make
not Grace to be natural; when besides all the habits of Faith, Hope, Love, and
other Virtues or Graces in the Mind and Will, they hold a general habit or holy
inclination in the Essence of the Soul, and not in the faculties, which
differs from Love and other such Virtues, as (they think) the faculties of
the Soul differ from the Essence (as he after explains it): and is it that is
called, The Holy Ghost and the Divine Nature in us: which is the same that Mr.
Pemble held: An influx received from God before our Acts I acknowledge: And
that this received impress some way disposes the Soul to the following Act;
and that Infants themselves may have such a holy disposition, and that this is
some reparation or sanctification of nature: and if there be more I oppose not
what I understand not: But the word Habit most properly belongs to particular
habits of this or that Act: (as Faith, Love, etc.) And whether you will call
this Grace a general Habit or a Nature, I contend not: But I think that the
founding it in the Essence and not in the Faculties, falsely supposes the
Faculties not to be the Essence; And I think that it differs from the
particular Habits or Graces, but as the natural power or ingenious disposition
of an Infant does differ from his said ingenuity when it is improved into
habits; which I think are not another thing, but the same disposition advanced
and perfected. But of this let each man think as he can.

Bradwardine cuts short all the Controversy, and says, [That as without Gods
special Grace, Free Will cannot overcome any Temptation at all, so that
special Grace is (besides all that is created) Gods own Will that he shall
overcome it. So that by this no man can do any more than he does, or than God
wills or decrees that he do. And so by his Opinion, effectual Grace is Gods
Essence as decreeing, willing the effect; Lib. 2. c. 4, 5, 6, 7. Yea he says,
that no man that is not tempted can avoid any sin, without this special Grace,
which is Gods Will that he shall avoid it.] But this opinion is rare: Gods Will
is his Essence and in it self simple and unchangeable. Indeed no good will be
done but what he wills: But the question is, whether he does not both will
and give much true proper power to do that which is never done? and so whether
he that wills not Good, or hates it, do it always for want of power to do
better. Gods Will as immanent, and considered in it self only a Will, does not
create or cause ad extra: But his Will as productive or really causing, which
we call his active or executive power (and he denies it not to be productive,
though he deny it to be any thing but Volition, de nomine). And if this be all,
then the questions of the nature and efficacy of Grace are ended; and Grace ex
part Dei is nothing but his Will, what shall be, and a production of it by
willing it; and in the effect it is nothing but the being of what he so wills
(Act or Habit).

So l. 2. c. 13. he says, [That the A^xil^um sine quo nullus perseverat, and
per quod quilibet perseverat, est spiritus sanctus, Divina Bonitas and
Voluntas,] (where he seems to hold that Dei Bonitas and voluntas is the Holy
Ghost, the third Person.) And l. 2. c. 9. p. 498. he labors to prove that no
Angel or Man (in Innocence) can by the greatest Grace before his Fall persevere
a moment without Gods special help, that is, Gods Will that he shall so do. So
that the necessitating cause why one Angel stood and another sinned, and why
Adam sinned, is, because God willed it. And though he hold that Adam could not
stand because God willed it not, yet he holds also that God positively willed
it; not seeing that he had made that needless. Read but Ruiz de Vol. Dei
copiously, proving that God wills the Salvation of them that are never saved,
and you will see that no Protestants more differ herein than the Papists do
among themselves. And there is no reconciliation with them that hold that
nothing is possible but what is future, or no man can do any thing but what he
does.


or vis impressa that we know of, is, The Act excited it self. It is Action
that God does suscitate the Soul to, and Action next follows.

V. As there is a difference between a Spark, or Candle, and a great incendium
or flaming-fire; so is there a mavelous difference between the Souls Actions
(upon the same Object and of the same kind) in the degrees: As we perceive by
daily experience. In a dream, the same thoughts stir us not up to execution, as
when we are awake will do it. And a man that hears a cold Preacher, and
coldly thinks over all the same Truths, and mentions them, and subscribeth
and professes them (as of the evil of particular sins, the need of Christ and
Mercy, etc.) yet feels no power in them; nor will all his knowledge overcome
a small Temptation, or set him upon Duty; but he knows, and thinks, and
talks, as if he did it not. And at another time, when his Soul is suscitated
or awakened to seriousness, the same thoughts wholly take him up, and make him
wonder at his former stupidity, and command his life with great facility.

VI. Experience tells us that usually this effectual suscitation of the Soul
to more powerful lively apprehensions and Volitions is done by a suitable
external means: As by a more clear and lively awakening Ministry, by some
notable Providence, especially by surprising sufferings and distress. A Thief
when he is taken, or judged, a Fornicator when he is found in the shame of his
Sin, a Prodigal in Jail or want, a Drunkard or Glutton when he is brought by it
to the Gout or other pain and sickness, etc. have quite other apprehensions
usually of the folly of sinning, than ever you could bring them to before, by
any other the certainest convictions.

VII. As we are certain by experience that the Acts called Intellection and
Volition now, are such operations of the Soul as ever stir and use the Spirits,
and we perceive both together as if it were a compound operation, and know not
by experience what any Knowledge or Volition is which uses not the Spirits; so
we find by true experience, that the suscitation of the said Spirits (or
igneous particles) in us, much conduces to the suscitation of the faculties of
the Soul: By which fervent speaking, and awakening Providence do much: And
also that they that have clear and quick Spirits, are easiliest awakened.

VIII. We find also by experience, that the internal sensitive faculty has a
great share in these effectual operations: For the certainest apprehensions of
the Intellect, work but defectively on the Will, unless they are accompanied
with, or stir up some Sense, Affection or Passion; either Fear, Hope, Love,
Desire, Delight, Anger, or some other proper passion. And Volitions themselves
are but sluggish uneffectual Acts, as to the imperium or command of the
executive Powers or Thoughts, unless they stir up some Passion to their aid;
And therefore lifeless wishes are common with sluggish and unreformed men.

IX. The Spirit of God can, and we have reason to think, sometime does stir up
the faculties of the Soul to holy Cogitations, Apprehensions and Volitions,
without any other means, known to us, than what the person before used
uneffectually: And when means are effectual to sanctifying Acts, it is
principally by the operation of the Holy Ghost, and less principally the
aptitude of the means.

X. The first received influx ad actum is not it which we call a Habit: For a
Habit is a fixed promptitude to act.

XI. An habit in the Intellect is skill, or intellectual promptitude to Act
rightly and easily. An habit in the Will, is inclination, and love it self
radicated, or aversation and radicated hatred. And a habit in the vital
executive Power, is a promptitude and vivacity to the right executing of the
Wills commands (and first exciting it to act).

XII. A habit infused is of the same Species with acquired habits, though it be
otherwise caused, and of a more excellent use. And in both we have reason to
think that the Act goes before the Habit; Though the Holy Ghost can fix a
Habit by one Act, when acquired Habits are caused but by custom or many Acts.

XIII. In the strict sense, as Acts so Habits are specified by their Objects,
and are not found but in such Species: But in a larger sense and less proper we
may say that there are more universal Habits, not denominated at all from any
sort of Objects, that is, the right Diposition of the Soul to its due
operations: But this is but an inadequate universal conception of the same
Habit, and not another thing I think.

XIV. A habit of the Intellect about Principles is a Disposition to the
knowledge of conclusions or consequents: And a habit of the Will ad finem, is a
Disposition to the choice and use of the known means; but not strictly a habit
to them.

XV. Motion tends to further motion. One Act of the Soul disposes it to or
furthereth another: And as water that has got a Chanel and is set in motion,
flows still the same way, and fire by burning, the more forcibly proceeds
to burn; so the Soul by acting, the more readily holds on that course of
action.

XVI. The Soul has at once more Acts than one, and upon more Objects. As at
once it understands and wills, so at once it operateth on and toward the
end, and on and in the means. But one of them (specially ad finem) is usually
deep, and not observed sensibly by the Agent; And the other is uppermost, and
using the sense and fantasy more, and the Spirits, is easily perceived. And so
a man in his travel, has a deep unobserved but most constant and ruling
Knowledge and Volition of his end or home; though yet he seem to himself seldom
to think of it, but only of things obvious in his way.

XVII. By all this its easy to perceive how hard it is to have the formal
knowledge of the quiddity of a Habit: when we have presupposed all this
before-said, 1. That the Soul is essentially of an active nature, and as
naturally contrary or averse to cessation or non-action as a stone is to
action: 2. And that it has inseparably in its nature, an inclination to Truth
and Goodness as such, and to its own felicity: 3. And that it has multitudes
of exciting Objects, and extraordinarily awakening Preachers, and Providence,
specially dangers and sufferings, naturally apt to excite the Soul into act: 4.
And that it has the use of the sense, and sensitive passions, which things
sensible are apt to excite, by which it may be it self excited: 5. And that it
has a certain degree of necessity of knowing by simple perception things
received by the sense and fantasy; men may know much of Good and Evil, Duty,
Sin, Danger, whether they will or not: 6. And that the Will has a natural
inclination to follow the Intellects apprehensions about Good or Evil, in its
Volitions and Nolitions (though not always necessarily:) 7. And that the Soul
excited to one Act is the more apt to another of the same sort: 8. And that a
cursus actionum with the foresaid inclinations, is like a course of corporal
motions, which strongly tends to continuation; (so that they that are
accustomed to do evil, hardly do well:) 9. And that the potentiae secundae, the
sensitive powers, and the Spirits by custom attain the same propensity to that
way of action in themselves, and so become to the active Intellect and Will,
what the Chanel (worn by course) is to the Torrent or River, which with the
natural gravity causes the continuance of its course that same way: Or as a
Horse, trained by custom who has got his own peculiar habit is to the Rider:
10. And that the Soul has its profound, or not noted Action which is constant,
and makes so little use of the spirits, sense, imagination or passion, as that
it is unobserved, while it is predominant, (such as is the aforesaid intention
of the end in the use of means: And doubtless the Soul is never unactive an
instant, no not in sleep; but has this kind of deep insensible action. It is
knowing it self, loving it self, intending its own Felicity, deeply, secretly,
insensibly, without using the memory and imagination, to the Act; and this deep
insensible Act is such, as that a man may doubt whether it be not the very
thing which we call a habit:) I say now, all these ten things being presupposed
(which yet are none of them commonly taken to be the habit of Grace,) How hard
is it to us to know, what a habit is indeed beyond all these, and what it is
that it adds to these? We are sure that it is a Disposition, Propensity and
Aptitude to holy Action in Specie; But what that Disposition and Propensity is,
besides all this forenamed, it is not easy to understand. And yet undoubtedly
it is the Operation of the Holy Ghost.

XVIII. How hard then must it be to know how much Power, or what kind of Power
(and in what sense so called) it is that this superadded habit contains,
beside all the ten forementioned excitations and propensities? And whether it
be properly called Power, and how it differs from the potentiae naturales?

XIX. But yet our great Disputes being more about the first act of Faith, which
antecedeth the habit, than about any of the acts that follow the habit, the
case will be yet harder, what that Power is which the Holy Ghost gives before
the habit of Faith, as to the performance of that particular act. That it
suscitateth the natural ^aculty to act is certain: Therefore in order of nature
it must be disposed or inclined to that act, before it act. That the Soul
receives the Divine influx is certain: But no mortal man knows what that is.
We commonly conclude that ex part Dei it is nothing but God himself. By God
himself is meant his Act; By his Act is meant his Essence as in Act: But how
his Essence is always immutably in equal Act, and yet produces a world in
time, which it produced not from eternity, and how the equal Act or Agency of
the Essence is natural, necessary and eternal, and the Effect free; How the
Volition is necessary in se, and yet free in every termination and effect ad
extra; How a natural-equal-eternal Agency, can produce such wonderful diversity
of Effects; And how Souls are said to receive Gods Influx, if it be nothing but
his Agent Essence; All these are past the reach of Mortals.

XX. And it adds to these difficulties that we are uncertain what use it is
that God makes of Angels in operating on the Soul. They are ministering Spirits
for the good of them that are Heirs of Salvation, about the matters of their
Salvation. It is absurd to think that Devils (whose very powerful Operations on
our imagination we surely feel,) have more power to put evil thoughts into us,
and stir up evil passions in us, than Angels good ones. And seeing a Spirit is
more active than a Body, they that take the Sun to be a Body, and perceive that
its Beams and Virtue, of Light, and Heat, and Motion, is extended to this Earth
and incomparably further in a minuite, should not take an Angel to be like a
stone or staff, that moves no where but where it corporally touches, and is
no where, but where it moves.

XXI. And all Motion and Action has so many impediments in the world, and all
Active Natures (as fire) have so strong a natural inclination to act when they
are not hindered by a greater Power, that we little know how much of the action
of the Soul is promoted by removing impediments, internal and external: As they
that dam up the water all ways save one, do force it to rise, (if it be a
stream) till it flow that one way. Embittering all other things to a Soul, does
much to turn its thoughts toward God; and despair of any delight or felicity
on Earth, makes Heaven regarded.

XXII. Seeing all naturally-necessary Concauses, Objects, Media are supposed to
the Ratio formalis of Power, (which is Relative ad possibile) he that gives or
takes away any one of those necessaries, does give or take away Power, though
he never change the Soul or faculty at all. And this is called A moral
collation or causation of Power (not a moral Power). As when a man brings a
Light into a dark Room, he enableth us to see; or if he bring in a Book, he
enableth me to read that which else I could not have read: If he open the
Windows, or if he cure me of blindness, by cutting a Suffusion, etc. So he that
preaches the Gospel to them that had not heard it, and God when he gave Christ
and the Gospel to be an Object of Faith, did make the natural faculty to be
more in sensu naturali, potentiam ad hoc, to which before it was no power, but
hypothetically only.

XXIII. The Will is not a Power of choosing or willing an unknown good:
Therefore it may be truly said to be naturally unable to will that which the
Intellect perceives not to be good. And he that gives knowledge to such a
Mind, does truly give more power to the Will, as the loss of knowledge* is its
loss of power. Though the Will it self should receive no habitual alteration by
it.

XXIV. We must not conceive of the suscitation of an active nature, as we do of
the motion of dead matter, which is merely passive: But as of that which is
passive indeed from God and superior Causes, but active in it self, and on
inferiors; (And I think like the Sun beams, passive from no lower nature, save
by stop or resistance of its own activity.)

XXV. As the Scotists distinguish Passive (Receptive) Power, into natural
(which is naturally disposed to the form received), and violent (which is
averse or opposite to the form) or neutral (which is indifferent), and affirm
the Soul to have the first sort of passive power (natural) to the love of God
and supernatural felicity; so the distinction is sound, and their assertion is
true as to the nature of the Soul in it self considered, (for it was made to
love God). But accidentally by reason of adventitious pravity, it is but
potentia passiva violenta: for the the carnal mind is enmity to God, and
neither is nor can be subject to his Law. So that it is both natural and
violent in several respects.

XXVI. As for the great question, what is a moral Power? I answer, 1. Power may
be called Moral ab objecto, because it is ad mores, and so our natural power is
moral, and actus humanus and actus moralis are often put for Synonima's.

2. Power may be called moral from the way of effecting it. And so our natural
Powers also are moral; not in the Essence of the Soul, but in the Relative form
of the power in specie vel individuo ad hoc objectum: For he that causes or
reveals the Object, does by moral causation give us a natural power ad hoc.

3. Power is called moral, formally; In that of it self it is a moral Virtue or
Vice, Good or Evil: which yet could not be true if it were but mere power: For
morality consists formally and primarily in the Will or Voluntary: And to be
able to do Good or Evil, as such, is not formally any moral Good or Evil, (but
natural): But Disposition is.

4. Power is called Moral, Analogically and Reputatively, as causa finalis is
said to cause, when it is called a moral cause, and the operation metaphorical,
or as he is called a moral cause who persuades to the End or Object. And so we
take the word [Moral Power] in our question. And so the received Impress or
Influx of Divine Agency, as also the habits of Grace in the Soul, are an
Analogical Power; because they are necessary to the natural powers performance
of the Act: And so the suscitation (as received) of a dormant active power, may
be called Analogically a Power: And the right disposition of a power may be
called a power: And the deep fore*described Action of the Soul, may be called a
power to other sensible Acts.

XXVII. Next to this moral power, is potentia logica which is but the name of
Power given extrinsically from some other thing, without which the effect will
never be, though it be possible, and the Causes have power sufficient. And the
name of Impossibility de effectu is oftener and more tollerably here used, than
of impotency as in the cause. So we say that whatsoever God wills or decrees
is possible, and what he nilleth absolutely is impossible: And thence some say,
That God can do it because be will, and he cannot do what he will not: And so
we say, that in sens^ composito an undisposed or averse Will cannot love or
will aright; when perhaps no more than a Logical impotency is meant, viz. That
these two Propositions cannot possibly be both true [Judas is undisposed to
Love and Justice] and [Judas at the same time does exercise Love and Justice]
speaking of a predominant disposition. And this is but a denomination of the
same sense, as necessitas consequentiae vel logica is, as distinct from
necessitas consequentis vel effecti. And so we say, that he that is
fore-decreed, yea or fore-known to be good cannot be bad: The meaning is not
that he wants true power to be bad: But that in ordine dicendi these two
cannot possibly be true, [Peter is decreed by God, or fore-known to be a
Saint,] and [Peter will not be a Saint]. And this logical impossibility is
meant often in Scripture, as Joh. 12. 39. Therefore they could not believe,
because that Isaiah says, etc. not that this hindered them: but logically de
consequentia, both these could not be true [that Esaia's Prophecy should be
true, and yet that the Person prophesied of should be Obedient]. And so the
words [the Scripture must be fulfilled] and [that the Scriptures might be
fulfilled] are often used, as to the inference.

XXVIII. Thus by extrinsick denomination and connotation, impotency is often
imputed to the Agent from the incapacity of the Recipient: As it is said, Mark
6. 5. That Christ could do no mighty work there, because of their unbelief:
When as this was not from a disability in Christ to have done it, if he would:
But here it is first supposed that God has ordinately fore-decreed to do no
such Works, but where the persons were so qualified as to be capable of them;
And then that the persons there were unqualified: And so the Effect was
logically impossible, in sensu composito. Thus we say, That [God cannot save
Unbelievers, he cannot hear the prayers of the Wicked, he cannot forsake the
Faithful]: that is, [His Ordination and Decree supposed, logically such a thing
cannot consist with it in verity.]

XXIX. When something else, and not impotency, does ascertain an event, by
omission, or something besides Power ascertaineth the contrary efficiently, yet
the effect is often denominated possible or impossible, and ascribed to Power or
Impotency, by a conjunction of this moral and logical denomination. So we say,
That [Gods pure eyes cannot behold Iniquity, that God cannot love the Workers
of Iniquity as such.] Not for want of Power, but by reason of his perfect Will
and Nature. So God cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. And it is impossible for God to lie.
God cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. God cannot be tempted with evil, Jam. 1.
13. So Joh. 10. 35. The Scripture cannot be broken. Isa. 1. 13. Your Assemblies
I cannot away with. No wonder also if this be said of men: As, 1. Joh. 3. 9. He
cannot sin, because he is born of God. Not for want of power, but partly he
will not, and partly logically these cannot consist. So of the wicked, Joh. 7.
7. The World cannot hate you --.

XXX. Often times the word [Cannot] is taken politically, I cannot, that is, I
must not, or I cannot lawfully: Quod turpe, impossible. Genesis 19. 22. I cannot
do any thing, till thou be come out. Act. 10. 47. Can any man forbid water,
etc. that is, lawfully. 2 Cor. 13. 8. [We can do nothing against the Truth,]
that is, by Authority from God.

XXXI. Often times in Scripture the word [Cannot] is meant only of that which a
man cannot do without suffering, or loss, or difficutly. So Act. 4. 16. We
cannot deny it,] that is, without the shame of falsehood. Luke 14. 20. I cannot
come,] that is, without such inconvenience as I am unwilling to bear. Jer. 29.
17. They cannot be eaten,] that is, without loathing. 1 Samuel 25. 17. He is such
a Son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him,] that is, without
inconvenience by it. 2 Samuel 23. 6. They cannot be taken with hands,] that is,
without hurt. Genesis 34. 14. We cannot do this thing,] that is, without God.

XXXII. Often times this inconvenience procuring unwillingness, this
unwillingness is named like impotency, and it is said, Men cannot, because they
will not. And so it is in diverse of the last cited instances. Joh. 3. 9. They
cannot sin,] that is, They will not. Luke 14. 20. I have married a wife, and
therefore I cannot come,] that is, I will not, because I cannot without this
inconvenience. Neh. 6. 3. I cannot come down,] that is, I will not. Genesis 44.
26. We cannot go down. Josh. 24. 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord; for he is a holy
God: that is, you are not disposed to do it holily, and then he will destroy
you. Joh. 6. 60. This is a hard saying, who can hear it?] that is, willingly.
Isa. 49. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking-Child?] that is, will she forget
it? Jer. 2. 32. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments? Mar. 2. 19. Can the Children
of the Bridegroom fast? etc. Mar. 9. 39. Can ye drink of the Cup that I drink
of, and be baptized? etc. 39. They said unto him, we can,] that is, Have you
Wills disposed for such sufferings, and will you go through them?

And this unwillingness when it is habitual and prevalent, is it that is
commonly called man's moral impotency, as to believe, love, obey, etc.

XXXIII. This impotency which is the moral pravity of the Will has diverse
degrees: And the same degree of received help from God, will not cure it in one
that will in another. The godly have some of it, and the ungodly more, and some
of them more than others. But we use to call it absolutely a moral impotency,
when the indisposition of the Soul is such, as that none such ever do believe
and consent without more help of Grace than yet they have received. And we use
to say that he is morally able, or has power, whose indisposition is not so
great nor Grace so small, but that some in that case by that same help do
believe and consent, though it be rarely. But that power is morally called
impotency, which no man ever reduces to act.

XXXIV. This moral Power is yet short both of Act and Habit; For a Habit is not
only a power to Act, but to Act promptly, and easily, and aright.

XXXV. By all this you may partly see how to answer the common questions about
men's power or impotency to believe, and to love God.


Quest. 1. Is every man able to believe, and love God?

Answ. Every man has that natural faculty, which has sufficient of that sort
of power called natural, to do it, supposing necessary concurrents.

Quest. 2. Is any man naturally able, without Divine support and concurse, and
without necessary Objects, Concauses and Media?

Answ. No: no more than to make himself an Angel. He never had such power in
Innocence.

Quest. 3. That Potentia peccandi is of God, see Aureolus in 2. d. 44. art. 2.
page 327. 328.

Utrum praecept^ supernaturalia possit bomo servare fine specia^i auxilio
gratiae? Resp. Quod non: quia ipsa neque^nt servari nisi eliciendo actus
insusarum virtutum, etc. Carera sum. Theol. 2. 2. c. 1. And what would you have
higher than his* q. 4. a. 1. An l^men supernaturale infusum fidei fit tota
virtus agendi actum fidei? Resp. Ass-Quia actus fidei est quoad omnem rationem
^odum, substantiam, denominationem, quidditatem, supernaturalis: ejus vita in
actu secundo supernaturalis, Deum and authorem supernaturalem attingens, nec
continetur intra vires and ordinem naturae, and intellectus creatus suapt^
natura est ad illam improportionatus, p. 38. 39. So other Thomists. But here
wants some explication of supernaturality.

Yea they assert (ut idem ibid. p. 39, etc.) That the Intellect has not so
much as a potentia obedientialis activa, but only passiva to the act of Faith;
but conceive that the supernatural infused Grace of Faith is as necessary to
enable the faculty to that act, as the faculty to the Essence of the Soul
therein. Though yet they grant that the Intellect is causa fidei principalis,
as the essence is which yet can do nothing but by the faculty: And thus they
make potentiam fundari in potentia, which Dr. Twisse denies.

But a hard question troubles some of the Schoolmen, seeing says is wholly
supernatural, and Gods work, and it was so in the Jews that believed that
Christ was to come; if that Faith continued in any some time after (as in
Nathanael, etc.) Whether God still caused it when it became false as he did
before? which must needs put them upon some exception: They say, How it is
fides humana, but per opporentiam divinam, and D^us omnium dominus efficere
potest ut quis ^li^^ ^ecidat fin^ pacc^^o (Idem, ibid.) But a further answer
may and must be given; which will be useful to the Case before us, when conside
ed. Of which in due place.


Is a man able to sin, if God Decree he shall not; or able to forbear sin, or
obey, if God foreknow that he will not?

Answ. Yes: for God is not supposed to decree or foresee that he shall not be
able; nay, if God foresee that he will not do what he can, it infers that
he can. But the event is a logical impossibility; that is, it is not true that
it will be.

Quest. 4. Is the Intellect truly informed, able to set right an habitually
undisposed Will?

Answ. It is able to do that toward it which on a better disposed Will would
be effectual: But not to produce the effect.

Quest. 5. Is a power not excited to Act, able to do that act?

Answ. The question is, Whether a power not excited be a power? Yes, It is a
Power, but such as will not act till excited.

Quest. 6. Is that Grace which exciteth our Powers, another second Power?

Answ. It is the excitation of a Power; or a received impulse: Call it Power or
what you will, so you trouble not the Church with a needless wrangling about a
Name, when there are others as fit.

Quest. 7. Is a Habit a Power?

Answ. It is somewhat not well known by man; But we know that it is less than
the natural Power, in point of substantiality, as being but an Accident: But it
is more than both natural and moral power, in order of perfection to the act:
For to be able and prompt is more than to be merely able.

Quest. 8. Is a hindered Power truly a Power?

Answ. If the hinderance be such as the faculty is not able to overcome, it is
not formally a power ad hoc: But otherwise it is.

Quest. 9. Can God make a man able without any change on himself, to do that
which he was unable for?

Answ. Yes: If his disability lay in the want of extrinsick Concauses, Objects,
or Media.

Quest. 10. May a mere change of the Understanding enable the Will to do what
it could not do?

Answ. Not what it had not a natural Power to do: But what it wanted but a
moral power or disposition to do; it may in two cases, 1. If God do powerfully
illuminate the Understanding, and by the Understanding powerfully operate on
the Will: Or in ordinary cases, if the understandings acts be clear and strong.
2. If the Will it self be not obstinately before ill disposed.

Quest. 11. Is an unwilling Will able to excite or change it self?

Answ. Even in the point of believing, it has natural power and liberty to act
otherwise than it does, even to turn it self from the act of Unbelief to the
act of Faith: But being undisposed and ill disposed, it will not do that which
it has a natural self-determining power to do; till God assist it or turn it
by his Grace.

Quest. 12. Can any man believe that Will?

Answ. 1. A man that knows not the Gospel, or what to believe, upon a general
rumor of it, may wish that he had it, knew it, and believed it: And yet cannot
believe it indeed, till he know what to believe. 2. A man that perceives not
the evidence of verity or credibility in the Gospel, and therefore believes it
not to be true* may for the end and matter wish he could see evidence of truth
and believe it; And yet is not able, till he see it. And a Believer that
believes it weakly, may wish to believe it more strongly than he can. 3. One
that consents not to leave his lusts for Christ, may know so much of the
wisdom and happiness of those that can consent, as to wish he had such a Will
himself, and that he were one of them: And yet may be morally unable, that is,
unwilling so to do. For it is one thing to will Christ and Holiness for it self
and God, and it is another thing to will to have such a Will. A man's own Will
may be the Object of his Will, for fear of punishment, and so he may wish that
he had a better heart, lest he be damned; when yet he loves not Holiness for
it self. In a word, 1. He that wills God, Holiness, Christ, as they are, as
better than all the World. 2. And that with a serious effectual Will, shall
have what he wills: And he that wills such a Will, as part of Gods holy
Image, and for it self, above the pleasures of his Flesh, shall have it, yea
already has it. But a man may will such a Will, yea and Christ, and God
himself, in a false notion, as minus malum, as not so bad as Hell, but less
amiable than sinful pleasures, and yet be graceless, and undisposed to believe.

The rest I pretermit.

XXXVI. The Intellect as such understands necessarily per modu^^ naturae: And
therefore as such, its disposition or indisposition is not morally good or
evil; And as it has no freedom, so these habits or dispositions are but the
accidental perfections or imperfections of a natural power, and participate of
the natural necessity of that power: But the same Intellect, so far as it is
under the power of the Will, and imperate, is the subject of moral acts and
habits; and so as secondarily moral, they are secondarily free.

XXXVII. To conclude, as Augustine says, We use in common speech to
distinguish Power and Will: and from one we say, Men are able, and can do this
or that: and from the other we say, They will or will not. And both habitual or
dispositive and actual willingness or unwillingness is not called usually
Strength or Power, but Will: The Will it self has its proper power to will,
for it is a natural faculty: But its habits and acts are better known by the
name of willingness and unwillingness, than of power. If therefore men would do
as Scripture does, usually express moral habits and acts by these their best
known names, and when we use the terms of Power, Can and Cannot, would do it so
rarely and explainedly as to be understood, that it is nothing but moral
will^ngness and unwillingness that we mean, it would do much to end all this
Controversy. For he that is puzzled with the question (unexplained) [Whether
an Unbeliever can believe, and have power to repent:] would quickly be
satisfied if the question were [Whether he be willing habitually, or actually
to believe and repent.] And he that is stalled with the question, [Can a Sinner
leave his Sin, and love Goodness?] would easily answer, [Whether he be willing
to do it?] Yea and [Whether he be disposed or inclined to it?] Yea and [Whether
he have a natural faculty of willing, which quoad potentiam naturalem can do
otherwise?]

A. You have been so tedious and numerous in your Distinctions and
Observations, that no plain man is able to follow you. Do you think that poor
Christians must be puzzled with all this, and lost in a multitude of
distinctions, before they can know the truth, Whether a man can believe and
repent, or not?


B. I expected to hear your own mouth condemn you. Quest. 1. Is there any of
these distinctions which are unnecessary to the decision of the present
Controversy? If there be, name it and lay that by. 2. Is a general and an
ambiguous term better understood by the bare ambiguous name, than by opening
the particulars contained in it, and the ambiguities? Than Catechisms, and
Commentaries, even on our baptismal Covenant, the Creed, Lords Prayer and
Decalogue, are hurtful. Do you understand your self what you mean by your
[Power] and [Can] and [Cannot Repent] without considering of the ambiguity? 3.
Will it satisfy you, if we use your words [Can] or [Cannot] what sense soever
we take them in? Is that all that you contend for? Must the Church be fired
about a word, which neither Side much stick at, could they have their sense of
it? 4. But the truth is, You open your own shame: that must trouble the ears of
honest plain Christians, with words which cannot be understood without all this
ado; and will choose such terms as have so many meanings, to confound, or
bewilder men, and that without explication; and even in strict disputes, and
not only in Oratory; when as there are plainer enough at hand, which speak the
matter as we are agreed.


A. You tell us a great deal of habits of the Will, which are more than Power
(in order to Action). But I find that some men of our Party hold, that there is
no such thing in the Soul as an habit or disposition which is not merely a
Power or an Act: They know no more.


B. The truth is, too many on the other side, who know not how much they
destroy their own work by over-doing, and use to fear but one extreme, do harp
so much upon this string, that no wicked man is able to repent, or has power
to believe, or c^n forsake his s^^* that they have ignorantly given you the
advantage which you lay hold on, 1. To call Grace still by the name of a mere
power, and 2. Then to disgrace their Opinion, who say that God damneth men for
doing that which, they are utterly unable to do.


A. What is the advantage which you think we take by this?


B. Mark what Pet. a. S. Joseph says, These. Univers. page 236. de Charit. Dare
facilitatem agendi spectat ad virtutes acquisitas, no^ autem ad infusas, quae
solam agendi potentiam ^ribuunt. So that proper habits by this are nothing but
acquired, which yet at other times he denies.

Herveus in Quodlib. 1. q. 13. unde^taketh to show the difference inter
potentiam and habitum, though habitus be potentia in a large sense as it is
taken pro omni principio activo and passivo: And he takes the substantia actus
(as it is called) to be more reducible ad potentiam, and the modu^ to the habit.
But he leaves the difference still in the dark. And Quodlib. 3. qu. 7. he is
larger of it, and says that a habit is [Dispositio potentiae pe quam
disponitur ad actum] and that it supposes a Power not sufficient to determine
it self to prompt and facile action.


The greatest that you have against your Adversaries. 1. By the first you make
Grace to be no determiner of the Will at all, habitual or actual: For Grace,
you say, gives men but a power to believe and repent* And so whether a man
will use that power or not, and will actually repent and believe or not, is
never the more ascertained for Grace, if it give men but a power. For you leave
it still to Free Will to use that power or not use it. (I speak but of some of
you.) 2. And hereby you contrive Grace into this conception, that it is but
some common thing like nature, and as a man that has power to sit, or stand,
or go, may use that power as he will himself; so all men where the Gospel
comes have a power to obey it, which they may use as they will: But to the
Will it self Grace gives but this power: And if that were true that a habit of
the Will were but a power to will, fair fall Pelagius.


A. It Is well you charge us not all with that Opinion; But I confess I am not
yet satisfied that it is false, and that the Will has any thing but power and
act: But power facilitateth the act.


B. You may say it facilitateth, because ^it makes it possible, which is
easier than that which is impossible? Is that facility? But mark.

1. If that Opinion be true, then 1. Gods inward workings are not suitable to
his outward means: For his means are Persuasions, and Exhortations, and
Mercies, and Corrections, which are not only to make men able, but willing: And
if they make them willing, they do in primo instanti dispose them to be
willing, and then procure actual willingness, and then fix the Will in an
habitual propensity.

2. If that Doctrine be true, then a habit has no moral good or evil in it, it
is no Virtue or Vice: And then there is no Virtue or Vice, that is, no such
thing as moral Habits, but only Acts. For no man should call mere power or
impotency, which is neither habitual, dispositive or actual willingness or
unwillingness, by the name of Virtue or Vice. It is not goodness merely to be
able to do good, nor evil to be able to do evil; unless as eating, walking may
be good or bad materially by participation, so far as voluntary.

3. If that Doctrine be true, the Will as a Will should be an unsanctified or
unrenewed faculty, further than it is found in action. For its disposition is
its holiness and rectitude.

4. And a man should have no Grace in his sleep, or when he is minding natural
things alone; unless you will say, as I hinted before, that sleeping and waking
he has still a Latent insensible Volition in act, which is it that we call a
habit: But if you acknowledge such a habit, (even a fixed latent deep constant
act inclining to other holy acts) the strife then is but about a name.

5. It is certain, that the Soul has in it besides power and observed acts, a
natural inseparable inclination. The form of the Soul is not only potentia, but
potentia seu vis vel virtus inclinata; Man is not only able to love good as
good, and felicity as such, and sensible Pleasure as such, but he is inclined
to it. And if there be such a thing as natural inclination or propensity,
besides power and act, then 1. It is possible and probable there may be a
gracious inclination. 2. Yea and if the whole Soul be sanctified, must not its
inclination be sanctified?

6. Why else are we said to be New Creatures, and have soft and tender hearts,
and to be made partakers of the Divine Nature? Nature in active things, is a
principle inclined to action, and not only able for it. And surely a Divine
Nature can signify no less than an inclination to holiness and the love of God.

7. Whence can you imagine that a wicked man should rise every morning so ready
to go on in wickedness again (that sleep does not end his sin,) yea that he is
so obstinate in such acts, if besides the act he has nothing but a power to do
evil? If you say that it is also a disability to do better or forbear; 1. You
will extenuate his sin, by saying that he can do no better. 2. Experience
tells you that his sin is sensuality: And Appetite (inordinate which rules
him) is more than Power, Impotency or Act; It is also an inclination to that
Act.

8. No doubt but each faculty has Grace suited to its nature and use: And
therefore as the potentia vitalis activa and executiva, has its power and
vivacity, so the Intellect has Illumination, and the Will holy Love, in
disposition and in act.

9. Lastly, The Scripture calls that which is given us by the name of the
Spirit of God, (and I would the Church would hold to that name, and say, Men
have or have not the Spirit of holiness:) But the word Spirit cannot be judged
to signify nothing but power and act. Yea it is expressly named in reference to
our three sanctified faculties, the Spirit of Power, and of Love, and of a
sound Mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7. And the Spirit of Love or Adoption (Gal. 4. 6. Romans
18. 16, 26.) is not only a power to love: A Child has more than a power to
love a Father; It is a filial loving nature which is called our regenerate
state. And if it were only the Act also, why is it called a Spirit and Nature.


A. To confess the truth you have said much to prove that we have ill managed
this Controversy about Power and Impotency, to repent and believe: And for my
part I mean hereafter to use most the common and Scripture phrase, and say as
to the efficient, that men have or have not the Spirit, and as to the effect,
that Power, Disposition, or Inclination, Act or Habit, are things to us
observable in the Soul, and that cannot and will not, must not be confounded.
And if it be moral or logical Power that I speak of, I will mention it properly
as it is in the effect or event, called Possible or Impossible, rather than as
it connoteth the faculty called Potent or Impotent thereto, lest I deceive men:
And I will let them perceive an impossibility of consequence, from an impotency
of sufficiency: For I know that when it is true, that logically in ordine
dicendi it cannot be, (that is, be true,) that [God fore-seeth or decrees that
Peter will not sin,] and yet that [he will sin]; yet it is not true that [Peter
had not power to sin]. But I proceed.


The third Crimination.
A. They make man so corrupted, and that by Adam's sin without his own consent,
as that there is no good in him; But he is dead in sin: And so all men should
be utterly and equally wicked.


B. Melanct: Loc. Com. de lib. arb. c. 7. Etsi peccatum Originis vitiat
naturam, non prorsus aufert eam, nec delet nec mutat eam in aliam speciem. Et
sp. sanctus non abolet, sed adolet naturam, non destruit, sed sanat.

Et Ambros. de Voc. Gent. l. 1. c. 3. Nec quia spiritu Dei agitur, ideo putet
se libero arb. carere: quiae nec tunc perdidit, quando diabolo voluntate se
dedit, a quo judicium voluntatis depravatum est, non ablatum: Non enim homo
voluntate, sed voluntatis sanitate privatus est: cum a diabolo spoliaretur: cum
igitur homo ad pietatem redit non alia in co creatur substantia, sed eadem quae
fuerat labefactata repar^tur.


The answer to the former might serve to this: But still I see that Names must
be our quarrel. Is the question of the Thing, or of the Name, whether it be to
be called Good? 1. As to the thing, they deny not that there are first notices
and common principles of morality in all men's understandings. 2. Nor that the
Intellect is inclined to truth as truth. 3. Nor that the Will is inclined to
good as good. 4. Nor that natural Conscience does somewhat for God and Duty,
and against Sin in bad men. 5. Nor that a Heathen may have as much good as
experience proves some of them to have had, as Antonine, Alexander Severus,
Cato, Cicero, Seneca, Epictetus, Plutarch, Socrates, Plato, etc. 6. Nor that
common Grace when the Gospel comes may prepare them for special Grace, and
make them almost sanctified Believers. In a word, almost all agree, that 1.
Nature, as now upheld by Mercy, may have all the good aforesaid. 2. That common
Grace with the Gospel may go further. 3. And that it prepares for special
saving Grace. If you deny this, you accuse them contrary to the fullest
evidence that you could expect, whilst our British Divines at Dort tell you so
largely how far universal or common Grace goes in this preparing work; and
when there are such a multitude of Treatises, written by the strictest English
Antiarminians on two Subjects, 1. Of preparation to Conversion. 2. How far an
Hypocrite (or unregenerate Person) may go in Christianity, (the Title of one of
Perkins's Books.)

2. But if it be de nomine, whether this may be called good, it is a question
unfit to trouble the Church with. All are agreed that is materially something
commanded by God, partly conformable to the Law of Nature or Scripture, and
that it tends toward the welfare of him that has it, and of others; and
is better than its contrary. But if we m^st set up a metaphysical Theater to
dispute de ratione Boni, by that time (on as good reason) we have prosecuted
our disputes de ratione entis, uni^s and very also, we may fall out with all
that agree not, in Suarez his Metaphysics, or at least in Aquinas or
Buridanes's Ethics. I pray you begin your self, and tell me what is bonum,
goodness, in your question?


A. You shall not tempt me into so difficult a metaphysical or moral dispute,
which I know the learned are so little agreed in: For you would but make use of
it to insult over me.


B. And yet is this one of your Accusations of your Brethren, that they agree
not with you in the sense of such a word, as you dare not definitively tell
your own sense of?

Moral good in man is his conformity to the holy regulating Will of God, by
resignation of our selves to him as our Owner, subjection to him as our Ruler,
and love to him as our End, or perfect Good, with all the exercise of these.
Now, 1. In the strictest sense, men say, Bon^mest ex causis integris, and so
where there is any sin, there is not good in that sense; that is, unmixed
perfect good: And in that (with a more transcendent) sense Christ says, That
none is good save God only: I hope you will not quarrel with him for it. And
yet the Papists commonly reproach the Protestants, as teaching that all that we
do is sin, and no good, because we say that all is mixed with sin, and
imperfectly good. I profess for my self, that I never loved, trusted, feared,
obeyed God in all my life without imperfection: And I take that imperfection of
my love to God, etc. to be the great and grievous sin of my Soul; so that I
groan out all my days; the last dying-words of Archbishop Usher, Lord, forgive
my Sins of Omission; And if the Schoolmen almost agree, that moral evil is
privatio boni, methinks a Papist should hardly dream that his greatest Faith
and Love have no degree of such privation.

2. But as the word [Good] signifies that which is sincerely so though
imperfectly, being more predominant in heart and life, than the contrary evil,
and proves the persons acceptance with God, and right to Salvation, and is
the imperfect Image of Gods holiness repaired, so all and only the sanctified
are good.

3. But in the third sense, as goodness signifies, such Inclinations and
Actions as are good but in a low degree, and bad predominantly; so none deny
but bad men have some good Inclinations and Actions. And de nomine here Divines
agree not, either Protestants or Papists: some (and most commonly) call all
such Actions good in their degree; Others say, That quia finis deest, none of
it is to be called properly good. It may end all, to say that it is good
analogically, as accidens is ens: or secundum quid, though not simpliciter.


The fourth Crimination.
A. So do the Jesuits, as you may see in Vasqu. in 1. Tho. q. 23. and passive.
They damn multitudes of Infants for Original Sin, which they could not avoid;
yea and the Adult too as necessitated by it to sin, for the prevention or cure
of which they have no remedy; especially all the Heathen World, in comparison
of which, from Adam's days till now the rest are very few: so that they make
the World to be made or born purposely for unavoidable damnation in Hell fire.


B. Here are several things which must be distinctly spoken to, I. Of Infants.
II. Of the state of the Heathen World. III. Of the necessity of sinning. IV. Of
the necessity of punishment for sin. Of these in order.

1. For the case of Infants, there are three questions to be handled, 1.
Whether they have Original Sin? 2. Whether they are worthy of punishment for
it? 3. Whether they are punished for it, and how many, and how?

1. For the first, I have proved in a peculiar Disputation, that Infants have
Original Sin, that is, moral Pravity in disposition, with their participation
in the guilt of Adam's sin, as being seminally and virtually in him. And I find
you not yet denying it.

2. For the second, no Christian doubts, I think, but that all sin deserves
punishment; But the desert of Actual Sin and of Original Sin are as different
as the nature of the sin. Habitual or Dispositive Pravity is a Dispositive
preparation or worthiness of punishment: And actual Sin, is an actual
preparation for it, but all deserve it; that is, are Subjects morally fit for
it, to demonstrate holy Justice.

3. For the third, Scripture and experience put it past controversy, that
Infants suffer: For, 1. They are deprived of the Spirit of Holiness, as quickly
appears by their early practice. Which privation is the greatest punishment
here. 2. They are hereupon left to the power of their own Corruption; which
desertion is a grievous punishment. 3. They have pain and sorrow. 4. And they
die.

And if they have all this suffering here, it is unlikely that they are wholly
free hereafter, if not pardoned: Because, 1. They have immortal Souls that are
capable. 2. And future as well as temporal death or misery is the wages of sin.

And that their suffering is for sin, is undoubted, from Romans 5, etc. And the
Pelagians scarce deny but that Adam's sin caused it. And if it be proved that
they have moral pravity, or sin of their own, then it is for their own sin. And
if so, it is their own punishment.

All the doubt then is, Whether all Infants are forgiven. And for that, 1. We
see that the temporal punishment is not forgiven them. 2. We see as soon as
they come to action, that to many at least, the foresaid penal desertion and
privation of the Spirit of Sanctification is not forgiven them: And 3. Without
holiness none can see God. 4. They that affirm it must prove it: which they
neither do, nor can do. There is no word of Scripture which tells it us. How
then should that be part of our Faith, which is no part of Gods Word?

If you say that Christ, being the second Adam, saves the World from all the
sin and misery brought on them by the first Adam; I answer, 1. Conditionally he
does: He has purchased Salvation to be given men on the terms of the Covenant
of Grace, and all that perform the Conditions shall have Salvation. But 2. His
bare Sacrifice it self without such application saves none, any further than
to bring them under the terms of the said Covenant. It is apparent by
experience, that Christ does not undo all the hurt that Adam did; immediately
to all, or any one in the world, no not till death, no nor till the
Resurrection. Sin and misery is still upon us. Infants show as soon as they
come to the use of reason, that they were not brought to the Innocence that
Adam had before the Fall. You your selves distinguish the Impetration from the
Application of Salvation as to the adult, and the reason is the same as to
Infants, though the condition be not the same. Show us a promise of the
Salvation of all Infants, and we will believe it.

5. Indeed they are saved conditionally as the adult are; and the condition is
expressed in Scripture, [That they be the Children of the Faithful, dedicated
to God.] The Parents and their Seed are in the same Covenant. And this is all
that God reveals of them. Says Twisse Cont. Corvin. page 136. c. 2: De
Infantibus infantia sua morientibus falsum est quod nobis obtrudit: Neque enim
dicimus ullos Infantes credentium and foederatorum Dei in infantia decedentes
ad exitium destinatos: Sanctos enim eos pronunciat Apostolus. Et una cum
parentibus fidelibus in foedere Dei comprehenduntur.

But I doubt he befriendeth the Anabaptists more than he was aware of, when he
adds, [Obsignant (Sacramenta) credentibus remissionem peccatorum and vitam
aeternam: At Infantibus quoties administratur Baptismus, non tam credentibus
quam credituris obsignat promissiones istas: Non credituris autem nihil
obsignant. If so, then to them that die in Infancy, or yet are Infants no
pardon is delivered and sealed by Baptism: which is not sound.

Of our guilt of nearer Parents Sin.

Let them that reject me in this, hear Augustine, in Enchirid. c. 46. Pa^entum
quoque peccatis parvul^^ obligari, non solum primorum hominum, sed etiam suorum
de quibus ipsi nati sunt, non improbabiliter dicitur: Illa quippe divina
sententia, R^ddam peccata patrum in* filios, tenet hos utique antequam per
regenerationem ad testamentum novum incipiant poenitere. -- Reperiuntur plura
peccata and alia parentum quae etsi non ita possunt mutare naturam, reatu tamen
obligant filios, nisi gra^uita gratia and miserecordia divina subveniat.




But whether God do also, without a Promise, save any of the Children of the
Heathen World, or of wicked Parents? and how many? and with what Salvation? and
also what degree of punishment they have in the life to come, we take for
unrevealed things, which we are so far from making Articles of our Faith, that
we take it to be presumptuous arrogance to dispute it, and meddle with the
Secrets of the Almighty. The Papists themselves are not agreed whether Infants
have only the poenam damni as shut out of Heaven, or also poenam sensus?
Jansenius and many more (yea most) have written for the first; and Petavius and
others for the latter. But secret things belong to God.


A. We cannot prove that all Infants are saved, nor do we presume to tell you
what Salvation it, is that they shall have; But we hope the best: And I am glad
to find that you take the Salvation of true Believers dying Infants to be sure
(by the same Covenant which pardons their Parents), and that you do not
peremptorily condemn all the rest.


B. You know that the Synod of Dort have said the same that I do of true
Believers Children, Art. 1. Sect. 17. and the rest they meddle not with.


A. But I pray you tell me your thoughts, Whether Infants themselves do perish
for Adam's sin alone? And what remedy is provided for them?


B. The whole tenor of the Scripture puts me past doubt, that Divines have
strangely erred, by over-looking the common Interest and Communion of all
Parents and Children, and appropriating our Original Guilt to Adam's sin alone:
But this requires a larger Disputation by it self. At present consider, 1.
That no Text of Scripture does so appropriate it, or make Adam only the
Corrupter of our Natures: But only makes him the Original of our Guilt and
Pravity, as he was the Original of our Nature: And so he only is the Original
of our Death and Punishment.

2. That the whole scope of Scripture contains Promises and Penalties to
Children with the Parents, for and by the Parents sins, more plainly than any
was antecedently expressed of Adam's Posterity as his: Yea the very Moral Law
in the Second Commandment, and in the Proclamation of Gods Name and Nature to
Moses, Exodus 34. 6, 7. which nothing but prejudice and partiality can deny to
be a valid proof, of a secondary Birth sin derived to us. And he that will read
the Sacred History from the Curse on the Seed of Cain, and Cham, of the Case of
Ishmael, Esau, Moab, Amnon, Saul's Grandchildren hanged, and so on to Matthew.
23. 38. [On this Generation shall come all the righteous blood, etc.] And [His
blood be on us, and on our Children,] with all the Promises to the Seed of the
Righteous only, and Threatening to the Houses and Seed of the Wicked, with the
reason of Infant Baptism it self, 1 Cor. 7. [Else were your Children unclean,
but now are they holy]; will soon be convinced that we are born under more
guilt and punishment than what we derive from Adam.

3. And even Adam's sin could not be, or is not made ours immediately, but as
we derive it from our nearer* Parents: For our nature is no otherwise from him.
Why am I guilty of what Adam did, but because I have a nature that was
seminally in him? And was it not proximately in my nearer Parents? And can they
convey their part of Adam's guilt and pravity to me, and no other?

4. And few sober men can deny, but that the Children of some Glutto^s,
Drunkards, Fornicators, etc. derive extraordinary diseased, and
vitiously-inclined temperaments from their nearest Parents.

5. And no peculiar reason can truly be given for our guilt or pravity from
Adam, which reaches not to prove the derivation of the like from our nearer
Parents, save only, 1. That Adam only was the Original. 2. And in Adam we
sinned under a Covenant that gave no pardon: But now under a Covenant of Grace.


A. If this hold, it will make easy the Doctrine of Original Sin, which I
confess to you that I have been inclined to doubt of, by your Divines fastening
all upon Gods Arbitrary Imputation, rather than from the Childrens seminal
in-being.


B. Doubtless they have much tempted Arminius, Episcopius, Arnoldus Corvinus,
Bishop Jer. Tailor, and others, to say so much against Original Sin as they
have done, by feigning an (unproved) arbitrary Covenant of God made with Adam
and his Posterity which was no Law of Nature, nor is made to any other since,
(according to the change of the Covenant), and by which God imputes Adam's sin
to us, not because we were in his Loins (for then it would extend to others),
but because it was his Will to do so; As if it had been God and not Adam that
defiled our Natures, and made us all Sinners, by an unnecessary, if not
ungrounded imputation. By which also they have kept men from knowing their
secondary birth-sin. Dr. Twisse frequently speaks rightlier of the reason of
the imputation of Adam's sin.
The Church of England prays not for the Dead, but for the Living, when it
says, Remember not our Iniquity, nor the Iniquity of our Forefathers: And
Nehemiah and Daniel were of the same mind.


A. But they say that then our Sins would increase as Ages go on, and the last
Age would be the most sinful.


B. Men will say almost any thing in their partiality, while they look but on
one side. 1. The Covenant is now changed which men sin under: Not so as not to
extend to Children: But it is now a pardoning Covenant; And when the sins of
the Fathers are pardoned to themselves, they are pardoned to their Infants
dedicated to God in the same Covenant, even by the same. 2. But where they are
unpardoned, there is a certain sort and degree of guilt increased on the
Posterity; and so no wonder if many Kingdoms of Heathens and Infidels feel it.
3. But as it is not so much to have a nature essentially derived from Parents,
and to be seminally in them, as it is to be a sinning person, so the guilt
proportionably differs. 4. And there is a pardon of some temporal punishments
which God gives some bad men in this life. 5. And as to the punishment in
Hell, there is a certain degree, that God will not exceed in hi^ execution, and
that humane nature, as it is, is capable of no more. And a man may have many
Obligations to one and the same punishment, as he may to the same duty; and so
a man is but hanged or put to death that has deserved death seven times over
among men: For the ends of punishment set the bounds in all executions.


A. Well, but what say you to the second; The perishing state of Heathens.


B. II. I have said so much in the First Book, that I must refer you thither;
Now only saying, 1. That it is first to be considered what Law they are under;
2. And next how they keep it; 3. And then how they are judged by it.

1. Undoubtedly all the World is now under the Law of Grace, as to the
essentials, as it was made with all men in Adam and Noah, though not as to the
mutable part, which bound men to expect a future Messiah. That Law was made
with all Mankind, Genesis 3. 15. and is never repe^^ed to Mankind. The World was
under it (as to Obligation) before Christ's Incarnation; And Christ took no
benefit from them which they had. Clemens Alexandrinus, and other Fathers,
erred not in this to much as some have charged them to do: No man is now under
the Covenant of Innocence alone.

2. But how all men keep or break their proper Conditions of this Law of Grace,
as they are under it, he that knows every man in the World, and all their
hearts and deeds can tell, but not I.

3. And no doubt but they are judged as they kept or kept not the Conditions of
that Law of Grace which they were under. What difference there is, 1. Between
the Conditions to the Christian-Church now, and the Jewish of old. 2. And
between the Conditions to the Jewish of old, and the rest of the World, I have
showed partly, Lib. 1.

But because many self-wise persons are bitterly censorious against me, or any
man that speaks of any possibility of the Salvation of any, save Jews
formerly and Christians now: I beseech the sober but to think of this one
thing, that Abraham thought there had been fifty righteous persons in Sodom,
even when God had told him how much worse it was than other places. How many
then proportionably did he think there was in Canaan and all other Countries of
the World. By which Abraham's judgment about the Salvation of others is
manifest, though he was mistaken in thinking Sodom better than it was. And I
desire to be a Son of Abraham, and am not wiser than he.


A. This seems plain truth, however the World take it: And it is a wonder to
me that any good man should take it ill to have so much of Gods certain Grace
acknowledged. But what say you to the third point, The necessity hence of
sinning.


B. I have answered it to you before: I now add, 1. It is not a physical
necessity from the principles of Nature, but a moral necessity from the pravity
of Nature. 2. It is not caused by God, but by sinful man. 3. It is not a
necessity of committing all sin, or every particular sin, nor of omitting every
duty. 4. It is not an uncurable necessity. 5. God of his free Grace has
provided the remedy himself, and tendered it in some degrees to all. 6. And he
appoints to all men certain duties and means to be used to this end, which
they can use. 7. Therefore it is no necessity What cold comfort the Papists
give to Infants, and what insufficient Grace they have that die unbaptized,
they ^^^^only declare. See ^^^^ in 12. q. 111. ^^^^ 7. p. 496.
of being damned.


A. This answers the fourth Question as to the Adult. But what remedy is
there for Infants, especially among Heathens and Unbelievers?


B. The same that is for their Parents: They have no sin but by their Parents,
and God has told us of no remedy, but that they be the Children of Believers
dedicated to God. It is meet that their remedy come as their sin did. They have
no Wills of their own, but be at the will of others. They are in Infancy, as if
they were members of their Parents: And as the Hand and Heart does fare as the
Head conducteth them, so may Infants here.


A. But it is sad that all Infants shall be unsaved, if the Parents consent not.


B. It is sad that men destroy themselves: And it is sad that they corrupt
their Infants. But what way else would you wish God to save them?


A. Certainly to save all dying in infancy.


B. 1. And why not as well all at Age? 2. Then men would be tempted to think it
the greatest act of mercy in the World, to go with an Army and kill all the
Children of Infidels and Heathens, certainly to save them.


A. So you may say by the Children of Believers then, if they be saved.


B. No: for they have holy Education, under Gods Promise, Ordinances and
Blessing, and so are in great hope of being publicly serviceable to the
Church, and also of attaining a greater degree of Glory. But it is an hundred to
one but the Children of Heathens and Infidels, are bred up to be also such
themselves.


The fifth Crimination.
A. They suppose that no man can do any more good than he does, nor Quod
Repro^us non possit gratiam adipisci, non est intelligendum secundum
impossibilitatem absoluta^ sed conditionatam, qui^ reprobatio non subtrabit
aliquid de potentia reprobati: Idem dicendum est de praedestinato quem salvari
necesse est. Carbo Thom. Compend. 1. q. 23. ^. 3.

Bradwardine and some Dominicans are liable to this Objection, but so are few
Protestants, and the Synod of D^rt rejects it.


forbear any more evil, than he forbeareth; Because he is not only
predestined to do just what he does, and no more or less, but also
predetermined physically in the practice, so that he cannot possibly do more or
less than God predetermineth him to; And 1. Gods Decrees having fixed all
future events, all that man can do will not alter them: Beverovicius may tire
the World of Divines with his question de termino vitae before he will ever get
satisfaction, how Physic can prolong a predestined term of life. And 2. By
this means God who set man upon a course of impossibilities or vain means, with
great and urgent exhortations, is made a dissembler, and his revealed Will and
his secret supposed contradictory, and the latter false: And how then can such
a God be believed?


B. These are but the bold effusions of a misunderstanding contentious
temerarious passion. Here are set together several things, which must
distinctly be considered: I. Whether man can do no more good, and forbear no
more evil than he does? II. Whether means to lengthen life or save Souls be
vain? III. Whether Gods secret and revealed Will be contrary, and the revealed
false.

I. As to the first, this unhappy syllable [CAN] by its ambiguity is the cause
of all our silly quarrels. 1. If by [CAN] you mean [a physical power or
faculty] man can not only do more good than he does, but he can repent and
believe who does not. 2. If you mean a moral power, that is, such a degree of
disposition to good as may be excited, or such an indisposition as may be
overcome as to the act, without any more supernatural Grace than he has; so
all men can do more good and less evil than they do. And therefore the Synod of
Dort rejects your accusation as a calumny. And men should know their own
minds best. 3. If by [Cannot] you mean only a logical impossibility that these
two Propositions be both true [Judas will believe and be saved] or [Herod will
not be eaten with Worms.] And [God decrees that Judas shall not be saved] and
[that Herod shall be eaten by Worms] I confess your charge; and say that
Arminius says the same upon the supposition of Gods foreknowledge. And how
are you concerned to prove God to be either fallible in his foreknowledge,
false in his Predictions, or mutable in his Purposes. By this rule all
Prophesies take away men's power, and make it impossible to do the contrary. But
you mistake: For they assert man's power: He that fore-knoweth and fore-telleth
that Judas will abuse his power, and decrees to damn him only for abusing his
power, does imply that he has such power --. But -- Ergo.]

II. Beverovicius (and other men's) question, de utilitate mediorum Aegid. Col.
Quodl. 1. q. 2. Precibus sanctorum potest juvari praedestinatio: Non tamen sic,
ut hae Divinum propositum immutent: sed quod taedem velut media illud ipsum
propositum adimpleant mediantibus enim talibus orationibus, fit de nobis quod
Deus disposuit. -- Si Divina praedestinatio dicat Divinum propositum in se
acceptum, non juvatur precibus; quia nullum aeternum juvatur per aliquod
temporale: sed si dicant divinum propositum, non absolute, sed ut impletur
mediantibus causis in effectu, sic praedestinatio juvatur precibus and operibus
sanctorum.
need no very learned Pens to determine it. He did well to make that learned
and pious Lady Maria Van Schurman one of his Casuists. What can be plainer,
than that means are made most necessary, and also the liberty of our Wills in
the use of means, when God does make this one Decree; e. g. [Peter shall hear,
believe, repent freely but certainly, and be saved.] [Noah shall make an Ark
freely, but certainly, and be saved from the deluge.] [Noah shall plant a
Vineyard, and water and dress it in due season, freely but certainly, and it
shall bear him fruit.] And [fore-seeing that Judas will freely betray his Lord,
I will condemn him.] [Such a Sluggard will not plow and sow, and therefore
shall have no crop.] [Such a man will not use any meet remedy against his
Disease, and shall die by it.] It Is strange that nothing can please you unless
God be ignorant, or mutable, and overruled not all the World.

III. I have made it plain, that there is no show of contradiction between Gods
secret and revealed Will. What contradiction is it to say, [Judas, I command
thee do not murder thy self,] and [I know that Judas will betray his Lord, and
will despair, and do that which tends to his own murder, and for his sin he
shall be so self-murdered]. Or [Judas will betray Christ, and shall be damned
for it,] and [I forbid Judas to betray Christ.] Plainly, 1. About punishment,
Gods revealed Will in his Law, speaks only de jure (vel debito) in forbidding
it. 2. Gods revealed Will by Prophecy sometime fore-telleth that this Law will
not be kept; and Gods Decree is, that the punishment eventually be inflicted:
so that one speaks only de debito, and the other de eventu. And about sin it
is but Gods foreknowledge de eventu, and his Law de debito, that seem to you
contradictory, without any reason.

But this belongs to the first Articles, where you had enough of it before:
And man's true power to do more good, and forbear more evil than he does, is so
far from being denied, that it is asserted in all, and your charge denied
generally by the Calvinists, unless perhaps by some rash contentious Disputer
of a shallow brain, who cannot distinguish between physical, moral, and mere
logical impossibilities. You may read the Synod of Dorts express renunciation
of it, that man can do no more good than he does, nor forbear more evil: And do
you know their judgment better than they know their own? And will you go on to
charge them with that which they abhor?


THE Sixth Days Conference OF Natural Corruption and Impotency, and Free Will.
BETWEEN B. (the Reconciler) and (C. a Calvinist.)
B. We come now somewhat nearer the heart of the Controversy: Try here your
contending skill, Whether you can make this breach seem wider than you did the
former, about Predestination and Redemption.


The first Crimination.
C. Some of them deny Original Sin, and so make man need no Savior to pardon
it, no Sanctifier to cure it, no Means or Duty on our part De modo and ratione,
many Schoolmen and other Papists open it better than those that lay all upon
Gods mere Will. Viguerius Instit. c. 18. v. 11. makes our membership of Adam,
and natural derivation to be the reason of Imputation, as the act of the Hand
is to the Man. So Joan. a Bonon* Panorm. de peccat. Orig. Non enim censetur
quis sacere quippiam in alio nisi quod alius faciat, facit and ipse. So
Contarenus, so Estius truly in Romans c. 5. 12. Dicuntur omnes peccasse in Adamo
^tanquam in principio and radice, generis humani, quoniam in lumbis ^ju^ erant
quando pecca^it:] that is, seminally: All which, and many more such, Rivet
cites, as concordant to us. Chamier To. 3. Paustr. l. 1. c. 2. sect. 9.
proves that Bellarmine Peltanus, Delphinus, Cunerus, Alvarez, Va^quez, etc.
are of the same judgment with the Protestants. See Drelincourts Synopt.
Controv. Art. 64. Sed quid tibi in mentem venit, ut Infantes sola imputatione
reos esse profitearis? Cum non modo in Adamo dum peccaret omnes sui^^^, a quo
naturam nostram accepimus, ^t ratione naturae plusquam imputatione Dei,
peccasse merito dicamur in Adamo, sed and conditionem misere corruptam and
vitiatam ab iis hausimus: Twis. Contr. Corvin. p. 269* c. 2. and ib. p. 343.
Certe peccatum Originis, ex primo Adae peccato (sed and ex nostro quippe qui in
eo peccavimus omnes) fluit. Et p. 344. At sic Adami peccatum imputari posteris
-- nostri ad unum omnes negandum contendunt, (i. e. mera imputatione). In Adamo
peccavimus omnes eandemque contagionem contraximus -- Itaque Adami peccatum
nobis imputatur sed non-tantum imputatur, sed and nostrum fuit, hoc est naturae
nostrae, etc. -- Ita saepissime Twissus recte. And Rivet in his Decret. Syn.
National. de Imputat. Primi peccat. Adami, by express citations proves the
concord of Protestants and Papists about the very Imputation of Adam's sin, and
among the Concordant numbereth Arminius, page 87. As also Baldwin, Brochmand,
Dietericus, Hunnius, Index, Meisner, Spangenbergius, and other Lutherans: And
Gell. Suecanus, the Ancestor of Arminius: And of the Papists, as Aegyd. Romans
Dion. Carthus. Gab. Biel, Ca^et. Clarius, Tolet. Sa^bout, Joan. a Bonon.
P^^orm. Contaren. Bellarm. Pererius. Soto, Museus, Vigner. Estius, Becanus a
Lapide, Catharinus, etc. Besides the concurrence of the Augustane and other
Confessions: And though with the Socinians he cite the Apol. and Corvinus for
the contrary, it is no more: And it is but this part of Original Sin, and not
the Corruption that he cites them as denying. And it is like that other men's
ill exposition o^ it, is that which they mean, or at least which tempted them
to it.
for the cure, no true Baptism for Infants, no true Repentance for such Sin;
and so are true Pelagians.


B. 1. Those [some] I undertook not to prove of the same mind with you and me:
But let us charge no more with it than we can prove guilty. That Is nothing to
all the rest: The Jesuits and Lutherans differ not from you herein as far as I
can find, nor the generality of the Arminians. Those that are chiefly charged
with it, are Arminius, Arnoldus, Corvinus, Episcopius, and Bishop Jeremy
Tailor: Arminius expressly owneth it: These. private. 31. n. 9, 10, 11. page 299.
Quoniam vero ratio-foederis a Deo cum hominibus primis mihi haec fuit, ut si
ipsi in favore Dei and Gratia, per praecepti istius and aliorum observationem
permanerent, ad posteros dona in illos collata transmitterentur, eadem gratia
divina quae illis obligat: si vero illi eorum se indignos facerent per
inobedientiam, posteri quoque ipsorum iis carerent, and contrariis malis
obnoxii essent: Hinc accidit ut omnes homines qui naturaliter ex ipsis
propagandi fuerint, morti temporali and aeternae obnoxios evaserint, and do^o
isto spirit^s sancti si^e justitiae originali vacui: quae paena priva^io
imaginis Dei and peccatum originale appellari solet. An vero praeter carentiam
justitiae Originalis aliqua contraria qualitas constituenda sit, tanquam
pec^ati Originalis pars altera, disquiri permittimus: Quamquam arbitramur vero
similius illam solam carentiam ipsum peccatum Originale esse, utpote quae sola
sufficient ad quaevis peccata actu^^ia committen^um and producendum.


C. Mark that he says, but peccatum Originale appellari solet.


B. 1. But he disowneth it not. 2. He owneth the name in the next Thesis. 3.
While he confesses the thing, the lis est tantum de nomine, if he had denied
the name.

Also in Disp. private. These. 67. de Baptis. p. 334, 335. he is for Infants
Baptism to wash them in the blood of Christ, and give them the Holy Ghost. And
he makes this to be a washing from sin. What else should it be?


C. But he takes it to be but Privatio Justitiae Originalis.


B. 1. He takes it to be doubtful. 2. Remember that he calls it not Negatio,
but Privatio. 3. Almost all the Schoolmen, and most or very many Calvinists
say the same (though I do not).


C. But in his Articuli perpendendi in fine, lib. p. 780. col. 2. he says,
that Peccatum Originis non est illud actuale peccatum quo Adam legem de arbore
scientiae boni and mali transgressus est, and propter quod nos omnes peccatores
constituti sumus and rei facti condemnationis and mortis.


B. 1. Mark that he expressly makes us by Adam's sin to be Peccatores and rei
constituti. 2. So in the next Thesis. An peccatum Originis sit tantum carentia
justitiae Originalis, and sanctimoniae primaevae, cum inclinatione ad
peccandum, quae and antea in homine fuit, licet non ita vehemens, aeque and
inordinata ut nunc est, propter amissum favorem Dei, maledictionem ejusdem, and
amissionem ejus boni, quo in ordinem redigebatur; An vero contrarius quidam
habitus justitiae and sanctimoniae infusus (vel ingressus, acquisitus) post
peccatum perpetratum, Dub. Here he confesses also a positive Original Sin in
the inordinateness of the sensual inclination. 3. When he denies Adam's Act to
be our Original. 1. He denies not (for no Christian denies it) to be the
Original Sin, that is, the first sin and the cause of ours. 2. And he seems
but to mean that Adam's Sin individually was not ours: which is most certain:
For the same Accident cannot be in two distinct Subjects: If our persons be not
every one Adam's person, it is impossible that the same individual sin or guilt
should be his and ours, any more than the same individual Soul. If God did
arbitrarily (merely because he would do it) impute Adam's fact to all Mankind,
and to every one personally, this would make it as many sins as there be
persons; One man's Original Sin would not be another, and none of theirs the
same quoad formam numericam with Adam's. Adams is Adams, and yours is yours,
and mine is mine. We cannot therefore be heretic men for such doubtful forms
of speech, in which we differ among our selves.

The plain truth is, the matter is not so well opened commonly among us, as to
allow us to condemn others till we have better done our own parts. My thoughts
are these: 1. That we were seminally and virtually really in Adam; having the
very essence of our Souls derived from him; not being in him only as the House
is in the head of the Architect, but as an essential form is in the generater;
though we call both, esse in causa. 2. That we were not personally in Adam
(though seminally) that is, we were not natural persons in him, when he sinned.
3. God supposes no man to have been what he was not, or done what he did not:
For he erreth not. 4. God is not the Author of Sin: Therefore he does not by
arbitrary imputing of Adam's act, and reputing us to have done what we did not,
make all men Sinners, which Adam could not do. 5. But God does truly repute us
to have been seminally in Adam, and to have no Essence but what is really
derived from his Essence: And as when a man is guilty, no part of him is
innocent, neque semen neque sanguis, though they have not a distinct guilt, but
participative qua parts rei; so we were Sinners in that act, and guilty of
that act, so far as we were parts Adami, and in him. 6. This was not to be at
that time guilty as distinct persons; for we were not such. 7. But we that were
then only seminally inexistent, after became real distinct persons, and then
that guilt even of Adam's fact, adhering still to us, became reatus personae,
because the Subjects of it are personae. Even as if Eve had been made after the
Fall, of Adam's Rib, that Rib at first was guilty, not by another, but the same
numerical guilt that Adam was, as part of a Sinner: For it was a capable
Subject of no more: But when that same Rib was made a person, it would be a
guilty person; For it lost not the guilt by that change. But then it is not
only or chiefly our Bodies which are from Adam (which are from the elements in
our daily food) but our Souls. And therefore the adherence of the guilt to a
rational spirit essentially flowing from another essence, is more easily
understood and defended than that of the corporal Rib could be. 8. I do
(contrary to excellent Jos. Placeus) suppose that in primo instanti, this our
participation in Adam's guilt is in order before our qualitative pravity: And
that God does therefore deny us his Spirit first, to make us originally holy,
not only because Adam, but because we in Adam (as aforesaid) did forfeit and
expel it. 9. I think that men's assertion of a Decree or Covenant of God, that
if Adam fell, any more should be imputed to his Offspring than they were thus
really guilty of themselves, is the bold addition of men's invention, of greater
audacity than the addition of Ceremonies to the Worship of God, which yet some
are more sensible of. 10. I think that if Adam had not sinned that same first
sin, but had sinned another sin the next hour, or day, or month, or year, or
any time before Generation, it would have been equally ours, as this first was,
because we were equally in him, and no Scripture-Covenant makes a difference.
11. I think that whereas Adam's sin had twenty particular sins as parts of the
whole, we were guilty of all, as well as of the first act or part; else we
should not be guilty of his eating the forbidden ^ruit; for doubtless that was
not the first: His incogitancy, and non-Nolition and sinful Volitions were
before it. Yea I doubt not but we are guilty of all the sin that Adam
committed, from his first sin till the making of the New Covenant, at least.
12. I doubt not but if Adam had never sinned, yet (supposing the same Covenant
to stand) if his Sons after him had sinned, we should have been guilty of it as
we are of his sin: yea had it been but our nearest Parents. 13. I doubt not but
that we are still so guilty of our nearer Parents Sins, further than as the
introduction of the new pardoning Covenant, and the often pardons by it, and the
incapacity of nature, to bear any more punishment, may make a difference. This
is not a place voluminously to prove all this. But if any Arminians be tempted
to speak doubtingly of this Original Guilt, while they confess Original sinful
pravity, 1. Blame your own additions to Gods Covenant, and your obscure
writings of the thing; 2. And say not that they deny Original Sin, but express
the matter as it is. It seems that Arminius by Peccatores and rei constituti
sumus means as we do.


C. I must confess your explication is rational and concilatory: But how can
you excuse Corvinus?


B. See but how he defends Arminius against Tilenus, as holding our Original
Sin to be truly Sin, and a punishment for Sin, and you will think that he
denies it not himself: See also what Twisse supposes him to grant, Cont.
Corvin. p. 253, 254. Indeed he does two much obscure and extenuate the formalem
rationem peccati in comparison of the ratio poenae in it. But I much suspect
that there is much Logomachie in the controversy, and that it is mostly de
nomine peccati non de re. For I perceive some of them conceive of peccatum as a
word that has only an active signification from peccare: And because an Infant
does not peccare actualiter, therefore they say that Original Sin is not
strictly called Peccatum, meaning that the Name properly agrees only to an
evil Act. And can a Controversy de nomine make a heresy? Ask them these
Questions? 1. Whether an Infant be not animal rationale liberum, as having the
same natural faculties with the Adult? 2. Whether he be not then capable of
virtuous and vicious Dispositions? 3. And whether these are not bonum and malum
morale? If he be not capable of malum morale, than neither of bonum morale? And
if so, then not of Holiness, nor any moral aptitude for Heaven, any more than a
Beast. This they all deny* and therefore must needs say that their vicious
inclinations are malum morale, adapting them not only physically for physical
evil, but morally for punishment. And truly if they will call Sin such a moral
evil, I will not break communion with them about the sense of Peccare.


C. But Amesius tells Grevinchovius, that it may be proved by good witnesses
that he denied Original Sin: which Dr. Twisse many times over and over recites
contra Corvinum.


B. As the instance of three or four single persons is nothing to my business,
so I am no judge of any such Reports, unless I had heard the witnesses my self.
I have had so many notorious lies confidently reported of me by men not
contemptible, that it has taught me to be backward in receiving any
Accusations, and judging before I hear the accused. Especially a man that
writes much is more to be judged of by his Writings, than by Back-biters
Reports.


C. But Episcopius is no way to be excused, Nor Bishop Jer. Tailor, who
copiously plead against Original Sin.


B. Therefore they are not the persons that I have now to do with; but have
elsewhere as copiously proved Original Sin, and confuted such Arguments as
they use; But the chief of my Arguments they touch not.


The second Crimination.
C. They say that man before regeneration can do that which is spiritually
good; and has power to use his naturals well, so that by degrees he may
thereby come up to a state of saving Grace, or be fitted to be a Believer: And
that some can believe and repent that do not. Whereas the Scripture makes men
dead in sin, and out of Christ we can do nothing.


B. This unhappy [CAN] I tell you is our Cannon that battereth our Peace and
Love; and pardon me if I tell you as I did them, that I doubt whether you
understand well what it signifies. Tell me,

Quest. 1. Have not wicked men natural life? Or are they dead?


C. No man doubts of that.


B. Quest. 2. Have they not natural powers or faculties for natural Acts?


C. Nor is that denied by any man.


B. Quest. 3. Is it not the same natural faculty of Intellection by which we
understand and believe things common and spiritual? And the same natural
faculty of willing, by which we love or will them both?


C. Nor is that questioned by any.


B. Quest. 4. Is there not such a thing as common Grace, distinct from, and
short of true Regeneration or Sanctification?


C. Yes, we are all agreed of that.


B. Quest. 5. Is there any Nation or People in the World, that are not obliged
by God to use some means toward their own Conversion, and to forbear their Sin?


C. No doubt of it, but they are obliged to perfect Obedience, and they are
specially obliged to repent, and use some means thereto.


B. Quest. 6. Is there not such a thing in the World, as a true power to do
something that never is done, and forbear what is not forborne?


C. I know not what to say to that: An hypothetical power, and secundum quid so
called there is: But of proper power I doubt. Dr. Twisse against Hord, li. 1.
p. 71. says, [Suppose all men had power to do any good: If God will not give
them velle quod possunt, -- is it possible that they should velle bonum, if God
will not work it in them.]


B. It is a logical impossibility of consequence (nothing to the purpose) which
also foreknowledge would infer: But as to real power, denominating the Object
possible, it is a palpable contradiction, to say I have true power to do an
impossible thing: when to say I have power to do it, and to say, it is possible
to me, are all one. Elsewhere Dr. Twisse can say, that Gods velle eventum is
not necessary ad possibilitatem, sed ad eventum. Do you doubt whether Adam was
able to have forborne the sin, and so sinned for want of power to do otherwise?


C. An obediential and passive power he had, and faculties that were able
hypothetically if God had predetermined them by premotion and effectual Grace:
But of the rest I doubt.


B. We will not be diverted with empty words: A dead man has an obediential
passive power (as the School mean it). An hypothetical or conditional power is
no power when the condition is not existent. If you say Adam could not but sin,
you make his standing a natural impossibility, and God the cause of all his
sin, whom he could no more overcome therein than make a World: And will men
then believe that God hates that sin which he unresistibly causes, and sent
Christ to die for it? and will damn men for not doing natural impossibilities?


C. Well! suppose (as commonly we do) that Adam was able to have stood? and
consequently that there is a true power in the World that is never acted.


B. Quest. 7. Is no man by Nature with common helps and Grace able to do more
good than he does, and forbear more sin?


C. No doubt, he can if he will; But the doubt is of his Will.


B. Quest. 8. Is no man by Nature and common Grace able to will the doing of
more good, and forbearing more evil, than he so wills.


C. His Will has natural power; but it is contrarily disposed.


B. Quest. 9. Can no man by Nature and common Grace, notwithstanding the
undisposedness of his Will, yet so far restrain or prevail against his
undisposedness, as actually to will and do more good and less evil than he
wills and does.


C. If* Adam could have forborne all sin, I must think common Grace P^aecipitur
nobis been agere; non quod possimus ex nobis illud facere, sed quia si faciamus
totum quod in nobis est, semper Deus paratus sit facere quod in se est. Aegid.
Colum. Quodl. 2. qu. 30. p. 121, 122.

Nostrum est enim secundum Damascenum sequi Deum vocantem ad virtutem; vel
diabolum vocantem ad malitiam: unde Damas. l. 2. c. 30. Ipse est omnis boni
principium and causa, and sine ejus co-operatione and auxilio impossible est
bonum velle vel facere: In nobis autem est, vel permanere in virtute and sequi
Deum vocantem, vel rec^dere a virtute quod est fieri in malitia and se qui
diabolum. Idem ibid.


to be no Grace, if by it a man could forbear no sin, nor do any good.


B. Quest. 10. Cannot every man desire to be happy? and to escape Hell?


C. Yes: For all do it in some sort or other.


B. Quest. 11. Cannot some men without Holiness, forbear Murder, Treason,
Theft, Adultery, and pass by a Tavern-door when they go in?


C. Yes; for we see many forbear such sins: and therefore more might do it.


B. Quest. 12. Cannot such a one go to a Sermon, and read good Books, when he
goes to a Tavern or a Playhouse?


C. Hobbes will say no, who thinks that every Volotion is necessitated as the
motion of a Watch is by the Spring: but so will not I. He cannot be willing to
attend Gods Ordinances as the godly do; but he can will to use them sometimes
in his manner.


B. Quest. 13. Cannot he by common Grace understand the meaning of the words
heard or read, and remember them?


C. Yes; and be a famous Expositer and Preacher too.


B. Quest. 14. Cannot a man by common Grace know that he is a Sinner, and
miserable by sin? and that he needs Mercy and a Savior?


C. Yes; or else he could not despair with Judas?


B. Quest. 15. Cannot he think of his own sinful and miserable condition? yea
and think how to get out of it and be saved?


C. Yes: dispairing men cannot forget it: And a wicked Preacher, for common
ends, can force his thoughts, most of the year, to meditate on Gods Word, and
holy things.


B. Quest. 16. Can he not wish and desire that he had mercy and a Savior, and
so much Grace as to keep him from Hell, and so make him happy when he must go
hence? And can he not by some earnest prayers speak out these desires?


C. Yes: All men have not saving Grace, that go but so far.


B. Quest. 17. Cannot a man by common Grace do all that which our Divines
commonly say, an Hypocrite may do, or a half or almost -Christian? such as Mr.
Perkins, Bolton, Rogers, Hooker, Mead, Bifield, and abundance more describe.


C. Yes; they that have so much common Grace can go so far.


B. Quest. 18. Are not the best of these men, by common Grace, more prepared
for Conversion than some others?


C. Yes: else what good did that Grace do them? and why should we write (as Mr.
Hooker) of the Souls preparation for Christ? and Christ told one, Thou art not
far from the Kingdom of God.


B. Quest. 19. Does God command all these men to use the means of their full
Conversion and Salvation utterly in vain?


C. No: it is not in vain, if he bless them to whom he will.


B. Quest. 20. Lastly, Then tell me, if you acknowledge all these [CANS] or
Powers, what is the power which you deny?


C. A power to things spiritually good.


B. Ambiguous words must not destroy Love and Churches. What mean you by
[Spiritual?]


C. That which is done by Gods Spirit, to spiritual ends, and in a spiritual
manner.


B. Here are three things: The Efficient, the End, the Manner. 1. Is not the
Spirit of God the Author of common Grace?


C. Yes, that is not denied by any.


B. 2. If by a spiritual end you mean, the foresaid saving of the Soul from
Hell, you confess common Grace may give it. If you mean loving and intending
God above all, do not the Arminians say as well as you, that none but the
Regenerate can do it?


C. I confess they do. Quum actus ille fidei non sit in potestate hominis
naturalis, carnalis, animalis, peccatoris, eumque nemo praestare possit nisi
per gratiam Dei, omnis autem Gratia Dei secundum voluntatem Dei administretur,
and voluntatem quam apud se ab aeterno habuit, etc. Armin. Disp. Private. These.
41. Sect. 1. p. 30^. Aegid. Colum. Quodlib. 2. qu. 29. page 121. Cum bona
habeant duplex esse, scil. Natural and supernaturale: Dicendum est quod sine
gratia habituali possimus bona agere quoad esse natural; non quod
supernaturale: Secundum sanctorum sententiam etsi sine Gratia possimus facere
bona non tamen been: ne^ mereri per illa, etc.



B. 3. What mean you by a spiritual manner? If you mean it, of doing all from
that love to God, and intention of that end, the answer is the same.


C. Man can do nothing of himself, without God.


B. Did ever man in his wits think otherwise? Was it ever a controversy,
whether we have any power that is not both given and still maintained by God?
All the question is, but how God gives it? and not whether we have it without
him. One thinks that he gives more by the way of Nature than others do: And
another thinks that he gives more by the way of common Grace than others do:
Mistake not your self: you ascribe no more to God, than any even Pelagian does;
but only he ascribes more to God by the way of natural conveyance than you do.
I only except the Dominican Predeterminants, that ascribe all man's
circumstantiated Volitions to God. Lay therefore the controversy where it is.


C. But we can do nothing without Christ and Grace.


B. I am more for that than you are. I doubt you think that we can do the works
of Nature without Christ; For I find that many of you will not have so much as
Magistracy to depend upon him derivatively. But all things are now delivered
into his hands, and Nature is reprived and continued by some degree of Grace,
that is, of Mercy contrary to Merit. But tell me, do men do that without
Christ, which they do by his common Grace?


C. The words signify, [Joh. 15. Out of me ye can do nothing.]


B. And do you differ about that? Do not you before confess how far men out of
Christ as to regeneration may go? Come to the point, and tell me where you
differ?


C. We differ here; that they think that God has promised saving Grace to men
prepared by common Grace, and we say, No.


B. Very good: Is all come but to this? Tell me what is this to the question of
man's power or impotency? This is only about Gods Word. Quest. 1. Do you not
believe that God has made it the duty of all the Unregenerate, to desire, and
beg, and seek his special regenerating Grace? and use means to get it? and
avoid impediments?


C. Yes: it is their duty; otherwise the omission of it were not their Sin.


B. Quest. 2. Has God commanded them to do all this in vain?


C. I told you, that it is not in vain, if he convert but some few of them.


B. My question was not, whether the command be in vain, but whether the duty
commanded be in vain. And how does one man's good use of common Grace, prepare
another man for conversion, and not himself. It is for himself that God
commands and earnestly exhorts men to be reconciled unto God. And is this
in vain to themselves if they do it? If they repent when commanded it is not in
vain? If they use common Grace in seeking God, how prove you that it shall be
in vain? If you say to your Servants, [Come and ask me for your Food and
Raiment when you want them], they would think that Command did not set them
upon a vain asking. If an able Physician that could cure a Disease at his
pleasure should say, [Take this Medicine for the cure of your Disease] or [this
preparative] it would be supposed not in vain. In this Command God is both
Rector and Benefactor: As Rector, the right government of mankind is his end;
which is not done by setting them on vain duty: As Benefactor, the good of his
Creature is his end (as we may call it, under his Glory therein). And vain duty
is an evil, and not a benefit to any. If the King sent to you to come and ask
him for He that reads the Doctrine of the greater part of the Papists, of
supernaturality, ^and infusion of Charity or Grace, will have little reason to
say that they bring them too much into the power of man: ^especially the
Dominicans. Does not Alvarez set Grace far enough out of man's power, when he
says, li. 7. disp. 69. p. 306. c. 1. Impossible est quod Gratia habitualis
sit connaturalis alicui substantiae creatae vel creabili: Ergo etiam est
impossible quod Charitas, vel ejus actus, sit ei connaturalis, aut ex solis
viribus naturae procedens. Prob. antecedens, Quia contra rationem Gratiae est
quod sit debita naturae; ex ^o enim gratia dicitur, quia gratis datur and non
ex debito --. And is not a man's Being and Nature given him gratis and non ex
debit^? Indeed had he defined Grace to be quod datur contra meritum, the
contradiction in the terms would have allowed this game at words to be true:
But words it is, and to no purpose, or else I cannot excuse it from blasphemy,
to say that God is not able to make an Angel or any Creature in whom the habits
of Grace or Love shall be connatural? Protestants hold on the contrary, that
some degree of habitual Love was connatural to Adam and the Angels, though not
as essential to their Natures, and so unlosable: And that Love is now called
supernatural, because medicinal supernatural Grace must restore it to corrupted
Nature. Rada the Scotist, Cont. 1. speaks better of supernaturality: For my
part, that which I fear in these high strains of supernaturality, in these
Papists Doctrine, and Sir Henry Van^'s is, ^est it should produce Infidelity
and Saduce^sm; And he that to day holds that the Love to God is so exceeding
far supernatural to perfect Nature it self, may to morrow hold that man's
Species is changed by Grace; And the next day that it is more credible that
man's Nature was never made to love God, or to be glorified, than to believe
that God will either make him of another Species, or give him another Nature,
besides the perfecting of the Nature created: Yea that God cannot make a
Creature that shall naturally love his Maker.
preferment, you would take it to signify half a promise. Now Gods Promises
are not strictly Obligations, any further than the notification of his Will,
and giving the subject a right, is an Obligation; where Gods Perfection is
instead of an Obligation. And is such a Command [Ask, Seek, Accept,] no
notification of his Will that our labor shall not be lost? I do not call it a
Promise: But is it not a signification that God the Rector and Benefactor of
the World, will not let the performer lose his labor.


C. He loses not his labor if he get by it but temporal mercies, and an
abatement of his pains in Hell.


B. Do you thus paraphrase Gods Command, [Seek for Grace, and thou shall have
Health or Riches: or seek for Conversion and Salvation, and thou shall have an
easier Damnation.] This is still a duty that is vain as to the commanded End.


C. I confess it were not in vain if they could do it as he commands: for God
commands them to do it in faith, and spiritual sincerity, which they cannot
do.


B. Do you thus paraphrase the Command, [Seek Faith in Faith, and seek
Sincerity in Sincerity] that is [You that have not Faith and Sincerity, if you
have them already, seek that you may have them.] Did not you confess that they
that have not special Grace are bound to seek it in the use of certain means?


C. They are bound to do it, but they are not able.


B. Did not you confess that they were able by common Grace to do the works of
common Grace? and that in abundance of instances? What is common Grace for, if
they can do nothing by it?


C. It is equal to nothing, for it is not acceptable to God.


B. Did not you confess that it is a preparation to special Grace, and may
bring them nearer to the Kingdom of God?


C. But without Faith it is impossible to please God.


B. But there are several sorts of Faith, and several degrees of pleasing God.
We grant that without special Faith it is impossible so to please God, as to
have Justification, Adoption, or any Title to Heaven, as the members of Christ
have. But by a common Faith men come to be less displeasing to God than grosser
Infidels and Rebels; and are more prepared for converting Grace. You know that
this is the common Doctrine both of our practical and polemical Divines, as you
may see in their Books, and the Synod of Dort.


C. But our Divines against the Arminians often say, That a man that has but
nature and common Grace, cannot use them well.


B. I am resolved not to be cheated by ambiguous words. To use them well
signifies, 1. To use them in love to God as the Ultimate End, and so none but
the godly use any thing: And do not all the Arminians grant you that? 2. Or it
is to use them so much better than worser men, as that they draw nearer God,
and are more prepared for special Grace? And do not all our Divines grant that
they may so far use them well? where then is the difference?


C. The prayer of the Wicked is abomination to the Lord.


B. By [wicked] is meant, either one that is yet unregenerate as such, or one
that is actually set upon wickedness, progressively, and is not about returning
to God. And by [abomination] is meant, either that which God accepts not so
far as to pardon and save him that does it, though he judge him more prepared
for Grace than others; or else that which he totally abhors as being no
preparation to his Grace. A man that is unregenerate may so far seek mercy in a
returning degree yet short of saving Grace, as that it shall not be in vain.
Even an Ahab had experience of this; And so had Nineve and many others: And why
else do you still confess a state of preparatory Grace? Is Gods preparatory
Grace abominable to him? Does Christ give abominable Grace? or is preparation
to Conversion an abominable thing? 2. But the Text speaks of a wicked man as
wicked: He that goes on in a wicked life, and thinks by Sacrifice and
Prayers to pacify God, and make him amends, his Sacrifice and Prayers are
abominable. But wicked men may have somewhat in them that is better than
wickedness: They may have such a belief that God is, and that he is a Rewarder
of them that diligently seek him; yea such a Faith in Jesus Christ, as shall
move them to that sort of repentance and reformation as that they shall be
almost true Christians, and not far from the Kingdom of God. And the wicked man
that does this, does it not as wicked, but by common Grace. And though it be so
far abominable as not to prove him justified, it is not so far abominable as to
be all in vain.


C. But when you have said all, yet they have no Promise.


B. 1. You know, I suppose, how hard it is to understand certainly many Texts
of Scripture, whether they be Promises to such or not! Matthew. 7. 8. Every one
that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, etc. Lam. 3. 25. The Lord
is good to the Soul that seeks him. Amos 5. 4. Seek me, and ye shall live.
Luke 11. 13. God will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him, etc. I only
say that there is difficulty in these and such other Texts. 2. But you confess
that God has formerly made Promises of Church Priviledges, and of temporal
things to unsanctified men: Therefore if he did make a Promise of further helps
of Grace, to them that well use former helps, it were no more incongruous. And
3. Truly I understand not what it is that moves some men to be so much against
such a conception, that God should make any Promise of further Mercy, to the
obedient use of former Mercy, when it is so agreeable to his Rectorship and
Bounty, and to the common interest of Mankind. 4. But yet I assert no such
Promise: All that I plead for is, that you will state the difference aright as
it is, and not misreport it, as if it were greater.


C. How is it that you would have it stated?


B. 1. You are all agreed, that by Nature man can do natural actions; and by
common Grace, he can do the actions of common Grace; and by special Grace, he
can do the acts of special Grace. Are you not all agreed of this much?


C. Yes, this cannot be denied.


B. 2. And you are agreed that the acts of common Grace are such as consist in
a commanded seeking of, or preparing for special Grace.


C. Yes, that also is agreed on.


B. 3. And you are agreed, that the best state of common Grace is in the nature
of the thing, certainly and always, a state of preparation or greater moral
aptitude for special Grace, whether it certainly follow or not.


C. Yes, that is not denied neither.


B. The difference then is but this. One Party says, That [God has signified
certainly his Will, to give special Grace to them that so seek it by common
Grace, as to come up to the highest degree of preparation: And that this
signification of his Will is a Promise]. The other Party says, [That God by
commanding such to seek his special Grace, and beseeching and exhorting them
thereto, and giving them abundant means and helps, does signify his Will, that
they shall not labor in vain if they do it: and gives them so much
encouragement and hope, as that none has cause of remissness by despair, but
all are unexcusable that shall neglect such means and hopes. But that this is
not a proper Promise, because it gives them not a right.]


C. You have truly stated the difference: And I confess that if I were
comforting an afflicted Conscience ready to despair, I should tell such, that a
Command to seek Mercy, implies a certainty that he that so seeks it shall
find it; And if we could but say to men, as the people to the blind man, Behold
he calls thee, It would be near to a promise that he will heal them.


B. But forget not that all this is but your anticipation of the Controversies
about Grace, or Gods Promises, and is no part of the Controversy about man's
power or corruption.


C. But there is a further difference yet. For they say, That man's Will has
power to resist the Grace of God, and frustrate it, which else would be
effectual, if man did not overcome it.


B. You have brought the Controversy now to a strange kind of power, and
further confirm me that this empty [CAN] is the sum of the Controversy, which
is nothing but a sound. This which you call power is nothing but natural power
as morally corrupt and impotent. If it be non-agendo, that you mean they can
resist, as by not-believing, not loving God, etc. What power is necessary to
it? Is it an act of power, not to love God? Next say, that a dead man has
power not to live, and a dumb man has power to be silent; and a blind man is
able not to see. If it be agendo that you mean that they resist, the act as an
act in genere is an act of that natural power which God himself gives,
upholdeth, and by universal concurse acts: and so far it is no resistance.
But as that act has the prohibited Object, rather than another, so it is sin:
And your meaning is that they say, Man can sin. And indeed is this the
Controversy? Have you been blaming the Arminians, advancing man's natural Power
and Will, and now do you become the advancers of it? Who advances or praises
man more? He that says, He can sin? Or he that says, He cannot sin? Even now
you pleaded, that men cannot believe, and will you now plead, that they cannot
choose but believe? Is it a power to sin, that you accuse them for asserting?


C. They cannot believe without special Grace: But they cannot choose but
believe if they have it.


B. It Is true: Because it is not that which we call special Grace, if it cause
them not to believe: And so it were a contradiction to say, That they have
Faith, and they have not Faith. But this [cannot choose] is not an impotency
[for to believe is an act of power]: But it is merely the name of a logical
impossibility that these two should consist, [He believes and he believes
not.] He that by Grace believes, has that natural power which of it self is
able not to believe (if you will call it ability): But it is power determined
to believe; and so Faith is become necessary, when a man has it necessitate
existentiae. But the asserting power to sin, and to be an Unbeliever, I will
never charge on the Arminians, when I would blame them for advancing man.


C. But it is a power to overcome Gods Grace, which they assert.


B. Read but Dr. Twisse his judgment of Resistance, and you will call it no
more an overcoming; any otherwise than a weight overcomes my strength, which I
can lift up, and will not. But I tell you, I will not be cheated with ambiguous
words. 1. Either you mean an active or passive overcoming. 2. And either you
mean an overcoming of Gods utmost exerted Power by a greater Power; or you mean
an overcoming of Gods Will, and his Power exerted with an absolute Will of
efficiency; or you mean the non-efficiency or non-prevalency of such an Act of
God, as comes without any Decree or absolute Will of prevailing, but with a
Will of leaving the success to man's free Will: (as in Adam's case.)

1. Speaking improperly, you may say that all men that are not softened,
convinced, converted by the means which God thereto appoints, overcome God,
in that they overcome the means.

2. Thus in not-repenting, not-believing, not-loving, etc. the less power any
man has, the more he passively overcomes: (as a hard stone overcomes the
Hammer that breaks it not.)

3. No Arminian holds that man is stronger than God, and overcomes his Power
by a greater Power: Out of Bedlam none have such thoughts that are awake.

4. None of them think that any Act of Gods Power is overcome, or is
unsuccessful, which is exercised with his absolute Will or Decree of
prevailing, or of the effect.

5. But they think that in some cases, yea ordinarily Gods Will is freely to
exert no more of his power toward the causing of a commanded act, than what
shall give man a power to obey, with some assisting motives, and leave the
success or effect to his free Will. That God does so sometimes, is proved by
the case of Adam. Now whether you will call this overcoming or not, and whether
you will say, Adam overcame Gods Grace, or Gods Grace overcame not Adam's Will,
is but a Logomachy. The thing in question, is nothing but sinning against that
degree of Grace, which enabled man to have done better. But all this belongs
to the controversy of Grace, and not of man's power: unless you think sin a
powerful honorable act.


C. At least in this they overvalue man's power, in that they hold, That man's
Will has power to determine the influx of God, and so man shall rule his
Maker: when Gods influx or premotion shall but leave it to the Will of man,
what shall be the success.


B. This touches physical predetermination; and needs no other answer than
is often given. 1. You wrong them: They hold not all (properly) that man's Will
determines Gods Will, either as to the essence of the Divine Will, or as to
the Act, connoting the mere Object: But only that it can determine of a common
effect, which Gods and man's Free Will would produce if both concur. 2. They do
not think that m^^^ Will has any the ^least operation causally on Gods Will in
it self; but only that variations are made by variety of recipient
dispositions, where the influx of the Agent is universal and equal: And so that
man's receptive indisposition may be a cause that Gods Influx work not the same
effect on him which it would do on a disposed subject. 3. And they say not this
of Gods absolute Will and Power, but of his power operating restrai^edly by his
own free Will; when he will exert no more, than what shall be successful only
on a free concurring and disposed Subject, and not on a resisting undisposed
one.

It pleases God that the Sun shall operate but with a common Operation,
variable in the effects, by the various disposition of Recipients. The Flowers
spring and are sweet, and Weeds stink, Trees grow, and Stones grow not;
humanity is acted by it in men, and not in Fruits. God could have made the
Influx of this Sun to have been causa specialis, and to have turned a Weed into
a Rose, or a Stone into a Tree, if he had pleased: but he does not. Now will
you say that we are erroneous, and over magnify the recipient, if we say that
its disposition is the cause of much of this diversity? and that the stone is
stronger than the Sun and overcomes it? No: the Sun did all that was properly
intended: Its beams came down on the Stone, as well as on the Animals and
Plants. It warmed it, though it did not quicken it. So God does his work on the
Will of Sinners: His Influx is terminated on their Will, and had he sent it
with a resolution to convert him, it should have done it. But seeing he sent it
limitedly, only to enable a man to Will, and to concur so far as shall prevail,
if he do what his own Will is able to do by selfexcitation, its no overcoming
God, if the man sin. Once more, I say, that men that fear God should be very
cautelous what they say in all Controversies which are resolved into the nature
of Divine Volitions, and their way of efficiency; Seeing, 1. Will in God is not
the same thing as in man; an Appetite. 2. Its own determination, and the way of
its determining us are confessed by the subtilest to be utterly unsearchable:
Says Vasquez (in Thom. q. 19. disp. 80. p. 503.) Quo autem pacto Deus seipsum
determinet ad hoc potius quam ad illud, ineffabile sane est; nisi-quod nostro
modo intelligendi intelligimus essentiam Dei, quae est ejus voluntas, habere
circa futura peculiarem rationem voluntatis cum respectu illo rationis: Et ideo
dixi, in hac controversia intelligi posse certa ratiocinatione Quid not sit:
Quid tamen sit, and quo pacto voluntas determinetur, explicari non posse: So
that what Gods Act of willing or working is, besides his essence and the
effect, they all confess that they are ignorant. And yet shall the more
ignorant contend?


The third Crimination.
C. They hold free will to good: that unregenate men have free will Austin li.
1. de G^n. Contr. Manich. c. 3. professes, That all men may believe if they
will; and justifies it in his Retractations: But if the Will of man be corrupt
and averse from believing, we justly say, such a man cannot believe, yet this
is an impotency, moral only, which is to be distinguished from impotency
natural. For notwi^hstanding this, it may be truly said, that all men may
believe if they will: And herein consists the natural Liberty of the Will: The
moral Liberty consists rather in a sanctified inclination unto that which is
good, whereby it is freed from the power of Sin and Satan, etc. But I never
find that Arminians do distingu^sh these. Twisse against Hoord, li ^. p. ^^
without Gods special Grace; and regenerate men have free will to do good and
forbear evil, even when Grace effects not the event.


B. This is an English Objection. What men that write in Greek or Latin deny
Free Will? Did not all the ancient Fathers and Churches hold it till
Augustine's time, of whom we have any notice? And are you coming to turn
Christ's Body into a Heresy, or the members of an Harlot by your charge? Did
not Augustine, Prosper and Fulgentius hold it? Who denied it for above a
thousand or thirteen hundred years after Christ? And do you deny all free will
your self?


C. No; but it is free will to spiritual good.


B. What need I tire you with the same things again. 1. Read but what I said to
A. of Free Will. 2. And see the Table of it in the Second Book. 3. And peruse
what I have just now said of the power of the Will, and you will see that here
is no more necessary. Make not new words to seem a new Controversy. Put but
Liberty for Power, and and the answer to the last Crimination serves to this.


C. The tenth Article of the Church of England says, [The condition of man,
after the Fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his
own natural strength and good works, to Faith and calling upon God: wherefore
we have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the
Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good Will, and working
with us when we have that good Will.


B. I had rather you dealt plainly, and kept close to the word of God, and
evidence of Truth, than seek shelter from the words of those in power. But what
Jesuit or Arminian will not subscribe to this? Who doubts of it? How often do
they all maintain the necessity of this preventing and cooperating Grace? But
by the words [no Power] you must not understand no natural power or faculty,
but no moral power: For 1. Else man is no man. 2. It is a moral Subject which
they speak of, and must accordingly be understood.

But what Free Will is it that you deny? Tell me what you mean by Free Will?


C. If you know what Will is, and what Free is, you need no exposition: the
words are plain enough of themsel^^s.


B. Thus do men strive about words that profit not, to subvert the hearers, and
increase to more ungodliness. Answer me these Questions.

Quest. 1. Has not the Will more than a Liberty Political, or by Gods Law to
forbear sin, and to do all good? Does God forbid it?


C. No; he commands it, which is more than leave or license.


B. Quest. 2. Do you think that the Will is forced? Is it not a contradiction
to Will unwillingly eodem respectu?


C. Yes: we all hold freedom from compulsion.


B. Quest. 3. Is not man's Will a self-determining faculty or principle
naturally; so as to be Domina suorum actuum under God?


C. Yes, under God; the understanding directing it.


B. Quest. 4. Has not the Will power and liberty to choose evil, or to sin,
without Gods predetermining premotion?


C. I dare not deny it, though many do*


B. Quest. 5. Has not the Will a certain command over the inferior faculties
respectively, and can move or not move them?


C. Yes: supposing it moved accordingly it self.


B. Quest. 6. Can Angels or Devils necessitate the Will by any efficient
predetermining premotion?


C. No: I think not; for its commonly thought so.


B. Quest. 7. Can any man by force or flattery necessitate another man to will
any thing evil or good efficiently?


C. No: They may strongly tempt, but not necessitate.


B. Quest. 8. Can mere Objects as such necessitate the Will to a comparative
The Opinion of Aegidiu^ Roman, how the Will is actuated and determined I will
set down, though not wholly approving it, Quodlib. 3. qu. 15. p. 177, 178: A
fine, and ab ^o quod apprehenditur sub omni ratione boni, voluntas Activatur
and Necessitatur. Ab his autem quae sunt ad finem and ab his quae non
apprebenduntur sub ratione omni boni, potest Actuari, sed non necessitari: A
^ullo autem potestviolentari. -- Ad finem nec activando nec determinando
semovet: Ad ea autem quae sunt ad finem, facta in actu per finem potest se
determinare, sed non activare: Quantum ergo ad actuationem nihil seiplum
secundum seipsum movere potest: aliter idem secundum idem esset actus and
potentia. -- Nunquam voluntas per s^ and direct actuat seipsum: sed bonum
apprehensum est quod causat Volitionem in voluntate: and quod actuat eam. --
Sed super hujusmodi Volitione voluntas habet dominium quia in potestate
voluntatis est sistere vel non sistere in tali Volitione. -- Lib^ra est quia
cum intellectus ^ffert ei, e. g fornicationem sub utraque ratione, sub mala and
sub bona oportet quod utraque consideratio sit Volita: Quamdiu enim stat in
utraque tamdiu vult de utraque considerare determinat autem se hoc modo: Quia
est domina sui actus potest totaliter desistere a consideratione unius, and
totaliter insistere in consideratione alterius: Vel potest non totaliter
desistere ab uno, nec totaliter intendere ali^d: sed magis esse intenta ad unum
quam ad aliud. Si autem totaliter desistat velle considerare de inordinatione,
vel notabiliter sit attenta ad considerandum de delectatio^e, modicum autem
attendat ad inordinationem, tunc fornicatio sic apprehensa activabit came and
causabit in ^a volitionem] So that he thinks that the free omission of the
Wills command of necessary thoughts is the beginning of Sin: But what he says
of the Wills being actuated per finem and non per seipsam needs better
explication. Objects actuate but morally, that is, are occasions, and quosi
materia disposita ad actu^ terminationem; but it is the faculty or form that
actuateth by proper vital agency*

Et postea Qu. 16. page 183. Etsi entitas effectus reducatur in entitatem
causae, non tamen defectus reducitur in defectum ^^^sdem causae. Non deficit
causa, sed effectus ille deficit a causa. Etsi non sit voluntas in actu nisi
prius sit in actu intellectu^, non sequitur quod non possit voluntas deficere
nisi prius deficiat intellectus: Absque enim eo quod intellectus male proponat
voluntati, potest se voluntas determinare male -- viz. si sit intenta circa
delectationem, non circa inordinatione^.


act, that is, to choose this rather than that, (de mediis)?


C. To good they cannot: but I doubt of it as to evil, whether Objects do not
necessitate some men, so that they cannot forbear.


B. Who made these Objects, and causes their nature and existence?


C. God made all things: Meat, Drink, Pulchritude, Money, etc.


B. Does God then necessitate men efficiently to Sin by Objects.


C. I say not so: For Objects are not efficient.


B. True; as Objects they are not: Therefore they effect not: Therefore they do
not necessitate properly, which is an efficiency: Indeed they are but causae
quasi materiales actus in specie seu individuo, and constitute it, and no act
is without its Object: But they effect it not.


C. Does not the Sun effect our sight by its light?


B. Yes: but not as a mere Object, for so it only terminateth and constituteth
it as the matter: But it causes it efficiently as an Agent.


C. Well! I will suppose that so far as a wicked man is necessitated to sin, it
is his pravity that does it circa objectum (ut sine quo non) and not the Object
it self efficiently and in proper speech.


B. Quest. 9. Is the Will efficiently necessitated by the senses or fantasy?


C. No otherwise than as by the Objects which they do present?


B. Quest. 10. Is it so necessitated by the Passions?


C. I know not whether I may say the Passions do it, or its own pravity, when
the passions do disturb and tempt it.


B. Quest. 11. Is it so necessitated by the Intellect?


C. So Camero and several others thought, and consequently by the Objects: But
I have many reasons against that Opinion quoad media, in comparate elections.
But the Intellect may necessitate it circa finem; 2. And quoad media, in
specificatione, etsi non quoad exercitium actus.


B. 1. Quoad finem, it is not the Intellect that necessitateth, but the natural
inclination of the Will; Intellection is but a previous act sine quo non. 2.
Where there is no exercitium actus, there is no specification. Therefore you
can only say, Non specificatur sine ductu intellectus; but the Will can prevent
that ductum intellectus, if not suspend its act also after it.

Quest. 12. Can any one but God, by force, impress ill habits on the Will.


C. No: we were miserable if any could make us wicked.


B. Quest. 13. Will God ever make any such evil habits in the Will.


C. As a habit he may cause it, but not as evil.


B. Quest. 14. Do you think that a Sinner is necessitated to every sin that he
commits, or to every Duty which he omitteth, so that he could not do
otherwise?


C. I think he is under a necessity of sinning: but I cannot say it of every
sin which he commits.


B. You before granted many things to be in the power of the Will: And can you
deny that power to be free, that the same things are in its liberty: I will
tire you no more; but desire you, 1. To peruse all your former concessions
about man's power. And 2. To peruse all the twenty Concessions of A. Confer. 5.
Criminat. 1. where he denies Free Will in all those senses, and then tell me,
where is the difference?


C. They think that our freedom is inconsistent with necessity; but so do not
we, who think that Decree and Predetermination do necessitate.


B. I have forced you before to confess your concord here. A Logical necessitas
consequentiae in ordine probationis, Arminius and almost all men confess does
result from mere prescience. And Dr. Twisse professes, that neither the
Protestants or the Schoolmen hold any other necessity to result from Decree or
Predetermination.


C. But the pravity of the wicked necessitateth their Wills to evil.


B. 1. Not to all evil: For 1. Men commit not all: 2. And you before confessed,
that men can do more good and less evil than they do. 2. The truth is, as I
distinguished power before into Physical and Moral, so must we do Liberty and
Necessity. The Will has its physical Liberty, and is free from physical
necessitation, in all the sin that men commit, and in all the good they do (I
think) though not from all Divine predetermining necessitation to good: Men do
not good and evil as Bruits do their acts. But the Will has a kind of moral
necessity of doing evil, by radicated habits, and has no further moral
Liberty, than it is freed from the power of those evil inclinations. But these
habits necessitate not physically, but morally, and that only to some sin, but
not to all. A man can act contrary to a good or evil habit, as common
experience proves. But because men's Volitions and Actions are ordinarily or
much agreeable to their fixed inclining habits, therefore we use to say that
morally such can do no better; meaning that they will not.


C. But sure you would not have me believe that there is no difference betwein
us and the Arminians in the point of Free Will?


B. If there be any, either you know it, and can name it your self, or you know
it not, and then may be ashamed to contend about it. Quest. 1. Tell me plainly,
Is not all the Liberty which you deny a moral Liberty a malo, from sinful
dispositions of the Soul?


C. There is much dispute about Liberty from Divine predetermination; But I
will not meddle any further with that. I never contended against any Free Will,
but freedom from sinful habits, as supposed to be in men more than it is.


B. Quest. 2. Do you not hold then that all men have Free Will so far as they
have effectual Grace, and Sanctification.


C. Yes, in that degree: For voluntas per gratiam liberata est libera.


B. Quest. 3. Do the Arminians hold that the Wills of the graceless and
unsanctified are freed from sinful habits? and so are morally free to holy acts.


C. No, I confess they do not: Corvinus and others often say, that it is Grace
that gives us the vires credendi which we had not before; But some of them
deny any habits to be in the Will: But these say the Understanding must be
enlightened before we are able to choose aright.


B. Quest. 4. Does not common Grace give men a moral Liberty to common good,
from all necessitating inclinations to the contrary?


C. Igranted it before as to Power, and therefore must as to Liberty.


B. Where then is the difference between you?


C. I take it to be here, that the Arminians and Jesuits say that the Wills of
the Unregenerate are not only free to common preparatory good acts, but to the
special acts of Faith and true Repentance and Conversion unto God, which we
deny.


B. Either you mean this of all unregenerate men, or but of some: 1. Of all
they say it not: For the Synod of Dort charge them but with saying that men
can use their naturals, so as by degrees to come up to Faith. They commonly
hold, that ordinarily the Will must be prepared by commoner Grace, before it
(morally) can believe, though such are freely Unbelievers, having a natural
liberty or power to the contrary, though undisposed, and have a moral power and
liberty to some preparatory acts. 2. But if you mean it of those that are come
up to the highest preparatory acts, and also have Gods Grace ad posse credere,
where there is the posse morale, there is moral Liberty so far. But whether
this be really any man's case, or how many, to have Grace to enable them to
believe who yet never do believe, is a Controversy which I find not
Protestants apt to meddle with; And it is too hard for us to decide.


C. That is the very heart of the Controversy, whether ever God give immediate
Power and Liberty to believe to any one, who never believes and uses it.


B. Where do you find this Controversy much meddled with, unless by the
Schoolmen, who assert sufficient uneffectual Grace to believe? But this
belongs to the next Article (of Grace) though here you anticipate it. But if
this must be it, I shall briefly dispatch it. 1. Adam's instance has already
made you confess, that such a thing there has been, as Grace ad posse and non
ad agere, called sufficient but uneffectual Grace? And your confession of all
the foresaid powers that men have by common Grace (to do more good and forbear
more evil than they do) yields that yet such a sort of sufficient Grace ad
aliquid there is.

2. The course of Gods Administrations, makes it seem most probable, that some
and many have such a mere sufficient Grace to believe and repent: For if Adam
had such a Grace enabling him to have fulfilled the whole Law of Innocence, it
seems proportionable that the Rector of the World give some such a Grace to
fulfill the mediate Law of believing and repenting, who use it not.

3. It Is common with Dr. Twisse to cite Augustine with approbation as saying,
Posse credore est omnium, credere vero fidelium, and to make this the great
difference of effectual Grace from that which is more common, that it gives
not only the Posse velle and credere, but the Act.

4. But yet because we can know no more of Gods secret workings than he
discovers, I take it to be dark and dubious: But that this is certain, that
whoever wants the power or liberty of Will (moral) to repent and believe,
they are penally denied it, for not using that power and liberty which they
had, to inferior preparatory Acts. And you can carry this Controversy of
Free Will no further.

And is it not then a horrid shame, to hear honest people so seduced into
Love-killing factious sidings by their Teachers, as that Boys and Women speak
of wiser and better persons with disaffection and reproach, saying, O he is a
Free-willer, or he holds Free Will, when they know not what they talk of: but
are made believe that it is some monstrous impious Opinion, making a man almost
an Heretic? When even you that lead them are unable to show me any proved (at
least considerable) difference at all.


C. Are there so many Books written de libero arbitrio between Jesuits and
Arminians, and us, and yet is there no difference?


B. 1. I do not say that no man that ever wrote of it, has wrangled himself
into any words of ill signification, or taking up any more than is defensible.
2. But if the main Controversy be not Logomachy, why do not you tell me what
the real difference is? It is not fair-dealing to make me ridicuous for calling
to you to name the difference, and yet your self refuse to name it, and make it
good. Will you assert what you know not, and accuse men without proof?


The fourth Crimination.
C. They hold that the Unregenerate are not dead in sin, and void of all
spiritual good. Of this read Milancth^n's Answer to all their Objections, in
L^^. com. de liber. ar^. c. 7. and Strigelius on him.



B. Do you think that they differ from you herein? This was spoken to before.
1. They hold that the Unregenerate have natural life, and so do you. 2. They
hold that their faculties are bonum natural, and so do you. 3. They hold that
common Grace is bonum morale, at least Analogically so called, and so do you.
Indeed as bonum is ex causis integris none on Earth is morally good, no nor
does any thing that is bonum morale, because it is imperfect; and so our
defective holiness is not bonum morale in that sense: But as good is so called
from the predominant Will, the godly have bonum morale: And as it is
denominated from that which is not predominant, yet real in the Will, the
Unregenerate in their common Grace have bonum morale. For common Grace is not
merely quid physicum, nor merely sin. 4. De nomine, whether we shall call this
spiritual good or not, when we have a Grammar written from Heaven, or by
Apostles, we shall have more mind to dispute with you. But I told you once
already, that 1. As to the efficient, it is spiritual, that is, common Grace is
wrought by Gods Spirit. 2. As to the end slightly and uneffectually wished it
is spiritual; But as to the truest end (the pleasing and glorifying of God)
predominantly and effectually willed and intended, it is not spiritual. 3. Nor
as to the manner, if the exercise of such an intention be called the manner.
Tell not men that we differ, because you can bring forth ambiguous words, and
there dream of a difference; but plainly tell me, Are not you and they thus far
agreed? and is not this all that is in your charge?


The fifth Crimination.
C. They hold that man is not merely passive in his first Conversion to God,
which is contrary to us and to the Truth.


B. When will the Lord give his Ministers as much skill to heal, as to wound?
to find out real concord as to make differences in their Dreams and Fictions?
Do you think indeed that you differ in this point? The Jesui^es with the other
Schoolmen commonly distinguish with Augustine the Grace which sine nobis in
nobis operatur, from that which after cum nobis operatur; The first they call
Operantem, the second Co-operantem: The first preventing, the second
con-comitant; the first infused, the second governing; the first exciting, the
second Adjuvant: Of which see Vasquez in 1. Tho. q. 23. disp. 88. c. 9, etc.

Alvar. l. 12. disp. 116. p. 473. In omni libero arbitrio creato, qua ratione
creatum est, reperitur aliqua indifferentia seu potentia passiva secundum
aliquam rationem. Nam 1. Lib. arb. creatum non est purus actus, nec lib. per
essentiam 'ut Deus --. 2. Ex sua natura est percabile. -- 3. Non est impliciter
primum se movens, sed movet se libere, motum tamen a Deo prius ration^. Here a
Jesuit, Vasqu. 1. Tho. disp. 12. n. 4 Prima gratia non datur been
laborantibus, neque expectantibus, neque qu^rentibus ut definitur, Council.
Aransic. 2. Can. ^ 4. 5. and 6. sed sedentibus in tenebris and umbra mortis.





C. Or else I must think that we may be ashamed to show our faces to the
people, if we make them believe that we differ when we do not, and thereby stir
up their distaste of others.


B. The question may have three several senses of passiveness, as man is
considered, 1. In his Nature. 2. In his Action. And therein, 1. In the
reception of the Divine Influx. 2. In the acting thereupon. And so the
questions are, 1. Whether man's Soul be an active nature, or passive matter
only? 2. Whether man's Soul be merely passive in the reception of the Divine
Influx ad agendum? 3. Whether man's Soul be merely passive in its own first act
of Faith or Repentance? Tell me, Are not these three distinct questions? And
are they not all that you can devise? (unless you will make another, whether we
are merly passive in the preparatory part?) And are you not now ashamed to
confess that you need any answer to any one of these three questions.

I. All the world is agreed save the Hobbists, and Somatists, and Sadduces,
that man's Soul is not mere passive nature, but is an active nature, inclined to
Action, as passive Elements are to non-action: And that when God moves it, he
moves not Earth, Water or Air, but a Spirit, whose nature is self-moving (as
fire) under the first mover.

II. All the world is agreed, that the Soul and all Spirits are not, so purely
and merely active as God is, but are partly and first passive; and that they do
and needs must be receptive of the Divine Influx before they can act: For all
Creatures depend on the first Cause, and both Being, Nature and Action would
cease, if Gods emanation to it ceased. And all the world agrees, that no man
before Conversion or after does any act of Faith, Love, etc. no nor eating, and
drinking, and going, etc. but he is in the first instant passive as influenced
by God, before he is active. Who ever doubted whether physice recipere be pati?
Did you ever know such a man?

III. All the world is agreed, that man is not merely passive when he acts.
An Act is an Act sure! And to believe, repent and love is an Act, and an act of
man's Soul. And Scotus who thinks that immanent Act: are qualities (as we
think of habits) yet thinks that the Soul is truly active antecedently to
that quality. Where now is there any room for a Controversy?


C. You would make me believe that we are very ignorant Wranglers, that make a
noise in our dream, and will not suffer others to rest! Do not the Arminians
say, that man concurreth with God to the first act of his own Faith? yea that
he makes Gods Grace effectual.


B. You shall not again tempt me to anticipate the question of effectual Grace,
though enough is said before to it as far as this Objection is concerned in it.
Gods Influx on the Soul is one thing: man's natural faculty receiving that
Influx passively is another: And man's Act is another. To thrust in here a
general word [man concurreth] and so to run away from clear and necessary
distinction, is not the part of a man of knowledge. Did ever man yet deny that
man herein concurreth as aforesaid? 1. Man concurreth not to make his Soul, nor
to continue it in being or power. 2. Man concurreth not as any efficient of
Gods Influx on his Soul ad agendum. 3. But man receptively or passively
concurreth as a Receiver of that Influx. 4. And man actively thereupon
concurreth to believe and repent. Is not all this true?

But you would tempt the Arminians to say, that it is you and not they that are
herein to be accused? For what mean you else, by confining the Controversy to
the first act of Faith, or to our first Conversion? Would you make men believe,
that a converted man is not as truly passive in believing, loving God, etc. as
the unconverted is? Must not the holiest person be passive in receiving the
Divine Influx on his Soul, before, he do any holy Act? You seem to deny this?
and then you are the person that err, by ascribing too much to man. If not,
show the difference.


C. There is a habit of Faith goes before the first Act: And it is in respect
to that habit that the Arminians say we are active procurers of it; which we
deny. But the godly operate from a habit.


B. You speak a private Opinion of your own brain, against the sense of the
Concordant Churches. Where does Scripture say, that a habit of Faith goes
before the first Act? Mr. Pemble Vind. Grat^
says so indeed: yet he sometime calls that but a Seed, which at other times
he calls a habit. Dr. Ames in his Medulla contradicts it. Bishop Downame In
the end of his Treatise Of Perseverance.

Le Blank. de diss. Great. 2. These. 22. speaking of our being passive as to
operating Grace, says truly, [Non videntur hac in part Reformati a sanioribus
inter Scholasticos dissentire, licet aliis verbis mentem suam exprimant] The
Schoolmen and Protestants little differ in the method of operations of Grace,
and all are drawn by Controversies too near curiosity, beyond their reach.


has written a large Confutation of Mr. Pemble. The generality of Protestant
Divines contradict it, and thus (with Rollock de Vocat.) distinguish Vocation
from Sanctification, that they suppose Vocation to cause the first act of Faith
and Repentance, and Sanctification to give us the fixed habit, the act
intervening. Mr. Tho. Hooker is large upon it, in his Souls Vocation. Will you
start one man's Opinion, which Calvinists and Arminians are against, and feign
this to be a difference between Calvinists and Arminians? And perhaps Mr.
Pemble himself, by his first semen or habit, means no more, than the Divine
Influx ad actum received. I have before told you how unsearchable the nature of
that Influx is, and how hard it is to know the true nature of an Habit.


C. But Mr. Pemble says, It is the Spirit that is given before we believe.


B. Away with Ambiguity. By the Spirit is meant either the mere received Influx
of the Spirit ad agendum; and so it is granted: Bad men receive the Spirits
Influx to such acts as he moves them to. Or else you mean, the foresaid fixed
Habits and Dispositions, to a ready and facile ordinary Operation. Or else you
mean, the Spirit given relatively by Covenant, undertaking to be the Sanctifier
and Preserver of the Soul. In both these latter senses, the Spirit is not given
before the first act of Faith, to Infidels. They have not the fixed habits of
Holiness, Love, Hope, Obedience, etc. Otherwise they were holy Infidels. No
Scripture speaks it: nay contrarily it promises the Spirit as to Believers,
and affirms it given after Faith, Ephesians. 1. 13. Joh. 14. 17. and 15. 26. Gal.
3. 14. and 4. 6. Joh. 7. 39. And that the Holy Ghost is not given in Covenant
to Infidels I need not prove, to them that will not baptize Infidels.


The sixth Crimination.
C. They hold that none are damned only for Adam's sin imputed. Yes, Vasqu. and
other Jesuits hold, that Infants that have no remedy, are excluded from Glory
only for Original Sin.



B. And I think so do all Christians, or should do. 1. Of all the Adult there
is no question. Is there any that has no sin of his own? Or does God forgive
all their own sin to the damned? And as to Infants, 1. Wise men should not vex
Gods Church with matters no more revealed. 2. All the Scripture makes them
members, as it were, of their nearer Parents as well as of Adam, and as I have
proved to you, threatens them for nearer Parents sins (even in the Second
Commandment, and Exodus 34.) as well as for Adam's. And all the world being,
Genesis 3. 15. brought under a Covenant or Law of Grace, which conditionally
pardons all sin, the not-believing of the Parent, is the cause of the
non-liberation or not-pardoning of himself and his Infant. How can you say then
that they suffer only for Adam's sin? 3. And sure their natural pollution is
their own sin: And the Church of England, Art. 9. thus describes Original Sin:
[Original Sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly
talk) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man, that
naturally is engendered of the Offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone
from Original Righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil: So that
the Flesh lusts always contrary to the Spirit: and therefore in every person
born into this world, it deserves Gods Wrath and Damnation. And this infection
of Nature does remain, yea, in them that are regenerated, whereby the lust of
the Flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound, the Wisdom, some
Sensuality, some the Affection, some the Desire of the Flesh, is not subject to
the Law of God.] (Though I think that Text, Romans 8. speak not of the
Regenerate.)


C. I include this Corruption when I speak of Adam's sin imputed; And though
the Article mention not this Imputation, I suppose it was but through
forgetfulness, and not that they denied it, as no part of Original Sin.


B. Vid. Chamier Paustr at To. 3. l. 1. c. 2. 7, 8. Contr Pigh. and Salmeron.
and Pet. Mart. in Romans 5. and Placaeum in These. Salmuriens. Vol. 1. and in
Tractat. pecub. defens. de Imputatpeccati Adae: who are less for the imput. of
Adam's sin than others, e contra vid. And Rivet's enumeration of Writers for
that imputation, Defens. Council. etc.
I have nothing to do with that, and am no judge of other men's thoughts that
are dead. All that I desire you to observe is, that all understanding
Protestants agree, that the sole Law of Innocence [Obey perfectly and live] is
not the Law that God governs the World, or any in it, by, since the Covenant
of Grace was made, but all are under a Law of Mercy: And therefore Parents and
Children, in and out of the Church, are judged by that Law which they were
under, and not by the Law of Innocence alone, without any remedying Law of
Mercy.


THE Seventh Days Conference Between A. and B. Of SUFFICIENT and EFFECTUAL
GRACE.
A. You have made us hitherto believe that the Controversies about
Predestination and Redemption, are all resolved into those of Free Will and
Grace, and if there be no difference here, there can be none there. Let us now
then come to the core of the Controversy, which is all.


The first Crimination.
1. The Calvinists deny sufficient Grace, By sufficient Grace is meant that by
which a man may be saved, and without which he cannot, in q. Vasqu. in 1. Tho.
q. 23. disp. 97. c. 1. 1. Some *say that to some men for former sin, God
penally denies Grace sufficient for Faith and Repentance: So Tostat. in Mal.
4. q. 12. Greg. Armin. 1. d. 46. qu. unica Cajet. in Joh. c. 19. Roffens.
Contr. Luther. ar. 26. Tapper. in art. 7. page 254. Henric. quodl. 8. q. 5.

2. Others say, that auxilium sufficiens is offered to all, and denied to no
man in this life, how obdurate hour, which Vasq. in 1. Tho. q. 23. d. 98. c.
3. says is the commoner Opinion of the Schools: Ita Adrian. in 4. q. 1. de
poenit. Sotus de not. and gra. c. 18. Driedo de Red. c. 3. and 5. Vega in Conc.
Trid. l. 13. c. 13, etc.

But Vasquez says, cap. 5. That ad poenitentiam and ad fidem, it is non
omnibus momentis, sed certis temporibus datum. They commonly agree to
Augustines words, though none know just how God changes Wills, Certum est nos
velle cum volumus sed ille facit ut velimus bonum. -- Et certum est nos facere
cum facimus, sed ille facit ut faciamus, praebendo vires efficacissimas -- De
Great. and lib. arb. l. c. 16. etc. 17. Ut v^limus sine nobis operatur. These
words put his Expositors hard to it. And Vasquez says, That ut is here put
finally, and the meaning is that to make us willing, he gives us (without us)
his preventing or operating Grace, or as Greg. his impulse: And if it mean any
more it cannot be true: For doubtless man is the Agent or Willer when he
wills.

So li. 1. ad Simplician. q. 2. Aliter D^us praestat ut velimus, aliter
praestat quod voluerimus. Ut velimus enim and suum esse v^luit and nostrum:
Suum vocando, nostrum sequendo quod autem voluerimus solus praestat; id est,
posse been agere and semper beat videre,] where the words also are obscure:
but Vasquez notes, that here the [ut] is not final as before; and that
[Voluerimus] is not preterpefect tense, but the future tense: as the following
words explain it: else he should contradict himself.

Et de Eccles. dogm. c. 21. Manet ad qu^r^ndam salutem ^rbitrii libertas; sed
admonent^ prius Deo, and invitante ad salutem, ut vel eligat, vel sequatur: Et
initium salutis nostra Deo miserante habemus: ut acquiescamus saluti-^erae
inspirationi nostra potestatis est.


and so make all men that are damned to suffer for mere Impossibilities, having
no Grace to enable them to escape Sin or Misery; And consequently that Adam's
sin only was avoidable, for which all the World is cast into a necessity of
sinning, and none but a few elect ones have ever had so much as the possibility
of any true remedy. Yea many of them deny that Adam himself had sufficient
Grace.

B. 1. The word [Sufficient] is sometimes taken, for all that is any way
needful, and so it is that they commonly deny sufficiency of uneffectual Grace.
More Grace might have certainly produced the Effect. A man is commonly said to
have enough who needs no more. Now more is here useful, needful, desirable to
the facilitating and ascertaining the event. If you are not agreed with them in
this, why do you pray for more Grace, and labor for more, and take it to be a
sign of sincerity to desire more. For if the Regenerate have not Grace enough,
surely the Unregenerate have not.

2. But in this Controversy the Dominicans and Jesuits, by sufficient, mean
that which gives the posse agere, that is, so much as is of absolute necessity
to the act, without which it cannot be done, and with which alone it can or may
be done. And in this sense the Protestants generally, and the Synod of Dort
particularly deny not that there is such a thing as sufficient Grace. I have
often told you, that 1. They confess it in the instance of Adam. 2. They confess
it in the case of common Grace, enabling men to common preparatory duty, which
many are able to do, and do not; as I have evinced before in many instances,
and the Synod, and specially the British and Breme Divines assert. 3. And as to
the point of Faith it self, whether any unregenerate man have sufficient Grace
to believe, which is not effectual, I find few meddling much with it. 4. But
they commonly (I think) agree, that all regenerate men themselves have
sufficient Grace for many an act of Faith, Love, Obedience which they never do.
Is it not one of the Opinions which at Dort and frequently these Divines
reject, as falsely imputed to them, that a man can do no more good, and forbear
no more evil than he does? And if he can do more, he has power to do more: And
power to act, is that which is called sufficient Grace.

Therefore I need not trouble you any more with this Controversy, seeing under
both the notions of Power and Liberty, it is decided, and confessed by you to
be so before.

Remember that all sufficient Grace is effectual; but not effectual to the act:
It does efficere potentiam, enableth men to act: but does not cause the act it
self, unless it be efficax ad actum, as well as ad potentiam. How ordinarily do
they profess the possibility of doing more than is done, by godly and ungodly,
and that all the power that men have is not reduced into act. Yea when some
assert Predetermination it self, they say that it does not destroy Liberty or
Power ad contrarium, but only determine it.


A. It is bad enough that they deny all sufficient Grace to believe that is not
effectual, though not to other acts.


B. You wrong them: They do not so: Have I not told you now, that they commonly
grant that even the godly themselves have sufficient Grace to believe, which is
not effectual as to many an act of Faith? And as to Unbelievers, 1. They say
that all have not Grace sufficient or necessary to believe: And so say the
Arminians. 2. But whether any one have or no, who believe not, they rather
leave it to the Searcher of hearts as an unknown thing to them, than deny it.
But they seem to infer that it is most likely to be so, in that 1. It is so
with the godly themselves. 2. And with all other men, as to other acts of
common Grace. And they all agree (as I said before) that no man is denied power
to believe savingly, but for not using as he could his antecedent commoner
Grace. And I think neither Party knows more than this, and in this both are
agreed. And he that will assert his uncertain Conjectures, and then pretend
that this is a Church-Controversie, is the maker but not the ender of
Controversies.


A. Some of them stick not to say that Adam himself had not Grace sufficient to
stand, or forbear sinning: and if so, then there is none such.


B. We have nothing to do with any odd persons words. Who is it that never
speaks amiss? I confess Dr. Twisse, Vind. Great. l. 1. par. 3. de Reprob.
sect. 2. page (Vol. minor) 306. says, Gratiam ad peccatum vitandum necessariam
duplicem esse dicimus; aliam ad posse vitare peccatum; aliam ad pecatum actu
vitandum: illa est Gratia Regenerationis -- Altera non in est homini per modum
habitus, sed per modum passionis; and est motio quaedam gratiosa in voluntatem
influens, and ad omnem sanctam actionem extimulans. -- And so one or two say
that Adam had Grace necessary ad posse stare, non autem ad actum. But this is
but a few men's odd Opinion, contrary to plain truth. I mean, If by necessary ad
actum be meant in the proper School-sense (not all that is conducible to
ascertain it, but) that sine quo esse non potest, it is a contradiction to say
that men have the power to Act, and yet want that which is necessary to the
Act, that is, that without which they cannot Act. It is plainly, [They Can] and
[They Cannot] (For we talk not de potentia passiva which a Stone, Tree, or a
Beast, or a mad Man have). This distinguishing of things that differ not, must
be detected, as well as confusion avoided. To say a man can believe, or has
power to believe, and yet wants that without which he cannot believe, is
palpable contradiction.

And where he makes Regeneration to give the posse, before the Act, he
speaks obscurely or unsoundly. Gods active Influx on the Will, exciting it to
Act, is (at least) part of his Regenerating Grace. A man is not Regenerate
before he ever actually believed or rep^nted; though he first receive the
Divine Influx ad agendum: Nor can he prove that any proper habit goes before
the first act. And whether it do or not, most certainly the nature, faculty,
and the habit, and all together, is truly and formally no power ad hoc, to
believe or love God, or do any good, without Gods necessary Influx, Concurse or
exciting Grace: No more than a Plant has a power to fructify without the Sun
or Earth: Of Gods help ad been esse we speak not: But to say that Gods exciting
Grace is necessary ad actum, without which the Act cannot be, and yet that we
have a power to do that Act without that Grace, is still a contradiction. This
is potentia hypothetica and aequivoca, a term fit to play with: But it is true
power, where nothing of absolute necessity sine quo non esse potest is wanting,
which our Divines do commonly confess that Adam had, and that all men good and
bad have to more good than they do. Therefore I find not that you are in that
disagreed.

And Dr. Twisse, as I told you, often and vehemently professes, Vindic. Great. de
Amiss. Great. Cont. Bellar. page (Vol. Minor) 230. c. 2. and 232. that man has
no necessity of sinning ex decreto, but logical consequentiae: But if it were
true that we wanted that Grace which is absolutely necessary to avoid sin, it
must needs follow that such are under an absolute present necessity
consequentis also of sinning; as much as of dying, when God cease to continue
life. And if he mean that the Decree necessitateth not sin, but the denying of
necessary Grace does, he should have said so.

Andr. Rivet Disput. 7. de Great. Univers. p. 113. says, [Sed non quemadmodum
Pomificii and alii qui eorum sententiam vel sequuntur vel interpolant, nobis
imponunt, ita ut plane negemus sufficientis Gratiae phrasin posse usurpari, aut
dicamus nullam esse sufficientem ullo modo, quae efficax non sit, vel nullam
esse efficacem quae ad conversionem and salutem non sit efficax -- Id tantum
dicimus, non dari omnibus talem Gratiam sufficientem, quae ita moveat omnium
hominum voluntates, ut sit in potestate electionis motioni aut obtemperare, aut
res^agari: adeoque nullum esse qui per talem gratiam non possit ad salutem
pervenire, Deumque id velle omnibus and intendere.] You see that he will own no
more, but the denial of a universal sufficient Grace for Salvation, intended of
God, to all men. And you your selves confess, 1. That God intends not
Salvation for all men, unless conditionally, if they believe and repent, which
from eternity he knew before he made them, that they would not. 2. And that all
men have not sufficient Grace to Salvation, no nor to believe, but only to make
them better, and bring them nearer it, and prepare them for it; (which some
call Grace mediately sufficient to Salvation; but that is an improper Speech, as
long as for want of their Obedience, they never attain to much that is
absolutely necessary.)

For my part I doubt not to assert, 1. That no man in the World has Grace
sufficient for Salvation, that is, Glorification, an hour before he dies: For
he cannot be saved without more; that is, without the Grace of perseverance to
the end. But every believing Penitent has Grace sufficient and effectual to
give him a present Right to Salvation. And 2. I add, that there is no such
thing as Grace sufficient to Salvation which is not effectual, and does not
save. Seeing all that persevere in holiness are saved; and they that do not,
have not Grace sufficient (that is, necessary) to Salvation. 3. And I add, that
no man has Grace sufficient to give him a Right to Christ, and Pardon and
Salvation, which is not effectual, and does not procure it. For every penitent
true Believer has that Right to Christ, Pardon and Life: And he that is not a
penitent Believer, has not Grace sufficient to obtain that Right.


A. Yes, if he have sufficient to help him to believe.


B. Not so: unless he actually believe: For is not Faith in act, somewhat more
than power to believe? When you confess that men are damned that have the
Power, but not that have the Act.


A. Yes; but man causes the Act often, when God has given only the Power, and
necessary concurse to the production of the Act.


B. Corvinus and others of you ordinarily confess, that Faith it self is the
Gift of God, and that Faith is more than a power to believe. And we denominate
Gods Grace by the various effects: Therefore I may say that a man that has
Grace sufficient to believe, yet has not Grace sufficient to Justification,
till he have, 1. The Grace of Faith. 2. And so the Grace of the moral donation
of the Covenant, which is the justifying, pardoning Instrument.


A. You seem then to deny sufficient Grace your self.


B. I assert, 1. That godly men have power or sufficient Grace to many acts of
Faith, Love and Duty which they never do. 2. And that all men by common Grace,
or sufficient, are able to do better than they do, in preparation for special
Grace. 3. And that they are bound so to do, in order to their Salvation. And so
that all men have some helps and Grace in its kind sufficient to enable them to
seek Salvation, and that God will not forsake them till they forsake him. But I
am not able to prove what Vasqu. asserteth in 1. Tho. q. 23. disp. 98. c. 4.
Nunquam occurrere nobis obligationem praecepti, aut tentationem sine
sufficienti cogitatione qua and hanc vincere, and illud observare possimus.
Loquor de praecept^ affirmativ^, cui non solum tempu^ adest quo solet obligare,
sed etiam cujus obligatio memoriae occurrit. And he adds a great untruth,
[Nam si nulla illius in mentem subiret cogitatio, nulla nobis ejus obligatio
in^umberet,] unless by [sufficient Grace] he meant mere natural power, and by
cogitation the natural power of cogitation, this is odious. As if a man were
bound by no. Law of God or Man, if he could but make himself ignorant,
contemptuous and wicked enough, never so much as to think of i^.



A. But does not your Church of England, Art. 13. say, [Works done before the
Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God,
forasmuch as they spring no^ of Faith in Jesu Christ; neither do they make men
meet to receive Grace, or (as the School Authors say) deserve Grace of
congruity: yea rather, for that they are not done as God has willed, and
commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of sin.]


B. This Article is intended against merit of congruity in the works of wicked
men. And it is certain, that all their works are sin, in that they are in
defectiveness of ends and manner, and in perverseness, the violations of the
Law of God, (as to pray to God only to be saved from Hell, without love to God,
and Holiness, or hatred of Sin; to give Alms for the same ends, etc.) where the
love of God, the true end is left out, the action must needs be sin. But we say
not that it is only sin, or totally sin. It is good and pleasing to God
secundum quid, though not simpliciter: And such Actions as are sin by
deficiency, may have a tendeney to better Actions, and so to Salvation, by that
good that is in them. He that in mere love to his own Soul, will pray, hear,
meditate, avoid sin, etc. is in a likelier way to Grace and Life, than he that
will do none of this.

And 2. The Authors of the Arti^le, by merit of congruity, meant somewhat more
than preparation for Conversion; For no English* Divines, I think, have denied
that.

3. And by [Works done] they meant such as the Papists taught men too much to
trust in, as giving Alms, building Hospitals, going on Pilgrimages, etc. which
went under the notion of Sacrifices and Oblations under the old Law, when God
said, He abhor^d the Sacrifice of the Wicked, and bid them be readier to hear,
than to offer the Sacrifice of Fools. But it is not, I think, Soul-humbling
Repentance, Confession; begging for Grace, considering their Ways, hearing the
Word, etc. though but such as preparatory Grace may do, which they meant by
Works.

4. And that is not done without Grace and the Spirit of Christ, which is done
but by his common Grace; And yet I could wish the Article had been better
worded.

But if you will see the consent of an hundred and twenty ancient Writers, and
sixty three Protestant Synods, Churches and Divines, for Universal Grace, read
Dallaei, Apolog. part. 4.


A. I am sure God says, That he would not the death of a Sinner, but rather
that he repent and live, and that he would have all men to be saved, and come
to the knowledge of the Truth, which they deny.


B. No man denies it, who denies not the Scripture. And I can hardly believe
that really you differ about the meaning of the words.

Quest. 1. Do you believe that God is absolutely unwilling that any perish? and
absolutely wills that all shall be saved?


A. No: but conditionally he is.


B. Quest. 2. Do you think that he absolutely wills the performance of that
condition?


A. I know you will say, If absolutely, it must come to pass, or God must be
overcome. If conditionally, how does he will that condition? and so in
infinitum? But I will say, that he wills it absolutely, and yet is not
overcome or srustrate by a greater Power. For he wills it only voluntate
inefficaci, or with a velleity, which is not a willing to do it all himself,
but that it be done by man.


B. If he will that man repent eventually, with an absolute Will, the
Impenitent then frustrate his Will or Desire. And it is a note of infelicity to
have absolute Desires not obtained: If Gods Will be not done, is it not for
want of Power or Wisdom to accomplish it?


A. No: it is because he wills not to effect the thing, but that man effect
it.


B. If you had said, that he conditionally wills that man effect it, the
failure had been no frustration: But that had been but to say, that he wills
that man shall will if he will; or at least, if he excite his own Will; and so
the question would recur, How he wills that excitation. But seeing you say,
that God absolutely wills that man shall will or excite his own Will, you
must needs mean that God desires that which he cannot obtain, and so is
imperfect?


A. No: I only say, that he desires that which he cannot obtain by man's free
agency, without exerting more of his own efficient power to obtain it. He could
obtain it, if he would do all that he can.


B. Hoc v^lt Dtus ut omne^ ^jus vit^ participes s^^t, circumsta^ti^ vero
p^n^rum non ipsius v^l^^tat^ fiunt: sed pro merito ^^ru^^ qui p^ccaverunt
infer^^t^^: Vitam De^^ cuique propria voluntat^ tribuit^ram vero sibi quisque
the^aurizat. Basil. in Psalm. 26.
This is no more than to say, that either properly he does not will that man
excite his own Will to the act (in that he will not do that without which he
knows it will not be done); or that he wills it but conditionally, [If so
much help will procure it.] And for want of plain opening the case as it is,
you do but entangle your self in unintelligible words, when you talk of
uneffectual velleities of the event which yet are absolute.


A. How will you explain it better?


B. As is sufficiently done before. 1. God absolutely wills that it shall be
man's duty to repent and believe. Duty is the thing antecedently willed with an
absolute Will. 2. God wills that Heaven shall be his due, if he perform that
condition. 3. But if he will not perform it, that Hell be his due. This Will is
conditional as to the thing willed. 4. These Volitions of God belong to him as
Rector, (supposing him a Benefactor) giving out his benefits by a Law. And this
Will is expressed by Gods Law, which actually constituteth the absolute Debitum
obedientiae, and the conditional debitum premii vel poenae. 5. The condition
being past, Gods consequent Will is absolute de premiando vel puniendo: He
wills the death of the Impenitent consequently. And this is but Gods Will,
qua judex, expressed by his Judgment actually. 6. Though in strict sense, the
thing that God antecedently wills is not the event, but the debitum vel jus,
man's duty, and his due thereupon; yet because it belongs not to a Legislator
as such to do any more toward the event, than command it (supposing necessary
power and helps) therefore after the manner of men, it is said, that God
wills the event (Repentance and Salvation) because he wills to do so much
toward it, even all that concerns him to do as a mere Rector, (besides the
donation of necessary power or help as a Benefactor.) And this is all that you
mean, in which both sides are really agreed.


A. I confess we use to explain it by his Antecedent Will, and saying that
quantum in se, he would have all repent and live. But by quantum in se, we do
not mean that God does as much as he is able to it: Therefore your explication
seems true, as well as conciliatory, that he does quantum in se as Rector per
leges, supposing also his necessary help.


B. So God delights not in the death of Sinners, because it is not his
Antecedent Will that they die, but only his consequent, on supposition of
impenitency which he wills not: And also because it is the good of Justice,
and not our death and hurt as such, or for it self that God loves and
delights in. But when men return and live, they fulfill his antecedent Will,
and do that which he loves as good in it self.

And he would have all men come to the knowledge of the Truth, and be saved;
that is, He obliges both Ministers to preach to them, and others to pray for
them and help them, and themselves to obey and receive his Grace; And he gives
them means, and gives Christ and Life by free donation to all, on condition
they will but accept the Gift. And he that strictly wills this much, may be
said after the manner of men, to will the event. And this is all that both
sides mean, if they understood themselves.


The second Crimination.
A. The great difference between us, is, that they hold Gods Grace to be
unresistible; Okam, Gabriel, and Catherinus do hold, that there are three ranks
of men in Gods Decree: 1. One of persons eminently predestined, to whom God
will give such extraordinary Grace as shall ex se ascertain their Conversion
and Salvation: 2. Another of the the ordinary Elect, who are foreseen to use
well sufficient Grace, and so elected to Glory upon that foresight. 3. The
Reprobates who are decreed to Hell for their foreseen sin. Vide Okam in 1. d.
41. q. 1. Gabr. ibid. q. 1. a. 2. and de hisce Vasqutz in 1. Tho. q. 23. disq.
90. c. 1. who contradicts them, cap. 2. and 23. Yet denies that in man there
is any cause condition, or occasion of his predestination, disp. 91.

Tilenus against Camero lays all upon the resistibility of Grace, but never
sufficiently explaineth the word.

The Arminians Synod, p. 15. assert, Etiam supernaturalem potentiam voluntati
conferri, and hac ratione Deum immediate in voluntatem agere; modo illa actio
voluntatem non necessitet, antecedenter, and libertatem potentiamque non
volendi tollat.

Hear a Jesuit, Ruiz de Praedef. d. 6. sect. 4. p. 91. Vocatio efficax suum
effectum infallibiliter sortitur, quoniam suam efficacitatem accipit ex
praescientia and proposito Dei, movente nostram voluntatem ut consentiat: --
Nam insuperabilis virtus Vocationis secundum propositum est.

Bradwardine, l. 3. c. 27, 28. asserting the necessitation of all that comes
to pass, would prove that yet Sinners deserve damnation, though they could not
sin less than they did, because Christ merited Glory that could not sin.] But
it is a deceit from the ambiguity of the words, [Can and Cannot]. It was not for
want of Power that Christ could not sin, but by perfection of holiness: But it
is for want of natural power to overcome God, that he seigneth men to be
Sinners and damned.


As if it did move man as a stone, or a dead body, and did necessitate or force
the Will of man: Whereas we hold, that God works by such moral, internal and
external swasion on the Will, as takes not away the power of resisting and
doing the contrary.


B. I confess this is the Point that makes the greatest noise. But let us
enquire how far indeed you differ.

1. Resistance is Passive (as a hard block resists the wedge) or Active (as
Fighters do resist each other.)

2. Resistance is effectual (when the Resister overcomes) or uneffectual (when
it is overcome.)

3. The Act of Resistance, must be distinguished from the power of Resistance:
And to overcome actual Resistance, from the destroying of the Power.

4. Physical and moral Power of resisting must be distinguished as is aforesaid.

5. Real and Logical Power of Resistance also must be distinguished as before.


A. Well: How do you apply these distinctions?


B. 1. All the gracious Operations of God on the Soul of a Sinner, are not only
resistible, but ever resisted, both passively and Actively, in some degree. 1.
Materia passiva qua talis, is said to resist the motion of the active nature,
in that its own nature is averse to Action, and the motus must be violentus.
And though man's Soul be not material, yet as under God it is substantia
passiva, and so passively may be said to resist, in a lower sort, that is, to
require the exerting of the Power of the Agent to its motion: Though this
puts God to no difficulty. 2. But sinful Privations and Indispositions make
the name of passive resistance to the Grace of God, yet more apt. 3. And the
contrary operations and re^itence of a vicious Mind and Will, are an active
resistance. Though it be above our reach to know in what sense it may or may
not be called a Resistance as to Gods Act in it self (God being not passive);
yet that it may be called a Resistance, as to the effect, is past doubt; (As I
resist a man's Work, if I undo what he does, though I touch not him.) All
penitent men's consciences tell them that they resist God in all the good that
he persuades them to, and does them.

2. No man actively resists God, but by his own power: That is, 1. God as the
Author of Nature, keeps up natural Power, and concurreth with it. 2. Man
vitiateth and perverteth this, in morals. 3. God by outward and inward motion
does Operate toward the rectifying of it. 4. Man using his natural power
viciously against those rectifying Operations, striveth by it against Gods
gracious Work, and so resists him by his own strength.

3. When ever Grace effects the Faith, Repentance, Obedience which it moves
us to, it overcomes all our actual resistance. Grace is not always overcome,
when it is resisted. To say that effectual Grace overcomes resistance, is but
to say that it is effectual.

4. All Grace which is sufficient, that is, which gives all that is absolutely
necessary to the effect, is not victorious or effectual; and so it is
resistible, as that signifies superable, and that uneffectual; that is, all
necessary sufficient Grace is not effectual.

5. It is an improper phrase to say that Gods Power is overcome: For it is not
done by a greater Power. But when God will put forth but a certain degree of
Power in his gracious motions; the motions of natural power perverted by Vice,
may be greater than them: And when they bring forth a contrary effect, are said
to overcome them.

6. Therefore whether Grace be de facto resisted or not resisted, overcome or
not overcome, is no matter of controversy, seeing the event does decide the
question.

7. Grace where it overcomes, is not properly said to overcome the mere
physical Power or Act as such, but as perverted, and viciously used against God.

8. The power of sinning may be said to be overcome, when it does not perform
the presently-endeavoured act, but the contrary.

9. The Power may be said to be overcome, when it is destroyed, and is no
longer a Power ad hoc. And so the natural power is never properly said to be
overcome by Grace, but to be determined.

10. The vicious moral Power, which is but the evil habit or disposition, is
always overcome by effectual Grace, as to that act where Grace prevails. But
not always thereby overcome in it self as a habit, and destroyed; till the
contrary habitual Grace destroy it.

All this is past all Controversy on both sides: And if so, tell me what
difference about the irresistibility of Grace remains.


A. It will put a man's brains hard to it to follow you, as you mince the matter
by so many distinctions and propositions.


B. And you put men's Consciences hard to it, to fire Gods Church, by contending
where you differ not, or can show no difference.

Quest. 1. When you say that Grace is resistible, do you mean that de facto, it
is never effectual and overcomes our resistance?


A. No: then no man should be saved.


B. Quest. 2. Do you mean that man's Will is more powerful than God?


A. You need not ask me such a question.


B. Quest. 3. Do you mean that God never puts forth so much power in his
work of Grace as man does in resisting it?


A. Here I must distinguish also: 1. Power is so called either as in se, in the
virtue, or in the effect. 2. Power in man is so called either as merely man's,
or as Gods that works in man. And so I answer, 1. Gods Power in it self which
way ever it works (in man or out of him) is the same, neither greater nor
less than it self, for it is God. 2. Power in it self as Gods is infinitely
greater than man's as such. 3. As power is so called from the effect, it is no
Controversy: For the event still tells which is the greater, or prevalent
therein.


B. You have answered well. Quest. 4. You do not mean I know that in the
instant of acting, the Soul that wills can nill the same thing at the same
time, in the same respect, much less after the act is past, that it has a
contrary power ad praeteritum? It is, I suppose, only in the instant,
antecedent to the act that you say Grace is resistible?


A. You may easily be sure of that.


B. Quest, 5. If you mean only that the natural faculty was potentia libera
activa ad utrumlibet, till Grace procured it to determine it self: And so that
Grace destroyed not the natural Power or Liberty; do you know any that differ
from you in that?


A. No, if they may take freedom in their own sense.


B. Enough of that, I hope, before. Quest. 6. If you mean that the moral
Pravity of this natural faculty, was such as could have prevailed against
Grace, though it did not; do you not speak unintelligibly? For either you speak
of a Logical possibility only, or of a real strength or power; If of the
former, you equivocate; and you differ not from others: For you often confess,
that Gods mere Prescience that it will not be, does infer a Logical necessity
consequentiae, and so a Logical impossibility of the contrary. But if by
[Could] you mean a real strength or opposite power, you mistake the matter.
Moral pravity is not strength or power at all; But the perversion or disease of
strength or power.

So that the case is not unsearchable: when a man is converted, what has your
question respect to, in the word [Resist] but the Act, the vicious habit and
privation, and the natural faculty? Is there any thing else to be considered?


A. Not that I remember; what then?


B. The Act you confess is procured, and therefore not resisted (effectually.)
2. The privation resists but passively, and so has no active power. And to
say that the privation of Faith could have resisted the Grace that wrought
Faith, implies a falsehood, if you mean it of active power or resistance. 3.
The contrary habit is not a power, but the ill disposition of a power.
Therefore if it be de facto, overcome as to the act by actual Grace, or in it
self by habitual Grace, it is on a false supposition to say, that it had power
to have resisted, when as it has no power, nor is a power. But if you speak of
Logical possibility, its impertinent equivocation. 4. All that remains then
is, that the natural faculty in the antecedent instant wanted not power or
freedom to the contrary act; which is true, and none of them that are
intelligent deny. For God by determining a free power, does not destroy it, but
use it, and determine it. And Gods change of the Mind and Will, is not by any
diminution or fraction of the power of it, but by a sapiential and loving
efficacy, acting it aright, and more advancing it. Even in our after lives, he
does not take away our natural power to will and do evil, but he takes away
the vicious disposition of it, that we may certainly will and do well. Tell me
yet then where is the difference?


A. Though you over-whelm me by distinctions, you cannot so blind me, but I
know a difference between these two Opinions, [when Paul first believed, he
could have resisted and not believed,] and [He could not resist, and not
believe.]


B. That is, you have learnt of the Masters of Confusion and Dissension to
strive about words, which you understand not; and having the Football before
you, you will drive it on. But little know you whither? nor how little thanks
the great Shepherd of the Flock will give you at the last. Either show us the
difference, or be ashamed to pretend a difference.


A. I perceive that the Controversy about Resistance is resolved into that of
power: [Can and Cannot resist], which was opened before.


THE Eighth Days Conference Between B. and C. of SUFFICIENT and EFFECTUAL GRACE.
B. I now expect your sharpest Charge against your Adversaries about the
nature, efficacy and extent of Grace.


The first Crimination.
C. 1. They assert an Universality of Grace to all men, sufficient to their
Salvation. Malderus, in 1. 2. Tho. q. 109. a. 10. dub. 1. page 464. mentions
five degrees of sufficient Grace: 1. That most imperfect degree by which
Sinners may forbear a particular mortal sin. 2. That of the Regenerate by which
they are able to forbear all mortal sin: but being infirm will not. 3. Adam in
Innocence, who could easily have persevered, but did not; when some Angels did
by the same degree which others had that fell. 4. That of the Predestinate, who
have Gods special custody, before they are confirmed in Grace. 5. The Grace of
Confirmation, of which there are five Opinions, (of which after.)

Some Lutherans seem to go further in this than the Jesuits or Arminians, and
to deny the distinction of sufficient and effectual Grace, saying that it is
the same Grace that is effectual in one and not in another: but I think they
differ but in words: So Gerhard, de lib. arb. c. 6. sect. 1. Concedimus sane
spiritui sancto conversionis opus aggredienti multos resistere, con^ilium Dei
adversus seipsos spernere -- and hac ratione sua culpa gratiam conversionis a
se repellere: sed propterea ipsam Gratiam in sufficientem and efficacem
dividendam esse negamus, siquidem una eademque Dei Gratia est, quae in
credentibus operatur, and quae ab intredulis repellitur.

And he supposes all men's Wills to be bad, and without power to convert
themselves, and that God gives them such Grace as does not physically
constrain or necessitate them or determine them; but such a suitable operation
as they can resist: And so that the efficacy of Grace is not from the Will, but
from Grace it self: but the inefficacy is from man: and the reason why any are
converted, is from Grace: but the reason why any are not converted, is from
their resisting that Grace; and so the Will of the Wicked is the differencing
cause.

Le Blank de did. Great. in suffic. etc. 68, 69. Remonstrantes non ideo Gratiam
distinguunt in sufficientem and efficacem, quod putent gratiam quam accipiunt
illi qui increduli manent and in peccatis perseverant non habere vim and
efficaciam necessariam and praerequisitam ad hoc, etc. sed ideo solum grati^
cujus su^t participes denegant efficacis n^men quod effectum ad quem destinatur
in iis reapse non producat propter impedimentum quod illi ponunt -- utrique
ergo docent gratiam hanc satis virium habere ad ipsos convertendos -- nihil
ergo pejus h^t in part sentiunt Remonstrantes illis qui Lutherani dicuntur: Ac
proinde cum Reformati horum communionem non refugiunt, sed ultro cos ad pacem,
etc.

Magna est bonitas Dei in dandis bonis corporis and anim^: major est bonitas
Dei in remittentis peccata magna and multa: maxima in patientia, etc: Strigel.
Loc. 60. page 301.

Carbo Compend. Tho. 1. q. 21. a. 4. Opus divinae justitiae semper p^^supponit
opus miserecordi^; and in ea ^undatur tanquam i^ prima radice quia ne
procedatur in infinitum deveniendum est ad aliquid quod ex sola bonitate
divinae voluntatis d^pendeat.





B. I hope you have no malignant desire to extenuate Gods Grace, but are
willing to acknowledge it to be as great and large as indeed it is, if you can
discern the proof.


C. God best knows how to honor himself.


B. Quest. 1. Do you think that all the World, or all that shall perish, yea or
any part of the World is under the mere Curse of the Law of Innocence, as
violated by Adam, without any remedy or mercy.


C. I think they are without real Remedy, though not without all Mercy; for a
delay of punishment is mercy.


B. Quest. 2. Do you think that they are only under the Curse of that Law as
the Devils are, without any possibility or offers of a remedy; or that they are
also still under the Covenant-Offers of Life, upon condition of Innocence.


C. I cannot suppose God now to offer a man Life, on condition he be no Sinner,
whom he knows to be a Sinner: For such an Offer is equivalent to a sentence
of Death, or denial of Life. Nor can I say that they are as desperate as the
Devils, because they know not the desperateness of their case.


B. Quest. 3. Do you think all the difference between them and Devils lies in
delay and ignorance of their misery? Then the most ignorant and presumptuous of
them is the least miserable, though the most sinful; which cannot be?

Quest. 4. But do you think that no Me^cy is to be offered ^o such?


C. Yes: because we know not who are Elect, and who not.


B. Quest. 5. Are we to offer men mercy only as Elect? or rather as Sinners and
miserable, under a Law of Grace? and as Subjects of God obliged by that Law to
accept it?


C. We offer it to all Sinners, that the Elect may receive it.


B. Quest. 6. Are none but the Elect under a Law of Grace, as the rule of their
Duty, their expectation and of Judgment?


C. Others may be under the Obligations of it, but not under the G^a^e of it.


B. Remember then, 1. That they are not lawless. 2. That they are not under
that mere violated Law of Innocence, [Be innocent and live.] 3. That they are
under the Obligations of the Law of Grace.

Quest. 7. Is there any of them that are not bound to use certain means
appointed of God, in order toward their own Salvation?


C. They are bound to intend their own Salvation, and with that intention to
use some means: But God intends it not.


B. Quest. 8. Does God command men on pain of damnation to any vain endeavors,
or use of means?


C. He commands it not in vain: for it shall make them unexcuseable. 2. They
are not to judge their endeavors vain, because they know it not. 3. But in the
issue all will be in vain to them.


B. Quest. 9. Would it be in vain to them, if they really did the utmost that
common Grace enableth any men to do?


C. It is not properly Grace to them, and so not common. 2. It would be in vain
to them.


B. Quest. 10. Is that vain which brings a man into the nearest preparation
for special Grace, and nearest to the Kingdom of God?


C. To the Elect it is not vain: Nor to others for their sakes: Nor to others,
as to the lessening of their pains in Hell: But as to their Salvation it is.


B. Quest. 11. Who would it be long of (or be reputed the Cause) if it be in
vain.


C. Of themselves, who are born in sin from Adam, and are Unbelievers.


B. You suppose it impossible for them to believe, and impossible for them not
to be the Children of Adam. They made not themselves, and you suppose that for
want of Grace they cannot believe.


Quest. 12. When Death shall acquaint them with the impossibility that they
were under, do you think, 1. That it will be the way of glorifying the Justice
of God in Judgment, to have the World know that he condemns Sinners merely
because he will condemn them, for that which they never had any more true power
to avoid, than to make a World? 2. Or will their Consciences in Hell accuse
them or torment them for that which they then know was naturally impossible,
and caused by God.

C. We know not how God will glorify his Justice, or how their Consciences
will torment them. It may be they shall then be as ignorant of the
necessitating cause as now.


B. 1. Do you know it now, and shall not they know it then? 2. God tells us
the contrary, That all hidden things shall be brought to light, and that God
will justify his own proceedings, by proving that men's destruction is of
themselves, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the World be guilty before
God: And he calls it his Righteousness in judging, to give to every man
according to his Works: and that men's Consciences shall then excuse them or
accuse them, when God shall judge the secrets of their hear^s, (and not when he
shall torment them, by deceiving them,) Romans 2. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Matthew* 25. and 7. 23, 24. 2 Timothy 4. 8, 9. Romans 14. 10. Genesis 18. 24, 25.

Quest. 13. Do you believe that none but the Elect have now any real mercy,
besides a delay of their future misery, and hopes of its abatement.


C. I do: For all things are to be judged of by the end: And that is really no
mercy, which is not intended to a man's happiness, but his misery. As
Afflictions are no evils to the Elect, because they are intended and work
together for their good.


B. Is the offer of Christ and Life no mercy? Is all Gods patience and
forbearance, as a means to lead them to repentance, no mercy? Is all the
teaching, persuading, entreating condescension of Christ, no mercy? See what
error here you run into, and how contrary to Scripture, and to nature it self?

1. You contradict Gods Word, which frequently calls them mercies, Psalm. 145.
9. and 106. 7. 45. Neh. 9. 19, 27, 28, 31. Jon. 4. 2. Romans 2. 4. Matthew. 18. 33.
Isa. 63. 9. Ezekiel. 16.

2. You deny the chiefest part of men's duty; even to accept of mercy, to
improve mercy, to be thankful for mercy, to be led by Gods good-ness to
Repentance, to use mercies as Gods Talents to his Glory, etc. If you say, They
know not but they are mercies; you feign God to bind men to duty, but by
deceit: It is as mercies, and not as that which for ought they know may be
mercies, that they are to be valued, used, etc.

3. You excuse men from the greatest aggravation of their sin: even sinning
against Mercies: How can they sin against them that have none.

4. You feign Gods Justice to be stragely glorified, by damning men in Hell for
ever, for sinning against mercy, who never had any to sin against.

5. You will make Conscience justify the Wicked, and condemn Gods Judgments in
Hell, instead of justifying God, and accusing themselves.

6. You must accordingly conclude that you never showed mercy to Child,
Neighbor, or any but the Elect your self, (because it was all to end in
misery) or else that you were to them more merciful than God.

7. When man is made in Gods Image, and we must be holy and merciful as our
heavenly Father is, you set all men such a pattern of mercy and justice, as you
would be loath your Prince or Parent should imitate.

8. You expose Christ's most compassionate tears to reproach, when, Luke 19. he
looked on Jerusalem and wept over it, as having had a day of mercy; and when
Matthew. 23. he says, How often would I have gathered thee as a Hen gathers her
Chick^ns under her wings, and ye would not. --

9. You teach all Gods Children in the World, to acknowledge no mercy, nor be
thankful for any, till they are sure that they are Elect. And how few have that
assurance?

10. You injure the Lord Jesus and his Covenant of Grace, while you say, that a
conditional Gift of Christ and Life, Pardon and Salvation, even if they will
but accept it, is no mercy to any that refuse it; nor yet the blood that
purchased it as such.

11. You measure and denominate Gods great Mercies, according to man's vile
abuse: As if it were no mercy, what tendency soever in it self it had to their
Salvation, unless they accept it, and use it well, or if they reject it.

12. You are singular from almost all the Churches of Christ in the World:
Contrary to the judgment of the ancient Churches, and of all present Chu^ches
of Greeks, Abassines, Arminians, Papists, or Protestants: expressly contrary to
the Synod of Dort, and the particular suffrages of our British Divines there:
except a very few men that by the heat of perverse Disputings against
Amyraldus, the Arminians, etc. have been carried into such extremes.


C. What mercy is it to a man to have Pleasure here a while, and Torment in
Hell for ever? yea to have Christ and Life offered him to make him more
unexcusable and miserable.


B. In all this Discourse, it is not the nature of the mercy in it self that
you deny, but Gods merciful Intents: It is your mis-apprehensions about
Predestination, which you are vending all this while, and there is the Core of
your mistake, which we have sufficiently spoken to already. You talk as if God
decreed men to Sin, to reject Christ, to abuse Mercies, to Impenitency, and
consequently to Hell for so doing; which is all false. God decreed no man to
these, or any other sin, nor to any punishment, but as for sin by them
committed against his holy Law, which he foresaw, but willed not. Yea God
decreed to set open the door of Grace* to Sinners, and to tender them mercy
when they deserved misery, and to bring Life to the acceptance or refusal of
their own Wills, and to entreat and importune them to accept it: His end in
giving them mercy, is not to make them miserable, though consequently he will
their misery for their sin. Now you feign in your own erroneous Imagination,
that God first decrees men's sin and damnation, and then gives them all which
we call Mercies as a means thereto, and then denominate them as bad as you have
feigned them to be by such a^ imagination. And you conceive of Gods Decree as
that which does transire in praeteritum, is past and gone, when to God all time
is nothing, but eternity is one everlasting instant.


C. When you have talked all that you can for such kind of Mercy, it will not
satisfy a man's understanding, who believes that most of the world shall be
damned, and that God fore-knew this from eternity, and would not prevent it
when he easily could. Mercy that ends in Hell is sad mercy: He will have mercy
on whom he will have mercy.


B. Even under the terrible Law at Mount Sinai, God proclaims his Name and
Nature, As gracious and abundant in Mercy. This Glory of his which he showed to
Moses, is more gloriously showed to the World in Christ. And this you study
perversely to obscure. And when you have contracted Salvation it self out of our
own brain, into a narrower compass than God in Scripture does, (who in every
Nation accepts them that fear him, and work Righteousness,) then you devise
false Decrees and Intents, and father them on God to obscure the rest. And what
do you by this, but seek to render God as little comely to his Creatures as you
can. And if the love of God be Holiness and Happiness; If his Amiableness be
his Goodness, even Himself; If it be Christ's great Work to reveal God in his
Goodness, and by Faith to kindle holy Love. And if it be the Devils malignity
and work in the World to counterwork Christ, and represent God as unlovely,
judge whether you serve Christ or Satan, and whether it be not his chief work
of enmity against God that you carry on?

But that you may have the true prospect of Gods goodness in all this, you must
remember that Gods Work as Creator goes before his Work of Government, and his
Work of Government in general before his Work of our Redemption; and his Work
of Redemption and the Law of Grace before men's sin and Judgment. And 1. If God
that has diversified all lower Creatures as we see, did please in the Creation
to make a rank of free-intellectual Creatures here on Earth, with power and
help sufficient to attain to an Angelical Glory, if they would not wilfully
prefer the way of misery, is there any want of goodness in making such a World?
Are they not nobler than Bruits that have no such hope, though not than Angels
that are confirmed.

2. And if he take pleasure having made such an Intellectual free Agent, to
rule him morally by Laws, according to his nature, and to take it for his own
great work to be his King or Rector in this sapiential way: That which much
deludeth men in this, and wrongeth God, is that these foundations in Nature are
not well considered. The issue of all the Atheists and discontented Unbelievers
Accusations of God, is but this, That he made man but man, and nothing higher.
A man is a mutable Intellectual free Agent, whose duty and happiness is left
much to his own choosing or refusing. And being so made, he is accordingly to
be governed; And as God shows his greatness of Power as Creator and Actor of
the universal frame of Nature, so he has chosen eminently to show his Regent
Wisdom, in his Cusp. Peucer Hist. Carcerum against the Luth^rans, page 719. An
in homine ocioso, nihil agente, habenteque se pure passive; aut sicut truncus
ad coactionem necessi^atis stoicae, afflatusve an abaptistici, sicut Flaciani
somniarunt; aut velut brutum mutatione and conversione hominis physica aut
hyperphysica, qualem fieri fingit Chimera (that is, the Liber Concordiae) non
sine sensu quidem, sed sine motu, ut subjectum patiens and convertibile,
eousque donec tantas accepit facultatis and virium quibus agere possit.
moral Government of Men and Angels; And his wondrous Love, as the special
Benefactor to the Vessels of Mercy. Power, Wisdom and Love (or Goodness) are
never separated; But each has its eminent demonstration. And the Omnipotent
Father is most eminently glorified in his Power in the Creation, and
sustentation and motion of the Universe; so the Son who is the Wisdom and Word
of the Father (and the Father in him) is eminently glorified in his Wisdom in
the Regency of the Intellectual World, by a sapiential way of Government by
Laws and Judgment. And then steps up the physical Disputer, and profanely
blasphemeth this honorable Work of God, and calls it moral Operation in
contempt, and thinks that unless God move man to every Volition, as he does the
appetite of a Beast, if not as we move a stone, or shoot an Arrow, he does
nothing, and it is his reproach. And to say that he can or did make a Creature
that can freely will or not comparatively, even by the Power and general
Concurse of God, they say is to feign him to make a God. And so both the Honor
of God as Creator is denied him, and his Honor of sapiential Government is
vilified.

It is an excellent Work of the Creator to make a free Agent in his own Image.
And it is a suitable and excellent Work as his King, to appoint him his end,
and means, and work, and rule him by perfect Laws and Judgments. In all which
also he acts as a Benefactor, while he freely offers him so glorious a
Reward, to which as Rector he would lead him. And in that Relation will not be
wanting unto him in any thing, which perfect Regiment requires.

Of all this, if the Reader please to peruse a very small book which I have
written, called A Vindication of Gods Love, he may see more than I must here
say.

But contrarily says Bradwardine, li. 2. c. 3. p. 614. [Quam facile posset
Deus si veilet, tollere obicem sive actum? Hujusmodi quoque obex ponitur a Deo
antecedenter: Quommodo ergo vult Deus confer buic gratiam in quo parat obicem
gratiam repellentem? Vel si Deus non dat gratiam propter obicem resistentem,
and ipse Deus scienter and praecedenter causat hunc obicem quomodo ipse Deus
non est causa non acceptionis gratiae salutaris?] I can hardly believe that
they that thus take Sin and Hell to be nothing but the fruits of Gods good
will, do believe that either of them are so bad as Scripture does describe
them, or so much to be hated or feared.


3. Consider also that Divine Love (the third Principle) as it has its common
demonstration and glory in the Works of the Omnipotent Creation, and in the
Works of sapiential Regiment, so has it also its peculiar eminent
demonstration on the Elect in their Grace and Glory, or in their Holiness and
Glory begun and perfected. And it does not follow that because this Love is
eminently glorified on a peculiar treasure, therefore there is no Glory in Gods
other Works, or no reason for them. O that men had the wit to be humble, and
confess that God is wiser and better than they, till they can come to more
Wisdom to understand the Methods and Reason of his Works.

As God has his Honor in making Stars as well as the Sun, and Earth, as well
as Stars, and Beasts, as well as Men, and Serpents and Toads as well as Birds,
and Clay as well as Gold; so has he his Honor in making a World of mutable
defectible Intellectual free Agents (Men) as well as in making the confirmed
Angels; and in gracious sapiential Government of them all, as well as in his
extraordinary Beneficence and Love to his Elect.

4. And you must not feign the damnation of the Wicked themselves to be any
such state as is inconsistent with the goodness of God to cast a Sinner into:
We know not perfectly what Hell is: But as we know that it is the extremest
humane misery, so we know that it is not at all worse than men's sins deserve;
And that when we come to Heaven, we shall be perfectly satisfied of the Justice
of God in men's damnation.

And though I say not melius est peccatori miserum esse quam non esse; yet I
will so far accord with worthy Dr. Twisse, as to say that melius est peccatores
miseros esse quam non esse: Because else God would rather have annihilated
them. For God does that which is best: And his Wisdom, and Will, and Glory are
fitter Rules of Meliority, than the Will or Interest of Sinners.

And it seems by the Devils Kingdom, and Conversation in the Air and on the
Earth (while yet they are in Hell, and reserved in Chains of Darkness) that
their Hell is a state consistent with all that voluntary mischievous
negotiation which they do. And it is like that though they have no Joy, yet
their Wills have some pleasedness in the mischief which they do, as an angry
and malicious man has in revenge.

And we have no reason to believe that the Hell of the damned is any worse or
more violent or irrational than the Hell of the Devils, when they must go to
that which was prepared for the Devils, Matthew. 25.

But if I should but open to you the plain evidence of this truth, how much of
Hell consists in their sin it self, in which undoubtedly they are voluntary
(though necessarily so, by their own doing and desert,) it might tend yet more
to the abatement of all disparaging and unbelieving thoughts, of the Glory of
Gods gracious sapiential Regiment of the World.

And to say that God could have made man better, and given him more Grace, is
but as to say that he could have made Toads to be Larks, and Beasts to be Men,
and Men to be Angels: And what if he did not?

5. And I again repeat what I have often said, that all this Earth is but a point
next inconsiderable in the vast Universe; And immeasurable spaces of those
superior parts of the Creation are like to have proportionable Inhabitants for
glory and number: And we know that we are come to an innumerable Company of
Angels, Heb. 12. 23, 24. And for ought we know God may have millions of blessed
Spirits, for one miserable wicked Soul. Therefore we must not talk against that
which we do not understand.

And if the Saints shall judge (wicked) Angels, and the World, (judging being
usually put for ruling and punishing) we know not what hand we shall have our
selves in the execution of Gods Wrath upon them, and how far they shall be as
Slaves to Saints.


C. You have said that (I confess) that tends to reconcile us all to Gods
Providence; But whether it will reconcile our own differences I doubt. How is
that Grace sufficient to all men for Salvation, which never tells most of a
Christ, or of Salvation at all?


Jansen. de Great. Christi, l. 2. c. 27. Non quaevis Gratia ad quosvis effectus
inferendos sufficit: ut quidam imaginati sunt sed potestates operationum
difficultati attemperand^ sunt.
B. You mistake your Adversaries. They hold not that all men have sufficient
Grace to Salvation: But sufficient to help them nearer to Salvation. I tell you
again, no Saint has Grace sufficient to his full Salvation, till he is fully
saved: Otherwise what need he any more? Some indeed call it mediately
sufficient to Salvation, but that is but lis de nomine.


C. If it be sufficient, what need they any more to that which it is said
sufficient for? And yet more would do that which is not done. But no man should
desire more than is sufficient.


B. All this is a Game at words: Blank de did. Great. etc* These. 77. Quod
Thomistae recentiores affirmant illos in quibus gratia non est efficax ad
conversionem nihilo minus gratiam sufficientem ad ^am haber^; id vero Reformati
cun Jansenio negant m^ra logomachia est siquidem, etc.
By [Sufficient] they mean only necessary help, without which the act cannot be
done, and with which it can and may be done: They do not mean all that is
needful ad cert^ esse, or ad melius esse. Therefore I use rather to call it All
necessary help or Grace ad esse.


C. I pray you yet make it plainer to me, what that necessary or sufficient
Grace is, that we may judge of it.


B. Grace is taken either for the Favor of God, or for his Gifts. And so
either for free Gifts without merit in point of commutative Justice: And so all
that God gives to any Creature, must needs be Grace. Or else for that which is
given contrary to commerit (of evil). And so all is Grace which is given to
Sinners.

Grace is either, 1. Efficient-principal. 2. Efficient less-principal. 3.
Objective. 4. Or subjective, which is the effect.

I. Grace as the principal efficient, is either Gods mere Benevolence or Will
to give. 2. Or his Act of Collation, as ex part agentis. Both these are really
one, and God himself, though differently denominated, and diversely conceived of
by us. God operateth per essentiam.

II. Grace as the less principal efficient, is all those means which have an
Aptitude to effect (and so are apt to be efficients) or actually do so; As
Christ, the Gospel, the Ministry, outward Mercies, Afflictions, etc.

III. Objective Grace is those means which as Objects are appointed for man
himself to act upon toward his own Salvation. As a Christ to be believed in
and accepted, An offered Glory, a certain Promise, etc.

IV. The Schoolmen have so many sorts of Grace as confounds themselves: when
they have agreed, partly, 1. Of exciting Grace. 2. And of infused habits. 3.
And of Concurse. 4. They are all to pieces about Gratia adjuvans per modum
principii, what It is. Malderus tells us of four Opinions (in 12. q, 111. a. 3.
dub. 2.) 1. That it is nothing but the infused Habit it self. 2. That it is but
gracia excitans: 3. That it is quaedam qualitas infusa transiens cum ipso actu.
4. That God himself immediately supplieth the absence of a habit and defect of
power to acts supernatural. He accounts the case too difficult to be
confident in: but inclines to this* that this concomitant Grace giving power
to supernatural acts before the habits, called by them Adjuvant Grace, is quasi
formalis terminus seu effectus gratia excitantis and praevenientis and secundum
rem non differ: Yet excitation is it self taken for an effect, and this
effects this power in question. But in the justified he says, the Holy
Ghost, besides habits and powers, dwells. Will you lay any great stress on
such nicities as these, past humane reach, and so confessed by the subtilest
Contenders?

Per peccatum non miunitur inclinatio naturalis ad bonum per subtractionem, sed
per oppositionem impedimenti quod neque tollit neque minuit radicem
inclinationis: cum enim peccatum non diminuat ipsam naturam rationalem, minuere
non potest radicem naturalis inclinationis ad bonum quae identificatur cum
natura: solum ergo minuitur bujusmodi inclinatio ex part termini quatenus,
viz. per peccatum p^nitur impedimentum pertingendi ad terminum unde quamtumvis
in in^initum multiplicantur peccata non potest totaliter destrui inclinatio
naturalis ad bonum rationis, Alvar. de Aux. li. 6. disp. 45. p. 210. Ita Aquin.
12. q. 85. a. 2. ad ^. and 1. p. q. 48. ar. 4. ad. 3.

Peucer Histor. Carcer. reproves the Lutherans, Concordia 2. quod non
distinguunt inter vocationem generalem seu universalem, communem omnibus, and
vocationem efficacem, page 724.


Subjective Grace is that effect which is wrought on man's Soul, as the
beginning of his recovery or healing, and having a tendency to more.


C. Now tell us which of these it is that is sufficient.


B. I. Undoubtedly there is no insufficiency in God. All that he wills to do,
he does: And if he will no more, his Will is not to be called insufficient as
to more, but null as to that Object: And we affirm no other proper Will of God,
but such as is fulfilled.

II. Gods means which wicked men enjoy are the same that the godly enjoy, and
are sufficient ex part sui, but not ex omni part, that is, for as much as
concerns their own Office. So Christ's antecedent Preparations, his
Satisfaction and Merits are sufficient. The Covenant of Grace is sufficient:
The preaching of the Gospel is sufficient in its kind, etc.

III. The objective Grace is sufficient; that is, God as he is to be believed
in and loved, revealed in the Word and in his Works: Christ to be believed in;
the Precepts to be obeyed, the Promise to be trusted, etc. And though it be
doubtful to many whether Amyraldus and his Fellows were in the right, that
thought that the (...), and other objective Grace be qua objective, sufficient
to all Heathens for Salvation; yet none can doubt but it is in suo genere,
sufficient to all those good and holy acts which those persons may immediately
exercise about them. And indeed he that loves God but as the light of Nature,
has taught Heathens, or may teach men that he should be loved, if he be
damned, must be a damned Saint in the love of God. But who do so love him, is
another question.

IV. Subjective Grace is either Power, Act, or Disposition or Habit.

1. This Power is the very thing precisely which they meant by necessary or
sufficient Grace. All men have true power to draw nearer Salvation, and do
better than they do, though not immediately to do all that is necessary to
Salvation. And he that can do it if he will, and also has power to will it, is
said to have sufficient Grace, which if he use not, the fault lies in his
wilfulness.

2. The Act, nor the just Disposition or Habit they have not. But that is their
own fault, who had those Means, those Objects, and that Power by which they
could and might have attained them.


C. Is any one ever converted by this sufficient Grace, or not? If not, frustra
fit potentia, etc. If yea, then it is effectual Grace.


B. Now you have brought the Controversy to the parting point, where the two
Parties use to part: (As you may see in Dr. Sanderson and Dr. Hamond's Letters.

I will first answer your Consequences. 1. Non frustra fit talis potentia,
though it never act. For 1. It attaineth other good ends, though it attain not
their Salvation. 2. If one of a thousand should not use their power, or if a
thousand to one do use it, that varieth not the case: For it is still as much
vain to that one man, as if no one used it. But 2. So far as it is vain, that
is, to their own Salvation, they make it vain themselves, and must blame
themselves.

3. I ask you whether you think not your self, that 1. All wicked men by common
Grace; 2. And all godly men by special Grace, have power to do more good and
forbear more evil than they do? If so, Do you hold that all that power which
they never use to any of those omitted acts is vain? If not, why should this in
question be accounted vain?

But to the great difficulty it self, I answer, 1. You must not forestall the
Truth by any of these false suppositions.

1. That there is any man to whom God gives a mere Power, neither disposed,
nor provoked to the Act. For 1. Man's natural faculty it self, besides natural
power, has all these aptitudes to the Act. 1. Man has self-love, and a desire
of felicity, and an unwillingness and fear of Hell and Misery, and of all that
he knows does tend to it as such. He can seek for Glory, Honor and
Immortality, Romans 2. And therefore God thus argues with men, Ezekiel. 33. Turn
ye, why will ye die? And 1 Pet. 3. 10. He that loves life, and would see good
days, etc. as making use of a common principle.

2. Man has reason to understand what is told him of Good and Evil in some
sort, and Nature contains a Law written in the heart, Romans 3. by which the
Heathens did much of that which was written in the Scripture.

3. Man has a Conscience to accuse and excuse.

4. He has misery and necessity to move him: which may be known to him by
common light and experience.

5. Sin, as sin is in common disgrace in the World: And Nature teaches Mankind
to distinguish moral Good and Evil; so that the worst do not love and own sin
as sin: And did not Satan hide it with some vail of goodness, he could not draw
them to it. Even those that murdered Christ, did it on a false pretense that he
was a Sinner.

6. Man's nature has an enmity to Devils, and a fear of them. And therefore
will fly from evil so far as they perceive the Devil in it (for the most part.)
For he is their known Enemy.

7. Lastly, All do known that they must die, and that this World will serve
them but a little while; And they have great experience of its vanity and
vexation: And Nature teaches most, and the Gospel much more, that man's Soul is
immortal, and therefore that there is a Reward for the Good, and Punishment for
the Bad hereafter.

2. And as depraved Nature it self has certainly all these advantages for
good; so God adds by his Works and Word many vehement Motives, Persuasions,
and urgent Exhortations, Examples, Mercies and Corrections: And all these may
give the Soul much more than a bare power to many good acts: For many such are
really done by bad men; And to others they are almost persuaded, when they
disobey.

2. You must not suppose, that just the same degree of means or help is
necessary to one man as to another; or to the same man ever at several times.
For one man's Soul may be more undisposed and ill disposed than another: And
the same man's more at one time than at another. And temptations and impediments
may be greater at one time, and to one man than another. Experience assures
us, that less teaching will inform one man's understanding than another.


C. Have not all men the same degree of Original Sin? What can be said more of
any than is said of all, that they are dead in sin?


B. 1. The same word [Dead] may be used of all, if it were words only that you
plead for. But that word proves not that all are equally either guilty or
corrupted. For though Adam's sin be the same to all, yet I have before told you
(and showed you besides Scripture, Augustine's judgment for it) that there is
also a participation of Guilt of nearer Parents sins by Infants; And
consequently of Pravity: Were it but the ill temper of body which many
Drunkards and Adulterers convey to their Children, experience tells us that
it does much in hindering the Soul. And all are not equal in this derivation of
Original Sin.

2. And Adam's sin, with all other being pardoned to faithful Parents, is in
them pardoned to their Infants dedicated to God; And we have reason to think
that where the Guilt is pardoned, the Vice is not equally transmitted as to
others that are not pardoned in their infancy.

3. And it is not only Original Sin, but much additional Pravity, and
particular habits of sin, contracted by practice, which is the impediment of
Conversion.

4. Yea, and actual sin it self, which temptations stir up, as well as those
habits.

5. And also the great guilt which all those acts and habits do contract, by
which Gods Grace is yet more forfeited. All these are a great disparity, and
show that more Grace is necessary to some than others.


C. Well! Go on with your Answer to the main Question?


B. My Answer is, that* if you will not turn Vorstians, but will receive the
common metaphysical School Divinity about God, (to deny which, is commonly
called Blasphemy by all Parties) I do not yet see any place for a disagreement.
For the Question, [Whether the same measure of Grace which we call merely
sufficient, is ever effectual?] is meant either, 1. Of Gods Agency or Influx as
it is Agentis. 2. Or of the Means. 3. Or of the Objects. 4. Or of Effects in
the Soul. Malderus in 1. 2. q. 111. a. 3. d. 8. Omnis gratia excitans est
efficax and rata respectu sui effectus formalis quo homo excitatur, and quem
sine consensu libero in homine ponit: non enim potest gratia pulsare, quin home
pulsetur.

And that exciting Grace is always sufficient Grace, to the Act to which it
exciteth, see his Reasons, ibid. page 462.




And 1. It is plainly the first that the most Contenders mean, upon a false
supposition. They think that God puts forth one degree of strength to one
effect, and another degree to another effect; and so that ex part Dei
operantis, there is a different Operation (in kind or degree) to the producing
of different effects: which is blasphemy in the Judgment of the Philosophical
Divines: For though we are fain to use the name of Act and Influx, yet it is
nothing but Gods own Essence (in Power, Wisdom and Will) by which he produces
all effects. And (to say) that Gods Essence is diverse in kind or degrees, is
contrary to his Simplicity and Immutability. And if all Gods Operation (from
the creation of the World to the moving of a Feather, and from the converting
of Saul to the least gracious action of a Saint,) be done by the same kind and
degree of power, and there be no difference at all in God or his Agency, but
only as in passo in the effect, then the very supposition of your dispute, and
the Subject being nothing, you may see how wisely you have long troubled the
World.


C. But it is unconceiveable that there should be variety in the Effects, when
the Cause has no difference at all in its agency ex part sui.


B. Aureolus in his Quodlib. 2. art. 2. page 13. (who has many singularities)
confidently maintains that there is some causal Action of God (e. g. in
creation) between his essence and the effect: because posita causa ponitur
effectus: but God did not create from, etc. and says, This Action is not God,
and yet no part of the Universe. But 1. It is utterly unintelligible what that
should be: For Action is virtutis alicujus actio; and that virtus is
substantiae virtus: Vis or Actio creata subsist not of themselves: Therefore an
Action that is neither God, nor yet a Creatures Action is unintelligible. 2.
And the difficulty will recur upon his own way: For either that middle Action
is one or many, eternal or in time: If one and eternal, his own Arguments
assault it: why then is the Effect temporary and multifaricus: If it be many
Actions and temporary, it is all one for one eternal God to cause many
temporary Creatures, as to cause many temporary Actions. Therefore when all is
done, we must say that Omnia sunt ab uno: Though how we cannot comprehend. 3.
And Gods Essence is an infinite power in Act, intimately present with every
effect: no other intermediate action need to be imagined.
How now! Did the Calvinists so much stir up King James against Vorstius, and
condemn him in the Synod of Dort; and now must we plead against you as
Vorstians? Did not one God, without any diversity in himself, make all the
variety of Creatures in the World? Can he not unica volitione velle plurima?
And so unica action plurima efficere? All multitude proceeds from perfect
Unity.


C. But Gods Influx or Action seems to be somewhat else than his Essence.


B. You must mean ex part Dei, or you say nothing: And if so, it must be some
Creature: For besides the Creator and the Creature there is nothing.


C. Action is not Res, but modus agentis. And so it may be in God.


B. Some indeed make the three Persons to be three Modes in God, which yet
others deny: But otherwise it is commonly taken for blasphemy, to say that God
who is most simple and immutable, has any true mode distinct from his simple
Essence, much more that his Essence has diversity of modes. And if you will
deny this, we must make a whole new method of Divinity, and such as will most
accommodate the Arminians.


C. But to say that God does Influere vel agere, and to say that he is God, are
not words of the same signification.


B. True: For they are different Conceptions that narrow-minded man must have
about God in whom there is no difference. We have our general conception of
Essence, and Perfections, and Relation, which we express by the Name GOD; And
we have one more particular, yea our modal conceptions and expressions: And to
express the one, is not to express the other. But that proves no diversity in
God.


C. If Actio be in Passo, then it is not God, but a Creature.


B. That old saying is but de nomine actionis. Doubtless there is of created
Agents a certain modus by which in Action they differ from themselves;
not-agent and agere signifies somewhat distinct from the effect, which is it
that is in Passo, and is called Passion. And if it be only quid creatum, or the
effect that you mean, we will after speak of that: But now the question is of
the efficient Causality.


C. By this rule we must say that ex part Dei, to will Peter's Salvation and
Judas his Damnation, are all one.


B. So all Philosophical Divines affirm: save only that the same Will unvaried
in it self, is variously related and denominated ab extra from the diversity of
Objects and Effects.


C. At least then we may here denominate Gods Operations on several Souls, as
various from the variety of Effects.


B. You may and must do so: But then remember that the question is but de
nomine, and that you confess that there is no real diversity in all Gods
Operations on men's Souls on his part, no not in degrees.

II. And then as to the means, though for my part I think that a great
diversity is caused by their diversity, yet you your selves will not consent,
that the question about sufficiency and efficacy be there laid. 1. Because it
is a moral operation: and you think that some other physical operation causes
the difference. 2. Because many that live under the most excellent means are
not converted, when some are that had far less. 3. Because you suppose no means
sufficient of it self: and no means insufficient when God will work by it.

But if this must be the question, it must be remembered that you grant, 1. That
means are but sufficient for their own part, and not ad omnia: and therefore
suppose somewhat in the person (disposition or use) to make them effectual. 2.
And that God is the Author of means: and that in themselves they are the same
often to good and bad. But 3. That the diversity of men's dispositions makes the
same less suitable to one, which is now suitable and consequently more
effectual to another. So that here is the same Grace often times as in the means,
made various by variety of Reception. And so that which you are to say of God
herein is this, that when some wicked Parents have more vitiated their
Posterity than others, and when some wicked men by their practices have more
vitiated themselves, yet God does not always give them a greater proportion of
gracious means Protestant Divines do commonly conjoyn the operation of the
Spirit and Word as well as Papists, and in some cases more.

Thom. docet q. 22. de Ver. a. 8. Deum inclinare Voluntatem ad aliquid
app^tendum, eam ^fficaciter and physice praedeterminando, non solum immediate,
sed etiam mediate aliqua entitate, recepta in voluntate: and ex mente D. Tho.
Deus movet om^^s causas secundas, and eas appl^^a' ad suas operatio^^, ita ut
etiam quando ^^^^ ^t voluntatem, aliquid ^^^imit in illam per mo^^^
transeuntis.] Alva^ez de Aux. disp. 23. p. 114.


and helps than to others, but leaves them under the common helps which
convert the more prepared Souls. Not that God always does so: For often times to
his Elect he does as he did by Paul, or the Eunuch, vouchsafe them
extraordinary means. For as a Benefactor he is free, and may do with his own as
he list, and may make Vessels of Mercy and Honor of them that deserved worst.
And the case of the Tyrians and Sidonians, compared with theirs of Capernaum
and Bethsaida, does prove, that less means are proportionable to some as being
less ill-disposed, when greater to others may be uneffectual.

III. And then as to objective Grace, it being the same God, the same Heaven,
the same Christ, and the same Promise which is set before all that have the
Gospel, this cannot be the Controversy. Though the revealing means be diverse
with many, so is not the Object, nor the Means to all.

IV. All that remains then to be questioned, is the Effect which is
subjective Grace: whether that Grace in one man which is but sufficient, be
efficient in another? or in the same man at several times. And here by this
subjective Grace is meant either, 1. The vis impressa. 2. Or the Power. 3. Or
the Act produced. 4. Or the Disposition or Habit.

The two latter are shut out of the question; which is not whether the Act or
Habit be sufficient and effectual, but whether the Grace be so that is to cause
them.

Whether this vis impressa be always caused by means with Gods Power set home
(as the impress of a Signature by the Arm and Seal) or be caused immediately by
God, without any proper means, the word being but a Concomitant, and not
mediate Operator, is made a Controversy by some: But he that well considers
the Scripture here abouts, and the experience of man, will be likelier to think
that it is God by means that ordinarily makes the impress on the Soul, and
that the same impress is the effect of both, though extraordinarily God can do
without means. For 1. It is most likely that God should work on man most
agreeably to his nature, and to his subject state under God his Governor. 2.
And Christ himself as our Teacher and Example, and all his Gospel, are
appointed to this use. 3. The Ministry and Ordinances are appointed to the same
end; And Ministers commanded to fit their teaching to that end. 4. No man can
prove that ever any came to actual Knowledge, Faith or Love, but by some means.
Experience tells Gods Servants that he works by them. 5. The most apt and
powerful usually have best success; and those prosper most in Grace that use
means best, and those speed worst that use them least. 6. God strictly
commands the use of the means as means for that end, that his Grace may be
wrought by them. 7. God promises his blessing on the means: Act. 26. 17, 18. 1
send thee to open their eyes, etc. Romans 1. 16. The Gospel is the Power of God
to Salvation. 2 Timothy 4. 16. Thou shall save thy self and them that hear thee.
Jam. 6. last. He that converteth a Sinner, saves a Soul from death, etc. 8.
When God forsakes a Nation, by taking away the means, he usually forsakes
them as to further Grace. 9. The Devil seems to know this by his earnest
opposition to a holy powerful Ministry, and other means throughout the World;
so that we may say with Cypriam, Epist. 69. ad Pupian. Ut etiam qui non
credebant Deo Episcopum Constit^enti, vel Diab^lo credebant Episcopum
proscribenti.

But whether it be by means or not, it must be somewhat different from Gods own
Essence, which is imprinted or communicated. And to get a formal conception of
it, what it is, if it be not the Power, Disposition, Act or Habit, is past man's
reach. Whatsoever it is, this is certain, 1. That God does not give an Act as a
thing pre-existent; but giving Faith is but causing us to believe, or do that
act our selves, which was none till we performed it. 2. That quoad effectum
disposed Power and Act also, are more than Power and Disposition without the
act. 3. Undoubtedly Dr. Fairfax, Of the Bulk, etc. of the World, page 5. 6, 7,
etc. [Though God be the Maker of every Being that is physicaly so, it follows
not that he is so of every Being that is morally so: It is enough that God is
the Maker of the Power to do evil (which being good, may spring from him,) etc.
[All that God does toward sin, is to leave us to our selves, to bring it forth
if we will: and instead of driving on to it, as a fellow-helper or
procatarktick cause, he draws from it, and toward the good, with unspeakable
endearments of wooing, and drives from it by forbidding the Evil with all that
earnestness of threatening, which may beget in man the utmostness of dread: Nor
is he any nearer the physical cause of it, than to give that good power which
is not the cause at all, as it looks toward him: for by giving this power he
is at the same time the evil is done, as much the cause of the good that is not
done: therefore he is not the cause at all.

Besides, this power is not only good, but also needful: For though the the
perfection of the Will in the next life, will not be in a wavering alike
toward Good and Evil, but only in a selfwillingness to Good; yet in this life
I think it mainly does and must. For this is a life of doing or believing, as
it looks on to reward in that to come: and that is a life of rewarding as it
looks back to doing or believing here, etc.]

[Hence we may answer the old (...)? For ^s sin is a moral thing, etc.
unbounded Wisdom and Goodness having said out endless happiness as a reward for
Obedience, and endless wretchedness as punishment for sin; without this
Obedience there could be no Heaven: without Sin no Hell. And without a power,
not to do in both, there could be neither: So then, that God may have leave to
make man happy for holiness, man must needs have power to make himself wretched
for sin: That evil should always flow from evil in a chain of Breeders is a
great misunderstanding.]

Object. Then man may thank himself too for all the good he does that Being, as
much of him as the other, etc. Answ. It follows not: For 1. Of all the good
that man does, God is still the moral Cause, egging on to it by all, etc. 2.
And the same Almighty Hand that barely upheld while Sin was done, does over and
above further the thing that good is by enlightening the Mind, renewing the
Will, healing the spring in man of that all which inbred Sin has brought upon
it; and in a word, making it every way more it self, God must be more an Owner
than man; And thence the thing done falls in with the Divine Will, because it
flowed from Divine Goodness. [That which is good in man by way of Offspring,
being so in God by way of Wellspring.] Ibid. p. 10.


the same degree of impress, or influx, or force, which causes one man to
believe or act, is not sufficient to cause any other worse disposed man to
believe or act: nor the same man when he is more ill disposed and hindered. 4.
If we put the case of men equally disposed, it is impossibly to prove that any
two men in the world are equally disposed; Nay it is most probable that they
are not: Their minds having far greater variety of thoughts to cause a
difference, than their countenances have of particles, making the wonderful
diversity which we see. Nor is the same man long equally disposed. 5. Men
equally disposed (if such there were) may have unequal impediments without, and
in their bodies, and temptations, which may cause them to need unequal help of
Grace. 6. The same individual Impress which causes no more than a Power,
causes not the Act also; For that is a contradiction; to cause the Act and not
to cause it. 7. But a less degree of impulse or help may cause the act in one,
when a greater degree causes it not in another. 8. A wonderful difference
therefore is made in this as well as in ^ll other diversities in the World, by
the diverse receptive dispositions of the Patient. Which made Johan.
Sarisberiensis (in Nugis Curial.) and many Schoolmen to liken God (with some
acknowledged difference) in his Operations to the Sun, which by one invaried
efflux of motive, illuminative and calefactive power, causes innumerable
varieties of effects, as all the particular Creatures have various Natures and
receptive Dispositions. 9. But all good disposition or preparation is of God;
But by such ways of operation as we are searching after. But all ill
disposition is from our selves. 10. To conclude, God gives men sometimes as
much power to Will or Act, when they do not, as they have when they do. But
(usually) not an equal predisposition, some having more indisposed themselves;
which is to be changed by contrary acts. But whether de facto men equally
enabled, predisposed, helped and hindered, do yet without any cause but their
own free will it self act or will variously, is a question that these
Controversies need not come to: That such (were there such in the World) could
do it, I take for granted, whatever they do.

The Controversy is well known which Hobbes has raised in the World, who
says, That to be free and to be willing is all one; and that every act of the
Will is as truly necessitated by physical premotion, as the motions of any
Engine are; And that we talk of liberty and contingency in the dark, not that
there is any such thing indeed, but when we know not the train of Causes, we
use those names, which signify but our ignorance: And that the first Cause and
other superior Causes do by premotion as much necessitate each Volition, as the
Archer does the motion of his Arrow. And the Dominicans predetermination, and
Camero's necessitation by a train of second Causes is the same I think. But I
think God has made a very good use (by his overruling ordination) of the
Doctrine of Hobbes, (learnedly and timerously, or cautelously seconded by
Gassendus, and improved by Benedictus Spinosa, an Apostate Jew in his Tractatus
Politico-theologicus.) For the goodness and learning of such worthy men as were
Alvarez, Twisse, Camero, (in all other points moderate and admirably judicious)
has been the grand temptation to the Church to receive that Doctrine, which
Hobbes and Spinosa having plainly and nakedly propounded, is now detested by
almost all good men. For from thence they have plainly inferred the subversion
of all morality as distinct from physical motion, and consequently of all true
Religion.

I deny not that I find my self the Controversy in it self exceeding
difficult; and that I have not been without temptations to their Opinion, nor
yet am: And that indeed, all pretended middle ways between Hobbes, his
Necessitation Physical, and true Free Will, are but fancies as far as I can
perceive.

And if I leave true Free Will, I must turn to their necessitation. I confess
their arguing is very plausible; that there is no Effect without a Cause; and
that when ever the Will chooses one thing, and refuses another, there is some
antecedent Cause in the power, disposition, or external things: and that the
same Cause in the same state and mode, having no difference in it self, does
always produce the same effect: Otherwise the diversity should have no cause:
And that the Will being in the same disposition, and having all the same
objects, helps, impediments and other circumstances, will have the same acts.

All this is plausible: But 1. If I receive it, I must let go almost all
Religion (as well as Christianity); of the truth of which I have a better proof
than they can give for their Opinion. And we must not reduce certainties to the
obscurest unsearchable uncertainties.

2. And in God himself their foundation is confuted: For he that is the first
Cause eodem modo se habens sine ulla diversitate, unicus plurima, immo omnia
causat. Therefore their Principle is false.

3. And finding man made after the Image of God, not only as holy, but as man,
(Genesis 6.) I have great reason to think that Free Will is part of his natural
Image, and that as God is a causa unica plurimorum, so may Free Will be: And
that as a God is causa prima entium, so Free Will may be a kind of causa prima
(not actionis qua talis, but) of the comparative moral species of its own acts,
(as choosing this thing rather than that) which is no addition to real entity,
but a wonderful mode of it, which man cannot tell whether he should call
something or nothing.

4. I say therefore that here is no Effect without a Cause: Free Will may be
the cause of various Effects, without a various predisposition.


C. Does not the Will act as it is disposed to act?


B. That it acts not always according to Habits, which are more than
dispositions, is certain by experience. For objects often prevail against habits;
and habits do not necessitate.


C. That is because the Will is otherwise disposed by some contrary stronger
habits: As either by the habit of sensuality, or the natural inclination to
felicity as such: which may bear down weaker particular habits or inclinations.


B. No doubt but the Will is quaedam natura, and has its natural inclination
to good and felicity, which is its pondus and radical disposition to its acts;
from which every act is caused that is done. But I say not that ever it goes
contrary to these radical necessitating inclinations to goodness. But de mediis
it may have inferior particular habits which it often goes against.


C. That is because the Understanding conceives that another thing is best;
and so it is necessitated by the Understanding.


B. The Understanding guides, but does not necessitate. That we Will rightly
is caused by the Understanding (as that I hit the way is by my eyesight) but
not that I exercise the Act it self. Though we Will not without or against the
last strongest dictate of the practical Intellect; yet 1. Note that the
Intellect has diverse perceptions at once (which is not commonly noted). It
does at once act a deep simple apprehension that e. g. bonum sensible is
pleasant, and good, and amiable; and that bonum spirituale which comes into
competition, is yet better, may be at the same time perceived, with so low,
dull and weak an apprehension, as that the Will may tenaciously so adhere to
the first simple apprehension by a strong simple Volition, as that the second
weak comparate apprehension may not move it to Election. 2. For we find that it
is not the objective truth of an apprehension which turns the Will, without
some answerable clearness and liveliness* And as a Preacher that dreamingly
speaks of great things uncontroulably, but coldly, moves not the hearers, so
is it with the Intellect it self. And 3. The Will being principium exercitii
can hinder the Understanding from perceiving truth, by hindering it from
thinking of the evidence. 4. And the Will it self can suspend its own act,
contrary to the understandings fluggish dictate. And not acting when it can
(toward God, and true goodness,) is the beginning of all the disorders of the
Soul.


C. But says Camero, etc. the Will is appetitus rationalis: And if it act
against reason, it acts not as a Will: And so also if it act without reason:
Therefore it cannot forbid the Intellect to think (by nolition) unless the
Intellect first say, Non cogitandum est. Nor can it choose but velle cogitare
if the Intellect say cogitandum est: Otherwise the Will were a brutish, and
not a rational appetite.


B. 1. The Will acts by reason, when it cleaves to that good which is simply
apprehended by the Intellect. The simple apprehension goes first; e. g. [That
this Fruit offered Eve is good and desirable]: This is true, and here the Will
adhereth to it as good. Then should the understanding think comparatively of a
greater Good, and say [This is evil as forbidden and as it hinders a greater
Good:] And this it performs not, because the Will is here the beginner of the
Sin: not perhaps by a positive nolition or forbidding the Intellect the
comparing Thought; (for that it does not without show of reason) but by
neglecting or omitting to excite the Understanding ad exercitium; which it is
brought to in Adam and Eve, 1. By diversion, being before taken up with the
Creature. 2. By voluntary neglect or sloth. For the Will can omit its act
without reason, and yet be a rational appetite. And the beginning of the Sin
may be this omission of the Will, or its over tenacious adhering to sensible
good, apprehended truly by the Intellect.

2. And we have not so much acquaintance with the faculties of our own Souls,
as to be sure that sense, and passion, and fantasy can do nothing immediately
on the Will to help or hinder it. We find that the Will easily follows
Passion, and very hardly goes against it.

3. Nay we are not certain, but there may be more bruitishness and less reason
in many Sins, than most imagine; and that the violence of the sensitive
appetite and passion, may not prevail both with the Will to forbear the
excitation of the Intellect, and with the Intellect to omit its opposite
Judgment, though neither Will or Reason in the first instant give consent.
There are some also that think that we are scarce sure that the Will and the
sensitive Appetite are two several faculties, rather than one between two
guides. I say not as they: But this I will say, that I grow daily more
confident, that they that make the rational and sensitive Soul in man to be
two, and their Brethren, that without all show of proof, magisterially face us
down, that the Soul at death puts off all sense (because it exercises it not
by the same Organs which were adapted to the Bodies use), do both of them
hainously wrong the Church, and darken many Truths, and open the way to
Infidelity.


C. But you cannot lay the beginning of sin on the Wills omission, to put the
Intellect on the comparing thoughts; for the Intellect can understand against
our Wills (as many know that which they had rather be ignorant of): And
therefore needs not the Will ad exercitium.


B. The Intellect may be forced: But it is not so always: Things sensible, and
near at hand, may force the Intellect: But things unseen and distant must be
voluntarily thought on, and studied, or else they will not be understood.


C. If e. g. Eves Will had said to the Intellect, [Cogita Comparative] either
the Intellect must first have said to the Will, [Comparative cogitandum est] or
not: If not, then that Will would have been no rational Will. If yea, then the
Will must have consented, or else been unwilling against reason, and so be
brutish still. Therefore Sin must begin at the Intellect.


B. 1. The Intellect did not say [Comparative cogitandum est] not only because
it was not commanded so to say by the Will; but because the Will was so
entangled before by the simple Love of the Creature, as diverted the thoughts
from the Creator. 2. Suppose the Intellect did say coldly [Comparative
cogitandum est] the Will did neglect it; being not necessitated thereby, and so
the Intellect went no further.


C. If the Will do velle bonum qua bonum necessario, it must needs necessarily
velle bonum cognitum, and so must follow the Intellect.


B. It does necessarily velle bonum quando vult, i. e. non malum; but it does
not necessarily velle hoc, vel illud bonum inter plurima: Nay though the
Intellect say nothing against it, yea something for it, the pre-engaged Will
may neglect it. And yet possibly Eves Intellect did perform one comparative act
which occasioned her further sin, viz. [If thou turn thy thoughts toward Gods
prohibition, thou will lose the pleasant good before thee]. And this was true.


C. But if Eve's Will first over tenaciously stuck to the forbidden Creature,
when the Understanding never said, It must do so; In so doing it was not a
Will, but brutish Appetite.


B. The Understanding said truly, [It is pleasant and Appetible] and so the
Will in its initial desire sinned not. But that it looked no further, and
excited not the Intellect to remember, and it self to desire more to please
God, was by an abuse of its power and liberty of self-determining, and so the
sensible good prevailed, because the superior good was forgotten and neglected.
And the Will may thus suspend its act after an intellectual perception, without
being brutish, though it so ^ar disobey Reason its guide.


C. These things are exceeding intricate and difficult, for all that you say.


B. They are so: The same I say of objective and intellectual necessitation of
the Will: says H. Kipping truly, Inst. Philos. Not. li. 9. c. 10. page 416.
Errant Scholae reformat^ doctores qui asserunt voluntatem ad actum suum
determinari a judicio intellectus, ita ut voluntatic libertas nulla sit,
constricta vero sit ad intellectus ductum a quo semper determinatur, Joh.
Camero, Mart. Schogkius, Hornbeck. Maccovius, Heerbord, Hos prolixe and been
refellit Episcopius.
But forget not, that the great difficulty is between us and the Hobbists or
Infidels, and Fatists, and not between the true Christians among themselves, as
to our present Controversies. I confess that the confuting of their Opinion,
that [all Volitions are necessitated unavoidably by Gods Operation] is a far
harder work than the reconciling of the Lutherans and Calvinists, who go upon
no such Principles.

Tell me, Is this it that you would come to or not? If you once persuade me
that God causes all sinful Volitions as necessarily as he causes a Tree to
grow, and that man can no more avoid them, and that liberty of Will signifies
no more than velle, or not nolens velle, and so that God is the prime
irresistible cause of all Sin, as much as of all Good, so far as it is capable
of a Cause.] I must needs next believe, 1. That God hates not his own Work:
yea that he loves it. 2. That he hates no man for it. 3. That moral Good and
Evil is nothing in man, but such as obeying or disobeying (proportionably) in a
Horse or Dog. 4. Yea far less; because man does ^ut as my pen which writes as
I move it, in respect to God: But so is not my Horse or Dog to me. 5. And how
then to judge of all the Scripture, the Ministry, of the Incarnation and Death
of Christ, of the Duties of a Christian life, of Hell, etc. it is easy to
perceive, viz. That as God differenceth Men and Toads merely because he will do
so; even so does he the good and the bad in the World: and that Sin is no evil
any way but to our selves: and that God is as much the cause of it as of
Sickness; and is as well pleased with the Worlds Infidelity and Impiety, as
with the Churches Sanctity; And that he will no otherwise damn men for Sin,
than erbitarily to make such baser than others, as Dogs are than men;
Benedictus Spinosa has given you the Consectaries more at large.

O how heartlesly should I preach and pray, how carelessly should I live, if
once you brought me to this Opinion, that all sin is the unresistible Work of
God (so far as it is a work) as much as holiness is?


C. If there be no middle between Free Will and this Impiety (as I confess I
cannot disprove your Consectaries) it is time for us to turn our studies against
the common Enemies of all Religion and Morality, instead of contending with one
another: specially when they have so much to say.


B. And do you think they do well, and friendly by the Church, who take these
men's part, and own their Cause in the foundation; and entangle poor Souls in
such intricate difficulties; when we that know not the least of Gods Creatures,
or the mysteries of any of his Works, do little know all the quick and
intricate actions of our own Souls.

In a word, man has more power to good than he uses, and that power is called
sufficient or necessary Grace to the act; though there be many difficulties
which no one of either side can resolve.


The second Crimination.
C. But I fear many of them with Pelagius by GRACE do mean nothing So Dr.
Twisse frequently repeateth that mee^ posse credere is but Nature and not
Grace, because it is equally a posse non credere. But 1. A natural power
reprieved by Grace, and preserved and given for gracious ends. 2. And many and
great helps of Grace to excite and rectify it, may be called an effect of
Grace.
but Nature it self, at least when they speak of the Heathens, who they say
have some kind of Grace.


B. Turn your eyes a little from the name of Pelagius, and every thing else
that uses to blind Disputers with prejudice and partiality, and then answer me
these following questions.

Quest. 1. Do you think that Mercy contrary to sinful Commerit is not properly
Grace?


C. I confess it is?


B. Quest. 2. Is not the whole frame of Humane Nature (and our Utensils) put
into the hand and power of Christ the Redeemer, to be managed by him to his
Mediatory ends, Joh. 17. 2. Math. 28. 19, 20. Joh. 13. 3. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. For this end he died, rose and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the Dead and Living. Romans 14. 9. Joh. 5. 22, 23, 24. The
Father judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, etc. And is
not the very reprieval of the World from deserved ruin and misery so many
thousand years an Act of Grace? and Nature now continued, used and improved by
Grace, and so far may be said to be of Grace?


C. This is plain truth, and must not be denied.


B. Quest. 3. Is it not undeserved Mercy to all Mankind, that ever since Adam's
Sentence, Genesis 3. 15. they are all ruled by a Law of Grace, and not the Law of
Innocence alone, and by that Law of Grace must all be judged?


C. If you before evinced that any thing is truly mercy to the Reprobate, I
must confess it. But I have not before so much thought of this, what Law the
World is under, as the case deserves: But I remember Camero in the fragments
of his dispute with Courcellaeus taken by Testardus, though he deny not that
the Covenant of Grace was made with all mankind in Adam and Noah, yet says,
That by or for their nearer Parents sins the Infants of Infidels are out of
that Covenant.


B. 1. It Is well you note, that it is not only Augustine (Enchir. ad La^rent.)
and I that are for the Imputation of nearer Parents sin, in some Vid. Pet.
Martyr in Romans 5. confessing Augustine's judgment.
sort, as well as Adam's. 2. He speaks there of the Covenant as mutual, and
not as a Law, or an offered Covenant, or Divine Disposition, (...)* (of which
Grotius speaks at large in his Preface to Annotat. in Evang.) And so I say
the same as Camero: which is but this, that though it be a Law or offered
Covenant of Grace, and not the sole Law of Innocence, which the whole World are
now under as Subjects to be ruled and judged by it. Yet no Parent that
consents not, has any right to the promised benefits, nor is in it as a
mutual Covenant (unless as any counterfeiting consent may oblige themselves)
nor are the Children of such Parents any true Heirs of the said promised
benefits for the sake of remote Ancestors, as long as their nearest Parents are
Infidels. This is all that Camero there maintains.

Quest. 3. Are not all the teachings, helps, means, time, and innunerable
Mercies which Heathens and Infields have contrary to their Commerits, and
consequently truly Grace? Le Blank tells you that Polanus distinguishes Grace
into natural and supernatural, These. 27. did. Great. 2.



C. They are at best but common Grace. But I am loath to grant that Nature is so
much, if I could deny it.


B. I am sorry that unwillingness and willingness can do so much with you about
these matters. But I pray tell me, Quest. 4. What is it that you mean by Nature?


C. I mean that fixed order of being and operation which God put all things in
at their Creations at the beginning.


B. You have done as the Incendiaries of the Church have done from the
beginning of contentious Disputes: you have chosen a word unexplained Media
a^tem destinat^ and propria and (...) sunt verbum et spiritus: Quibus etiam
jungi possunt bona and mala hujus animalis vitae, quibus Deus ad eundem finem
utitur. Armin. Disput. Private. These. 41. Sect. 8.
to make a ma^ter of reproach of, which has so many significations, and is so
uncertainly used, that Philosophers themselves, even in their greatest
accurateness, know not what to fix upon; though there are few words which they
are more concerned to be agreed in, if they could. But where the thing is
unknown, no wonder if there be discord about the Name. Fortun, Licetue alone de
natura primo move^te may suffice to evince this. But I perceive you take not
Nature for Principium motus et quietis, etc. nor for the essence of things,
matter or form, or both* nor with Scotus de potentia for the passive power, nor
in other senses usually intended by various Writers: But for the created status
and ordo rerum, and the motus thereby alone caused. And if this he NATURE with
you, you cast your self into inextricable difficulties to know what you say.
For 1. We are very much ignorant of second Causes, and their concatenation and
co-operations; who ever took in pieces this great Engine of the Universe (as
men do a Clock or Watch) to find out the form and compagination of each part?
or ever understood it. 2. Who can tell certainly what is done by this
compagination of Causes and Author fidei est spiritu^ sanctus quem filius
mitti^ a patre tanquam advocatum and vicarium suum, qui ipsiu^ causam in mund^*
and contra mundum agat^ Instrumentum est evangelium seu verbum fidei, continens
sensum de Deo and Christo quem spiritus intellectui proponit and persuadet.
Arminius Disput. Private. These. 44. Sect. 6.
cooperation according to its primitive state, who knows not the whole
Engine, but some parts alone (not so much as one sand is to the whole Earth)
seeing that it is the whole that co-operateth to the foredescribed motions? And
3. Who knows how far God has fixed the state and operation of second Causes?
and how far he is pleased to alter them from their first state and course of
motion, or daily does it? 4. And who is so well acquainted with the state of
the Universe in the Creation, and the state of it now, as to be able to make an
ac^^rate comparison, and tell whether or how much it is since then altered? or
whether all things continue just as in the beginning. 5. Yea it is certain,
that a great alteration was made both on man's Soul and Body, and on the Earth
by the sin of Adam, and the Curse. 6. And it is certain, that God makes much
use of the Ministry of free Agents in the affairs of the World, even of Angels,
Devils and Men, whose voluntary contingent acts (and consequently their
effects) go not as a Watch or Cl^^k in one constant natural course of motion.
How then can you tell here what is natural as to a great part of the changes
upon man?


C. You would make me believe that WORDS are so defecti^^ as to delude us and
befool us all, and that nothing men say can be understood. Does not all the
World distinguish between Nature and Grace?


B. The vanity of speculative Sciences, and the misery of Mankind thereby, and
the reason of Paul's contempt of the Philosophy then predicated, and the cause
of all our love-killing Contentions, cannot be Sine hoc speciali auxilid
Gratiae nihil boni posse ab ulla creatura rational^ ^eri est certiss^^um. ^ed
an hoc auxilium Gratiae sit voluntatis Divi^^ volentis illud absolute
communicare, and per illud communica^^^ absolute bonum ^p^rari, est in
controversia po^itum Thealogis: nec immerito, cum vox absolute in Scripturis
non inve^iatur* etc. Armin. exam Perkins. de praed. Sect. 6. page 501.

Among many others, read but Vasqu^z in 1 Tho. and Pet. a S. Joseph de Auxil.
divin. (in These. Univers. and spec. and moral.) and Ruiz, and Bellarmin. de
Auxil. And you may see how much supernaturality the Papists stand for: Indeed
for more th^^ the Protestants in some cases, as in asserting the
supernaturality of Adam's first Righteousness, etc. And many of the Scho^^men
speak higher of Infusion than most Protestans, so that this a^ti^^ will not
prove the difference.


readilier assigned than by charging them on the lamentable defectiveness and
ambiguity of words next to the darkness of Humane Intellect. But the
distinguishing of Nature and Grace is needful; but must be rightly understood.
1. Principally as Nature signifies the constitution of man and all things as
made by their Creator, and GRACE the medela or medicinal Operation of God, by
which he recovereth the lapsed sinful and cursed World. 2. And as any Motus,
Action or Change, can be said to be from the first natural Principles of
Action, so far they may be called natural: If from Nature alone, they are only
natural. But as they come from recovering Grace they are gracious: If from
Grace alone, without Nature, they are only gracious (whether there be any such,
or any but Miracles, I pass by.) But as they are by and from Nature, either
sanctified, or ordered and overruled by Grace, so they are both natural and
gracious in several respects.


C. This seems plain and true: and what do you hence infer.


B. 1. All degrees of the medela or recovery of Nature are so many degrees of
Grace.

2. Exparte Dei efficientis, the operations of Grace and Nature really are all
one, and differ not: That is, God does per essentiam operate in both, and his
operating Essence is the same. But as the nature of a thing in its original or
constitutive Principles are one thing, and the recovery of it from its vitiated
state another; so relatively the same God, and his Will and Operations are to
be variously denominated; even as he is the God and Fountain of Nature, and as
he is the God and Giver of Grace.

3. I think it is past man's skill to prove that most Miracles themselves have
no part of natural Operation in them. It is sufficient of God interpose and
overruled the matter by any other immediate Operation of his own: yea or that
he put natural Operations themselves out of that course, in which they would
have gone if he had not so altered it.

4. By this you may plainly see that though all natural Operations are not
gracious; All gracious Operations are also natural, except the highest sort of
Miracles: that is, they are the Actions of some natural Principles, ordered by
Gods gracious Will to a gracious end, in a gracious manner. I also except such
Operations of God alone, in which he uses no second Cause, but himself
immediately without any instrument produces the effect. But note, 1. That this
is only in the Reception of the Divine immediate influx it self on the Soul,
antecedent to our very first Acts: For our first Act (e. g. of Faith) is from
Gods Influx on our own natural faculties, and so from those faculties
themselves as suscitated by God. 2. Note that this is no distinction between
natural and gracious Operations, to be so immediate: For God does as
immediately operate in the natural: As in the Creation he made all the World by
such immediate efflux, so he still operateth immediately on the first created
Cause (whatever that is), and say almost all Divines) even when he uses second
Causes, he himself is as near the Recipient and Effect, and immediatione
suppositi and virtutis, as if he had used no second Cause at all: The
difference being not in his distance or proximity, but in his using or not
using a second Cause together with himself.

5. Moreover it is utterly unknown to us how far God operateth without Vocatio
ad communionum Christi and beneficiorum ejus, est grati^sa ^ctio Dei qua
homines peccatores re^s condemnationis and sub domin^o peccati constitntos, ex
animalis vita condition, ex mundi hujus inquinamentis and corruptelis, ^^^^t
per verbum and piritum suum ad vitam supernaturalem in Christ^ per poenitentiam
and fidem consequendam, ut in illo tanquam capit^ s^^ ad^o destinato and
ordinato unir^, and beneficiorum ejus communion^ ^rui que^nt, ad gloriam Dei,
and ipsorum salutem. Armin. Dispur. Private. These. 42. Sect. 1.
any second Cause, even on the Soul it self. As we know that Devils do much on
the wicked, so we know not how far he uses the Angels or superior
Intelligences in operating on the Elect: And yet we will not go so far as
Aristotle did, in ascribing to the primum mobile. But as God is said to write
with his own Finger the Law on the two Tables, and yet that Law was delivered
by Angels; and as God is said to appear and speak to Adam and many others, when
yet it must needs be quid creatum, which Humane senses could see and hear; Even
so we know not when God operateth on the Soul, what spiritual Ministry he may
use.

And now tell me again, what it is that you accuse them of, that you think turn
Nature into Grace?


C. According to your explication I must mean nothing else, but that the name
of Grace is given by them to Nature alone, with the natural operation is not
gracious.


B. Wherein is it that they thus err? Instance in particulars.


C. 1. When they make Gods common Providence to be Grace: 2. When they make
the preaching of the Gospel to be Grace. 3. When they make Reason and Free Will
to be Grace.


B. I. Do you not believe that all Gods merciful Providence are acts of Grace?
Are they not mercy contrary to merit, which is the definition of Grace in the
general? And have they not an aptitude and tendency in medelam animarum to man's
Recovery, which is the specification of Evangelical Grace?


C. Yes, I grant all this: But we take Grace for the inward saving work of Gods
sanctifying Spirit on the Soul.


B. 1. You do not only strive about words; but perversely abuse words, that you
may have matter of strife. Will you confine the general name of Grace, not only
to a Species, but to one inferior Species, and then accuse your Brethren for
giving the name to other Species? As if you would accuse them for calling any
besides a Philosopher or a Soldier a man? And 2. Do you know either Jesuit,
Lutherane or Arminian, that holds that outward common Providence are inward
Sanctification?


C. Let that pass, and go to the second.


B. II. Do you doubt whether the preaching of the Gospel be Grace? either as to
the general or special definition?


C. I deny not that the definitions agree to it; but I doubt whether it be a
fit name, when use has appropriated it to the inward Sanctification.


B. 1. Here again you are convinced of striving about words: 2. And till you
are forced, you confess it not, but make it seem a material difference. 3. You
confess that your Adversaries name agrees with the definition. 4. When you
have abused the name your selves by erroneous confinement of it to one species
of Grace, you then plead your own sinful use as a reason sufficient against
Etymology, Definition, the custom of all the Christian Churches from the
beginning to this day; yea and against Scripture it self. 5. For the Scripture
so uses the word, as you may see (sometimes for merciful Providence,
sometimes for the Gospel, sometimes for Church Priviledges, for Gifts,
sometimes for Favor, and often for recovering mercy in the general) Ezra 9. 8.
Zech. 4. 7. Joh. 1. 16, 17. Act. 4. 33. and 14. 3. and 20. 24, 32. Romans 1. 5.
and 5. 2. and 20. and 6. 14. 15. and 11. 5, 7. and 12. 3. 6. and 15. 15. 1 Cor.
10. 30. 2 Cor. 8. 19. Gal. 1. 6. 15. and 5. 4. Ephesians. 3. 8. and 4. 8. and 4. 7.
Phil. 1. 7. Jud. 4. 1 Pet. 4. 10. and 5. 12. Tit. 2. 11. Ephesians. 3. 2, 7. Col. 1.
6. 2 Cor. 6. 1.


C. Go on to the third instance.


B. 1. Who do you know that calls Reason and natural Free Will in it self
considered, by the name of Grace: I know not any such? 2. But 1. Reason as
reprieved in order to recovery, and Reason as illuminated by common Grace, (and
so Free Will) are certainly a sort of common Grace. 2. And Reason as specially
illuminated, and the Will as freed from Sin, are special Grace.

But now you see the injury of your Charge, will you search and fear, lest even
by contending, it is you that have run into worser than the Error which you
declaim against as other men's. Is it not you that call a great deal of Gods
Grace by the name of Nature, yea sometimes of Wrath; and as I before evinced,
deny much common Grace to be any Grace at all? And who wrongeth God more? He
that honors his Works of Nature with an undue title (of Grace)? or he that
utterly dishonors his Grace, and says that it is no Grace?


The third Crimination.
C. They make Grace to be but a moral Operation or swasion, and seem to deny
that physical operation which is eminently Grace: or at least take it to be but
a physical use of moral means; And indeed I doubt whether some of them confess
any other Grace than the Gospel and other means of Grace? And so the Spirit
must work only on the Preacher, or on the sound of words, if he work not
immediately and physically on the heart. The untruth of this common Charge
appears in the following citations.

Vocatio ista tum externa est tum interna: externa per ministerium hominum
verbum proponentium: Interna per operationem spiritus sancti illuminantis and
cor afficientis ut attendatur iis quae dicuntur, fidesque verb^ adhibeatur: ex
utriusque concursu efficacitas vocationis existit. Is It a distributio non est
generis in speci^s, sed totius in parts, hoc est totalis ^ocationis in
partiales acti^nes, etc. Armin Disput. Private. These. 42. Sect. 10, 11.

Remonst. Synod. art. 3. 4. p. 15, etc. Si quaeratur ex nobis an Dei
convertentis actio tantum moralis sit, suadendo, proponendo, invi^ando,
Respondemus, Plusquam moralem esse, and si excitantem spectemus gratiam dicimus
in ipsam voluntatem quoque potentiam supernaturalem insundi distinctam ab
illuminatione: si vero co-operantem, dicimus came physicam vocari posse, and
realem ac propriam habere efficientiam.] Note here their plain profession of
physical and infused Grace.

[Si quaeratur an praeter mentis illustrationem and ^ffectuum excitationem, and
voluntatis invitationem nihil faciat Gratia per modum principii vel
antecedenter ad conversionem, Respondemus facere, Id. ibid.





B. Still I fear that you are guilty of striving about words to no profit, but
subversion of the peoples Charity.

1. Moral has usually three different senses. 1. Moral is as much as
Reputative; As he that concealeth or encourages a Traitor or Murderer, or
defends not the assaulted, is, ex lege morum, reputed and judged as guilty of
the Treason or Murder. And thus causa moralis is usually but causa ex lege
morum reputata.

2. Moral is often taken for Ethical, or that which is ex genere moris, either
Good or Evil, Virtue or Vice, which contain all morality.

3. Moral is often opposed to merely natural (forced, brutish, etc.) and means
the action of a free Agent as such. In which of these senses, or what other do
you take it.


C. I mean the first, that God does but operate ut causa moralis per modum
proponentis objectum; which Dr. Twisse says is but in genere causae finalis,
and so is but operatio metaphorica.


B. It Is pity that Christ's Disciples must be troubled with such uncertain
arbitrary notions, without necessity. But what remedy: 1. I know no Law that
forbids me to dissent from Dr. Twisse, or you in Logic or Physics. I do
not believe that objectum qua tale is causa finalis: And no wonder; For 2. I
hold that to be no proper cause which you call commonly causa finalis; And
instead of advancing each Object to the dignity of a final cause, I take down
the final cause to the order or rank of the prime Object of Volition or
Intention. To be optimum is the Ratio objectiva primaria, it being most
suitable to the Will. To be medium ad optimum is the Ratio objectiva
secundaria. Bonum qua tale non agit in voluntatem, sed voluntas in bonum
cognitum: Though the cognitio boni does dirigere voluntatem. When it is
commonly said, [Ob finem amatum volo medium, the preposition deceives us, as
if the causalitas sinis were upon the Will: But it means no more but that the
Aptitude of the means, ad finem, is the Ratio bonitatis, and so the Ratio
objectiva medii: I will or choose it, because it is apt or conducible to the
end or chief object; that is, That it is Goodness for which I will it. Which
speaks no more but Rationem objectivam. 3. And all objects of the intellect
and will are causes indeed of the act in specie; but what causes, Receptive and
Terminative, such as we must call Material (so far as an act may be said to
have matter) of which more anon.

And if the object be no other than a material or receptive cause, constituting
the act in specie, then the proposer of the object, who operateth but in
subservience to it, can be no other than a preparer and offerer of the matter.
But how great a hand this receptive cause has in the mutations and diversities
in the world, is little considered by the most.

2. But I pray you tell me, How many, and whom do you find that hold that God
does no more but proponere objectum? I remember none.


C. What say they less when they call it Moral suasion, when suadere is but
proponere objectum?


B. So then, your accusations are your own Inferences, and not their words. But
do they not commonly tell you of an inward suasion by the Spirit (and
Conscience) as well as an outward by the word?


C. Yes they do so; but that inward is but suasion still.


B. But are you sure that by suasion they mean nothing but proposing the Object
to the Intellect, and by it the Will.


C. What else can they mean, if they speak congruously?


B. As far as I can understand them they mostly differ not from the Synodists
at all, in their meaning; (much less do the Schoolmen and L^therans, who use
not the word [suasion] so much as they.) For the thing that they mean is 1.
That Gods Spirit works on the Intellect by objective means, (though not only
propounding that object, but also assisting and exciting the mind.) 2 That by
the apprehension of the Intellect, the wills object is offered to it: And as
Camero copiously pleads the act of the will is ever excited by the act of the
Intellect. (Or indeed the object is so aptly presented, as that the will shall
or may either by Natural or Gracious Inclination excite it self, supposing Gods
assistance.) But that the will is not moved, to any but an Apprehended Good. 3.
And that God does this work on the will in a sweet connatural manner; like as
an effectual perswader does, not forcing the Will, but preserving its liberty:
and as the Arminians speak, not irresistibly, or by necessitation, leaving the
act to be contingent. 4. But withal, it is most certain, that God operateth on
the Mind and Will it self, and not on the Preacher of the Word only. 5. But no
mortal man knows how; nor is able to comprehend his way of operation.

11. But next tell me what you mean by Physical, which is the other branch of
your distinction?


C. What should I mean but Natural, by Real Contact, attingency or influx on
the Recipient?


B. 1. God is above Nature, and not included in your Physics: How then do you
call his operations Physical, ex part agentis. No Physics pretend to treat of
God.

2. Contact and proper attingency belongs to Bodies: But God is not a Body;
and therefore the Contact or Influx by which he operateth, is utterly unknown
to mortal man, any farther than that it is by his Essence.

3. God is immense and essentially every where; and therefore such a
Metaphysical Attingency or Contact, as may be spoken of him, he has to all
things in the world; and therefore must do all that he any way does in such
attingency.


C. Explain it and resolve it your self, if you like not my Explication.


B. Gods operations are called Physical or Moral, 1. In regard of God the
Agent. 2. In regard of the means or second causes. 3. Or in respect of the
effect.

I. In respect of God the Agent they are not properly either Physical or Moral,
but transcendently they are above both; for they are his Essence The Papists
who are most for mere moral operations in this Controversy, yet have such
strange opinions about the physical operations of Sacraments (e. g. Baptism on
Infants) as that they make them to be instruments of Miracles, the Miracle
being first wrought upon them (e. g. the water, and then on the receiver. Yea
they seem to make God to operate miraculously with every Sacrament.
and Will, which is the transcendent Head of all operations and causes,
Physical and Moral.

II. As to the Means or second Causes, those acts of God that have no such
means or causes are not here concerned: And as for all those that have such
means, no doubt but they are to be called both Physical and Moral: for Morality
is but Modality or Relation, ex rerum ordine. And all Order, Mode and Relation,
is Alicujus entis ordo, Modus and Relatio. And e. g. preaching the Gospel, is
such an act of a Physical and Moral Agent, as is it self both Physical and
Moral. Man is quaedam natura, and yet Intellectual and Free: And his act is
quid physicum in genere entis; and yet quid morale in genere moris, and
imputanda juxta l^egem morum.

III. And as to the Effect, it is no doubt, both quid physicum (for Faith is
actus realis) and quid morale: For it is morale bonum, and ita reputanda. And
will any Arminian deny any of this, that understands words? Where then is
your difference in this?


C. But when you dispute about Pre-determination, you can say it is not
Physical: what mean you by it then?


B. We marvail that men should say that God physically pre-determineth the Will
to all acts of sin in the specifying circumstances, when as he pre-determineth
it not really to them at all, either physically or morally. So that it is here
a Real efficient motion of God to the evil act, which we deny.


C. And it is a Real efficient motion of God, to the act of Faith and
Repentance which we assert, and mean by the word Physical.


B. And this your Adversaries will not deny: and so you are in this agreed.


The fourth Crimination.
C. I doubt they hold not Faith to be infused, but acquired: whereas Arminius
professes Faith and Repentance Nisi Deo dante haberi non posse. Exam. Perk.
page 57. and that both of them are denied to the Reprobates by the Decree of
Reprobation. See his own words, At Deus statuit D^ereto reprobationis reprobis
fidem, and poenitentiam non dare, concedo lubens illam assumptionem, sed recte
intellectam. Twisse against Hord, p. 70. l. 1.
Dr. Twisse shows the difference to be so great, that an unjustified person
may have an Acquired Faith about the same objects, when yet only an Infused
Faith will justify.


B. 1. Tell not me what you Doubt, but what you Prove, unless you mean no more,
than to tell me of your injustice and uncharitableness: I find the Jesuits and
Lutherans commonly asserting an Infused Faith, and I have met with few
Arminians if any that deny it; though the word be not so much in use with them.

2. But because you that are the Accuser are supposed to understand what you
speak against, I pray help me to understand it.

Quest. 1. What mean you by Acquired Faith?


C. That which we our selves get by our use of means and consideration.


B. Quest. 2. Is there any man in his wits that denies Faith to be the effect
of consideration? Do you not think what and why you must believe, and even
believe in and by Thinking or Considering. Do you believe, and not think what
or why?


C. No, but it is by Infusion that we have those thoughts.


B. Infused Faith then is by Infused Thoughts: Be it so; but then it is not
without Thoughts or Consideration. But further;

Quest. 3. Is there any Christian that denies that Faith comes by hearing,
and the use of the means which God has appointed us? I pray you hear Dr.
Twisse against Hord, page 169. [God in his Covenant of Grace requires
obedience to salvation; but of his Free Grace undertakes to regenerate them,
and work them to obedience: But how? agreeable to their rational natures; that
is, by admonition, instruction, exhortation; that is, to work Faith and
Repentance by exhorting and persuading them to repentance. All this he performs
by his Ministers.] Do you not believe that the Apostles were sent to open men's
eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, -- Acts 26. 17, 18. And that Ministers must The Schoolmen-men and even the
Jesuits ordinarily profess the necessity of infused Grace; yea many of them in
a higher sense than many Protestants dare own. Even Molina himself asserteth
the supernaturarality of Grace thus, [Ut consensus liberi arbitrii Deo
excitanti and vocanti per gratiam praevenientem nihil in re sit quoth. non
supernaturale, and quod non simul a Deo ema^et, non solum tanquam ab allic^ente
excitante, and invitante ad id arbitrinm* sed etiam tanquam a co-operanee per
auxilium gratiae. And he pronounces Anathema on them that affirm [Consensum
arbitrii nostri Deo excitanti and vocanti per auxilium Gratiae praevenientis
esse actum naturalem, aut posse elici sine auxilio and co-operatione ejusdem
praevenientis Gratiae.]

And the sum of his opinion about the nature and cause of our holy actions is,
1. That Gods universal influx or causation is necessary on our will to make
them acts. 2. That Free Will is the cause that they are these particular acts
about this object rather than another. 3. That Gods particular or special
influx of Grace is the cause that they are supernatural acts. And that
preventing Grace does give men good thoughts, and the first motion of the
affections, before deliberation, and choice or liberty (as Vasquez also says)
which seems the same with the Doctrine of Ockam, Buridane, and the rest of
the Nominals, who call it Complacency, as antecedent to Election, yea and
Intention. To be pleased with the thing simply on the first apprehension they
call a necessary natural act. Though the Scotists say that quoad exercitium
actus vel libertatem contradictionis even that is free.) And it seems the same
which Augustine and Jansenius call primam aelectationem. But converting Grace
it self Molina takes to be a habit wrought by Gods special help in and with the
word or means. His words are of men that are hearing Gods Word or thinking on
it, [Influit Deu^ in ^easdem notitias in^lux^ quodam particulari ac
supernaturali quo cognitionem illam adjuvat, tum ut res melius and dilucidius
expendatur, and pe^etret, ^um^etiam ut notitia illa jam limits notitia
supernaturalis, and ad finem supernaturalom in suo ordine attingat. Inde oritur
in voluntate motus affectionis, etc. Yet no Jesuit is supposed to go further
from the Calvinists than this man. In truth I cannot perceive but that
Jesuits, Arminians, Lutherans, and all such are willing to ascribe as much to
Gods Grace, as they think consistent with man's Free Will and Gods not being the
cause of sin: which is the same thing that the Calvinists also endeavor,
though^hey seem not to hit on the same names and notions to do the thing
desired.


save themselves, and those that hear them, 1. Tim. 4. 16. And that he that
converts a sinner does save a soul from death: James 6. ult. And that the word
is the immortal incorruptible seed by which we are begotten again, and which
remains in us: Are you now in doubt of this?


C. It is one thing for God to work with the Word, and another thing to work by
the Word: The first we confess; But if God work by the Word, then he must
operate first on the Word, which is the Preachers act; and so by that Word on
the soul, and not immediately: Therefore I rather think that the word is a
concomitant than an instrumental cause.


B. 1. You wrong your self and Christ in that you will not believe him, John 3.
that we mortals know not the way and manner of the Spirits accesses and
operations on the soul, any more than the cause of the wind whose sound we
hear. Do you not know, that you do not know how Gods Spirit moves our
intellect and wills, and how he makes use of instruments; except secundum quid
in some particles revealed.

2. An hundred Texts of Scripture (which I omit lest I be tedious) tell us that
the Word is a means or subordinate cause (to God) of his informing and
reforming operations on men's souls. And it is dangerous to dream of any second
cause that is so concomitant as to be but coordinate with the first cause, and
not subordinate to it. And the word is not only subordinate to God as
Instituter by Legislation and Declaration, but also to God as efficient
operator.

3. God can work two ways by the Word, which are within our reach (besides
others) 1. As it is the act of the speaker, by exciting and illuminating him.
2. As it is the species (as they call it) received by the senses and
imagination, which God can by his power set home to the attainment of the due
effect.

4. And yet I know not any, or many of your Adversaries that deny that besides
this Divine operation by the Word, God has another immediately on the soul,
exciting it to operate upon the Word, as the vis plastica vitalis materna
operatur in semen jam receptum. But I will here forbear to trouble you with the
physical difficulties, whether the Word heard be only objectum intellectus, or
also causa efficiens (as light is both to the eye.) And whether it be operative
on the intellect, or only terminative, with other such like.


C. Well I must grant you that all Infused Faith (as to the act) is Acquired:
But all Acquired Faith not Infused: but infusion is added to our own
endeavors, like the creation of the humane soul.


B. I am glad that we are got so far on toward peace. But Quest. 4. What mean
you by Infusion? Is it not a Metaphor?


C. Yes, and we mean that immediate persuasion of God which you even confess to
be besides his operation by the Word, and by our Cogitations. Even a Creation
of an act or habit.


B. Quest. 5. Is it the name [Infusion] or the thing that you plead for?


C. The name (though I confess Metaphors must not be used unnecessarily in
Disputes) is yet convenient: but that I leave indifferent.


B. Quest. 6. Do you not think that the act of Faith is the act of man's own
Intellect, and Will, or Soul, and that immediately.


C. Yes, that cannot be denied.


B. If so, then when you say that our act is Infused, I hope you will confess
the term to be none of the plainest; and you only mean that Gods Grace does so
operate on the faculty as to excite it so to act; and consequently that the
thing first and properly infused is not the act of Faith it self, but the vis
impressa facultatem, before described, by which the act is caused: And so in a
secondary sense the act may be called Infused, but not most immediately.


C. I confess it is the habit which we commonly take to be Infused; and
therefore we use to distinguish habitus infusos ab habitibus acquisitis, rather
than actus infusos ab actibus acquisitis.


B. Is that Habit before the Act or after it?


C. You know that it is a Controversy among our selves. Mr. Pemble says it is
before, and the common opinion is, that it is after the first special Act.


B. 1. I once received that from Mr. Pemble (ignorantly.) But that comes to us
by not distinguishing the vis impressa or first received influx of the spirit
from a Habit: when as Amesius well says, it is fitter called semen fidei vel
dispositio quaedam, than a Habit of Faith. For 1. no man can prove such an
antecedent habit; and therefore none should assert it. 2. The true nature of a
Habit consists in a promptitude to perform that special act with facility.
But that we should have such a promptitude and facility not only while we are
Infant Christians, but no Christians; as having not yet believed in Christ, is
not probable according to our commonest observation. 3. All other Habits follow
the Acts, and therefore we have little reason to say it is otherwise here.


C. Does the Soul believe before it is inclined or disposed to it?


B. Inclination is a hard word, and belongs both to Natural Inclination (such
as we have to Felicity) and to Habits, and to mere Dispositions. And a
pre-disposition we grant: As when you spur your Horse, you make him first the
patient of your act, and by suscitating his natural faculty, you dispose him to
a speedy motion: though the similitude does not quadrare per omnia, because
Gods influx is on the whole Soul it self. But this Disposition to the present
act, is far less than a proper Habit; or it is another thing.


C. When I spur my Horse, or whip my Dog, I do but stir up a former faculty, or
slothful power: But God gives a new life and power to them that were dead in
sin.


B. Yet, I cannot take words for matter. 1. It Is nothing but the natural
faculty or power which you suscitate in the beast: And has not an unbeliever
the Natural faculties or power? Is he not a man? Why do you not bury him, if he
be not alive? 2. Death in sin is relative, or real: The Relative is Reatus
mortis, which denominateth men filios mortis, and is done away by pardon. The
real is the Privation of a holy disposition to the act of Faith and Repentance,
etc. or of the Act it self, or of the Habit. You can name no other. Now 1. the
death which consists in the privation of the first disposition to act
(supposing all natural dispositions) is taken away by the first influx or
suscitation of the Holy Ghost. 2. And by the same in secunda instanti is caused
the Act, and the death gone that lay in its privation. 3. And (in the third
instant, or afterward by degrees) is taken away the death which lies in the
privation of the Habit. And this giving the Habit, is called in Scripture and
by Divines Sanctification as following Vocation, and it is wrought in us by
degrees and not all at once, and that by the Spirits power, with and by our
exercised Acts. In my youth I was so prematurely confident of the contrary,
that the first Controversy that ever I wrote on (was a Confutation of Bishop
Downam, Amesius, Medall. de Vocat) Mr. Tho. Hooker, etc. in Defense of Pemble
herein; but riper thoughts made me burn that Script.


C. But the spur or rod puts no new power at all into your Horse; but Gods
Spirit puts a new Power into us.


B. I have talked long enough to you about Power before, and therefore would not
turn back needlessly to say it over again. Gods Spirit puts no such thing
into us, as we call a faculty or natural power: For that is the form or essence
of the Soul; and our Species is not changed by Grace. But he gives us that
which is called a Moral Power, which consists conjunctly in the concurrence
of means and objects, and the disposition of our faculties to the act. Hear Dr.
Twisse against Hord, page 12. lib. 2. He secretly maintains that every man
has such a power by Grace, by which he may repent if he will: Concerning which
Tenet of his, we nothing doubt but every man has such a power: but we say it
is nature rather.

Page 18. Truly I see no cause to deny this, that even the wicked could do good
if they would: We may safely say with Austin, Omnes possunt Deo credere and ab
amore rerum temporalium ad Divina praecepta servanda se convertere, si velint.
(Here is posse se convertere, id est, velte, si velit.)

But says Twisse, page 170. l. 1. [But such is the shameful issue of them that
confound impotency moral with impotence natural, as if there were no
difference] which he often shows is but the want of actual and dispositive
willingness. Now the rod or spur may cause both a present disposition, and an
act of will.


C. But is this all the new Life and Spirit, and Divine Nature that is given
us? Sure it is much more?


B. No doubt but it is much more. But that Spirit, Life, and Nature is promised
and given to Believers, and is promised on condition of our accepting Christ,
in whom is our life: And therefore it is that habitual Grace which follows
the first act of Faith, and is a nobler disposition to the following acts.


C. Will one act of ours cause a Habit?


B. Not as ours only: But when the Spirit will work* by it, it will. But even
that Habit I told you is weak at first, and increased by degrees.

But proceed and tell me, Quest. 7. Are you sure that in the Acquisition of
Habits there is no immediate operation of God on the Soul that causes them?


C. We all hold an immediate Influx necessary to the Being and Action of every
Creature, natural and free: but not an immediate Infusion.


B. What Is the difference between Influx and Infusion?


C. The first is an universal operation, the other a particular.


B. Do you mean that the difference of the acts or operations is at all ex
part agentis, sen act us ut est agentis, antecedent to the effect, or only in
the effect it self.


C. I dare not say that there is any difference in God, for it is against his
simplicity; and his very will and act as in himself is his Essence, though
vario^sly related and denominated by cannotation: Therefore I must needs
confess that the diversity is only in the effect.


B. Do you not see then what a delusory and troublesome stir men make for and
about mere words? What Is the Crimination come to then about Acquired and
Infused Habits? when the difference is only in the effects? You confess that
all proper Habits Infused are by our cogitation and use of means, and so are
also acquired. And you confess that all Acquired Aabits are wrought besides our
cogitation and use of means by an immediate influx of God; so that as to the
Causes you can name no difference: And yet the words Acquired and Infused
signify a difference in the Causes, and their operation, and not in the
Effect, by their notation. Is not this deceit then?


C. Tell me what you take to be the difference your self?


B. 1. I suppose that ab uno omnia, God without diversity causes all
diversity, which is only in the Creatures, and not in him. 2. I suppose that
God has appointed natural means and second causes for common natural effects;
and his Will is, that they shall operate according to their aptitude: And that
he has appointed extraordinary means, even Christ, and supernatural
Revelation, for the production of saving Faith: And it is his will that they
shall work usually according to their aptitude. 3. It is his command that we
use these several means (natural and supernatural) accordingly. 4. As these
means are special, extraordinary, and for a special end (the production of
Faith and Holiness.) So it is the will of God that they shall have answerable,
noble, special effects; which effects besides his operation on and by the
means, the said Volition of God it self produces immediately operating on the
Soul; not as a mere volition alone, but as conjunct with his Wisdom and Vital
Power or Activity by which he operateth all in all.

I could here say that God does concur with these supernatural means on his
Elect, with a stronger, greater, special energy, force, or influx. But I am
loath to deceive you with bare words: for this force, energy, or efflux is
either God or something created. God operateth by that Wisdom, Will, and Power
or Activity which are his Essence: therefore there are here no degrees in any
operation: And in the effects the degrees are not denied. The sum of all is
then but this, natural effects are natural effects, and Faith is Faith: the
difference we partly perceive; the means also are various* but in God the
operator there is no diversity. And so you may see what the stir about Infusing
and Acquiring is come to.


C. I dare not deny this, because it is agreed on by all Philosophical Divines,
and I should be called a Blasphemer, if I affirmed any real diversity in God,
at least besides the Trinity of Persons, called by the Schoolmen Real
Relations, and by some real modes of being. But it surpasses man's
understanding to conceive, that the same cause no way differing, ex part sui,
should produce variety of effects. By which it seems, that when there was
nothing but God, his love to Jacob and his hatred to Esau, his decree to save
and to damn, his will to make the world, and to destroy it, his foreknowledge
of good and evil, had no real difference at all. And is it not somewhat of a
lie then in us, to call those acts different, or by different names, which
really have not the least difference at all. (But of this before.)


B. God were not God, if man's shallow wit could comprehend him. All this must
be confessed, unless you will be a Vorstian: But if our conceptions be not false,
our diversity of names here is no lie; because we intend but to denominate Gods
knowledge and decrees or will, but by the relative connotation of the things
known and willed. And though those things were nothing before the Creation, and
so the difference between Gods Decrees, etc. was really none at all, and the
esse cognitum was nothing but Gods simple Essence: Yet as Greg. Armin. has
disputed, there be some kind of Relations (which are nothing themselves) and
consequently denominations which may be terminated on nothing (as praeteritu
and futura are.) But if your understanding rest not here, do as I do, rest in a
necessary and willing ignorance; and be but so wise as not to trouble the
Church with that which you know not, nor imitate them that can show the valor
of their raging zeal, by Writing or Preaching against them as the enemies of
the Grace of God, which dote not as confidently as themselves.


C. But what say you to Dr. Twisse 's words against Hord, (l. 1. p. 156.)
Albeit it be not in the power of nature to believe fide infusa, yet is it in
the power of nature to believe the Gospel fide acquisita which depends partly
on a man's Education, and partly on Reasons considering the credibility of the
Christian way, by light of natural observations above all other ways in the
world.


B. 1. Pet. a S. Joseph. These. univers. de Great. habit. p. 86. Datur aliquod
donum Gratiae Divinitus infusum quod post operationem in anima nostra
habitualiter permanet: Dari gratiam habitualem jam videtur esse de fide, post
Council. Tridenti^: antea tamen non erat habitus gratia sanctificantis realiter
a charitate distinguitur (which others deny) Gratia habitualis constituit
hominem in statu supernaturali, etc.

The Reader that will peruse Casp. Peucer's Hist. Carcer. page 692, 693, etc.
may see that the Luthorans were more for Infusion and miraculous operations of
Grace, and may see a handsome explication of Conversion, and the operation of
the Word and Sacraments: and page 698. De viribus humanis in renascentibus and
renatis dum fit conversio and deinceps ad sinem. Credo quod gratuiti beneficii
ac meriti Christi salvatoris applicatio and naturae mortuae vivifitatio in
regeneratione non fit action physica and br^ta aut raptu Enth^stastico, aut
Stoica coactione, aut Magico aff^atu verbi, Sacramentorum and sp. sancti. Ne^
mutatione Physica aut M^gica, hyperphysica substanti^, temperamenti and viriu^
seu facultatem h^minis sentientis quidem, nec moventis se nec qui^quam agentis,
sed sustinentis tantum impressionem, ut subjectum pations, sicut ran^
reviviscunt a tepore solis, etc. By this you may see what this excellent man,
Melan^^hons Son-in-law suffered his ten years cruel imprisonment for, by the
instigation of Schmidelinus and other Lutherans, to their perpetual shame; and
who was then (as the Papists still are) most for Physical infusions ex op^re
operato in Word and Sacraments.


Not only he, but all the Schoolmen distinguish acquired and infused Faith:
But though the names sound otherwise, the difference meant by them is in the
effects only (and the means) and not in God. He means that a slight
ineffectual belief may be performed by that disposition or moral power which is
found before special Grace, as excited by good Education and helps: But an
effectual saving Faith must be the product of a special impress of Gods Spirit
on the Soul; which is a special disposition and moral power to that act. And
this is true: And no more can be truly meant or said.

2. But I will tell you a mystery added often by Dr. Twisse, which may much
moderate your judgment about the cause of men's condemnation, if it be true. He
holds that no man is condemned for want of an infused Faith.


C. How? why no man is condemned (at least that has the Gospel) but for want
of it: For if it be only an infused Faith that justifies, then it is the want
of an infused Faith by which men are unjustified: And if as you say, Infused
and effectual or special Faith, be all one, sure men are condemned for want of
special effectual Faith.


B. His words are these against Hord, l. 1. p. 156. [Neither have I ever read
or heard it taught by any, that men shall be damned for not believing fide
infusa; which is as much as to say, because God has not regenerated them; but
either because they refused to believe, or else if they have embraced the
Gospel, for not living answerable thereunto; which also is in their power,
quoad exteriorem vitae emendationem, though it be not in their power to
regenerate their wills, and change their hearts, any more than it is to
illuminate their minds: Yet I never read that any man's damnation was any whit
the more increased for not performing these acts.] And again, page 170. [It is
true there is a Faith infused by the Spirit of God in regeneration: But who
ever said that any man was damned because he does not believe with such a
Faith? As much as to say, that non-regeneration is the meritorious cause of
damnation.


C. I am amazed at this, especially his supposing that no man ever said that,
which I thought no man of us had denied.


B. I would think that his meaning is, that men are not condemned for want of
Gods infusing act, but their own believing act; or for the privation of
Infusion, but for the privation of Faith; or of Faith, not quatenus infused,
but as they ought to have believed without infusion. But he was not so wanting
in accurateness, but that he knew how to have expressed himself, had that been
his meaning: And then I know not how his words will consist with this sense, [I
never read that any man's damnation was the more increased for not performing
these acts] where changing their own hearts is one. [And whoever said that any
man was damned because he did not believe with such a Faith.] Here it is the
Faith as such which is supposed spoken of; the privation whereof is not the
meritorious cause of damnation. And indeed though the power of this Faith would
have been in us, had there been no Sin or Savior, yet there would have been no
obligation to believe in Christ as Mediator: And therefore if the Law of
Innocence had stood alone, even the want of an acquired Faith in Christ would
have been no sin.

But this is the unhappiness of such as must read Controversial Writings: There
is no end of searching after the Writers meaning. But the thing it self I think
is plain, etc. that only an effectual special Faith will save us: and it is
such a Faith of which Christ speaks, Mat. 16. 16. He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned, (though he
believe with any other Faith whatsoever, which he calls acquired.)

Perhaps this his opinion has some dependence on what he says before (ibid.)
He punishes the disobedient with eternal death. True: but according to what
Covenant? Not according to the Covenant of Grace: that is only a Covenant for
Salvation: but according to the Covenant of the Law, the Covenant of Works.]
Woeful error and confusion. The Covenant of the Law is almost as bad a phrase,
as [the Covenant of the Covenant.] 1. Gods Law of Innocence was a Law and
Covenant in several respects. 2. So was the Jewish Law, which Paul means by
the Law of Works. 3. So is the Christian Law of Christ, and of Grace. No man is
now condemned by the Jewish Law of Works as such, it being ceased; and never
did it bind the Gentile world: The Law of Nature and of Innocence indeed
condemns the disobedient; but the Law or Covenant of Christ or of Grace does
condemn them to much sorer punishment, Luke 19. 27. Those mine enemies that
would not I should reign, etc. Mark 16. 16. He that believes not shall be
damned, Heb. 10. 29. Mat. 25. throughout. But this confounding of the Covenants
I must not here rectify.

But yet I hope he meant only that men suffer not for want of Gods
Regenerating, Infusing Act, but for want of their own act of Faith.


The fifth Crimination.
C. I find Dr. Twisse (ibid. and alibi saepe) charging it on them, as holding
that Grace is given according to Works (which is Pelagianism:) For they think
that God looks at some preparation in the Receiver, and gives it to some
because they are prepared for it, and denies it to others because they are
unprepared: whereas it is not in him that wills nor in him that runs, but
in him that (of his mere good pleasure) shows mercy.


B. There is enough said of this after, about differencing and effectual Grace.
But if we must say more, I ask you,

Quest. 1. Do you by this phrase [according to Works] mean to urge the
Scripture that speaks in that phrase, in its proper sense, or do you Vulgatum
illud facient^ quod in se est Deus non denegat Gratiam intelligitur de faciente
^^ gratia auxilie, Pet. ^ S. Joseph. These. Univers. de auxil. page 83.

Idem. page 90. Nequidem ipsius Christi opera fuerunt actu meretoria citra
promissi^nem Dei usi ex se essent valoris in^^^iti (which needs explication.)


only use the phrase in some other sense of your own.


C. I use Scripture phrase in Scripture sense, because I rest on its Authority.


B. Quest. 2. Are we not also saved without Works in Scripture sense? And would
it be contrary to Paul to say we that we are saved by Works; yea, or according
to them in that sense that he speaks of them. See James 2. 14, etc. Tit. 3.
5. Ephesians. 2. 5, 8, 9. Gal. 3. 2. 5. 10. Acts 15. 11. etc. and 16. 31. Romans 5.
10, And yet saved according to Works in another sense, James 2. 14, etc. Phil.
2. 12. Gal. 6. 4. Romans 20. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 5. 10.


C. In several senses of Works we deny it not.


B. Quest. 3. At least you will grant that we are not justified by Works, and
yet that we are justified by Faith: yea in another sense by Works.

Quest. 4. Is not believing and repenting in order to Justification, and all
holy obedience in order to Salvation; as truly op^^ a work, and in a far nobler
sense than preparation for Faith is?


C. That cannot be denied.


B. Then you cannot affirm that the phrase [not according to Work^] which
excludes not Faith, Repentance, holy Obedience to justification and salvation,
does intend the exclusion of all preparation in order to Conversion or Faith in
Christ; when by Works excluded, it means the same thing, or sort, in all.


C. But says Dr. Twisse, ibid. page 154. [Pardon and Salvation God does
confirm only on condition of Faith and Repentance: But ^^ for Faith and
Repentance, does God confer them conditionally also* If so, whatsoever be the
condition let them look to it how they can avoid the making of Grace, to wit,
the Grace of Faith and Repentance, (to be given according to Works.]


B. I know he frequently says the same. But 1. I speak now only of the sense
of that Scripture, and say, that this goes upon a most false and dangerous
supposition, that Justification, and Salvation are given according to Works,
though Faith and Repentance be not: whereas in the sense of Works there meant
by Paul, no man can be justified by Works. And though Christ says, This is the
work of God, that ye believe in him whom the Father has sent; yet it is not
that which Paul means: Let not therefore Scripture words be abused to mislead
men's understandings.

2. But as to the matter of the Controversy, I spoke to it enough before. No
man can deny but that God usually prepares the Soul fer Conversion by a common
sort of Grace: And though he may do what he list with his own, and
extraordinarily may in an instant convert the most unprepared malignant
obdurate person; yet that is not his usual way: (And some that think otherwise
are led into the mistake by thinking that a man is converted, when he has
suddenly some terrifying humbling preparation, which ends in conversion.)
Whether he convert all that are brought to the very highest and nearest degree
of preparation, I know not, nor perhaps you neither: But that usually he
converteth all such we have very great reason to think probable: And that he
has not commanded men to seek his special Grace in vain. So that whether it be
a proper promise on Gods part, or only an encouragement short of proper
promise, I told you before is a hard question. But we maintain that it is not
that proper mutual Covenant which makes a Christian, and is celebrated in
Baptism, and gives Salvation.

If one of old John Rogers's, Thomas Hooker's, or Robert Bolton's hearers, when
they were vehemently urging preparatory humiliation, desire, endeavor, etc.
should have said to them, Sir, you play the Arminian, and contradict St. Paul,
who says that Grace is not given according to Ista ^^^dia nemini Deus dest^^^^
propter vel secundum morita ipsius, sed ex pura puta Gratia: Nemini etiam
denegat nisi just propter gracedentia peecata, Armin. Disp. Private. These. 41.
Sect. 10.

Adrian VI. Quodl. 3. q. 1. fol. 21. expounds Habenti dabitur thus, Qui habet
verbi Dei amorem ut illuc mentis intuitum dirigat dabitur ei sensus
intelligendi: and qui non habet verbi Dei amorem auferetur ab eo naturalis
capacitas intelligend, etc


Works: Therefore God will give it me never the more for such preparations:
what would you have said to him. The truth is, practical Preachers in these
practical cases, are carried with full sail into that truth which Disputers
would wrangle out of Doors.

But as for any work^ meritorious in point of commutative Justice, y^a, or of
any full and proper Covenant of God, giving a proper Right to the Sinner, upon
which he may claim special Grace as his due, I know of none such before true
Conversion; though Gods commands and general promises give men sufficient
encouragement.


C. But what say you to Romans 9. It is not in him that wills or runs, etc.


B. I do not love to expound hard Texts unsatisfactorily by scraps: I will give
you, God willing, a Paraphrase of the Chapter together by it self. I suppose
you have read John Goodwin's and Dr. Hammonds Paraphrase. At present it may
suffice to say, 1. That the meaning is not, that he that would have Christ, and
Grace, and Holiness is no fitter for it* than he that would not have them: nor
that he that seeks them is no fitter for them than he that rejects them^nor
that he that believes is no fitter for Justification than ^n I^fidel; nor he
that is holy any fitter for Heaven than the unholy: nor yet that he that
hears, meditateth, prays, a^ he can, and attaineth the highest degree of
common Grace, is no fitter or likelier for Faith or special Grace than he that
despises it and the means of it. 2. But the meaning is, that God of his free
mercy c^lled the Gentiles that were further from him than the Jews, and may
give (both) the Gospel, (and the Grace of the Gospel) to one, and take it from,
or not give it to another, when both of them are equally unworthy of it by
their sin. So that the first and principal cause that difference^ha Jacob from
an Esau, is not that Jacob before Gods Grace did will and r^n, desire and seek
Grace; but that Mercy begun with him, and gave him, though as unworthy as Esau,
both commonner and special Grace, which caused him to will and run. And yet for
all that both are supposed to have forfeited mercy by sinning against it; and
it is in him that wills not, and runs not, that the cause of his misery,
and privation of mercy is to be found. Yea in many an instance where mercy and
helps are given by an equality, a wicked man may make himself to differ by his
sin, and wilfully become worse than others.


C. At least you must here confess, that de facto we do really differ from each
other in this point.


B. All they that hold all that Doctrine of Preparation for Conversion, which
you find in the suffrages of the British Divines in the Synod of Dort do not
(that I know of) differ from many of the Lutherans, and Jesuits, nor from many
of the Arminians herein; while by the name of merit of Congruity, used by some,
and Preparation by the other, no more is meant than they there assert: And as
to the question of a promise or no promise, I showed you before how small the
difference is; yea with some it is but de nomine, while one calls that a
Promise, which another calls but a half promise (with Mr. Cotton) or a
precept to use means with sufficient encouragement; when perhaps in the
description of the thing they agree: So that among the most and sober practical
Preachers, I yet see no real difference in sense at all, about the necessity of
preparatory Grace.


The sixth Crimination.
C. For ought I can understand, some of them acknowledge no Corruption nor
Grace in the Will, as having no Habits, but mere Indifferency or Liberty; but
think that the illuminating of the understanding is enough to change the will.
The Remonstrants say, Synod. circ. art. 3. and* 4, p. 15. [Voluntatem i^super
Deus in obsequium suum fle ctit, and ad actu^ fidei and obedienti^ ita inclinat
per spiritum suum sanctum verbo utentem, ut voluntas per illam operationem non
solum possit obedire, ^ed and obediat quoties obedit; non ex se, an^ per se,
aut a se.



B. 1. These are a few odd persons, that differ from the generality of your
Adversaries: and I am not to justify all that every man writes.

2. But even of these I suppose the meaning of the most is, but this, that sin
began inthe Intellect, and there Grace must begin: and that God works on the
will but mediante Intellectu. And these Camero held as well as they; and so do
many more. And these seem to differ, not about the necessity of Grace, but the
manner of its conveyance to the will; whether it be only by the intellect.

3. And as the wind blows where it lists, and we hear its sound, but know
not whence it comes, or whither it goes; so is every one that is born of the
Spirit. We know that the will is vitiated as ill as the understanding, and
needs Grace as much as it: and that God is as near to the one in his
operations as to the other, and gives real Grace to both. But because the
intellect is in the natural order, the first in acting, and the will but
second; and because the act is commonly (and reasonably) supposed to go before
the Habit (though not before all Divine Influx ad actum;) therefore men are
uncertain whether God who first acts the Intellect, do not by its act, first
operate on the will. But this depends much on the Physical Controversy,
whether the Intellect determine the will ad speciem actus, or at least really
and efficiently move it; or rather only present the object to it, and so work
but in subserviency to the material cause, which is constitutive indeed of the
act in specie, but not efficient: and the perception of it goes to the
conditio objectiva, without which it is no object to the will. This I incline
to with Scotus, and suppose that the Intellect moves not the will per modum
naturae, by necessitation. But while we know not the order and nature of the
operations of our own souls, how shall we know the unsearchable way of the
operations of the Holy Ghost.


The seventh Crimination.
C. They make Gods Grace a resistible thing, which man can frustrate; and so
God works at uncertainties. Man's ignorance of the way of Gods operation on
second causes, told us by Christ himself, Job. 3. should end such quarrels and
teach us all with judicious Davenant to prosess uncertainty; and with judicious
Jos. Placeus de lib. arb. p. 174. (speaking of the dependence of the second
cause on the first, and the Papists digladiations about concurse and
predetermination) to say, Nos quidem qua reverentia erga infinitam Dei
majestatem ducimur, non audemus definire quanta sit dependentia causae secundae
a prima: Nobis sufficit, modo ne Deo ullam peccatorum nostrorum vel minimam
labem aspergat, non posse nimiam stat^i. To which also the very judicious Lt
Blank subscribeth, These. 51. de concursu, etc. The Remonstrants Syn. ar. 3, 4.
p. 15. etc. do profess that Gods operation of the Intellect, Affection, and
Will, do thus differ, that the converting work on the will is more resistible
than the other.

And to the question, An convers^o contingens sit et in certa, an vero
necessitate causae aut eventus insallibiliter sequatur in ^o qui convertitur,
Respondent, conversionem esse contingentem quia Libera est: nec tame^ D^o
incertam, quia praecognita est; nec sequi necessitate causae, sive
consequentis, quia resistere poterat homo; sed necessitate consequentiae, etc.
Et page 17. Declarat. [Quare dicimus hominis voluntatem ad volendum bonum non
necessitari, sed hominem posse resistere, hoc est, non-velle, et saepe actu
non-velle et resistere grati^ sufficientis operationibus.





B. I have said so much of this before, that I need not tire you with much
more. Quest. 1. Do you know of no way for God to work with certainty of
success, if Grace be resistible.


C. I will not say so: I know what you have said to this before.


B. Why then do you speak that which is not valid in your own judgment? Quest.
2. Dare you undertake to justify all the world against the accusation, of
having resisted the Grace of God.


C. No; I dispute not on such hard terms.


B. Quest. 3. Did you never repent your self for resisting Grace?


C. Yes, in some sense; but not as I now mean it.


B. How is that?


C. To resist the Gospel and Ministry is a resisting of Grace, and the Holy
Ghost, Acts 7. and so I have done. But I speak of immediate resisting God.


B. 1. Remember that here you confess that the Gospel is Grace, even to them
that resist it. 2. God himself cannot be resisted immediately, where he works
not immediately. 3. But where he does so, he is said to be resisted; 1. Not by
any repelling of his strength. 2. Much less by opposing a greater strength. 3.
Nor by acting by any strength but what he gives. 4. Not by causing any
difficulty to him. 5. Not by frustrating any absolute will of his: But 1.
Passively, by being ill disposed to the reception of that Grace which he
offers, and that operation which else might effect it. 2. And actively, by
doing that which rendereth us yet more ill-disposed both naturally and morally
by commerit. 3. As also in that we do that which is contrary to Gods actions in
their tendency to the effect. When he moves us to hear, read, meditate, pray,
love, trust, etc. and we do the contrary; this may be called a resistance.


C. If God intend the effect, it will be done: but if he intend it not, how is
he resisted in that which he never intended to do?


B. You know the Scripture speaks not at these rates; but when men will set
their silly wits against Gods Word, thus they will seem subtiler than he: But
it is but a dream. 1. God may be resisted when he intends not the effect: in
that his Law is resisted, and with it that necessary measure of Grace, by which
the effect might have been wrought. Though his Decree be not resisted, yet his
Law and his Grace and help (which had a tendency to the effect, and a
sufficiency on its part) may be resisted. 2. And he is ordinarily resisted in
that which he does both intend and do: For he seldom does us any good without
resistance, though he overcome. But he that overcomes resistance is resisted.


C. But I mean by Resisting, Overcoming.


B. Why then did you not speak as you meant. None dreameth that Omnipotence is
overcome by a greater strength; much less by the derived power of us worms. But
the Case is weighty which you and others perilously overlook.


C. Let me hear your explication of it.


B. God does not work like necessary agents to the utmost that he is able. His
Wisdom has diversified Creatures; and his Wisdom has appointed (even in the
works of Grace) a stablished order of second causes and means which he will use
for the effect. And his Wisdom and Free will has fixed a certain degree or
proportion of his concourse, suitable, 1. To the nature of man; 2. And to the
nature and use of all those means; 3. And to the effect as it is to be
ordinarily accomplished: Even as in nature, he concurreth with all causes
agreeably to their stablished nature and use. Now though Omnipotency cannot be
overcome, yet the same creature that has a certain stated proportion of
natural activity, and Gods suitable concourse (e. g. to a healthful body which
has strong appetites), and also a congruous proportion of Gracious means, and
concurse and helps of Grace, by which he can rule the foresaid appetite, may
yet by neglect of that help, and by wilful indulging of that appetite, make the
appetite stronger than his ordinary degree of help, and so overcome the Grace
of God, though he overcome not Gods Omnipotence or Decrees. But there is yet
another thing of great moment commonly overlooked.


C. What is that?


B. The great importance of that common saying Recipitur ad modum recipientis;
on which, had I time, I would write a Book of Instances. Causa Receptiva is not
well understood. Aristotle makes Privatio to be one of his three Principles in
Physics. By Privation must be meant, not Absentia formae, sed Dispositio
materiae: And whether you will call it a third Principle, or only the due
qualification of the first (Matter) to make it immediately Receptive of the
form, the matter being de nomine and ^umero is small. But it is most certain,
that the wonderful diversity of alterations, or effects of motion in the world,
is very much to be ascribed to the diversity of Receptive Dispositions. And
accordingly as in Physics the three Active Natures (Intellective, Sensitive,
and Veg^tative, (which its like is Ignis) are to be defined per virtutes suas
Activas; so the Passive Elements (Earth, Water, and Air) are to be defined by
their several contextures or constitutions, which make up Dispositionem
Receptivam Influxus Activorum, unicuique propriam; which is their very form.

In Physical cases, God does first as Creator make all things in wonderful
variety of natures, quantities, figures, and contextures. And secondly, he
causes an Universal Cause to Influence them generally; such as is the Sun for
one (what other we know not well); whose ^r^ple influx Motion, Light, and Heat,
affects all things according to their several Natures and Receptivities. The
special Active principle in every living thing, is both cherished, and
suscitated by this universal solar influx. But the diversity of effects is not
from the Sun, but from the diversity of Recipients. The Sun by its influx is
the cause that all things live, and move* But that one thing has a life and
motion Intellective, and another Nonsttive, and another Vegetative, that by the
Suns influx an A^orn bring^ forth an Oak, and every Seed its own kind of Plant;
that a Horse ^^^^ as a Horse, a Dog as a Dog, a Sheep as a Sheep, etc. that the
^osa has one smell, color, shape; the Carna^ion another; the Tulip another,
and ^. that the Dung^^l s^^keth, that the Clay is hardened, the Wa^ softened,
etc. the innumerable different effects in the inferior creatures, are all
caused by the Sun, as to their general nature (the received Influx of a Motive,
Illuminative and Calefactive Virtue) but they are none of them in specie vel
gradu unde differentia qua talis oritur caused by the Sun alone, but also by
the variety of the suscitated vital forms in animals: And in things inanimate
though not the Recipient, but the solar Influx be the efficient cause of the
variety of alterations and effects, yet the Ratio diversitatis is more in the
Disposition of the Recipient: The Suns Influx is the same in it self without
any difference, on the clay and wax, on the dunghill and the rose: Let the
question then be what causes the different effects? Answ. 1. The Suns influx
causes all the Motion, Light, and Heat (which they all receive) as the
Efficient cause. 2. The Material Recipients I have marvelled often why Elisha
called for a Ministrel, when the spirit of Prophecy was to come upon him: And
so Music helped Saul. I am sure that Satan works on the minds of Melancholy,
Choleric, etc. persons, by and according to the temper of the spirits and
humors, and cannot do the same things without them. And perhaps the spirit of
God, who can work as he list, will do it ad modum recipientis; and so Elisha's
spirits must be brought up into an harmonious elevated preparation, that the
mind may be made fit to receive the spirits extraordinary work.
are the several things named, as Material. 3. The said Recipients being of
diverse Natures and Shapes, etc. have their variety of Receptive Dispositions.
4. The forma Recepta a sole, is nothing but its triplex influxus, Motus, Lux,
Calor. 5. These are variously Received according to the various Dispositions of
the Recipients. 6. Hence follow the Variety of the second effects; By the
motive Influx some things are moved, when stones and houses stir not. By the
Lucide Influx the eye sees, when the hand does not: the flowers appear in
various colors according to their various Receptivities; and some things give
little reflective appearance of their Reception of it. The Calid Influx
cherishes the living, and burns by a burning-glass, when the dead stir not
by it, and some unapt recipients are little altered by it. I call these the
second effects which are thus various; For the first effects are still the
same, viz. the Motive, Illuminative, and Calefactive efflux of the Sun is still
sent forth, and some how or other reaches every capable recipient in general:
But the Alterations which are thereby made are diversified according to the
diversity of Receptivities.

But yet these Receptive Dispositions are no efficient Causes of this
difference, or of any of the alterations. But they are the Receptive Material
Causes, without which the efficient does not make them, and according to which
he does make them.

So that the Sun, though but Causa Universalis, yet is also the Universal Cause
(and sole efficient) of all these Particular motions and alterations; And yet
the Ratio differendi is not to be given from it, but from the different
Receptivities, according to which it still produces them.

So the Rain falls equally on the stones, on the earth, on vessels of various
shapes and sizes: The stone retains none: The vessels variously retain it: As
they are round, square, long, great, or small, so are they variously filled.
The efficient cause of the difference, is the descent of the rain. The material
constitutive cause, is the different quantities and shapes of the water. But
yet the Ratio differendi is to be assigned from the diversity of Receptive
dispositions in the vessels.

And that you may see that these Receptivities are no efficients, and yet
contain the chief Rationem differendi, note that the Reason to be given from
them is, ex alter a differentium part, still Negative or Privative, as on the
other it is Positive: E. g. Why does the Sun make the Rose smell sweet, and not
the stone or dunghill? Because the stone or dunghill have not those odoriferous
particles to be suscitated by it as the Rose had. Why does the Sun move the
Flies and not the Stones? Because the Stones had not that vital principle to be
suscitated, as the Flies had. Why did not the rain fill the Stones as it did
the Cisterns? and this Vessel as that? Because they had not the same Receptive
and Retentive shapes.


C. Well! but what is all this physical Discourse to our present Controversy?


B. 1. The constancy of God in operating according to an established Order in
the world, does show us, that the God of Order delights so to do.

2. Therefore we have reason to conceive that he does some such thing in the
methods of Grace, as he does in nature, viz. That he has instituted a frame of
means, which are the established way in and with which he will convey his
Grace: And that he has decreed to concur with a certain congruous universal
influx which shall afford to all such a degree of suscitating, illuminating,
and converting attractive force, as his wisdom sees meet to be the established
measure for the redeemed World. And this universal Influx is the sole efficient
of all the good that is found in the redeemed: But 1. It is but a certain
convenient proportion, and therefore will not do all that God can do; nor do
the same on one man as on another; nor at one time as at another, on the same
man. 2. And recipitur ad modum recipientis: The diversity of second effects may
often be most assigned to the diversity of receptive Dispositions.

It is a wonder to see how the same causes variously work on men's minds that
are dispositively diversified but by some preconceived opinion. You Remonstr.
Declar. p. 17. Huic sua conversion^ homo ex insita sibi pravitate and in res
mundanas affectu, obicem and impedimentum liberum opponere potest, and ponit
sape; five voluntas praedicationem Evangelii externam neglegat, and susque
deque ^abeat, tum quum ejus audiendi copiae fit homini: aut auditum verbum
perfunctorie tra^^^t, magis rebus mundanis intentus; aut ali^ modo impediat quo
minue ipsi doctrina Evangelic^ veritas, necessitas, utilit as a spiritu
s^persuadeatur sivt verbo assentiatur sed voluntatem, etc. and laxatis carni
babenis spiritum extinguat, spiritui resistat, and bona desideria
cogitationesque s^pius calitu^ infusas and oblatas volent elidat and extermenet.
may see two men learned, sober, pious, in doubt whether the Arminians or
Calvinists, the Conformists or Non-conformists; yea perhaps the Papists or
Protestants, be in the right. One is before hand more inclined one way, and the
other the other way; yea perhaps not inclined in will, but have received in
judgment a great apprehension that some one Principle is right, which more
induces to one side than the other. They both pray, and meditate, and resolve
to read and search the Scripture and Controversal Writings with all possible
diligence and impartiality: They set upon it; and one sees all along as he
goes, the fullest evidence, as he thinks for the one side and the other,
sees all go on the other side, through the difference of Receptive disposition.

I have had sufficient notice of two Nonconformist Ministers, that had
favored in mind, the late cause of the Parliament in the Civil War, and by the
face of the dreadfulness and heynousness of the guilt, if it should prove that
their cause was bad, were brought to resolve to do all that possibly they could
to be resolved. They both set themselves to Fast and Pray, they searched the
whole Scripture, read over the Statute-Book, and all the Common Law Books and
Cases, that they could get, and all the History of our ancient Government, and
of our late Transactions; they read what was said on both sides, and one saw
all as clear as the light go for the King against the Parliament, wondering
that any should make a doubt of it; and the other, though still not fully
certain, was more confirmed in his old apprehensions the other way; yet both
learned, able, judicious, godly, and truly desirous to know the truth, and many
and many years begged it of God, and unweariedly followed on the search; and no
carnal interest I am fully persuaded made the difference. And what then, shall
we ascribe it all to immediate operations of God, without any more ado? No; as
far as I could perceive the difference arose from hence: One of them was first
deeply possessed with the sense of Gods late Judgments Spiritual and Corporal
on the Religious party which adhered to the Parliament; and thought these
Judgments indicated their sin: Their Scandal, Divisions, Confusions, Matual
Censures, and Errors were still before his eyes; and the Laws of Order and
Government, and Obedience, and Patience, lay in greatest power on his heart.
The other looked all abroad the world, to Infidel, Heathen, Mohammedan, and
Popish Kingdoms, and thought that tyranny was the grand sin on the earth, which
kept out the Gospel, and consequently, Godliness and Salvation from the
generality of mankind; that kept up Popery, and kept out Reformation; that
silenced powerful Preachers, Suffrag. Theol. Britt. in Synod. Dord. art. 3. and
4. Sunt quaedam effecta interna ad conversionem praevia quae virtute verbi
spiritusque in nondum justificatorum cordibus excitantur; qualia sunt notitia
v^luntatis divinae, sensus peccati, timor poenae, cogitatio de liberatione,
spes aliqua veniae. Quos Deus mediante verb^ per spiritum s^um hunc in modum
afficit, eos ad fidem, conversionemque vere and serio vocat and invitat. Quos
ita afficit Deus non deserit, nec desistit* in vera ad conversionem via
praemovere, priusquam ab illis per neglectionem voluntariam art hujus gratiae
initialis repulsam, deseratur.
and kept up Ignorance; that most served Satan, and fed the jaws of Hell. He
thought of all the inhumane consequents of unrestrained Tyranny: He read
Politics more than the other, and read more of the Greek and Roman History,
and regarded more the Judgment of the several Parties and Religions among
mankind: and he fell upon Bilson and Hooker the chief Prelatists; and he
thought that Gods Judgments consequential to those Wars had been incomparably
less than the mercies and benefits, and that there were now proportionably
multitudes more of Godly Ministers and People than there were before the Wars:
And these different pre-conceptions and pre-possessions, made them have quite
different Interpretations of all the Scriptures, the Statutes, the Law Books,
etc. which they read. And as the Proverb is, As the Fool thinks, so the Bell
tinketh: So it is wonderful to see in all things, how much the diverse
disposition of the Recipients, does occasion diversity of effects from the same
cause.


C. But I hope you would not make us believe that all diversification is from
man: Though the Sun be but an universal cause, yet God is also a particular
cause, and a specifying; and who is it else that caused that diversity in the
Creatures, which turns the Suns universal Influx into various effects. As God
created the variety of Recipients, so he does by Grace diversifie man's
Receptive dispositions.


B. These are weighty matters, and deeply to be considered, with many thoughts
and cautelous sobriety. We have two questions fallen before us: 1. How far Gods
Grace is resistible. 2. How God or man do cause diversities. Though I have been
drawn on to speak much to the last, it is here but in order to the resolving of
the first. The last is to be spoke to by it self anon. Before we come to that,
these things I here conclude of.

1. That the Diversity of Nature, or Receptive Dispositions, being presupposed,
God has an established order of means, and a congruous established universal
Concurse, which quantum in se, as far as belongs to it to do, works equally
on all.

2. That this established measure of aid, or concurse, recipitur ad modum
recipientis, and operateth variously as to the effects, according to the
various disposition of the Recipients: from whom the ratio diversatis is to be
fetched, and not from it.

3. That this established measure of Concurse or aid may by the greatness of
the Passive and Active Indisposition and Illdisposition of the Recipient, be
both resisted, and overcome or frustrate.

4. That as Adam did resist and overcome such Grace, so do all wicked Hi
praecedan^i effectus virtute verbi spiritusque in hominum mentibus producti,
rebellis voluntatis vitio, suffocari and penitus extingui p^ssu^t, and in
multis solent: ade^ ut nonnulli in quorum mentibus virtute verbi spiritusque
impress^ fuit aliqualis notitia veritatis divinae, etc. mutentur plane in
contrarium, etc.

And even Alvarez. Disp. 18. n. ^0. says, Si non operatur action qui est in
praecept^ imputabitur illi ad culpam eo quod su^ culpa se impedivit, ne dareter
illi auxilium efficax quod necessarium erat, ut actualiter operaretur: sicut si
Deus imponeret homini pr^ceptum volandi, and quantum est ex part sua offerret
illi alas and adjutorium necessarium u^ volaret, ipse autem responderet, D^mine
nec v^l^ alas accipere nec vol^re, merit^ reputaretur reus, etiams^ non possit
absque alis, volare, q^ia sua culpa^se impedirit ne illi d^narent^r a De^.


men in some cases now. And so do all godly men, in most of the sins (if not
all) which they commit.

5. As God rarely works Miracles, (and we hardly know when he violateth his
established course of nature, though we may know when he works beyond the
power of any second cause known to us, and when he leaves his ordinary way)
but ordinarily keeps to his established course and use of the second causes
(even in his wonders.) So it is very probable, that in the Works of Grace,
Recovery and Salvation, he ordinarily keeps to his established order, his
Ordinances, and fixed degree of Concurse.

6. Yet as God is still above all his Works, and a free Agent, and is no
further tied to one constant order and measure of Concurse, than he tieth
himself by his Wisdom and Free Will; so God is free in the conveyance of his
Grace, and can when he please, forsake that order, and work Miracles by Grace,
as well as on natural things above nature. He can strike down Saul, and convert
him by a voice from Heaven; and in a word, can do what he will.

7. And as in most wonders, its past our power to know whether and when God
does indeed forsake his established order, and work contrary to it, or without
such second causes, as are unknown to us; though we can tell when he acts
unusually: So is it in this case, about his works of Grace. A Comet, or Blazing
Star is an unusual thing, whose necessary antecedent cause we know not: And yet
it is but a natural effect of second causes, operating in their established
course; so are ecclipses (better known) and unusual Tempests, and terrible
Lightnings, etc. So great and sudden, unusual and wonderful changes may be made
by Grace on sinners: and yet all in Gods established course of working, and by
those second causes which are to us unknown.


C. But God is not a natural but a voluntary Agent; and Grace is hi^ immediate
work or offspring.


B. 1. He is a voluntary Agent in Creation, Preservation, and in all the works
and changes of nature: and yet he operateth constantly in his appointed course.

2. Its unknown to us, what means he uses, out of our reach, in his operations
upon souls, as well as in nature.

3. We find that Grace keeps a harmony with nature* ye^ as morality is but
the modality of things natural, so we may conceive that God may possibly work
it, by the modifying of physical Agents and their actions, and the recipients.

4. Immutability and constancy is one of Gods perfections; and the expression
of it in the constant order of his Works is part of his glory in the world:
Though our mutable Free-wills are better than the fixed or necessitated
appetite of Bruits, that is not, as they are mutable, and the acts contingent,
but as they have a higher object. But the fixed unchangeable wills of the
Glorified (Angels and Saints) are far better than ours. And why should we think
unsettled mutability of efficiency, to be the best discovery of Gods
Immutability.

5. But yet we grant that God is free to do what he please.


C. But it is by fixed second causes that God keeps a fixed order of natural
productions and alterations in the world. But you can name no such universal
second cause of Grace, affording under God a resistible Influx as the Sun does
in Nature.


B. What will you say, if I name you such a second universal cause; (though if
I could not, it follows not that therefore there is none such.) I think I can
name you one that all Christians should know; and yet it seems is not well by
Divines themselves considered. JESUS CHRIST as MAN, and MEDIATOR is Gods
Administrator General of the humane world; and is compared to the Rising Sun,
which illuminateth all the world, with a light suitable to it and them. So
Christ is the light of the world, the Sun of Righteousness, that arises with
healing Grace, and enlightneth every man that comes into the world: (or as
Crotius and Hammond render it [which coming into the world enlightneth every
man] supposing (...) to be the Nominative Case and Neuter Gender, and not the
Accusative Masculine) In him was Life, and the Life was the light of men (not
only to the sanctified who received, but uneffectually though quoad se
sufficiently) the light shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not: The world that was made by him knew him not: He came to his own, and his
own received him not (yet he came to them) But as many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the sons of God, John 1. 3, 10, 11. It is apparent in
Scripture that all power in Heaven and Earth is given to Christ, Matthew. 28. 19,
20. that all things are delivered into his hands, John 13. 3. and God has
given him power over all flesh, John 17. 2. and he is head over all things to
the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.


C. We all grant that Christ is an universal light and Savior: 1. Objectively:
2. And as to his Doctrine, Covenant, and Example: But what is that to internal
efficient Grace, which is immediately from God?


B. Great is this mystery of Godliness: there is more in Christ than you take
notice of, even the Spirit which must work Grace in men's souls, is two ways
given first to Christ: 1. In that as Administrator general, the power of giving
out the Spirit to mankind is now given to Him, even in his humane Nature. And
he gives it out in manner and measure suitable That Grace habitual is
participatio naturae divinae, and how, and in what sense. Vide Caceres sum.
Theol. 2. 2. cap. 1. And abundance of Jesuits and other Schoolmen go as far
in asserting its supernaturality, and some in ascribing it to Christ, as
Protestants do: But Vasquez and many go farther than many Protestants in
supposing Christ the cause not only of Grace but of our Election to Grace. And
yet even there the difference is most, if not only in words.

The Thomists maintain even that Christ's humanity is the Instrument of the
Deity in operating Grace in us, which the cause of the Eucharist leads them
to.


1. To himself: 2. To us. 3. To his established means and Ordinances, by which
he works. So that now the Spirit with its aid (common or special) is not
given to any sinner immediately from God, as Creator; and as it was given to
Adam before his fall, but by the Mediation of Christ the Redeemer. I mean not
only the moritorious and procuring mediation, but also the powerful conveying
mediation. Though God the Holy Ghost be still proximately the cause of Grace,
yet Christ as Mediator is made by office, the Mediator and authorized giver of
that Spirit and all its Grace; and so the measurer and orderer of his helps,
and appointer of the conditions.

2. And Christ is first filled with this Spirit personally himself, that he may
be a fit Head of vital Influence to all his Members, who by the previous
operations of his Spirit are drawn and united to him.


C. How prove you all this universal power in Christ?


B. You have heard the express proof: And study further, 1 John 5. 11, 12. And
this is the record that God has given us eternal life; and this life it in his
Son: He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life.

Romans 8, 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his.
Mark that it is, The Spirit of Christ.

John 15. 26. The Comforter (or Advocate) whom I will send to you from the
Father.

John 16. 7. If I depart I will send him to you.

John 14. 26. The Comforter whom the Father will send in my name.

Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are Sons God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying Abba, Father.

Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God who loved me.

John 5. 21, 22. The Son quickneth whom he will; for the Father judges no man
but has committed all judgment to the Son. -- 26. For as the Father has life
in himself, so has he given the Son to have life in himself. And that you may
see that he gives the Spirit with and by means, he says, Verse 24. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent
me, has everlasting life.

John 6. 27, 32, 33. Labor for that meat which endures to everlasting life,
which the Son of man will give you: For him has God the Father seated; that
is, openly owned as appointed to this Office.

He gives life unto the world -- Whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood
has eternal Life -- Dwells in me and I in him. -- My Flesh is meat indeed.
-- As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that
eats me, even he shall live by me. -- Verse 63. It is the Spirit that
quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing.

John 3. 34. God gives not the Spirit to him by measure.

John 7. 39. This he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe in him should
receive.

John 1. 5. 4, 5. Abide in me and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
it self, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye except ye abide in me. I
am the vine, ye are the branches. He that abides in me and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit; for without me (or out of me) ye can do nothing.

Matthew. 28. 20. I am with you always to the end.

1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit.

2 Cor. 3. 17. The Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty.

Phil. 1. 19. Through the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Col. 3. 3, 4. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God: when
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory.

Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. And gave him to be head over all things to the Church, which
is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.

Do you need more to prove this great Office of Christ?


C. Here is more than I have well thought on. But I find more to prove Christ
the vital Head to his Church, than to prove him the universal dispenser of all
Grace whatever is given to the world.


B. Read them over again; what would you have more, than all Power, all things,
all Judgment given or committed to him: And to be by Office the Redeemer,
Savior, and light of the world, coming as such even to them that neither
comprehend him, know him, or receive him. I add another Text, Prove. 1. 20. to
the end. -- Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice. -- How long ye
simple ones will you love simplicity, and the scorners delight in their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof: behold I will pour
out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. -- Because I have
called and ye refused, (see the rest.) Ver. 32. For the turning away of the
simple shall slay them.

And two things more I offer for your conviction. 1. That to show both his
Power, and that he will exercise it orderly by means, Christ empowered his
Apostles and Ministers under him to give the Spirit. And if the extraordinary
Gifts were given by the laying on of their hands, no wonder if the ordinary
were given by their Doctrine.

2. That on this ground Christ shall be the universal Judge of all the world,
as he was the universal Lawgiver and light to all.

But what need I more, when it is his very Office as Christ: as Prophet to be
the universal Teacher, by Spirit and Word; and as Priest to sanctify by Spirit
and Word; and as King to rule by Spirit and Word.


C. I am amazed to think how little we well understand of our very Fundamentals
and Catechism which we teach the ignorant: Methinks in this universal Light I
see more than ever I before observed, that God indeed has set up a Sun, an
universal medium, a Christ, who in our nature is a Creature, to be the Donor
and Convey or of all Recovering Grace to man, and to give out the Spirit in
that stated order and measure as is suitable to his design and Subjects. And as
on earth he gave out much light and help which was resisted and rejected, I now
less wonder that it is so now he is in heaven; even as to his Spirit as well as
his Word: When I consider, that though God be Infinite, his Grace is given out
to mankind finitely, by a finite Creature, Christ as man; even as God shines
to us, not immediately, but by the Sun. I will no more then account it an
injury to God, that he should be said to give limited and resistible degrees of
Grace by Christ, but repent that I have so much grieved and resisted the Spirit
of Christ my self.


B. Proceed now to your other accusation.


The eighth Crimination.
C. They make man's Free Will, and not Gods differencing Grace to be the cause
that one man by Faith does differ from another that has Remonstr. Synod. ubi
supra. [Si quaeratur quae sit causa cur hic convertitur, non autem ille?
Respondemus, hic conv^rtitur quia Deus bunc non apponentem novam contumaciam
convertit: Ille non convertitur quia novam contumaciam opponit: Quaeres, cur
hic opponit novam contumaciam, alter nons Respondemus, Hic opponit quia
oppo^ere vult: Ille non opponit quia a gratia movetur ne opponere velit:
Quaeres, annon ille qui non opponit novam contumaciam and per consequens
convertitur, majorem ^abebat gratiam, quam qui opponit, and per consequens non
convertitur? Respondemus, Antecedentem and praevenientem gratiam aequalem esse
posse: sed coopelantem hab^t prior, and non posterior.
no Faith. Contrary to Paul's supposition, who made thee to differ? Tilenus
could not answer Camero to this charge.


B. I doubt here again is a Controversy about words. I will speak to you as to
one that would know the truth. 1. De re, as to the Controversy. 2. As to the
meaning of the Text.

I. Let us here consider, 1. What it is to Differ 2. What are the causes of
such difference?

I. To DIFFER is nothing but to be dissimile, unlike. Dissimilitude or
Difference is a Relation. This Relation (as Ockam truly and largely shows) is
nothing extra intellectum, besides its fundamentum, subjectum and terminus, the
Absoluta.

II. Difference then being a Relation is the dissimilitude of diverse persons
compared. Here the natural numerical difference of persons, and abundance of
other differences are presupposed. And it is the Difference between a Believer
and an Unbeliever, the Penitent and Impenitent as such, that we have to
consider of. Now here are two Subjects differing, and in each one, if not two
differences from the other: So that here are two, if not four several Relations
of dissimilitude between them. 1. Paul is a Believer; by which he differs 1.
From Nero as a Privative Unbeliever. 2. As a Positive Unbeliever. On the other
side Nero 1. as a privative Unbeliever: 2. and a positive, differs from Paul.
Now every one of these Differences or dissimilitudes have a several cause. 1.
The fundamentum of both Paul's differences from Nero are hi^ own Faith; and the
Termini are Nero's Privative and Positive unbelief. 2. The fundamenta of Nero's
difference from Paul are his Privative and Positive unbelief, and the Termini
are Paul's Faith to both.

Now if the question be, what does Constitutive make Paul differ from Nero, it
must be answered Paul's Faith and Nero's unbelief. For dissimilitude resulteth
from the one compared with the other. And if both had been Believers there had
been no difference. And so were this the question, there were no difficulty in
it at all.

But the meaning of the question is not of the constitutive cause of the
dissimilitude, or the fundamentum, but of the efficient cause of that
fundamentum, or else of the diversifying Dispositiv Receptiva. Now supposing
that Faith and Unbelief are the constitutive differencing causes; the efficient
causes of both must be sought as the Ratio discriminis, and not of one only.

Quest. 1. What is the cause (efficient) of Nero's unbelief? Ans. His own will
or wicked heart.

Quest, 2. What is the efficient cause of Paul's Faith? Ans. 1. The Principal
efficient is God by his Spirit. 2. The meritorious cause is Christ. 3. The
chief ministerial efficient is Christ as giving the Spirit to work it. 4. The
Instrumental efficient is the Gospel. 5. The Immediate efficient is Paul: For
it is he that believes, and not God. Is there any one that denies any of this?


C. I doubt they think that man's will is more the cause than the Spirit;
because they suspend the Spirits success upon man's will.


B. Accuse not men by suspicions and doubts without proof; yea contrary to
their own professions. Your crime of uncharitableness is not theirs; nor does
it follow that they are faulty because you are suspicious. Alliac. Camer. ^. ^.
q. 12. B. D^us nullum praedestinavit ant praedestinat (accipiendo
predestinationem secundo modo) propter aliquod bonum aut aliqu^m causam
praevisam in praedestinato quia non stat aliquem noviter aliquod bonum habere,
quin Deus prius voluerit and a^ ^terno, etc.
You may read Corvinus to Tilenus expressly assigning the efficiency of all that
Grace that makes us to differ, principally unto God. Some of them only say
[man cannot effect, (or convert himself) but he can resist: and so require no
more of man to his conversion but not to resist: yea not to resist in an
obstinacy and high degree. Others of them require of man also an actual
concurse of his will by his power received, with the concurse of God: But they
make God here incomparably the chief efficient; not only as to Priority of
operation, but as to his causation of the effect. And they use to illustrate it
some time as Scotus by the similitude of two drawing at a Ship, sometime by a
Father, that should bid his Son lift at a heavy weight, and resolves to put to
900 degrees of the force himself if his Son will but endeavor, and put forth
one degree. In this case, if the Son will not put forth that one which he can
do, and so the event fail; it is not by the Impotency nor absolute
unwillingness of the Father. And if the child do put forth that one degree,
will you say that he does more to the effect than the Father that does 900
parts; and that only because that the Father would not do all himself? But this
carries us from the matter in hand, and is after to be spoken to.


C. But if you make so many things go to make the difference, the question, who
made thee to differ? must have a long answer.


B. Not as Paul meant it, but as our troublesome Contenders use it, in Even
those that found the infallibility on scientia media, make congrous Grace ex
proposito convertendi to be the cause of the difference. So Malderus 1, 2. q.
111. a. 3. p. 517. Quod hic credat prae alio, indubie venit de misericordia
Dei, ipsum si^ vocantis ut accomodet assensum; misericordia inquam qua nos in
C^risto elegit, Totum est miserentis Dei ipse vocat, ipse facit ^t vocatus
veniat; ipse ^t currat; ipse nolentem praevenit, ut velit; volentem subsequitur
n^ fr^fira velit, vi sua Gratia it a sibi aptat liberum arbitrium; ut a n^llo
d^ro cord resp^^t^r, quod dici^^s provenire ex ^o quod meris, in^^^abilibus
and occultis modis noverit Deus ita hominis ^over sensum ut accomodet assensum
-- Fatemur Dei omnipotentiam and Dominium quod habet in voluntates hominum*
manifestari in gratiae eff^catia. -- Et consensus homi^is est don^m Dei,
descendens a Patre luminum* ^llumque consensum De^^ vult and ^acit, quia facit
^ominem virib^^ grati^ ^acer^. Ye^ he yields to ^radwardines Doctrine,
supposing him only to intend necessitatem quandam consequentiae, necessarium
esse hominem libere velle ill^d ipsum quod Deu^ cuju^ omnipotentia* quaecunque
voluit facit) praevoluit ipsum ville libere. Item, gratiam efficacem der^
intuit^ meritorum Christi, non tantum quatenu^ est* sufficiens^sed etiam
quatenus est e^^i^ax dum seeundum propositum ^^^^. -- ^^^m cura D^^ non est
aqualis do omnibus.
another sense, the answer must be suited to the question. And here note that
really it is the state of both parties compared, and not of one of them that
constituteth the dissimilitude as is said: And the efficient causes of both
states, are the causes of the difference. And so truly the cause of Nero's
unbelief, and the causes of Paul's Faith (which are many as aforesaid) all set
together are the causes of the differences; or rather all make up one cause of
it. This no Logician can deny. But yet in vulgar speech we use to say that that
person or thing is the cause of the difference, 1. Which is the cause of the
singularity. 2. Or which causes the state of the second person compared,
supposing the state of the first person to be already existent. And so you will
find yet several senses of the question.


C. Explain it by some instances.


B. 1. As to the cause of singularity. If one man be born an Idiot or a
Monster, when we ask, what made him differ from other men, though really the
causes of the dissimilitude be to be assigned on both parts; yet we mean only
on his part, why is he not like others. So if one Child be unlike to all his
brethren, or one Scholar in the School be much better or much worse than all
the rest; or if one in a Family be sick, he that asks, what makes him
differ? does mean, what made him sick? etc.

2. And so as to Posteriority of State, if you suppose one of the dissimiliar
parts pre-existent, and ask what makes the other to differ from it? as if you
ask why the Scholar writes not like his Copy? why the Son is so unlike to the
Father? why this age is so unlike the last? etc. We mean only what causes the
difference ex part subsequente.


C. Apply it to the case in hand.


B. If you ask, what made the difference between the Devils and the persevering
Angels? In the full and proper answer you must assign the reason on both parts:
But according to the usual sense of the question, you must say [The wilful sin
of the Devils made the difference.] For the equal state of uprightness went
before the difference.

So if you ask, what made the difference between the world after the fall, and
before it? vulgarly, we must say, sin; because that came last.

So if you ask, what made the difference between Noah and the world? between
Lot and Sodom? Ans. Indeed, that which made one part sinful and the other
righteous. But according to the vulgar sense of the question, it was the
Righteousness of Noah and Lot, and the causes of that righteousness.

So what made the difference between Judas and the eleven Apostles? Ans. Judas
his wilful sin and Wickedness, (though indeed the cause is on both sides.)

So what makes the difference between Believers and the Unbelieving world?
Really, the unbelief of the world, and the Faith of Christians with their
causes: But it is like the speaker means only ex part credentium: And then
the cause of their Believing is the cause of their differing.

But now, if it hold true that God gives a sufficiency of Grace ut causa
universalis ex part donantis (antecedently to men's accepting or rejecting)
equally, then if one ask, what makes the difference? you would understand him
(why have not unbelievers Faith, as well as others? And then the answer would
be, wilful resisting, or refusing Grace, or the moral special indisposition of
the Recipients makes the difference; or else all would be alike believers.

But note, that we ask not [What makes the difference between Believers and
unbelievers?] but do particularize the subject, and ask, [what makes the
Believer differ from the Unbeliever?] or what makes the unbeliever differ from
the believer?] It is then supposed that we mean only ex part nominata. And
thus in the vulgar sense the questions, [what makes the believer differ from
the Infidel?] and [what makes the Infidel differ from the believer] must have
various answers.


C. I understand you thus in brief: 1. You say that constitutively it is Faith
that is the difference on Paul 's part, and unbelief on Nero 's. 2. The causes
of the said Faith and unbelief, are the causes of the difference: (As the
causes of the whiteness of one wall; and of the blackness of the other cause
their difference.) 3. That to ask (why the Believer differs from the
Unbeliever?) is but to ask [why he is a Believer when the other is not?] 4.
Here you say the two Relations of dissimilitude in two ubbjects make the
questions two in one, viz. 1. Why or whence is Paul a Believer?] 2. Whence is
it that Nero is an Unbeliever?] 5. You say that Nero is an Unbeliever through
his own wilfulness, and illdisposition resisting Grace (Satan's temptations
concurring.) And that Paul is a Believer from many conjunct causes: 1. Gods
Grace by his Spirit. 2. Christ's Merits. 3. Christ's donation of that Spirit. 4.
The means by which he works. 5. The concurse of Paul's will. To which
efficients you add in most a competent Receptive disposition in genere caus^
materialis, both passive and active. 6. You say that in all this Gods Grace is
incomparably the greater cause than man's will. 7. But yet not the sole cause,
and that some free-not-necessitated concurse of man's will, in the use of such
Power as he has, is a condition sine qua non ut dispositio Gratiae receptiva,
ordinarily. 8. But that God is not tied to this, but may extraordinarily do
otherwise. 9. But that this Ruiz. de praedif. tr. 3. d. 18. p. 222. Resp.
dispositiones proximas and pro^ertionatas ad gratiam n^^il ob esse quidditati
gratiae, quoniam ex prima radice nascuntur ex prima gratia, quae absque ulla
dispositione quasi creata est a Deo sine materia. At pugnabit cum quidditate
gratiae quaelibet dispositio etiam remota. si ab illa sumit initium gratia ita
ut prima gratia detur intuitu talis dispositionis. I^ not this enough?
pre-requisite disposition, and the concurse of man's will is only the use of a
power freely before given of God, with all necessary helps to use it. 10. And
therefore that God is from first to last the first cause of all that is good in
man, though not the only cause; and that of himself man can do nothing. Have I
not taken your meaning right.


B. Yes, so far as you have recited it?


C. But methinks yet you answer not the great question, which Camero baffled
Tilenus with. It is not why Paul believes? Nor why Nero believes not? as
singly considered: But comparatively, why Paul believes rather than Nero?
Speak to that.


B. Camero and Tilenus were great and excellent wits. But if you can forgive
the Truth, I must add that which they said nothing to, which will prove that a
few degrees more of acuteness, might have shortened or better ended their
dispute.

It is the Comparatio personarum that is now the subject of that Controversy:
why this man rather than that as compared? Here then we are to consider, 1. The
Comparabilitas. 2. The Ipsa Comparatio.

1. The question as to the first is, either 1. Whether there was antecedently
any such ratio comparandi in them, as might be a reason or motive to God
himself, quoad actum ex part agentis, why he should decree to give, or
actually give Faith to one man rather than to another? 2. Or else whether there
were any such difference antecedent as might be Ratio discriminis ineffectis,
the reason why one received or had Faith, and the other not.

II. And then quoad actum comparandi, the question is, whether God in his
Decree or mind did truly compare the persons antecedently, and say (not only [I
will cause this man to believe] and say [I will not cause that man to believe]
or, not say [I will.]) But also said [I will cause this man to believe rather
than that.]

To these several questions then I answer. 1. Negatively to the first: For Gods
acts ex part agentis are his essence; and as he has no cause, but is the
cause of all things, so thus far nothing in the world is a causal reason or
motive to God. He wills because he wills, or rather without cause.

II. To the second, There are in the Creatures different capacities, for
terminating God^ will and action objectively, and accordingly denominating his
Volitions and Actions variously: And so this question must be divided into
three. 1. Whether always. 2. Whether ordinarily. 3. Whether sometimes there be
an objective ratio comparabilitatis and of preferring one before another, as to
the effect of believing? or why Gods operation should effect Faith rather in
this man than in that? To which I answer.

Ad primum, 1. There are nearest Reasons in the immediate aptitude of the
receiver. Such as is the highest degree of preparing Grace in one, which
another has not. And there are remote reasons or aptitudes. As e. g. A man of
great learning, wit, and zeal, or some other remote aptitude, will be a fitter
person for Gods work than another, when he believes. 2. It is not known to any
mortal man, what different aptitudes in both these kinds, God the only
heart-searcher sees, which no man can see: And therefore this question cannot
certainly be answered as to both sorts.

3. But as far as our blind eyes can reach, it seems most probable to us,
that God does not always effect Faith according to the degrees of receptive
aptitude of either sort. Because we see that sometimes he suddenly calls very
great sinners, and also some that are silly and little serviceable in the
world. But yet what special aptitudes God may see in them we know not.

Ad secundum, Qu. I answer, That it is Gods ordinary way to give Faith
according to the first sort of predisposition alone (were there no difference
in the last) that is, To those that have the highest degrees of moral
preparation, or Common Grace, I take to be a certain truth. 1. Because in all
Gods Works we see that he operateth by degrees in order, and, on predisposed
matter, and that efficit juxta dispositionem recipientis. 2. But specially
because he has himself appointed a course of means for the obtaining of his
special Grace, to be used by all men: And he cannot be thought to do all this
in vain; nor to set men on doing their part in vain. And all practical Divines
who preach so much for the souls preparation, are of this mind, that such
preparation is the ordinary predisposition.

Ad Qu. 3. I answer, That at least sometimes it is so, is past question with
any sober man. For it is a contradiction, to call it preparing Grace, or
Disposition; and yet to say that by it no man is made ever the more receptive
or nearlier capable of Faith or special Grace. So much to the two questions de
Comparabilitate. Mark what Bannes himself says of Common Grace, in q. 23. page
274. [Pie credi potest quod omnibus venientibus ad usum rationis Deus opem.
aliquam ferat supernaturali quodam auxilio secreto instigante ad operandum
bonum. 2. Si vera est opinio Thomae, etc. necesse est dic^re quod omnis qui
justificatur, receperit gratiam praeparantem saltem prius natura quam
praeceptum natural adimpleverit. 3. Quotiescunque aliquis pec^at speciale
peccatum contra supernaturale praeceptum, vel fidei vel p^nit^ntiae, etc.
necesse est ut ille de facto receperit aliquam divinam inspirationem
illuminantis Dei dut vocantis aut incitantis ad fidem, etc. Immo necesse est
hominem tangi aliqua supernaturali inspiratione ut nullam ^abtat excusationem.
Possibile est se^undam legem ordinariam quemlibet dum est in hac vita salvari.
D^us paratus est dare omnibus quamdiu sunt in h^c vita auxilium quo fiant
potentes converti, immo and auxilium specialius quo converta^tur si velint. I
cite this, because for his Doctrine of Predetermi^ation, Protestants much value
Ban^es (a boasting Author, who thanketh God that their King burns
Protestants.) Indeed the Dominio^^s commonly confess sufficient Grace which is
not effectual.


III. But as to the third question, Whether God Actually in his mind thus
Compare men, and prefer one before another, and say, I will cause this man to
believe rather than that? I answer, 1. There is no Act in God but his Essence,
which is invariable, and indivisible. 2. But because his operations as
terminated and productive ad extra are various, and have objective material
causes of their diversity in the recipients; therefore we usually thence
denominate Gods volitions as various. And so when we see that one man has
Grace given him to believe, when another has not, we hence say that God
mentally and by Decree prefers one before the other: when the difference is
not at all in God, not his Act ex part agentis, but only of and by God in the
Recipients.


C. But come yet nearer the heart of the case, and tell me plainly, 1. Whether
the difference of Effects be more from the will and action of God, or from men's
different Receptive dispositions. And 2. Whether all these different
Receptivities be not of God.


B. Order bids me begin with the latter. 1. The different Dispositions are of
two sorts, Good and Bad. God is not the cause of the Indisposition or
illdisposition of any. And as to the good disposition or Preparation of Souls,
no doubt but he is the principal Cause of it all: but not the sole Cause, nor
(always at least) the necessitating Cause; but often gives men that necessary
help by which they might have been prepared for more, when yet they are not
through their wilful resistance or neglect. For few men will deny that men have
sufficient uneffectual Grace for some preparatory acts, though not for faith.

Ad. Q. 2. I told you that the difference in the effects, resulteth from the
Causes in both Subjects, and not in one only: That which makes one a believer,
and the other an unbeliever, makes them differ. And I have told you what these
Causes are. But further; I suppose as aforesaid, a certain established order
and degree of universal help, external and internal, by Christ to the Soul, as
the Sun affords to inferior Bodies: This stablished order of Grace,
universally affords such a degree of Divine Influx and help, as will cause
faith in a prepared Soul, and will not cause it in some much unprepared Souls:
(For if as little help would serve the unprepared as the prepared, to what use
is preparation, and quomodo recipitur ad modum recipientis;) In this case now
the efficient of Grace is God, and not Man; but That even Jesuits confess in
their way of scientia media that the Ratio discriminis why one person rather
than another has Grace is from God, initially and principally, and not from
any beginning in man. See Ruiz proving it at large in all his Tract. 3. Disp.
18. 19. De Praedest. exordio. So that this is no difference between us. Yea,
more he maintains that ante fidem ni^il est dispositionis, meriti aut
impetrationis. Sect. 3. Disp. 19. 24. And one would think that this should
satisfy even the Antinomians. But he means only that this disposition is not
always necessary. He that will in brief see what the Schoolmen say of
preparative Grace, may find abundance of them cited by Ruiz ibid. d. 21. per
totam, and what nature can do in preparation. Greg. Armin. in 2. d. 28. q. 1.
a. 1. speaks most like the Reformed.

Aug. de bono persever. c. 8. Sed cur Gratia Dei non secundum merita hominum
datur? Resp. Quia deus miserecors est. Cur ergo non omnibus? Et hic respondeo,
Quoniam Deu^ justus Judex est.


the Ratio proxima of the difference in the event and effects is the Diverse
disposition of the Recipients. But here, mark well, that it is not the good
disposition or preparation of one party, that is, the only, and I think, not
the chief reason of the difference; but the Privative and Positive
indisposition of the other party, is as much, if not, the chiefest reason. If
one man shut his eyes against the light, when another does not, the Ratio
discriminis why one man differs from another in seeing and not seeing, is on
both parts, but principally on his part that shuts his eyes; because the
other does but what he was made to do, and all living creatures should do: But
the other absurdly crosses nature. So that under an universal Influx and help,
the said Influx is the efficient of the action or effect; but the disposition
of the Recipients are the Occasions and Reasons to be assigned of the various
effects; but especially the incapacity of the defective party. As the reason
why the Sun does make a Tree bear fruit, and not a dead stock, is because the
Tree is an apt recipient of its influx, but the stock or stone is not.

2. But, (Note) that in case that God operate not by such an universal Influx
only, but also by superadded special or extraordinary degrees of particular
Grace, which by a difference from the universal Influx or degree, is peculiarly
apt to procure the effects, here the ratio discriminis is principally to be
ascribed to that special Grace, and not to the preparations on the Soul.


C. Tell me then, what you think, whether God works by such an universal Grace,
or by such a special Grace. 1. How far does he work by universal Grace? 2. Is
that universal Grace ever effectual of it self, on prepared Souls? 3. How far
does he also use the special particular Grace which you mentioned?


B. I. To your first Qu. I answer, 1. God in the beginning made mankind upright
in Adam and Eve, and made no difference as to the present case.

2. Eve having first sinned, did make a difference between her self and Adam,
which God made not, nor altered first his universal Grace.

3. Adam next (without Gods alteration) by Sin did difference himself from
himself (as he was before).

4. God then set up a new universal Grace; even Christ with the new Covenant,
and Recovering means, to give out universal help suited to his Covenant and
means; to be the Giver of the Spirit, and the Light of the world (we cannot
have time now to open the difference, between Christ's administrations before
and after his Incarnation). There was at first an universal sufficiency in this
Recovering help of Grace.

5. Cain (that could have done otherwise) wilfully sinned against this
universal Grace and Covenant: and so made a difference between him and the rest
of mankind, when God made none.

6. Whether Abel did offer his acceptable Sacrifice by this same universal Help
alone, or by any special extraordinary Grace ex part mediorum vel Influxus
primi recepti, is a thing unknown to us, because unrevealed.

7. The Posterity of Cain (as of Adam at first) because Seminally in him, and
personally from his very guilty essence, were justly deprived of some of that
Grace, both Subjective and Objective which Cain had deprived himself of. Their
natures were more vitiated, and so they were made less Receptive and more
disposed as to the universal means and Influx. And by his secession from the
holy seed, he was deprived of much outward means: And having forfeited the
Spirit, he had less also of its helping Influx: And thus he and his posterity
made themselves to differ, as if a Generation of Sinners should be born bl^nd,
while the Sun shines as it did before.

8. The Holy seed that is not yet Apostate, have great subjective and objective
Grace.

9. The seed of Cain are still under the same Law of Grace, and universal
conditional promise, that If they will believe and repent, they shall be saved:
And they have some Means and some Help of Grace yet left them, which have an
aptitude by degrees to bring them back again to God: And if they will not use
that lower degree of Grace, by returning as they can, they forfeit that and
further help.

10. But yet God has besides this Universal Grace, some special and
extraordinary ways and degrees of Grace for some, according to his Good
pleasure. But this with the answer to your other two questions, will come in
better anon, under the next head.


C. Having spoke to the matter, now speak of the sense of the Text, 1 Cor. 4.
7. and Romans 12. 6. For who makes thee to differ from another? and what have
thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory as if thou had not received it.


B. It is most evident, that Paul speaks of the Gifts or Excellencies
themselves primarily and of Differing from others, but as a resultancy from
those Gifts: And he medleth not here with the question, why others have not
those Gifts as well as they? and so why others differ from them. q. d. Are not
all those things of which you glory, the free gifts of God? And is it not by
those free gifts that you differ as more excellent than others? And should you
boast of that which is Gods free Gift, of which you are but Receivers? To pass
by the common answer that Paul speaks of Ministerial Gifts, and not of
special Grace, what Arminian can deny any of this, about the Grace of faith it
self. 1. He must confess that we have no Grace to cause faith, but what we have
received; (For the Act which we performed is no otherwise to be said to be
received, but as we receive the gracious operation which causes it). 2. He
cannot deny that by this Received Grace and Faith, the believer in excellency
differs from unbelievers. 3. Nor that such a Receiver has no cause of
boasting, as if he had not received it. Who will deny this?


C. But they leave him to boast, that by his better preparation and
disposition, he was a fitter Recipient than another. And so all boasting is not
excluded.


B. 1. In Paul's Case (of extraordinary Ministerial gifts) there is less room
for that much; because they are not given so much according to preparations, as
saving Grace is: For even ungodly men may have them.

2. The boasting which is excluded, is a boasting of our selves as against or
without the glory of Grace, as if we had some excellency which we had not
received. But our very Receptive disposition was received by Gods Grace, even
from his common preparing Grace: And that common Grace was freely given.

3. If by boasting, you would mean, an acknowledgment of Gods grace, then all
thanksgiving is boasting. Or if a Rejoicing in the effects of that Grace as
Received and improved by us, then Paul so boasted often, yea and to the death
rejoiced in this testimony of his Conscience, that in simplicity and Godly
sincerity, and not in fleshly wisdom he had had his conversation in the world,
2 Cor. 1. 12. And that he tamed his body, and that he suffered for Christ, and
that he had fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. If praising Gods grace in his
Servants, and that holy use of it, in wisdom, faith, love, obedience and
patience, be boasting, God so boasts of them and praises them, even at
judgment, Math. 25. Well done good and faithful Servant. And Scripture
throughout so boasts of them. And we that must honor those that fear the
Lord, Psalm. 15. 4. must so boast of them also. But this is not the forbidden
boasting.

And as to Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 1. 6, 7, 8. and such like its past
question that God freely diversifyeth Offices and such Gifts as he pleases;
and we know of no praedisposition to which, even ordinarily, he tyeth himself,
as to many of them. But saving Grace is given more under a Law, and stablished
course of means, in the use of which we must be fit Recipients.


The ninth Crimination.
C. They make the Grace of God to be Effectual, not from the Will of the Giver,
nor from the proper force of the Grace it self, so much as from the will of man
concurring: For they think that Gods Grace is but universal and indifferent,
and leaves it to man's will whether it shall produce the act of faith or not:
so that the posse Credere and velle is of God, but the actu credere and velle
is of our selves. This is the grand difference which I have reserved to the
last; and as Dr. Twisse often no^eth the question, Unde Gratia fit Efficax? is it
which they are loath to be brought to answer.


B. I know that this is cried up as the great difference; And wherever things
are mysterious and hard, there will be variety of Conceptions and words; from
whence it will be easy to pretend real differences, and make them seem great*
But because order befriendeth Truth, we must be agreed first of the subject of
the question, what Grace is it whose Efficacy you dispute of? I take it for
granted, that it is such as is to work, in genere Causae Efficientis. But tell
me first, whether you Arminius confesses Gods infallible operation, thus,
Nihil mali caveri posse nist Deo impediente certum est; Sed de modo impediendi
disputatur: an ille sit ex Omnipotent^ Dei action in voluntatem hominis agente
secundum modum naturae, unde impeditionis existit Necessitas; an vero ex tali
action quae ag^t in Voluntatem, secundum modum voluntatis qu^ liber^ est, unde
impeditionis infallibilitas. Armin. Exam. Perkins page* 501. Note, by Necessity
Arminius does mean Necessity consequentis, vel effecti, and confesses
necessity Consequenti^, (which here he calls ^nfallibility). And Dr. Twisse
professes that he and all the Schoolmen hold no other* And note the unde that
he makes the Infallibility to result from the operation of God, and not from
his fore-kno^ledge only.
confess or not, that there is such a thing as Universal Grace, or Help of the
Spirit, fixedly or ordinarily accompanying or working by the means of Grace,
which operateth as the Sun, ad modum recipientis, and will not produce the same
effect on one receiver as on another.


C. I cannot answer what you have said for it: And when I read Dallaeus Apolog.
and in him almost all ancient Writers, and late Churches for it, I dare not be
so singular as Spanhemius and a few more of late in denying this Grace of God.
Though I once thought that it had been Objective only, and with Amyrald I noted
little more in the Controversy, than between the Objective and Subjective
grace, as if there had been no other Efficient grace to come in question. But I
am convinced, 1. that de facto there is a degree of Grace ad posse that leaves
men unexcusable, which is not effectual in the event: For I dare not say that I
could never have sinned less, or done better than I did. 2. And that the same
degree of the Spirits help is not sufficient to an utterly unprepared Soul, as
to the prepared; or to cause a man to believe and love God above all, as may
cause him to forbear some sin, or to use some means Non possunt initia illa
accendi, aut fides inchoata retineri, dum voluntas omnino repugnat: Non enim
Efficax est Spiritus Sanctus in eo, qui ne vult quidem audire Evangelium, and
excuteretur si voluntas succumberet dubitationibus. Loc. Com. de lib. art. c. 7.
for further Grace: Therefore such a thing as is called sufficient and
universal Grace or help I do confess. But (by the way) if Christ be the
universal Dispenser of this Grace, how reaches it to those that know not
Christ.


B. 1. I have showed you in Cain's instance and his posterity, that it reaches
not Equally to all, no more than the Sun to the Southern and the Northern
Nations.

2. I have proved to you that Christ was after the fall made the Head of the
new Covenant, and that this Covenant was made with all Mankind. And that he is
the Administrator General to all Mankind, and all things, Power and Judgment is
committed to him: that he is now the Owner, Ruler, and Judge of all.

3. Therefore all the Light, Means and Mercies that are in any parts of the
world, are as truly from Christ as the universal Mediator, as all light is from
the Sun. (Even in Dungeons and Caverns, and where there is least) And as the
Sun sends forth some light before it arises, and some after it is set, and
some in the night, even by the Moon, etc. so does Christ enlighten all the
world, so far as they have light though in very various degrees.

4. You will not say that Christ by his Incarnation, did put all the rest of
the world into a worse condition than they were in before his coming; and to
take away from them any of the mercies of the Law of Grace, which God had made
with them in Adam and Noah.


C. I am afraid you go about to confound the world and the Church, while you
make all to be the Kingdom of Christ; and to be under the Law and Covenant of
Grace.


B. I must still call you to difference the question de re from that de nomine.
Whether all should be called the Church is one question? And how really they
stand related to Christ, is another. To that de re I say, 1. It is past doubt
that Christ the Mediator, is the Owner and Ruler of all the world de jure, even
jure Redemptionis, as all are given to him of the Father.

2. It is doubtless that all are under his foresaid Law of Grace, as that which
is in force to oblige them, and to punish them if they break it, and to reward
them if they keep it. For they are not Lawless nor hopeless.

3. It is doubtless that all are possessed of many and great Mercies, as well
as obliged to many duties, as tending to their recovery and salvation. And thus
they are so far the Kingdoms of Christ. But yet de nomine they are not to be
called the Church; because the Church is Regnum peculiaritatis. As the
Israelites had the foedus peculiaritatis, and were Regnum peculiare before
Christ's coming, and yet not the only people in the world that were under a Law
of Grace (for that was universal). So is it now with the Christian Churches and
much more.

Briefly, Christ has three sorts of Subjects in the world; 1. Subjects quoad
obligationem; and so all the world are his Subjects (because first his
beneficiaries). 2. Subjects by professed Consent, which is, 1. A half consent,
as many without the Church. 2. A full consent by Baptism: and these are the
Church visible. 3. By sincere Heart-consent; and this is the Church mystical or
regenerate that shall be saved. In this I think we are agreed.


C. Well; Supposing an universal help of Grace, how answer you the question?
Under fit Efficax?


B. Do you grant me then that this universal Grace is ever effectual?


C. Stay there. You told me that is the turning point where Dr. Sanderson and
Dr. Hammond came to a ne plus. But, 1. As to preparatory Acts we shall not deny
it. I find not that our Divines do assert the necessity Vasq. in 1. Tho. q. 23.
Disp. 88. Recites various opinions of the Schoolmen of the nature of operating
and cooperating Grace: 1 Vega's in Conc. Trid. l. 6. c. 8. That operating
Grace is each holy cogitation and first motion of the will, in which God acts
Physically, and Man is but Passive. And so the Nominals who make God only
Active, and Man Passive in the efficience of Intellection and Volition (as he
says) And some Thomists.

2. The way of Aquin. Co^rad, Cajet. Dur. Anton. Sot. Dried. Tapper. Who say
that Gratia operans is in the first free motion of the will, circa finem,
whence the will is moved ad media, etc.

3. Greg. Armine's which many follow, supposing it Augustines, Omn^ opu^
intellectu^ and voluntatis non solum a Deo fieri, sed etiam a nobis tanquam a
causa secunda efficient^ Physice produci: Deum tamen sola sua virtute primo
voluntatem applicare ad libere volendum, non jolum ^am praeveniendo praevia
Cogitatione ex part intellectus, and primo motu non deliberato timoris aut
spei, sed etiam ^am impellendo ad consensum liberum. H^nc impulsum putat
Gregor. esse medium quid inter ipsum consensum liberum ad qu^m cooperatur
voluntas, and primum motum non deliberatum voluntatis, I^u cogitationem
intellectus; and appellati ab Augustino Initium boni operis.

4. This Vasqu^z confuteth, and asserteth, that Gratia operans (quam sine nobis
in nobis Deus operatur) according to Augustine is no such middle impulse, but
^psam Sanctam cogitationem, quae est ante consensum, and motum voluntatis
subitum sine nostra liberate ex pia illa cogitatione ortum, quo deterremur a
malo (he means some passion) and ad bonum provocamur. And that cooperating
Grace is Ipse consensus, liber in quo meritum reperitur, Etiam circa finem.

Now either there is such a middle Impulse or not: If not, then besides Gods
essence, there is no effect on us antecedent to our consent, but the said
cogitation and passion; And 1. These are commonly said not to necessitate the
will. 2. And if they do, it must be but Morally, which is commonly held to be
no way of necessitating though it may be of ascertaining the event. And so
consent or our Volition it self would be but of cooperating Grace. And if
there be such a middle Impulse, as Gregory holds, it is confessed by him and
the Dominican praedeterminants, to determine the will only to act freely, and
therefore not to necessitate it to consent, but only to ascertain it, and so
the Volition will be as free as but by cooperating Grace, though the Impulse
would be necessary which tends to it.


of a special Grace for every preparatory Act. But of the rest I doubt.


B. And then, 2. Sure you cannot deny it as to well prepared Souls. 1. Because
you granted that the same degree of help may be effectual to a disposed Soul.
2. And so the Help though universal, will to a prepared Soul be proportionable
to the desired effect; and is nevertheless Grace or powerful to such, for being
universal, or uneffectual to others. 3. And it seems that such a kind of degree
of Grace was effectual on Adam before his fall, and uneffectual in his fall. 4.
And it seems congruous to Gods other works, that he give Grace suitable to
his Law and Promise, which shall not be always uneffectual.

So that it is most probable that to prepared Souls, that ordinary established
degree of the Spirits Influx from Christ, which is universal, but uneffectual
to the unprepared, is not only sometimes, but ordinarily effectual. I think
none can prove the contrary. And the same Grace you confess to be effectual to
preparation.

But to unprepared Souls whom God will suddenly convert out of the ordinary
way, a special extraordinary operation seems necessary. But wherein the
extraordinariness of it consists, antecedent to faith the second effect
(besides the extraordinary means) I think it past man's reach to know.


C. Well, now tell us, Unde Gratia fit Efficax.


B. Any ordinary Logician will tell you, that the effect is from all the
causes, and not from any one alone. It is effectual in that it produces the
effect: To which each cause does its proper part; and one is not all* The
effect in question now is Faith. Faith is caused as is said, 1. By Gods will as
the Original. 2. By Christ as sending the Spirit (and meriting Grace first). 3.
By the Spirit as the Operator. 4. By the Gospel as the Instrument. 5. By the
Preacher as a Sub-Instrument. 6. But all this effects ordinarily in materia
disposita, and no other. (Having before wrought that preparation). 7. But
extraordinarily in materia indisposita, working disposition and all at once.

Now here, 1. Gods Will does its part without any cause; Velle ex part Dei
(sicu^ and agere) is his essence; and the termination of it in rem Volitatam
has no efficient, but only an Objective Cause. 2. This prime Cause is the
prime reason of all the efficacy of Inferior Causes: Not qua voluntas simply
moving them, but qua voluntas cum potentia executiva moving them; and qua
volitio infers the necessitatem consequentiae of the effect. So that
plainly, I think that no Good comes to pass in the world, but what God
forewilled, and nothing which he absolutely wills, comes not to pass; what
he fore-knoweth is necessary, necessitate Infallibilitatis, and what he
absolutely wills, necessitate Imutabilitatis; and what he works from such a
will is necessary necessitate invincibilitatis. 3. Though all the other Causes
are the reason of the effect, and not only the first, yet none of them operate
on the first Cause, and put any force into it for the act. So that its force is
from it self, but theirs from it.

And having said this much preparatorily, I thus resolve your great question.

Here are three things before us, whose cause may be enquired of; 1. The
necessitas Logica consequentiae, ex quo in ordine probandi necessario sequitur
eventum futurum esse: And this is the Decree or Will of God, (yea, and his fore
knowledge) This is presupposed.

2. The prime effect of Gods Will and Active power operating: And this prime
effect is not our Faith, or Act, but the Impression or Received Influx of God
on the Soul. For the Soul receives (its like) some Impression by the Divine
Influx by which it believes or acts it self: It does not Receive its own
Act, as if that act had been first preexistent in the Donor; but it performs
that Act because it is premoved to it. Now if the question be of this first
effect, Unde operatio Gratiosa sit efficax, I answer, 1. The whole efficient
reason is in the operator and operation it self. It is effectual ad
impressionem ex natura rei, because it is an Act: If it did nothing, it were no
Act transient. 2. And the specification and individuation is from the
terminating object. It is denominatively and Relatively, one Act which is on a
Stone, and another on a Soul, de specie: And it is numerically one which is on
Peter, and another on John. If the Sun did shine in vacuo, there being no other
creature to be objective or passive, it would still agere, but it would nihil
efficere: quia nihil afficere; So God is one Infinite act, and ex part sui
never begineth to act, nor ever cease, nor is divided; But transiently he
does nihil afficere vel efficere, but first by making objects, and then acting
on them. So that were there no mobile Gods act would not movere. This first
effect then of Impress has an Effective and an Objective Cause, The Effective
Cause is Gods Essence; that is, his Active Power, Intellect and Will, and
nothing else: (Supposing now that it be not Gods operation on the Instrument or
medium that we speak of, but immediately on the Soul it self). But Man's Soul
is the Objective Recipient Cause of this first effect, which is, the Impress,
or Influx received.

3. The Secondary effect is, Man's Act, Faith and Repentance it self. If the
question, Unde Gratia sit efficax, mean this, (as with most it does) then it is
all one as to ask, Unde hic Effectus? For that Gods Influx on the Soul
immediately, is the sole Cause is false. Therefore the answer is, that this
effect is from all the Causes conjunct: From Gods Will, or Law, and Power and
Wisdom; from Christ's mission of the Spirit (before merited); from the Spirits
Impress or Influx; from the Gospel; from the Ministry (usually) and from the
Agent Believer; all these as the efficient Causes. And it is from or on the
prepared Soul (ordinarily) as the Materia disposita, vel Causa Receptiva,
Objectiva of the Divine operation: And from or on God Christ, the promise,
Glory, as the materia objectiva actus humani; where I conclude the Causa
finalis as the chief object.

Thus I have showed you truly and plainly unde fit fides, as that is all one as
unde hic effectus; and that is all one, as unde Gratia fit efficax, as to this
secondary effect.


C. But I conceive that the sense of the question rather i^, which of all these
is the chief cause or reason of the existence of the effect?


B. Pardon my impatience of Confusion. The chief cause, and the chief reason
are not always the same. There is no question but God is the only and total
Causa prima, from whom all the rest have all their power and force. But by the
Reason of the existence is often meant, that which in discourse must be
assigned proportionately in answer to the question, Why is one converted rather
than another? supposing Gods Influx on them both: And this is often the Receptive
disposition as is said; for Reciptur ad modum recipientes.


C. Well; But the question recurreth what is the chief Cause and Reason that
one, not another, has that preparatory Receptivity.


B. The chief Cause is God why one has it: The chief Cause why another has it
not, is himself, that is, the Moral deficient cause. The Ratio differendi I
opened to you before. The most notable, if we suppose Gods Influx to be of it
self universal and equal, is the Indisposition of the Sinner, whence he does
difference himself from those that God causes to receive even preparing Grace.
But the true Ratio effectus is from all the Causes conjunct.


C. But you must come at last, to some prime difference. And if you will say
that the reason of our Preparatory effect or degree of Grace, is, because I
used a former well, or did not refuse it, or was prepared for it, what will you
say of the first degree.


B. I say that the first preparatory Grace or help was given to Adam, and all
in him: as the first natural goodness was.


C. But where came in the first difference?


B. By Cain's wilful Sin, against God and his Grace.


C. But though you do with Augustine hold a communicated guilt of the sins of
other Parents than our first, and so a difference between persons (yea and
Kingdoms) thence arising, yet some Children as Esau and Jacob, born of the same
Parents, must have in them some other cause of difference, even as to
preparatory Grace.


B. Suppose Gods fixed equal Influx universal, there are two Causes of
difference herein. 1. One is the mere sinful wilfulness of one party, that does
not do what that Grace enabled him to do, by which a difference is made.


C. You mean that Jacob better used his help than Esau.


B. Not so: but that Esau more abused it than Jacob. Suppose Jacob had slept
out his youth, or done no good, and Esau had rebelled against God also, and
done much mischief, Esau had hereby made a difference, which is assignable
without commending Jacob.


C. Well, what is the other Cause?


B. 2. Gods own free differencing Will and Grace, who is a free Benefactor, and
may do with his own as he list: and therefore freely loves Jacob with the
electing special love and decree which he has not to Esau. For though I have
all this while discoursed with you of the Ratio Efficaciae of an Universal
Grace, I say not that there is no other.


C. O: Now you come to the matter indeed.


B. II. The Question Unde fit Gratia efficax, Blank de Did. Great. These. 79.
Naturam Gratiae efficacis Thomistae ponunt in motione quadam virtuosa quae est
in voluntate, per modum quo impetus in re quae impellitur: Jansenius in
^ffectibus Amoris and desiderii boni coelestis and spiritualis, quibus suaviter
sursum rapitur animus humanus: Discip^li Cameronis in pot^n^^ssima mentis
illuminatione and persuasione quae voluntatem and ^ffectus secum rapit. Alii in
omnipotenti and efficacissima Dei operatione qua novum principium spiritualis
vitae Cordi hominis vocati inditur and homo sim^l excitatur ad actus eliciendos
quae hic plerique v^i docti proferunt componenda potius quam opponenda videntur.

Even they that are for Physical praedetermination, are not agreed what it is:
some make it a transient quality passing with the act. Some say it is only man's
Act it self as from God the first cause. Some with Alvarez say, It is Aliquid
quod habet esse incompletum as colors in the air, that is, They know not what,
and yet venture on hot contentions about it.

And Jansenius who makes it to be Delectatio or Complacentia, says it is
Actus vitalis and indeliberatus animo, and quidem amoris and desiderii
praecedentis consensum ac delectationem illam quae and quies animi and gaudium
dicitur. De Great. Christi l. 4. c. 11. Much like to Vasquez, save that Vasq.
calls it but an indeliberate prime motion of the affection and Jansenius calls
it Indeliberate Delectation or Complacency; which certainly is an Act of man;
and the Scotists say that all the Wills Acts are free, though not all its
inclinations. But thus we strive about that which none of us understand, viz.
How God moves his Creatures and our Wills in special.


being put of Gods special Grace, by which he arbitrarily makes a difference,
and is more than his Universal Grace, must be thus resolved, That though other
Causes concur to the effect, the Great, overruling, differencing, and
ascertaining Cause, is the very quality and aptitude of Gods operation it self,
as proceeding from an absolute volition of the effect, and in the Means and
Influx fitted to ascertain the effect.


C. Wherein consists this differencing special Grace?


B. Deceive not your self: No mortal man can know in what it ordinarily,
constantly, or chiefly consists. We know, 1. That though God as Rector per
Leges, keeps one even and constant course, yet as Proprietor and Benefactor he
may vary as he please: And that a Benefactor may give unequally to men of equal
merits: And that God really does so de facto: And that his Will has no Cause.
2. We know that God has innumerable ways to fulfill his Will, and make a
difference between man and man, which are beyond the search of Mortals. 3. And
though we can name diverse which he can take, we know not de facto, which he
does take, hic and nunc.


C. What differencing free acts of Grace do you observe.


B. None which violate Gods established order, or diminish his universal Grace.
But such as are superadded specially to some. As, 1. To Children of the same
Parents, he gives to diverse a temperament of Body, as in one much more
conduces to thoughtfulness, tenderness, meekness, sobriety, chastity, zeal,
honesty, etc. than in the other. He is a stranger to man that knows not this.

2. He sometime gives them various Education: One is piously educated. Another
is snatched away and made a Janizary. A third the Parents dying, leave to such
as educate them vitiously. And some the Parents apostatizing educate in Heresy
or unpiety themselves.

3. He often casts their lot under different means for their Edification. One
is set Apprentice to a Godly Master, and another to an ungodly one. One is cast
under a Holy able Minister, and another under an ignorant Seducer: One is cast
among Godly Companions, and another among lewd Seducers, idle, wanton,
voluptuous, unclean, malignant, scornful, or other such tempting persons, as
that a great deal more grace or help is necessary to their preservation.

4. One (for ought we see of equal commerit) is impelled or occasioned to go to
Church, just when an apt Sermon is prepared for him: and another occasioned to
be absent. A Minister or Friend is sent (as Philip to the Eunuch, though by
ordinary means) to meet with one, and speak suitably to his case; and not to
the other.

5. One falls under some great affliction, which takes him down, and
awakeneth him to seriousness; and another swimmeth down the violent and
dangerous stream of prosperity and constant health.

6. One sees some notable Judgments on others, or some convincing Providence,
or has some strange deliverance himself; which another never has.

7. One Nation or Kingdom of equal ill desert, has the Gospel and powerful
Preachers sent to them; while others are left as the most of the world without
it; yea, as the poor Islanders, Laplanders, Brasilians, Soldanians, and
Canibals.

A thousand ways God has to fulfill his Will which we know not of. But besides
all these in point of Means, we see that under the same Means, or Sermon, or
Family helps, there is not the same success: Not only because the unbelievers
make the difference by sinning against sufficient universal Grace; but because
God does especially touch the hearts of some, by such Grace as he gives not to
others. Thus did he open the heart of Lidia, Act. 16.


C. Methinks you should lay all on this Internal changing Grace, and not on the
difference of means.


B. Certain Experience tells us, that most usually God gives extraordinary
differing means where his Grace shall work different effects.

Christ himself who was to bestow extraordinary Grace after his Incarnation,
was himself to be an extraordinary means: He must work Miracles, raise the
Dead, rise from the Dead, etc. as the Means.

The Apostles that were to do extraordinary things, in calling the unbelieving
world to Christ, were to do it by miracles and extraordinary* means. The 3000
Act. 2. must have the Apostles miraculous gift of tongues to be the means of
their Conversion. Cornelius must have both an Angel and Peter. Paul must be
stricken down and blind, and hear Christ speak from Heaven, and after have
Ananias's Ministry. The Eunuch must have Philip. The Jailer, Act. 16. must have
an Earthquake; and so of others.

And to this day we see how little God does where there is no Ministry or
Means. And how much the success of able, holy, skilful Ministers, does differ
from that of wicked, or Ignorant sots: And how usually in all the world, the
success goes according to the means; and that the instances of contrary are
unusual rarities: Therefore separate not what the wisdom of God has conjoined.


C. But do you think that God ever ascertaineth the Effect, merely by such
Moral Differencing helps or means, annexed to his universal Gracious Efflux or
aid, without a special degree of that Immediate Efflux it self on the Soul.


B. 1. We little know when God works Immediately, and how far His Efflux or
Action ex part agentis I often tell you has no degrees being himself: The
degrees are in the Received Impress on the Soul. And it is like this special
differencing Grace consists in a special degree of Impress: But when that
Impress is made by the Spirit without the Instrumentality of Means, we know
not. God can make our own Imagination, and spirit,, and inward temperament a
means undiscernably to us.

2. If I have proved to you that even the universal Grace it self with common
means, may attain the effect, and does in many, who dare question, whether All,
yea One extraordinary or special Means added by God to that Common Influx,
(with a will of success) may ascertain the effect. It were Blasphemy to say
that God has not Wisdom enough thus to attain his ends, by a series of adapted
means, in conjunction with that Grace.


C. But methinks you spin too fine a thread, when you talk of an Impress of the
Spirit on the Soul, as the first Effect, (of God alone, or God and the Means)
antecedent to faith or the Act of man as the second effect (of God and Man
together). I find not that our Curiousest School Wits do talk much of such an
Impress.


B. 1. You will find the same sense in the Thomists and many of the Schoolmen:
And methinks it is clear in it self. The Act of Faith is done by us: Our Souls
have need of some Grace to be the Cause or it. The Cause goes before the
Effect. This Cause must not be out of us, but within us: Grace therefore must
be first within us as a Cause, before it is within us as the effect of it. Yea,
Action being nothing but Modus Agentis, is not a fit recipient it self
immediately of a vis impressa: It is the Soul or faculty that must Act; and to
say that Gods Influx is not on the Soul or faculty as the recipient, but on the
Act of that faculty aloue, seems to be unintelligible, if not absurd. It is
our Act, or our Soul that needs help or Grace? If not the Soul, but the Act,
then we have need of none at all: For the Act is yet future, that is, is no
act, and nothing, and so has no need.

2. But if really you will hold to the opinion that our Act it self is the
first Effect of Gods Influx or Will, then take notice, that all our
controversy here between you and the Arminians, what Grace is sufficient, and
what effectual, is at an end; And it is on your part, and for the truth that I
spin that thread which you account too fine.


C. How do you manifest that?


B. Most plainly: For if we have nothing to enquire after between Gods agency
ex part sui and the Act of Faith, it is a ridiculous question to ask, what
Grace is sufficient, and what effectual? and what difference between the one
and the other? and what is that which makes efficiently the difference? For
either your Question is of the Cause or the Effect: If of the Cause, it is
(besides the second Causes) nothing but Gods Essence, even his essential
Activity, Wisdom, and Will: And do you think that Gods essence is diversifyed,
as little and great, more or less, sufficient and effectual? Do you enquire for
Diversity in simple unity? That which works all effects in the world, is one
Cause, that has in it self no real difference of parts, kinds or degrees.

II. But if your question be of the Effect, it is ridiculous or past question.
Do you ask what Grace in us it is that makes the Difference, between a
Believer and an Infidel? Why, your question answers it self. It is Faith, and
that makes the difference in one, as Infidelity does in the other. Do you ask
what is sufficient? To what? If to Salvation it is perseverance in Faith and
Holiness: If to Justification, it is Faith; if to Faith and Conversion; nothing
pre-existent in us. Do you ask what makes Grace effectual? what Grace mean
you? If Faith, it is none of the doubt or Controversy: It is (improperly)
effectual to Justification (being no efficient of it, but a Condition, which is
a Receptive dispo^ition) ex ordinatione divina, and virtute foederis. You must
recur then and ask, what makes Gods Essence or Spirit effectual? As if Gods
essence had a Cause, or suffered from the Creature. But if you mean no more but
what are the Causes of Faith? that is another question often answered.

Choose now whether you will lay all our Controversies on that fine thread, of
Gods various Impress on the faculties in order of Nature antecedent to Faith
(in act or true habit); or else confess that we have no difference, nor show of
any, but have many ages abhominably abused the world.


C. But seeing you maintain that God as a free Lord and Benefactor does vary
his gifts of Grace as he does of Nature, though we know not when he does it
Morally, and by means, and when by Immediate differing Impress; yet methinks
you should hold that by one of the two he always does it: And that equal Grace
has never unequal effects by the unequal free reception, rejection, or other
difference made by man.


B. To conclude this whole dispute, 1. By Grace here I mean not with
Bradwardine Gods Will, as denominated from various objects: Gods Will in it
self is but One, and the Effects are many: and the Will is variously
denominated virtually ex connotatione terminorum vel effectuum. If he could
prove more diversity in Gods Will, or that no man can do any thing but what he
does, I should be of his mind.
That equal universal Grace can end in different effects, in the same Man, and
in diverse men, by man's own free various concourse or neglect, I have fully
proved to you.

2. And when we have proved that such a Grace there is, and so it can do, we
have great reason to think that sometimes it does so: And no man can prove that
it never does so.

3. And de facto I have proved, that sometimes it does so: in Adam's case, and
in Cain's making a difference, before God denied him sufficient Grace. And in
all bad men and good men in the world, who sometimes sinfully omit to do that
which by the same Grace they could have done and did another time.

4. But de facto: How often, and when, and in how many, God converteth men by the
one way or the other, no Mortal man can tell.

And therefore forget not that when I call universal Grace, ordinary, and the
special different Grace extraordinary; I intend not to tell you which God most
usually does the work by as distinct from the other. But I call one Ordinary
because it is common to all, or more, in it self, and also concurreth always
with the other in its work, and so is never left out: And I call the other
Extraordinary, because it is above the universal degree and way, and proper to
some, as superadded.


C. You did well to remember that: For I was offended that you called that
Different Grace, Extraordinary.


B. I say again, to conclude, I will earnestly entreat you to take heed of
these few errors in your foundation here, that they mislead not your
understanding in all the controversy.

I. Do not think that God must needs act ad ultimum posse in all his
operations: It Is certain that as to many possible effects, he does omnino non
agere (as to make more Suns, more Men, more Worlds) And if he can therein
totally not act, he can act limitedly or in tantum only as he freely will.

II. Do not think these degrees of Operation as various ex part Dei, for they
are but his most simple essence. Nor do not Imagine that there is a certain Vis
media called Grace, which is somewhat Causal between the Creator and the
Creature. I doubt such a wrong conceit lies at the bottom of all these
disputes; and men think that besides Gods essence, and the effects on the Soul,
there is some middle force or cause called Grace, which is neither God, nor a
Creature; whose kind and degree they enquire after. As Aureolu^ maintains.


III. Do not overlook the Glory that God designeth to himself in his SAPIENTIAL
Kingdom, Government, and operations, I doubt some think so much of Strength and
Power alone, as if they thought God were Glorified by nothing else, or more in
an Ox, or Horse than in a Man. And whatever is ascribed to Gods Sapiential
operation, they contemptuously call, A Moral Causing, and not a Physical: As if
God must move men as he does the air, the water, or a stone. Remember that
though Gods Omnipotent Activity, his Wisdom and his Will, do still inseparably
cooperate, yet they have each its eminent Impress, Effect and Glory. And so
the frame of Nature is the Glorious Impress of Omnipotency, with Wisdom and
Love: The Kingdom of God on earth, especially of Grace, is the Glorious work of
the Wisdom of God, directly governing Man as a Moral agent by Moral means: And
the Kingdom of Glory, as foretasted on Earth, and perfect in Heaven, is the
glorious work of Divine Love. Separate not these, nor undervalue or dishonor
any one of them; But study the Glory of Gods Sapiential Kingdom and works. And
remember that Moral Means, and Moral Operations of God, are not unsuitable to
the Government of Moral Agents, in Moral works.

IV. Forget not the great difference between the way of operation suitable to
such a Moral Rector as such, and to a mere Proprietor or Actor, and Benefactor.
And then you will see, that standing Laws are the Rectors Instruments; and
Judgments, and Executions equal according to those Laws. And that Life Eternal
and Gods Glory and pleasure being the ends of Government, it cannot be doubted
but Gods Laws to all the world, have some aptitude and suitableness on their
part to that end. And therefore that the frame of Moral means and annexed help
has a certain universal equality, antecedent to man's sinful will, which by
forfeiture and rejection makes an inequality: And therefore it is one of the
noblest parts of your study here, to find out what Acts God does as Legislator,
(for those are first and equal) and as Judge (which man makes unequal) and
what he does as Owner and free-Benefactor; For so he may make what difference
he pleases: And the wonderful varieties through all the world tell us, that he
pleases to make very much.

V. Forget not that the Humane Nature of Christ Glorified is made of God, the
Universal Sun, or Cistern of all Grace, by whom it is to be given out to all
mankind; to draw them to God, and to rule and Sanctify them further when
converted. And do not think of any Recovering Influx of God but by the Holy
Ghost; nor of the Spirit given any way but by and from Christ, who first
draws men to him, by the same Spirit which dwells in them as a Divine
Nature when they are united to him.

VI. And as Christ is the Healing Sun of righteousness, and the universal
Medium or Mediator and Administrator both of Rule and Influx, so forget not
that he gives out this Spirit and Recovering Grace, much by a Law or
Conditional promise, which has its terms which must be observed. And as the
measures of Christ's Influx are often resistible, so it is specially, by all wise
Christians to be noted, that the Giving or Denying of the Grace or operations
of the Spirit, are the grand Rewards and Punishments in this world, above all
Corporal ones, and those which all Christians should daily and principally
respect in their Hopes and Fears; Marking when the Spirits operations are
denied them, that they may find out the Cause, and with David cry (betimes)
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me, Ps.
51.

VII. Lastly, forget not, that as man is not moved as a stone but governed as a
Moral agent, Melanct. Loc. Com. de Lib. arb. c. 7. Joh. 6. Nemo venit ad me
Resp. Cyrillus l. 4. Non vi quadam cogi trahique credentes putandum est; sed
monitione, doctrina, revelatione: Omnis qui audit and discit a patre venit ad
me: ubi auditus, disciplina, doctrina adest, ibi fides non vi, sed persuasione
oritar. Non enim possum secundum Ecclesiae veritatisque dogmata liberam
potestatem hominis, quod lib. arb. vocamus ullo modo negare. Ita Aug. tr. in
Joh. 26. Non traheris? Ora ut traheris. Addit Strigel. p. 389. Sicui non
placent haec Cyrilli and August. is amet sua somnia quoad volet.

Utrumque and creder^ and Velle est Dei quia ipse praeparat Voluntatem and
nostri, q^ia non fit nisi nobis volentibus. Aug. Retract. li. 23.


and as the wonderful changes by motion in the world, are made recipiendo ad
modum recipientium, by the diversity of Receptive dispositions, which are no
efficient causes of what they receive; so Man can and must do somewhat, yea
much under God to the due Receptivity of Divine Influx; not without God, nor by
any Power which is not freely given him of God; But by a Power which he may or
may not use. And that the neglect of what we can do, and doing the evil which
we could avoid, is much at least of the daily sin of good and bad in all the
world. And that though the faithful Servant be laudable, he is yet
unprofitable, and has nothing to boast of. And even the young Birds must open
their mouths if they will be fed: which man must do freely, as they do
necessarily. And when God gives Man not only the Gold if he will open his
hand, and the Meat if he will open his mouth, or not turn away and spit it out,
and also gives him all his Vital power by which he can do this if he will, and
also can will it, and gives him both Freedom to use this power, and manifold
persuasions and helps to use it, All this must not be reproached as no Grace,
nor the world instructed in Ingratitude, by them that should Preach that Gospel
of Christ, which makes Gratitude he universal complexion of all our duties,
which must give life and beauty to them all.

And to take off your prejudice against Dissenters, remember that I have after
told you, and often in the Margin, that even many Jesuits, and Monks, and Friars
profess, that the Efficacy of Grace is in and from the Nature or Power of it,
and the Will of God, and not from the free will and cooperation of man. See
Bellarm. de Great. and lib. arb. c. 12. Vasquez often cited. Pet. a Sancto Joseph.
in Suat. Concord. elsewhere cited, and Idea Specul. Theol. l. 4. c. 7. Ruiz
elsewhere cited, and abundance of Schoolmen. And what say any Calvinists herein
more?


THE Ninth Days Conference Between A. and B. OF PERSEVERANCE.
B. We are now come to that point, where I confess that the difference between
you is real: But I maintain it to be so small, as that no breach of Christian
Love or Communion should be made for it; but it should be taken for a tolerable
difference among Brethren. If you think it greater, say your worst of it.


The first Crimination.
A. By making it impossible to fall from Grace, they make fear, and care, and
endeavor to be folly; or unnecessary at least: For what use is there of
fearing an impossible hurt? or of care and endeavor to prevent it? And so all
religious Duties and diligence, as means, are made to be but vain.


B. 1. You wrong them in your supposition: Except a few ignorant men Aegid:
Colum. Romans Quodlib. 3. qu. 3. p. 135. Verum est quod ita erit sicut Deus
praevidit: sed non est quod non possit aliter esse: Propter quod si
praedestinavit and videt me salvandum; verum est quod ego salvabor: sed hoc non
est verum, quod non posset aliter esse: potest ergo praedestinatus finaliter
peccare, and potest damnari: Quia infallibilitas divinae praescientiae non
imponit ei necessitatem: Attamen finaliter non peccabit nec damnabitur: Nulla
est autem necessitas simpliciter, nisi conditionis, sicut omne quod est quando
est necesse esse: Ita and futura quae sunt praesentia praescientiae, divinae;
Necesse est evenire, quae Deus praevidit: non necessitate simpliciter, sed quia
jam sunt praesentia Divinae praescientiae.

Ita Malderus in 12. Tho. q. 103. a. 10. dub. 3. Jastus qui babet donum
p^se^eran iae, excidere finaliter potest: sed nunquam excidet. Yet says that
quodammodo it may be said, Eum qui habet perseverent a donum excidere non
posse: eum autem qui non habet non posse non excidere. So Aug. de correp. and
great. c. 12. dicit, eos qui preseverantiae donum non habet non posse
perseverare. So that this is but a strife about equivocal words.


that understand not the state of the Controversy, I meet with few or none
that say, It is impossible to sin or fall away; but only de eventu that it will
never come to pass. For they say (as I remember I heard Mr. Vines once preach)
that our falling away is not only possible, but too easy in respect to us, and
the habits of Grace which we have received: But they lay the certainty of our
perseverance on Gods Decree and Promise. Now, say they, God did not decree that
it should be non-possibile, but only that it should be non-futurum. And so that
he has promised the non-futurity, but not an impossibility of falling away.

3. And yet they sometimes use the term impossible here: But how? 1. Say they,
There is a logical impossibilitas consequentiae; And so there is on supposition
of mere prescience and prediction. For do but make this one of the premises
[God fore-knoweth that Paul will persevere] and it is impossible this
conclusion should be true: [Paul will not persevere.] But yet this may be
nevertheless true, [It is possible for Paul to fall away.] But this
impossibility of consequence in order of arguing, is nothing to the
impossibilitas rei, in respect to the Causes.

2. And also they say, that there is impossibilitas hypothetica; supposing that
man wilfully reject not Grace, Gods Power it self is so engaged to defend him
against Satan and all Enemies, that it is impossible for them to overcome God,
and destroy him: But here impossible is related to the power of Enemies only:
It is a thing that Satan has not Power to do, to conquer Grace.

3. But when the question is of the Power of the Person himself, they say, It
is unfit to say that he is unable to fall away, or that it is impossible in
respect to his own Power. 1. Because that to fall away is an effect of
Impotency and not of Power. 2. Because God will not so operate by his Grace, as
to make a man unable to sin, but unwilling, and actually to keep him from it.
So that Grace does not make us impotent to resist it, and make it really
impossible to us to fall away; but makes us able and willing to stand, and
causes us freely de facto to persevere.

3. And I must tell you, that your Crimination is grounded on a lame and faulty
recitation of their Opinion; you name but half of it, instead of the whole:
which is, [That the sanctified never fall away from the due fear, and care, and
endeavor of persevering, and consequently not from Sanctification or
Justification]. And will you infer that [a man needs not fear, care or live
holily, if certainly he shall do so?]


A. Yes! what need I take care of that which I shall certainly do?


B. That is, what need you take care if you certainly shall take care!


A. What need I trouble my own head about that which God will do, whatever I
do? If he undertake to ascertain it, I may leave it to him.


B. You talk contradictions! God does not undertake to secure your Salvation
whether you will or not, or care or not, or labor or not: But to cause you to
will, to care and labor. And you say, If God will make me willing I need not
be willing: If God will make me think of it, and care and labor for it, I need
not think of it, or care or labor for it. The Sun need not shine if God will
make it shine! You need not eat if God decree that you shall eat. Are not these
weak Contradictions?


A. But as weak as you make it, the Contradiction is their own: For they first
make God to make their falling away to be impossible or certainly non-futurum,
and yet say, that he will make them fear it: that is, to perform an Act without
the proper Object: As if God decreed that they should fear Good as Good, or
love Evil as Evil: No man can fear that which neither is, nor is taken to be
fearful: An impossible (or certainty non-future) hurt is not fearful, or an
Object of fear, unless to a mad man.


B. There were much weight in what you say, but for that which you leave out:
1. That objective certainty may be separated from subjective certainty: that
is, men may be uncertain of that which is certain in it self. 2. Yea few of the
Godly have a strong assurance of their sincerity and Justification. 3. And no
man in this life has a perfect assurance, no more than other perfect Graces.
4. And every man's faith it self in Gods Promises and fidelity is imperfect.
Therefore while all these are imperfect, and not only so, but liable to sad
assaults, and interruptions, and decays. 5. Yea and the person liable to such
heinous sins, as look terribly toward Apostasy, you cannot say that fear is
needless. For though God decree the certainty of their perseverance, that
proves not that they are perfectly certain of it.


A. But God will not found our Duty on our Sin, nor command men to fear,
because through sinful weakness they do fear.


B. God will not make our Sin to be our Duty, (in sensu conjuncto). 1. But God
will make Duty on supposition that Sin makes it necessary. If you sin, God
will make sorrow and confession your Duty, which would else be none. 2. Yea
more, the same Act may be a Duty and a Sin in several respects. And so may fear
of Hell be.


A. Stay there! Do you not then make God the Author of Sin? For if he cause the
Act as a Duty, when it is caused it will prove a Sin too.


B. You mistake: Two Causes may cause two Modes and Relations of the same Act,
and one not at all cause that which the other causes. God causes every Act in
genere act us which is sinful, and yet causes not the deficiency or
exorbitancy of it: As the Rider makes the Horse go, but not to go lamely. God
knowing our uncertainty of our own Election and Sincerity* may make it our
Duty, by a wise and careful fear to avoid our own danger: And yet that fear may
not only come also from some ignorance and unbelief in our selves, but have
sinful degrees, and so have that in it which God is not the cause of.


The second Crimination.
A. Their Doctrine tends to the indulgence of all sin: One would think that
the Doctrine asserting the loss of Justification by mortal sin were stricter
than the Calvinists: But judge by the Jesuits Doctrine, who teach that a man
in mortal sin or unconverted may de congr^o merit Justification, Ruiz de
praedest. exad. d. 19. ^ect. 4. p. 242. Ad meritum congrui non requiritur
personam esse simpliciter Deo gratam; quin poti^s propter peccatum mortale fit
inimica Dei; nihil^minus actus fidei and alii qui ex side procedunt secundum
se, grati sunt, quantum sufficit, ut justificationem de congruo mereantur opera
namque fraternae charitatis, Heb. 13. and miserccordiae sunt ut sacrificia,
quibus Deum per mortale peccatum amissum promeremur reconciliatum accipere: and
1 John 1. si confiteamur, etc. So that Gods Justice is bound to be reconciled
to, and Justify a wicked enemy, for an Alms or for Confession: Is not this an
easy cure of enmity? But the promise is made only c^teris patibus, to true
Believers, already just, but needing a particular remission.
For if a man cannot fall away however he live, he may give up himself to lewd
carnality, and say, I cannot fall away.


B. This is the same shameless self-contradicting Accusation, and needs no
other Answer. As if you said, [If a man cannot fall away, he may fall away.] To
give up himself to carnality is to fall away; And you say that he may do this,
because he cannot. The Doctrine of your Adversaries is, That God will certainly
keep the godly from turning from him to an ungodly fleshly life: And how does
this conduce to ungodliness?


A. The conceit of safety will make them careless.


B. Not if they conceive that their safety and their carefulness are equally
decreed. The bad and ignorant will abuse any thing. But I am persuaded that
very many live the more holily for this belief: 1. Because as Prophecies
conduce to their own accomplishment, in that what men believe will certainly
come to pass, they all promote, and will not oppose: So it is in part in this
case. 2. And when they believe that God will have it be, it greatly animateth
their endeavors by hope, and takes off their discouragements. 3. And when
they find that God has in his Decree conjoined their care and labor to the
end, and has no more decreed their perseverance, than that they shall
carefully avoid sin and temptations, it makes them fear that they are not
Elect, when they find these signs of Election to be doubtful, and so preserves
them from presumption and security.


The third Crimination.
A. Their Doctrine is uncomfortable; in two respects, 1. In that it allows no
man to be sure of his present Justification, Pardon and Adoption, who is not
sure that he goes further, yea that he is not quite in another stat^ than any
man that ever fell away: which it is not possible that many, if any one at all
should be. 2. In that it allows no man to be sure of his Justification and
Adoption, till he have so much Grace, as that no Temptation, how great soever,
would turn him from Christ if he were tried by it.


B. Wherein is the uncomfortableness of these?


A. I. I have known my self some fall to Socinianism, Arrianism, yea
Infidelity, denying Christ, or his Godhead, (which is his chief Essence) and
the Scriptures, (and therefore sure had no saving Grace then, and died so) who
had forty years lived in as eminent Piety, Humility, diligence in all religious
Duties, charity to others, neglect of the World, and patient suffering for
their Religion often times, as almost any men that ever I knew. And that they did
not dissemble, not only their constancy, suffering and whole Conversation
showed, but my own intimacy with them assured me, by which I knew the very
thoughts of their hearts. Some of them were not of judgments clear and strong
enough to discern the fallacies of Deceivers: Others of them were naturally too
hasty in judging; And some were carried away by the advantages of the constant
company of extraordinary able and insinuating Seducers. But diverse of them,
even after they apostatized, did continue so much strictness of life and
charity to all men, and religiousness in their Theism, and Infidel way, and
neglect of the World, as convinced me, that it was more the insufficiency of
their judgments, than the hypocrisy of their hearts, which was the cause of
their Apostasy. Now by the Calvinists Doctrine, none of these men were ever in
a state of Grace: And of the strictest Professors round about us, there is not
one of many hundreds that goes so far as they did. And all these must be left
uncertain of their Justification, till they are certain that they went beyond
them all? yea and certain that they are unjustified, while they are certain
that they came short of any one of them.


B. The case that you describe I have known, and it is sad: But we know not the
hearts of other men: There might be more sin and hypocrisy in them than we
know of.


A. Though God only be the searcher of hearts, yet long intimacy and near
experience may make us so confident of some men's thoughts, as that I confess to
you, you will never change my mind, if you plead against so great experience. I
know their judgments were insufficient. But I will never believe that their
hearts were false, as to what they knew.


B. God has made his Word, and not other men's hearts, the rule for us to judge
our selves by.


A. But if you think that his Word tells us that we are the Children of the
Devil, till we go beyond any that ever fell away, we must look both to that
Word, and to such Apostates.


B. The truth is, assurance of Justification and Salvation is not easily nor
commonly attained: And it is not Opinions alone that will procure it: And while
we have that sin and weakness, which is the cause of doubts, which Opinion
soever we hold, we shall find occasion for our doubtings: But let us hear your
second part of the Accusation.


A. II. They hold that if any man fall away, by what temptation soever, it is
because he was never sincere: And consequently that he is not sin^ers, that
would fall away by the strongest temptation that possibly may assault him. So
that every poor weak Christian, whose Infant-strength is not proportioned to
the greatest temptations, must needs take himself to be still but an Hypocrite.


B. We stand not by our own strength of habitual Grace, but by the upholding
Love and Will of God. Carbo ex Aquin. 1. 2. q. 137. a. 4. Si persev^rantia
sumatur pro ipso habitu, indiget dono habitualis gratiae, ut caeterae virtutes
infusae; si autem accipiatur pro actu perseverantiae durante usque ad mortem,
non jolum indiget habituali gratia, sed etiam gratuito Dei auxilio conservante
hominem in bono -- praedestinatis per gratiam Christi, non solum datur ut
perseverare possint, sed ut perseverent, ut Augustine. Per se potest perseverare
in malo, non autem in bono.

Bradwardine who holds that no temptation can be overcome without special
help, that is, a divine Volition or Decree, does yet hold that the same Will of
God which saves one man by overcoming his temptations, saves others by
keeping temptations from them.





A. 1. When we dispute against their Doctrine, it is from the immortal quality
of the seed of God abiding in them, that they plead for certainty of
perseverance. 2. Who finds not by constant experience, that God works on
all things according to their Natures: And so on man as man, and so on Saints
as Saints, and on the weak as weak, and on the strong as strong. Do we not see
that he gives men wisdom and all Intellectual abilities, before they speak and
do as such abilities must fit them to do: When did you see Gods Grace make
ignorant, injudicious, fools, or weak persons, judge, speak and live, in
equality with the wise? Do we not see that as man is, so is his strength and
work, operari sequitur esse: The strong do as the strong, and the weak judge
and do as the weak. Why else does God give men strength of Grace? sure they
that think the habit of Grace must needs be before any act, will not hold that
all our lives after, the Acts (from immediate divine production) go beyond the
degree of the habits. We know that God is the chief cause of our perseverance,
and all our works that are good: But he causes them by disposing and
quickening, strengthening, illuminating and sanctifying our faculties to do
them; which is habitual Grace.


B. What is your own judgment in this point?


A. Our judgment is, 1. That he that truly at the present prefers the
pleasing of God, and his Salvation, before all this World, is sincere, and
justified. 2. That of these some have well settled apprehensions and
resolutions; but others have such shallow Conceptions, and weak Resolutions, as
that a very strong Temptation would change their minds, and overcome them. 3.
But if they escape such Temptation and be not overcome, they shall be saved:
For God will not damn men for possible Sin and Apostasy, which they were never
guilty of, but only for that which they did commit. 4. And that it is no
certain sign of hypocrisy, that they would have fallen away, had their
Temptations been great, but only a proof that they were weak: 5. Else to pray
[Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil,] should be rather
[discover not our sincerity or hypocrisy by temptation]. 6. Therefore God
uses to proportion men's trials to their strength: And that young and weak
Believers may persevere, he exposes them not (antecedently to their
provocation) to great Temptations as he does the strong. Even as while a young
Tree has little rooting, it has also but a little top: else had it the top of
a great Tree, and but the roots of a Plant, the first great Wind would overturn
it. 7. Even strong Christians might possibly have some Temptations, which would
overmatch their strength, and turn them from Christ, if God should not keep
them from such Temptations. 8. Therefore there are some Temptations so far
above the very nature of man, by such Grace as is not a mere Miracle, to be
overcome, as that God does not suffer Mankind to be tried with them: As to be
most exquisitely tormented many months, or a longer time. And in that unusual
trial of the poor Christians in Japon, though many endured those torments many
weeks, yet nature could not sustain them to the last; but when they had
suffered as much as many Smithfield burnings to death, at last almost all
denied Christ, so that Christianity is now there extirpated. Now if Rogers,
Bradford, Hooper, showed sincerity by suffering death, why should we not think
that these did so that suffered far more than they, though afterward the degree
was greater than their strength. 9. We hold that Gods Punishments and Mercies
to men in this World, are very much exercised in either permitting or not
permitting great Temptations. The same Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 16. holds that
the cause of the damneds obstinacy in sin, is not only themselves, and Gods
notwilling to cure and save them, but also Gods positive Will by which their
obstinate wills are for ever continued in the act. But I see not why we should
assert Gods positive Will of Sin in Hell or Earth, when his not-effectual
willing to cure it is enough.
And that for great sin, he often delivers men up to Satan, and gives him the
greater power over them. Yea that the nature of sin it self is such as gives
greater advantage to the Tempter: As he that will with Achan look on the wedge
of Gold; or that will please his taste with delicious Drinks and Meats* or that
will permit his eyes immodest Spectacles, has thereby let in the Devil into
his Imagination, and will not easily thence cast him out: And on the other
side, he that pleases God, and conquereth one Temptation, obtains that Grace
by which he is much saved from the next, and the Tempter is the more
disadvantaged and restrained. 10. Lastly, We therefore hold, That seeing
Temptations do not only try our sincerity or hypocrisy, (else we should desire
them, for selfexamination) but also tend to change men's minds, and make them
worse, the way to persevere is to pray against and avoid Temptations, and
resist those that cannot be avoided.

This is our judgment: In which you see that we hold that all weak Christians
that are sincere, may have assurance of their present Justification, though
they are not strong enough to stand the greatest trials. And that they may well
hope that God will save them from over strong Temptations, while they sincerely
do his Will.


B. But Christ says, That he that forsakes not all that he has, and hates
not his own life, cannot be his Disciple. And what greater trial can there be,
than the loss of life it self?


A. Though some taking it to be hard that none are true Christians, that would
not be Martyrs were they tried, have said that this Text speaks de
necessitate praecepti, non medii, [You must grow up to this at last, if you
will be my Disciples]; yet I will not so force the Text, but say as you do. But
1. There are far stronger Temptations than the love of Life: Though not from
Interest, yet from false reasonings, which may deceive the judgment: And one
that would die for Christ while he believes in him, may possibly have so
strong Temptations to unbelief as shall exceed in danger, his fear of death. 2.
And all men that at the present would forsake Life and all for Christ, yet have
not the same fixedness of Resolution, nor the same degree of Faith and Love. No
doubt but the Martyrs in the same flames had various degrees of Grace. Now a
less firm and fixed measure may be loosened by degrees, or shaken by Seducers,
and mutable man may after be overcome by that same Temptation which once he
could have overcome.

So that I accuse their Doctrine, as utterly inconsistent with true Christian
Comfort, on both these account. And such is the success of those men that will
overdo, and devise means of their own, for extraordinary comforts, which God
never gave them.


B. The comfort of poor Christians it seems stands but on slippery terms in
the Opinion of both sides, while each Party thinks that there is no true
comfort in the others way. Whether we may be morally sure of our present
Justification, the Papists Doctors agree not among themselves, Bellarmine and
many others affirm it, and others deny it: as Aureolus (cited by Brianson, in
4. q. 4. fol. 36.) and others that say, no man can know whether his Habits are
infused?
But does not experience confute you? Do you not see that many have true
Christian comfort that are not of your mind?


A. That is because of some better Principles which they hold, and because they
see not the contradiction and inconsistence.


B. You come near to this truth; Indeed there are Principles better than either
of your controverted Opinions, common to both sides, which may afford us great
Consolation, and which sound Christians live upon. And I doubt your Disputes on
both sides do more disturb than comfort most. But this must be granted, that
Opinions are not true, because they are comfortable, nor all false that have
any thing in them apt to trouble men, who have the sinful matter of trouble in
themselves: no more than Physic is naught that makes men sick. We must take
our Comforts on Gods terms. The truth is, your Doctrine seems more
comfortable in the respects which you have named, as to the assurance of
present Justification, and theirs more comfortable in another respect; viz. as
to the continuance of it when they have it. But if this Doctrine were to be
chosen by the comfortableness, yea and usefulness of it, there is a middle way
(of some Schoolmen) which would be preferred before both. That is, that neither
any of the Elect, nor any that have attained to confirmation ^r a fixed degree
of Grace, do ever fall away: But that there are some not-Elect, who are sincere
and justified, but weak and mutable (as Adam in Innocence) and not confirmed,
who fall away and perish: And this Vossius thinks was Augustine's Opinion.
And Grotius in his excellent Epistle against Molin: lately translated into
English by Mr. Barksdale, affirms it to be the common judgment of the
Fathers: which will be no small advantage to it with me. And 1. This avoideth
the uncomfortable Doctrine which you charge on them; For this holds that a
weak Christian may have the comfort of present Justification, that is not
certain to persevere, nor that he is any better than some that fall away. 2.
And it avoideth the uncomfortableness which they charge on you, viz. that no
man can be assured of his Perseverance and Salvation: For these hold that all
the cons^med may be assured of it; And that all weak Christians may possibly
attain to confirmation. 3. And it only leaves weak unconfirmed Christian^
uncertain of Salvation, which both sides are agreed in. For they confess that
weak Christians are seldom if ever sure of their present sincerity and
Justification: And you hold that they are uncertain to persevere: And so both
of you hold them to be uncertain of Salvation. But proceed.


The fourth Crimination.
A. They do reproach the Holiness of Gods people, and his ^mage, and encourage
most horrid wickedness, while they make all the s^^ that ever was committed by
any man after his Regeneration, to be consistent with Holiness and
Justification: not only Noah 's Drunkenness, Lot 's being Drunk and Incestuous
two nights together, David's h^rrid Murder and Adultery, Peter 's denying and
forswearing his Lord; but (for instance) Solomon they say was a Saint, and
justified, when he gave up himself to all manner of pleasure, and denied
himself nothing, (and Paul says, The carnal mind is enmity to God, and if ye
live after the flesh ye shall die,) when he clave in love to many Idolatrous
women; having seven hundred Wives, and three hundred Co^cubins, and his Wives
turned away his Heart after other gods, and his Heart was not perfect with the
Lord -- but he went after Ashtoreth, the Goddess of the Sidonians, and after
Milcom, the abomination of the Amorites, and built an High Place for Chemoth,
the abomination of Moab, and for Molech the abomination of Ammon; and likewise
did he for all his strange Wives, which burnt Incense and sacrificed to their
gods: his Heart was turned from the Lord that appeared to him twice, 1 King.
11. 1, to 12. All this say the Calvinists you may do, and yet be Saints, and
justified and saved. Bradwardine, li. 3. c. 27. having maintained that all
things come to pass by necessity, and cap. 29. p. 734. answering the Objection
that this will make men cast all their sin on God, and be ungodly, answers
that it will do so by none but the Reprobate, and confesses that so one of his
Monastery did argue, and turned thereupon to a wicked life; but that he cannot
help that, for he cannot predestinate men that are reprobated.
All this may stand with Gods Image, and true Holiness.


B. As to all the rest, except Solomon, the sin being one or two particular
Acts contrary to the main bent and scope of their lives (which were holy) you
seem, 1. To deny an evident truth, viz. that the habitual love of God was not
extirpated by those Sins: Can you think that habitually (though the act was
hindered) Noah, Lot, David, Peter, did not then love God and Holiness better
than sinful Pleasures? And the Papists confess, that Sin is not mortal (that
is, an evidence of spiritual death) till it conquer the habit of the love of
God.

2. You seem to take your offense at the Mercy of God himself, because he will
not disown men for such a particular sin, contrary to their general will and
life. As if you provoked him to deal hardlier also with yourself, lest he deal
too easily or mercifully with others.

3. But they are in these resolved that no man has true Grace, that loves not
God and Holiness above the World and sinful Pleasure: And they and you are
agreed in this: And in the hypothesis, if you can make them believe that any of
these lost that predominant habitual love, they would grant that they fell from
saving Grace. So that thus far you agree.

4. And as for Solomon's case, it is too hard for us all: Some think that he
had but common Grace, till that Repentance which he published in Eccles. And
that so much might produce his Proverbs, which say they were but spoken by him,
and written long after by others (as some by Hezekiah's men). Others think that
he did but tolerate his Wives Idolatry, and that he aggravated his own
sensuality in hyperbolical words, and so that his sin did stand with true
Grace: Others think that he fell into a state of damnation (in which had he
died he had been damned) but yet neither totally (from all feminal Grace) nor
finally; and that others may do the like. In a word, the case is too hard for
us: But our comfort lies not in being sure what condition Solomon was in,
either first or last.

And also, as Means and Grace are greater under the Gospel than they were to
Solomon, and Life and Immortality more brought to light, so more spirituality
and heavenliness is now required of us than was then of them. As long as Christ
has fullier described to us the title-conditions of Salvation, we have better
means to judge of our states, than the deciding of these Difficulties about
Solomon would be.


A. This is true, but nothing to the purpose: we prove by Solomon that a man
may fall from Grace.


B. How will you prove it against them that think Solomon had but common Grace,
till he wrote Ecclesiastes, or repented of his Fall?


A. He was a penman of the Scripture (the Proverbs) before; And he was beloved
of God, and excelled all others in Wisdom.


B. 1. Whether he wrote, or only spoke the Proverbs, you prove not? 2. You
cannot prove that writing part of the Scripture, is a more certain sign of a
Saint, than speaking part of it. And Balaam spoke part of it (what Job's
Friends were, I know not.) And if many Workers of Iniquity did by the Spirit
prophecy and cast out Devils, in Christ's Name, how prove you that they may
not write part of the Scriptures? (To pass by that, Pilate, Festus, Cla^dius,
Lysta^, and other such, wrote part of it.) And an ungodly Preacher may now
speak and write excellent things. 3. His Wisdom which he begged, and is
magnified for, is described objectively to be political, physical and ethical;
but how far spiritual the Text does not speak. 4. God might be said to love
him, as Christ did that man that was not far from the Kingdom of God:
Complacencially, according to the good that was in him; And benevolently, as he
purposed his future Sanctification and Salvation.

I write not this as my own Opinion, but to tell you that you cannot prove so
much as you think you can.


The fifth Crimination.
A. Even Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 15. who goes as high against Free Will as Hobs,
or any man does, yet confidently holds the Apostasy of Saints, though not of
the Elect; and questioning what causes perseverance in Glory, he consuteth all
that lay it on any thing as sufficient but Gods Will, which he calls his
Love, and the Holy Ghost. 1. Them that lay it on the nature of Grace. 2. Or the
degree of Grace. 3. Or the sight of God. 4. Or the intenseness of that sight.
5. Or the delight in God. 6. Or the degree of that Delight. 7. Or on uniting
adhesion to God. 8. Or the degree of that adhesion. 9. Or on our not seeing any
good which we want. 10. Or the fear of misery by sinning. 11. Or that the joy
takes away Free Will. 12. Or on a perfect beatitude in all these: All which he
says are insufficient, and Gods Will is the cause, though using these. And so
in this life, men stand or fall, not because God gives some his inward Grace
(for that may be lost) and others not, but because God wills the persevering
and obedience of one, and wills it not to another]. This is over-doing of the
Champion of Grace against Free Will.
They show exceeding much immodesty, 1. In holding an Opinion which is contrary
to the Doctrine of the universal Church, from the Apostles till of late times:
neither Orthodox nor Heretic, being ever known to hold it, unless perhaps
Jovinian alone, till above a thousand years after Christ. No not Augustine and
his Disciples, who were thought by many to run toward an extreme in
over-pleading for Grace; so that they were called by some Predestinarian
Heretics. 2. And yet they have the face (instead of being ashamed of their own
singularity) to revile others as heterodox, if not heretical, who will not be
as singular as they, and set as light by the judgment of Christ's Church.


B. I am not one of them that will cite any scraps of the Fathers, contrary to
their current expressions, to contradict you: Vossius has copiously related
their judgments in his Pelagian History, and that as favorably for
perseverance as there was cause; And Dr. Twisse, who frequently speaks his
distaste of him, says nothing to prove his History false. Which in this, he
that reads the Fathers must confess to be true. But this should somewhat
moderate you in your censure, 1. That the Writers of the first three hundred
years are few, and their Writings (except Tertullians, Origin and Cyprian)
very short; (even Clements, Alexand. and Justins not long). And few of them
very learned and accurate Writers; who are the common Managers of
Controversies: nor was this Controversy started in their times, and therefore
not accurately searched into. 2. And if you say that this is the more for your
cause, if it were not so much as made a Controversy; I add that the Platonic
Philosophy which then most prevailed, might do somewhat to dispose them that
way: For as Grotius de fato has copiously proved (out of above thirty
Philosophers and philosophical Christians) most of all the Philosophers,
especially Platonists were for Free Will, and most learned Christian Doctors
came out of Plato's School, (and most of the learned Heretics too). 3. And yet
Laertius in Zenone tells us, That the Stoics were against falling away, and
taught that no truly virtuous man did ever cease to be such.

2. But above all, I would have you consider, 1. That this Point was not held
by these consenting Doctors for an Article of Faith, and necessary to
Church-Concord and Salvation; but as one of those many Opinions which were left
free. 2. And that many or most of these Fathers did agree in some Opinions that
are not true. 3. Yea that the greater part of them are by the Papists
themselves charged with several Errors, and some and not a few with Heresies.
4. And that therefore the holy Scriptures being the only and sufficient Rule of
Faith, we need not be so much ashamed as you intimate, in some things to differ
from the generality of those Fathers, if the Scripture be more for us than
them. There is many a Text of Scripture which Papists themselves interpret
contrary to most of the Fathers, notwithstanding their Trent Oath to the
contrary. Therefore your heavy Accusation of immodest singularity is too keen.
But as for their Cross-Accusation of you as heterodox, I now meddle not with
the truth, nor excuse any uncharitableness therein.


The sixth Crimination.
A. They contradict abundance of express Scripture, which asserteth that the
godly may fall finally from true Grace.


B. And they think that you rather contradict abundance of Texts that speak
expressly for the contrary: It is none of my work now to defend either them or
you: I have long ago written a peculiar Tractate of my own Opinion herein: Who
is in the right I am not now determining: But that you over-magnifie the
difference on both sides usually, I shall show you in the end. No doubt but the
Scripture is of it self sufficient to decide all Controversies, as a Rule of
sound Doctrine, so far as God would have them clearly decided. But yet he that
denies that some things in Scripture are hard to be understood, will
contradict not only Peter's words, but his own and all men's experience. For as
it pleased God to make up the World of variety of Creatures, so also to make up
the Scripture of Truths of various degrees of necessity and evidence. And in
this Point there are so many Texts, that both Sides think do favor their
Opinions, that we have not the same certainty as in many other Points, and
therefore not the same consent and concord among the learnedest Divines, and
the godliest Christians: And in my Observations most on each side are more
moved to their Opinion in this, from the congruity that they think it has with
other Verities or the Analogy of Faith, than from the proper plain sense of the
Texts which they themselves allege. So that though no doubt the Truth is to be
found in the Scriptures, yet not with such ease and certainty as will allow us
to make the decision of this Point, any part of the terms of our necessary
Concord.


THE Tenth Days Conference Between B. and C. OF PERSEVERANCE.
B. You have now some advantage for your censure of Dissenters See Ruiz de
Praedes. d. b. Sect. 4, 5, 6. Proving that Faith and certain Perseverance of
all the Elect proceed from Gods decrees or predefinition; and that all things
work for their good, etc. This the Jesuits acknowledge.
where the difference is real: But I am loath you should make it greater than it
is, or make as hot and contentious work about it as Marbachius and Zanohy did.
How odious soever Thompson and Bertius have been made by our side, and
Jovinian, Calvin, and his followers by the other (though I wish there were no
difference at all) I undertake to prove that the difference is not of so great
moment as is commonly on both sides pretended; And no greater than should
consist with true Love and Communion, even between the Members, yea the Pastors
of the same Church, who are therein of differing opinions: But first let me
hear what you have to aggravate it.


The first Crimination.
C. Their Crime is that they overthrow the comfort of Believers, by denying
them any certainty of Salvation. Paraeus himself makes such an Intercision of
Justification in Believers as I cannot own (in Bellarm. de Amiss. Great. l. 1.
c. 7.) Fides tunc dicitur Justificare quum actum proprium accipiendi
remissionem peccatorum exercet. Hinc vero actum non exercet neque exercere
potest fides aegra, saucia, sordibus carnis oppressa, peccatorum compedibus
quasi ligata: -- Justificati^ la^^i^ D^^^ non imputat peccata; nempe
resipiscentibus: Ante resipiscentiam certe imputat, infligendo poenas
temporales, and imputarit ^tiam ^^fligendo poenas aeternas nisi resipiscerent.
-- Tunc igitur fides in lapsis habitualiter tantum ^ane^s proprie Justificans
dici, aut cos Justificare non potest.] But his reason is bad: For faith is not
called Justifying for the Reason which he gives.

The like say the Polonian Protestants in Colloq. Thorun. de Great. Sect. 2. n.
11. Falso accusamur quasi statuamus semel justificatos Dei Gratiam ^jusque
certitudinem and ipsum Spiritum Sanctum non posse amittere, quamvis in
peccatis, pro lubitu, volutentur. Cum contra potius doceamus ipsos etiam
renat^s quoties in peccata contra conscientiam recidunt, in iisque aliquandum
perseverent, nec fidem veram, nec Dei gratiam justificantem, nedum ejus
certitudinem aut Spiritum Sanctum pro tempore retinere: sed novum irae ac
mortis aeternae reatum incurrere: Ac propterea nisi Speciali Dei gratia
excitante (quod in electis fieri non dubitamus) ad resipiscentiam iter^m
renoventur, reipsa etiam damnandos esse.] This is the same with the Doctrine of
Augustine and Musculus, or near it.

Yea, both Ursine and Pareus seem to come as far: Catech. de Peccat. actuali
[Peccatum regnans est cui peccans non repugnat ideoque fit obnoxious aeternae
morti nisi, etc. Propter quod non tantum ex ordine justi^iae Dei, sed ex
reipsa, aeternarum poenarum reus est qui illud habet. Talia sunt omnia peccata
in non renatis, quaedam etiam in renatis: ut error in fund^mento fidei, and
lapsus contra conscientiam; cum quibus fiducia remissionis peccatorum, and
consolatio vera non consistit; donec resipiscant. Quod enim etiam renati poss^t
cadere in peccatum regnans, satis ostendunt tristissimi lapsus Sanctissiomrum
hominum, ut Aaron^s, Davidis, etc. Rob. Baronim in his excellent little Treat.
de Pec. Mort. and veniali, says that by Mortal Sins the regenerate may, 1. Be
excluded from that Grace and favor of God, by which he before loved them, ye^
he incurreth Gods hatred and displeasure, so far, etc. 2. Their Prayers,
Thanks, Obedience, yea nothing that proceeds from them, is then acceptable to
God. 3. In that state God cannot forgive them, and give them peace of
Conscience and joy.





B. To be absolutely certain of Salvation, no doubt would be a very great
comfort. But let us enquire, I. What number will be by this Doctrine hindered
from this certainty. II. In what degree this tends to their discomfort.

1. And by the first enquiry, I doubt we shall find that you also hold
Doctrines that hinder most men from concluding themselves certain of Salvation:
and yet perhaps be very true.

These Questions therefore, I crave your answer to.

Q. 1. Do not you grant that we must take no comfort but what God gives us,
and on his terms; and that the false comforts of presumption are worse than
none, or not desirable? And that all Doctrine is not true that were it true
were comfortable?


C. Yes, none will deny it you.


B. Q. 2. Do you not find by experience (being a Pastor who has discoursed
with your Flock man by man about their state) that of those that you account
truly Godly persons, there is not one of fifty, yea of an hundred, yea of many
hundreds, that will say that they are certain of their Salvation; properly and
fully certain.


C. I suppose your question implies your own observation, which I contradict
not.


B. Q. 3. And as for the multitude of more careless and loose Christians, do
not you think that (whatever they say) their certainty is less than these Godly
persons?


C. Yes, no doubt: for their evidence is less or none.


B. Q. 4. Do you not think that it must needs be so (that certainty of
Salvation must be exceeding rare) considering that all these things must go to
it?

1. There must be a certainty that Gods promises are true: whereas the faith of
most is weak.

2. There must be a certain understanding both of the meaning of the promise,
and what are the true Conditions of it, and the difference between true saving
Grace, and all that is but counterfeit or common. Whereas most are uncertain
and dark herein, if not mistaken.

3. There must be these Evidences in the person himself; not only in reality,
but in ascertaining-discernableness: which cannot be unless it be 1. Much and
strong: for that which is small, is so like to the common and counterfeit, that
it is seldom certainly discerned. 2. It must be in Activity: For Grace out of
Act is not discernable. 3. It must be powerfully operative without, and in the
life, to conquer temptation, and keep us in clear and sure obedience, in a Holy
fruitful life: or else it will not be certainly discerned from dead opinion. 4.
It must not be clouded and blotted by great and powerful habits of sin within,
or acts of sin without. For these will many ways hinder assurance: And how few
have all these Necessaries to make up an ascertaining evidence.

4. And it must be one that knows how by self examination to discern all
this, to be certainly in themselves: That frequently and skilfully thinks on
the matter.

5. And it must be one that is not under the power either of Melancholy, or
other distracting passions, or Temptations.

6. And one that knows the true difference between a Mortal sin (inconsistent
with Justification) and a mere infirmity.

7. And one that knows the true nature of that Repentance which is necessary
after sinning. And alas! how few be they that have all these qualifications.


C. The Spirit of God can give them certainty without all this ado.


B. What he can do is little to our case, but what he will do. If you once take
that course, to teach men to look for assurance of their Salvation or
Sanctification, without certain finding that Sanctification in themselves, you
will make sad work in the Church of God. For nothing is more certain, than that
without Regeneration, Conversion and Holiness, none shall see God. And that if
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, which must be known by his fruits, he is
none of his, Joh. 3. 3. 5. Math. 18. 3. Heb. 12. 14. Romans 8. 9, 13. Gal. 5. 21.
And that it is he that repents and believes that shall be saved. And to be
sure that a man is sanctified, and not to be sure that he has the Graces of
Sanctification, is a contradiction; to be sure and not sure of the same thing.
And to say you are sure of Heaven without Holiness, is to say that you are sure
that Gods Word is false.


C. But the witness of the Spirit certifieth us of all.


B. True: And what is that? As your Reason witnesses or evidenceth that you
are a man, and your Life witnesses that you are an Animal, so the Spirit
witnesses that you are one of Christ's; that is, the sanctifying, illuminating,
quickening work of the Spirit: For the Having of the Spirit is your witness:
And to have the Spirit is to have Holiness, which is his work; which also the
Spirit, to complete his witness, helps us both to Act, increase, discern, and
take comfort in.

Q. 5. And I next then ask you, whether he that will have certainty of
Salvation, must not also have (beyond a strong opinion) a certainty that this
Doctrine of certain perseverance is true?


C. Yes: No doubt of it.


B. And are the generality of Professors certain of it, when not only the
Greeks and Romans, but also all the Lutherans and Arminians, and most
Anabaptists utterly deny it? I grant that men may be confident in the opinion
which they are educated or fallen into. But are the unlearned certain, when most
of the Learned are confident of the contrary? Following our Leaders eagerly is
not certainty.


C. It Is granted you.


B. Q. 6. I ask then, seeing so exceeding few of your own side are truly
certain of their Salvation, who never receive the Arminians opinion, whether
that be it that hinders their certainty?

II. And now let us try in what Measure their Doctrine hinders comfort?

Q. 1. Do you not think that many of those of your own side have much comfort
though they attain not to assurance.


C. Yes: Experience tells it us.


B. Q. 2. Do you not think that some, yea many of the old Christians for a
thousand years after Christ, had comfort, who yet were not of your opinion of
Perseverance? All the Martyrs and great Sufferers for Christ, and the excellent
Pastors, were not comfortless.


C. That cannot be denied.


B. Q. 3. Do you think that none of the Nations of Greeks, Armineans,
Lutherans, nor any of the Anabaptists of their mind, do live in the comfortable
hopes of Heaven?


C. Yes, No doubt but many do.


B. Why then you see that comfort may be had without certainty of Salvation.
But I proceed to the Nature of the Case it self.

Q. 4. Would not your life be uncomfortable if you fore-knew that you should
commit Murder, Adultery, Incest, deny Christ, etc. kill your own Father,
Mother, Wife or Child; and lie as long as David did in your Sin; (much more to
sin as Solomon did)?


C. Yes; I must needs be less comfortable in such a prospect.


B. Q. 5. Would it not much grieve you if you knew that you should fall from
the Degree of Grace received, to the very least that is consistent with
sincerity.


C. It must needs be my grief; but yet such as would consist with greater
comfort, because it consists with Salvation.


B. Q. 6. Are you certain that these two last Cases to commit such heinous
sins, and to fall so far from Grace, may not be your Case?


C. No: I cannot be sure of it; because it may stand with Grace.


B. Q. 7. Tell me then, what is it that now keeps you from those sorrows
which would befall you, if such a thing should be?


C. The great hope that I have that it will never be.


B. What are the Reasons of those your hopes?


C. 1. Because I know that God is Good and merciful in himself. 2. And he
deals with man upon terms of Grace. 3. And he has given me experience of his
mercy to my self. 4. And I have his general promises that He will not fail me
nor forsake me: which though they assure me not that I shall not so fall, yet
they assure me that ^e will not so far forsake me, without some heinous neglect
of his Grace. 5. And I feel in my self a present detestation of such heinous
sins, and a fixed Judgment and Resolution against them: And though I have not
power of my self to avoid mutation, and backsliding, yet I have reason to
trust him for the keeping of this Grace, who freely gave it me. And the truth
is, though man be mutable, he is not apt to fear the change of his own mind,
when he is conscious that it is resolved on sound and unquestionable reason. 6.
And it is not nothing, that I have been kept from all such sin till now. 7. And
that it is a rare thing for any faithful person, so to fall: And why should I
fear that which not one of a multitude ever falls into.


B. And why may not all these reasons comfort others, that are uncertain of
their Perseverance in a state of Grace (Allowing but the difference of the
degrees of the dangers.)

Q. 8. Do you think that your Wife or Children are certain that you will not
Murder them.


C. No: they cannot be certain.


B. Q. 9. Would it not make their lives sorrowful if they knew that you would
do it?


C. Yes, no doubt.


B. Q. 10. What keeps them from ever tasting of such sorrows at all?


C. Such reasons as I before named to you. They know that I am a Husband and
father, and have natural affections, not mad, nor wicked, but abhor such a
thing, and they know that my love daily causes me to do them all the good I
can; and they see nothing to make them fear the contrary; and such a Villainy is
not heard of in many Kingdoms in an Age.


B. But they are as uncertain that they shall not by some heinous crime (even
the seeking of your death) provoke you.


C. Men fear not that which their Judgments and Wills are so averse to and
resolved against, as that there is no probability of a Change.


B. You see then upon what terms the ancient Fathers, (even Augustine himself
that denied certainly of Salvation) and the Martyrs and other Christians of
their times, and the most of the Christians now in the world, do hold their
comforts: And that uncertainty of Perseverance overthrows not all solid peace.

Q. 11. But does not the exclusion of Certainty of present sincerity and
Justification, much more exclude Comfort, than does the exclusion of
Perseverance alone.


C. Yes, no doubt: For to be sure that I am at present in a state of Leg. Jo.
Gerhards To. 2. Tract. 13. de Peccat. act. c. 19. n. 92, 93, 94, etc. De
differentia peccat. Mort. and Ven.
life, and to have very strong probabilities that I shall so live and dye, must
be much more comfortable than to be uncertain whether I now am or ever was in a
state of life.


B. If therefore not one of many score or hundreds have a certain knowledge of
their sincerity and Justification, who are of your own opinions, are you fit to
cry out of others as the destroyers of Christian comfort, on the foresaid
account?


C. They destroy it by their Doctrine, and so do not we: It is with us, but
men's own sin and infirmity that hinders it.


B. Q. 12. What say you to your Doctrines before objected against you? 1. That
no man can be certain of Salvation, who is not certain that if he had the
strongest Temptations in the world, he should not be overcome by them to fall
away. Do not these put the comforts of the weak as hard to it, as their
Doctrine does?


C. These are True Doctrines, but Theirs are false.


B. That is the controversy, which I am not determining: I only answer your
aggravation of uncomfortableness of their Doctrine.


The second Crimination.
C. Their Doctrine makes God to be Mutable, and his gifts and calling Pet:
Alliac. Camer. n. 1. q. 12. C. Quaelibet rationalis Creatura a Deo
praedestinata potest damnari, and quaelibet Reprobata potest Salvari: Quia
cuicunque Deus dabit gratiam and gloriam libere dabit: and per Consequens
posset non dare: ergo, etc. Sed licet haec conclusio de virtute Sermonis sit
vera tamen in sensu Composito intellecta est falsa. Thus all the quarrel is
about words.
to be liable to repentance; and that one day he loves a man, and the next day
hates him, one day Justifies and another condemns him.


B. This charge is injurious, upon gross mistake; and on the like grounds may
be laid against your selves. For,


Q. 1. Do you not hold that God hates all the workers of iniquity?


C. Yes: as such.


B. Q. 2. And that he that believes not is condemned already, and that all
Infidels and Heathens are unjustified?


C. Yes; though God may decree to justify them hereafter.


B. Q. 3. But does not God after Love and Justify such as are converted?


C. Yes; none does deny it.


B. Q. 4. If then this prove not God to be mutable, to Justify and Love such
as he condemned and hated, why should it prove him mutable to condemn and hate
such as he Justified and Loved? I do not say that he does so; but if he did, or
do, it will not prove any change in God. For as he that is One causes all
Diversity and Multiplicity of Beings; so he that is Immutable, causes
innumerable Mutations: The change is in the Creature, and not in God.


C. Is it not a change to Hate where he Loved? These are immanent acts.


B. No more than to Love where he Hated; In Man such words signify a change,
but not in God: For it is not Gods Immanent acts as Immanent that are changed,
viz. His Activity, understanding or Will in it self: But only that Immanent Act
as Objectively Transient (if not effectively); so that it is only, 1. The
termination of the essential eternal Act on this or that Object. 2. The
Relation of it to that object; 3. The Extrinsick Denomination of it, from that
Relation, by Connotation, which are changed and diversifyed; and this infers
no change in God.


The third Crimination.
C. At least they make his Covenant changeable, as condemning a man one day
whom it justified the day before.


B. Not at all. The Covenants Action is physically none, but only such as some
call a Reputative Act; that is, per modum signi; and as the Fundamentum causes
the Relation. Gods Legislation was a real Action: But the Law made does not
Act, at all; But improperly, morally, or metaphorically is said to Act, when it
does not; what Action does the sign post perform? or the post and hand at a
cross way? or all the Letters in all your Library which teach you the greatest
mysteries? none at all? It is you that are Active on them. What Action do
millions of Eggs at the Indies perform every time your Hen lays? And yet they
then have a new Relation of Similitude. So Gods Law (nor Man's neither) is not
at all changed, while ut instrumentum morale per modum signi and fundamenti, it
condemns the Infidel, and justifies the Believer, no more than when it
justifies him at conversion whom it condemned before. The change is only
(really) in the person.


The fourth. Crimination.
C. They make Gods Covenant to be but Conditional, and deny that absolute
promise, I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me.


B. I find this Controversy (whether this promise, and that of taking away the
hard heart, etc. was Conditional or Absolute, to be harder than sometime I
thought it had been. And the determining which of you does rightliest expound
the Scripture is not my business. But, 1. The Jesuits and Lutherans and many
Arminians confess, that God has foretold that certain Individual persons shall
persevere and be infallibly saved. 2. That this prediction may well be called a
Promise in several respects; 1. In that it is de bono futuro. 2. As it is made
to Christ, that he shall see of the travail of his Soul, and that none shall
take those that are given him by the Father, out of his hands. 3. As it is made
to Mankind in general; that there shall be certain (innominate) persons of them
infallibly saved. 4. As it was made to the Israelites in special, that there
should be more Grace given them, so that they should not depart from God to
Idolatry at their return from Captivity, as they had done (which is the true
meaning, I think, of the Text). But I ask of you,

Q. 1. Does the promise called Absolute (of taking away the heart of stone,
etc.) give any person a Right beforehand to the benefit?


C. Not such a Right as that any one can claim it as his own due, or know that
he is the person to whom it belongs: But such a right as that he is really
the man to whom it shall be given.


B. So you may say of Gods mere secret Decree, or of a mere Prophecy. Q. 2.
What comfort then can any man have by that promise, before it is performed,
when he knows not that he is one that it belongs to?


C. No more than that which you say before they grant.

Q. 3. Is not this cited by you of the same sort?


C. In respect to the first part it is, [I will put my fear into their hearts];
but not as to the second part [They shall not depart from me]. For men that
have Gods, fear, may know that it belongs to them.


B. It is strange that all the ancient Doctors and Churches for a thousand
years, were ignorant of this plain Promise, if it mean that none that have Gods
fear shall depart from him. But if one say that it speaks only of the Jews
after the Captivity, not turning from God to Idols; and another say, that it
conjoyneth two distinct benefits promised to certain persons, (whosoever) but
does not make them as receivers of the first, to be formally the Subjects of
the second, and so does not promise to all that have Gods fear, but to those
meant in the Text only, that they shall not depart: and if a third say that the
promise is conditional; I am not now to decide this controversy: Augustine
thought that it was spoken only of the Elect, and not of all that truly feared
God. And as Gods promise to the Israelites, that they should be brought out of
Egypt, and brought to the Land of Canaan, did not mean that every man that had
the first should have the second; As the promise to the Apostles that they
should have the Spirit of Miracles or Tongues, and should be saved, did not
mean that every one that had that Spirit should be saved; so does Austin
expound, Romans 8. 30. limiting all the following sayings to those that Verse 28.
are said to be Called according to his purpose. But to decide this is not my
present work.


The fifth Crimination.
C. They make a second Regeneration necessary, unless with the Novatians, they
will deny pardon to those that fall after the first.


B. Do they say so expressly; or is it only a consequent of their Doctrine?


C. It follows plainly, though they say it not.


B. 1. There will be no end of odious accusations, if the Adversaries shall
choose what Doctrine men shall be said to hold, as he spineth out consequences;
what if they think that your Doctrine unavoidably brings in Anabaptists (the
denial of Infant Baptism, I mean).


C. That were strange indeed: Some men can draw quid vis ex quo vis.


B. Answer this series of connexed Theses.

1. No one falls away from a state of Justification (that is your Ground).

2. Many Baptized in Infancy prove wicked at Age.

3. Therefore none of those were justified in or before Baptism.

4. Therefore the Justifying Covenant was not sealed to them as to consenting
persons (by themselves or Parents) who have a present right to this benefit
(else Gods Covenant should be false or fail.)

5. Therefore they received not Christian Baptism: For, 1. Christ never
instituted a Baptism, to seal any other Covenant, but that which gives pardon
and Justification. 2. Christ never instituted Baptism, to give only a future
pardon to future consenters; but only to invest Sacramently present Consenters
(or Covenanters, by themselves or Parents) with present pardon. These two are
certain verities, easily proved, whatever some talk of future pardon by Baptism.

6. Therefore they are to be rebaptized.

I think I can loose the links of this chain, or confute the last conclusion:
But I leave you to your proper work. Davenant and Ward thought it must be done
by denying your first Thesis. I assure you the trifling distinctions, of an
outward and an inward Covenant, and of the benefit of Church Privileges sealed
to all, and Salvation only to the Elect, or of present and future Justification
sealed] will not do this difficult business. You must do better, or be
Anabaptists.

2. Either it is quoad Nomen or quoad rem that they infer a second
Regeneration, not as to the Name: For they so deny it. As to the Thing, 1. Some
hold that men indeed may totally fall from special Grace; but that no such are
ever recovered: Though other Gross Sins, which are not such a total Apostasy
may be pardoned. These cannot be said to hold two Regenerations. 2. The rest
say that the word Regeneration (like Generation and Creation) does not only
signify the causing of Holiness in the Soul, but the Order of doing it, that
it be Now first done, and not before. As Christ's raising Lazarus was neither
Creation nor Generation. So say they, Grace indeed is after infused de novo;
but not first: Therefore it is to be called Repentance, and not Regeneration.
So that the change they confess, but the Name of Regeneration they reject as
incongruous.


The sixth Crimination.
C. They go against the Doctrine of Augustine, Prosper and Fulgentius.


B. This is the rashest charge of all the rest. Beyond all controversy these
three Fathers, held that all the Elect persevered; but that some were
Justified, Sanctified, Loved God, were in such a state that had they dyed in,
they had been saved, who yet are not Elect, but fall finally away and perish,
and that none can ordinarily be certain of perseverance and Salvation, at least
but strong confirmed Christians (which Vossius thinks he excepted, but I
cannot prove it).

If you cannot have leisure to read Austin himself, read but, 1. What I have
said lib. 1. 2. What I said in my Treatise of Perseverance. 3. What Vossius
says Hist. Pelag. de Persever. 4. And the very words in the Jansenists, Paulus
Eryn. in his Trias Patrum. In a visible matter of fact, which all the world may
see, that man who will deny this (as yet many have done, and even Dr. Kendall
till Bishop Usher in my hearing and at my motion satisfied him) does but tell
us how men otherwise pious abuse Gods Church, by trusting to their Leaders, and
mis-reporting visible and copious Writings, and founding bitter censures and
invectives upon such dreams, and yet thinking that all this is the Work of God.
The Lord pardon and heal his Servants hasty partial judging of things and
persons, and the bitterness, uncharitableness, injuries, contentions and
divisions that have followed thereupon.


The just Extenuation of this last Controversy.
IN all these things following, the parties are agreed (for the most
considerable).

1. That Adam fell from true Righteousness and Holiness, and lost the Spirit.

2. That therefore we cannot argue from the Nature of Holiness alone to prove
that it cannot be lost.

3. That as the word Possible relates to man's Power to do evil and omit good,
it is not only Possible to fall away, but too easy: yea, it is not opus
potentiae sed Impotentiae, except as Natural Power is exercised in the mere
Act, with Moral Impotency.

4. Yea, without Gods preserving Grace, it is not possible to persevere.

5. God has appointed us much duty to be done that we may not fall away: And
among the rest, to discern, and fear the danger of falling away; and in that
fear to depart from evil and temptations.

6. God has promised us Salvation, on Condition that we persevere.

7. God often threatens the faithful with damnation, if they fall away, and
describes to us the sin and misery of Apostates.

8. The Justified may lose many degrees of true Grace, and dye with far less
than once they had, and so become incapable of that Greater Glory, which they
were morally capable of before.

9. It Is too possible for them to fall into heinous sin: They are not certain
that they shall never commit Adultery, Incest, the Murder of Parents, Wife or
Children, etc. nor certain just how often they may so fall, or not.

10. Such Sins make them so far morally incapable of Glory, as that See the
British Divines Suffrages at Dort, of perseverance.
a sound Repentance for them, and from them, and a renewal of Faith, are
necessary to full right or moral capacity.

11. God does not decree any man's perseverance, let him live never so
securely, negligently or vitiously: For those that do so are fallen already: It
is a contradiction, to persevere in holiness, and to live unholily. But Gods
Decree is ever entire, that such a one shall fear danger, fly temptations, live
holily in the use of means, and therein persevere unto the end: He never
separated these in his Decrees.

12. Except Hierome truly accuse Jovinian with it, there is not (that I know
of) any Father, Christian, or Heretic, that has written that Lege Vossi,
Histor. Pelag. de Perseverant.
no truly Justified persons fall finally away from Grace and perish, for above
a thousand years after Christ: And it is commonly granted that generally they
held the contrary: Even Augustine, Prosper and Fulgentius not excepted.

13. It is confessed to be a sad clog to the contrary opinion, that it is held
against the Judgment of the Universal Church for above a thousand years, and so
seems to bear the imputation of novelty and singularity: Though that be not a
sufficient confutation of it.

14. It is confessed that the Greek and Roman Church the Lutherans and
Arminians, and most Anabaptists, are against this Doctrine.

15. It is confessed that all these Fathers, and Churches of old, and all these
Churches and Christians of late, are not void of the Christian comforts of the
Gospel, even of faith and hope of Glory.

16. It is confessed that the Scripture has many passages, so much seeming to
favor both the opinions, as has made the controversy thus difficult to so
many Learned Godly Men: And what the Scripture is, it will be, to the worlds
end.

17. It is confessed that none can be sure of Salvation or perseverance, who
are not first sure of their Sincerity, and Justification.

18. And to be uncertain whether one be a true believer, and justified, is more
uncomfortable than to be sure of that, and uncertain of his perseverance.

19. No man can ordinarily be certain that he is Sanctified and Justified, that
is not certain of the truth of the Gospel, and has Grace somewhat strong and
active, not clouded by great Soul-wounding Sins, nor frightful or melancholy
passions; nor any that through Ignorance is uncertain of the true Nature of the
conditions of the Covenant of Grace.

20. Certain experience of the defect of these qualifications, and of men's own
Consessions, assures us, that not one of a multitude of the strict Religious
sort, have that which we call proper certainty of their Sincerity,
Justification and Salvation: though they hold against the Arminians that
certainty of perseverance must be asserted, as that which may be attained by
them that are first certain that they are in a state of life.

21. Yet the forementioned knowledge of Gods Mercy, Christ's Love and
Covenant, with experience and many evidences of great probability may cause
even such as are uncertain of their Justification, to live in some good measure
of true Christian peace, though mixed with some doubts and fears: Because their
Probability is much greater than their cause of fear. And much more may they do
so, that doubt only of their perseverance.

22. It must be confessed that the Doctrine that none fall from Justification,
has its temptation also to discomfort, as in the two or three forementioned
particulars (which I Will not repeat.)

23. It is confessed that if God should condemn those whom he before Justified,
it would argue no change in Him or his Word; but in them alone.

24. It is confessed that some Justified persons (who live in as much sin, as
will stand with sincerity) are at present unfit for assurance of perseverance
and salvation: For it would not stand with that humbling correction which they
are then most fit for.

25. Lastly, it is confessed that this point is no Article of our Creed, nor is
an agreement in it necessary to Church Communion or Christian Love, but
difference in it must be accounted tolerable.

In all this the moderate are commonly agreed. On the other side,

1. It is commonly granted that all that are elected to salvation shall
persevere (though how far that election is upon foresight they quarrel.) Cur
ergo id quod Apostolis tunc fecit Christus non concedemus pro omnibus
praedestinatis fecisse, ut peculiari modo sua merita illis applicaret and
perseverantiam eis obtineret? nam si multi sancti pro aliis orantes
conversionem eorum and perseverantiam impetrarunt, cur dicemus Christum pro
omnibus praedestinatis non orasse, and peculiari sua oratione tantam gloriam
and gratiam illis obtinuisse? Vasquez in 1 Tho. q. 23. a. 8. d. 94. c. 3.


2. It Is granted by all that not only such election, but foreknowledge of
salvation and perseverance, makes it Logically Impossible, quoad
consequentiam, not to persevere: that is, It Necessarily follows, [God
foreknoweth it: Therefore it will come to pass.]

3. It is commonly granted that God forsakes none till they forsake him.

4. And that so great is his Goodness that no willing ^oul, that solidly
understands the Grounds of the Christian faith and hope, and is in Love with
God and Holiness, and willing to use means and avoid temptations, has any
reason to vex himself with any such fears, as consist not with a life of
greater hope and peace and comfort. And that living by faith on Christ and his
Spirit and General promise, they should comfortably Trust him with their souls.

5. It Is granted that the more Faith, Love, Holiness and obedience any has,
the nearer they may come to full assurance of persevering: and may live the
more confident and joyful lives.

6. Many with Austin hold an Antecedent absolute special Election to faith and
perseverance: and that no such elect ones fall away.

7. Many hold that besides Election, a degree of Grace called Confirmation,
does settle some in a certainty of perseverance: and neither the Elect nor
Confirmed fall away: And that the confirmed may be certain of their own
election, perseverance and salvation. And this seems to be the opinion of
Origin, Macarius and diverse Ancients: Even that God does with Believers as he
did with the Angels, and Adam, to whom he would have given confirming Grace,
had he at first overcome.

And where faith has kindled so much LOVE to God and Heaven and Holiness, as
that it is become a Divine nature in the soul, and operateth as the Love of
Children to Parents, above mere Reason, as a fixed Habit, like a nature, then
Grace seems to some Confirmed and not loseable.

All these Concessions laid together (and more which I could fetch from the
most learned Schoolmen,) do show, that though here the difference be real, it
is in a point and a degree, where humane frailty, and the difficulty, and the
non-necessity of a fuller understanding it, do fully prove to all sober,
self-knowing, loving believers, that it is their duty to bear with one another,
without the quenching of brotherly Love, or denying Christian-communion to each
other: But the wicked will do wickedly, and none of the wicked will understand:
but the wise shall understand, Dan. 12. 10.

The Eleventh Days CONFERENCE. Of Christ's Righteousness imputed: of Faith,
Justification, and man's duty; their several parts, to a Christians Comfort.
Speakers: Saul, Paul, a Libertine Teacher.
CHAP. I.
S. SIR, I am now come to you in a greater straight than I was in before: I
have met with a Teacher that tells me you are a deceiver, and have all this
while misled me, and have taught me to build upon the sand of my own
Righteousness, and set me on doing to my own undoing; and that I have not built
on the Righteousness of Christ, and therefore all will end in my overthrow and
ruin: I was not able to answer him; And I have prevailed with him to come to
you, that I may hear you speak together.


P. Did not I tell you beforehand of such temptations? and give you
instructions for your preservation against them?


S. I confess you did: But I find my self insufficient to use them without help
when it comes to trial.


P. The truth is, Infant Christians will still need the help of their Elders,
and of Christ's Ministers, when they have been never so well forearmed; as you
need a Physicion in your sickness, after all the preventing directions which he
can give you. And you have done well to bring him, and to hear both sides
together. Had you trusted to your own understanding, and only disputed it out
privately with himself, you might have been enfnared to your danger. I shall
willingly conferr with him on these two conditions: 1. That you remember that
it is You and not Him that I am to satisfy: and therefore when I have satified
you, I have done: For to follow him as long as he will talk, will waste more
time, than we have to spare. 2. That when you are delivered from this snare,
you will remember that you must meet with many more such in the world: The
Anabaptist will say as much to you for his way, and the Papist much more for
his way; And most of them will affright you with the danger of damnation, if
you turn not to them: Therefore when ever you are assaulted by any of them,
bring them to me, and hear us together, as you now do.


Lib. I am sorry to see how you abuse poor souls, and build them not on Christ,
but on themselves! What a deal have you said to this man of Doing and of
Working, and how little of Believing? You have set him on tasks of Duty, and he
thinks now to Do this and Live, and to be saved in his own doings; his
repenting, his praying, his keeping the Lords day; etc. while the poor man
knows not Jesus Christ, and submits not to the Righteousness of God. You
will needs be a Teacher of the Law, and bring back poor souls to bondage, that
Christ may profit them nothing; but trusting to their own works and
righteousness for life, they may fall from grace, and be found in their
nakedness and sin.


P. Sir, these General exclamations do but tell us, that there is something
that you differ from us in, but tell us not what. If you are a lover of truth,
and will speak to edification, tell us distinctly what are the points of our
doctrine which you dislike: and let us debate them one by one.


Lib. Among many others the chief are these, I. That you must not have men come
to Christ till they are prepared. II. That you set men on Repenting, and Doing,
and Working for salvation, and so teach them to trust in a Righteousness of
their own; and do not tell them that All Christ's Righteousness is ours being
imputed to us, and that Believing is our Conversion, to which you are to call
men: If they Believe, they have a perfect Righteousness in Christ. III. That
you overthrow the Gospel, in making it a Law. IV. And you make the new Covenant
to be made with us, when Christ is the only party in Covenant with God. V. And
you make the new Covenant to have Conditions, and so to be the same with the
old. VI. You make Justifying faith to be a believing in Christ as a Teacher and
Lawgiver, that you may lead in works: and not a mere Believing in him for
Righteousness. VII. You make Faith to justify as a condition of our
performance, and not merely an Instrument of our Justification, or apprehending
Christ. VIII. You make faith in it self to be imputed to us for Righteousness,
and not Christ only the object of faith. IX. That God is made Mutable by you,
and forgiveth and justifies them when they believe, whom he did not justify
from eternity. X. That a justified man must be afraid lest his sin should
unjustifie him again. XI. You make men think that they are able to believe of
themselves. XII. You call men to Duttes, and to Mortification, before they
believe and are regenerate. XIII. Instead of the Witness of the Spirit, you
comfort men by the Evidence of their own holiness and righteousness. These with
abundance more, are the errors, by which you corrupt and deceive poor souls.


P. Because Christ would have his Servants as Teachable as Children, and not to
strive by needless disputes, I pray you be you the Teacher, and I will be the
Learner, and tell me what you would have us believe in these particulars which
you have named. And first of the first.


Lib. I. Men must be taught to come presently to Christ without staying for
Preparations, and not discouraged, delayed or kept off. The first Charge.



P. By [Coming] I suppose you mean [Believing and Accepting.] I pray you teach
me further then: Quest. 1. Must men believe in Christ before they Hear of him?


Lib. No: How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard?


P. Quest. 2. Must they Believe that he is the Mediator between God and man,
before they have learned that there is a God: and that this God is True, and
Just* Quest. 3. Or before they have learnt that man is a sinner* and deserves
death? and what sin is? Quest. 4. Or before they have learnt that we cannot
redeem and save our selves?


Lib. No: That were a contradiction.


P. Quest. 5. Must men Believe that Christ is the Son of God, and the Savior
of his Church, before they have learnt what it is to be the Son of God? or what
a Savior is? and what is the salvation which he has wrought, and will
vouchsafe us? before they understand the Articles of the Christian faith; that
he was conceived, born, suffered, was buried, rose, ascended, is glorified, and
the like?


Lib. No man can Believe that which he does not Understand.


P. Quest. 6. Must men take Christ for their Savior, before they heartily
pe^ceive that they want a Savior, through sin and misery* and that they are
lost for ever if he save them not? and that no other can do it?


Lib. No: this is an impossibility and contradiction.


P. Quest. 7. Must a man take Christ for his Savior, before he is willing to
be saved?


Lib. Yes: He must come to Christ to make him willing, and not think that he
must bring willingness with him: This is your Legal doctrine.


P. Quest. 8. Is not Accepting Christ, an Act of the will? a willingness that
he shall be my Savior? And do you say, that a man must be willing to have
Christ before he is willing? and not stay till he is willing?


Lib. You would make me ridiculous: I say not, that he must take Christ before
he is willing; But he must come to Christ for a will.


P. In despite of edification you will stick in the Metaphor [Come to Christ]:
What mean you by coming?


Lib. Poor blind soul! If you had been taught of God you would have known what
it is to Come to Christ! But you will not come to him.


P. With such exclamations you cheat the ignorant! Cannot you tell your own
meaning? What mean you by [Coming to Christ]?


Lib. I mean Believing in him, and casting my self wholly on him.


P. Still you stick in Metaphors: Can you cast your self upon him for a will,
before you are Willing? Is not that casting your self, the act of your will,
which we call Trust or Affiance?


Lib. You would hide your Lies with words! You teach that men must have good
desires before they come to Christ; as if they must bring with them good
desires of their own, or by Preparatory Grace!


P. Quest. 9. Can a man Accept of Christ as a Savior to save him from sin and
punishment and Gods displeasure, and to justify, sanctify and glorify him,
before he has any desire to be saved from sin or punishment, or Gods
displeasure, or to be justified, sanctified or glorified?


Lib. He that has no such Desires, must come to Christ for them, and believe.


P. Still [Coming] must hide your sense: Does Christ give these Desires to be
saved, before we Take him for our Savior by Consent? Or after?


Lib. You are catching me by craft. If I say [Before,] you will say, Then it is
Preparatory to our Consent. If I say [After,] you will say, that it is
impossible to consent to the Means till a man desires the end; and to Accept a
Savior before he is willing to be saved. But besides this, you tell men that
they must not come to Christ, till they are broken* hearted, and sorrow for
their sins: You heat the Win^ of the Gospel so hot, that it shall burn men's
lips, and then invite them to it.


P. Quest. 10. Is it possible for a man Heartily to perceive that he is a
heinous sinner, and has displeased God abused mercy; hilled Christ, undone his
soul, and wronged others, and not be sorrowful for it? nor be vile in his own
eyes, or feel that he is a lost sinner?


Lib. No: but all this he must come to Christ for, or Believe for.


P. Do you mean that he must first Believe that the Gospel is True, and that
Christ is an Offered Savior; or else, do you mean that he must first Accept
him as offered for a Savior; or do you mean that he must first Believe that he
is his Savior accepted? or do you mean that he must first Trust in him as his
Savior? All these are different acts.


Lib. You would confound us with your distinctions to keep out the light: This
is the trick of such carnal Sophisters.


P. Saul, You hear what this man has to say against us. You hear that when he
has cried out against Preparations to Believing, that here are ten several
Preparations which he cannot deny. I will now tell you what is our Doctrine and
the truth, about Preparations.

We hold that Christ is the True Light who lights every man that comes to
God; but in various degrees, by various means: He is the Lord of Nature as its
Restorer, Romans 14. 9. All power in Heaven and Earth is given to him, and all
things put into his hand, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. John 17. 2, 3. John 5. 22. He
teaches those that have not the Gospel, (and those that have it, first) by the
Light of Nature, many Natural Truths, as that there is a God who is Almighty,
Wise and Good, that we owe him our Love and duty, that he is Just, etc. As the
Sun enlightneth the earth at its rising before it appear it self, so does
Christ the world. By the Gospel, he teaches us more, even supernatural truths,
about himself and our Redemption, etc. Some commoner cooperation of his Spirit
goes along with the Gospel, convincing and moving many that are not yet (or at
all) converted: Those that Christ converteth savingly, are first in order
brought to understand the Meaning of the word, and next to Believe the Truth of
it, and so to Believe what Christ is, and what he has done and suffered for
us, and what need we have of him by sin and misery, and how freely he is
offered to our salvation: And they are moved so seriously to consider all this,
till it prevail with their wills, first to desire not only their own
deliverance from Hell and misery, as all men may do, but also from a state of
sin; and then to desire Christ as a Savior to effect it, and bring them home
to God: And believing that he is freely offered to them, they next thankfully
Accept him by consent, and Trust him and give themselves to him. And all this
is Christ's own work upon them: but in this order and by these degrees. So that
coming to Christ signifies diverse acts, of which one is preparatory to the
other.

And whereas he tells you, that we keep men off from Christ till they are
prepared, judge you whether he speak truth or falsehood. Do we use to call to
sinners and say [Do not believe that Christ Reconcileth God and man till you
first believe that there is a God. Do not make haste and believe that Christ
will save you from misery before you believe that you are miserable: Or that he
will wash away and pardon your sin, before you believe that you are sinners and
need a pardon: Do not consent that Christ shall be your Savior before you are
willing to be saved; or before you believe that he has dyed, rose, etc. and is
offered you.] What need we persuade men from Impossibilities? Is it we, or
their own necessity that keeps them from Consenting before they Believe, and
from believing before they Understand? We do as it were entreat poor sinners
who love their dungeon, to open the windows that the Light may come in: And
these men rail at us, and say, that we persuade men not to let in the light
till they have first opened the windows! What need we do that, when it is
impossible to do otherwise? We persuade men to believe that they are sick, that
they may go to the Physicion: And they rail at us for persuading men to delay
going to the Physicion till they think they are sick. We exhort sinners that
are asleep in sin, to awake and run the Christian race: And they rail at us, as
if we persuaded them not to run it till they are awake.

So that the preaching of these men according to their Doctrine must be thus:
[Come presently to Christ; stay not to hear the Gospel, or to consider of it,
or to understand the meaning of it, before you Trust Christ as your Savior:
Presently cast your selves upon him before you know who he is, or what he has
done for you; and trust him for the pardon of your sin before you perceive that
you are sinners, or feel any need of pardon: Stay not for a will, but Take him
or Accept him for your Savior before you are willing of him, or willing to be
saved.] Do you think this is the only Gospel-preaching?

I pray you Sir, tell me your self, How would you preach to the Indians if you
were Mr. Eliots assistant? or to any other Heathens? Would you at the first
word call them to cast themselves upon Christ for salvation? before you taught
them to know that there is a God, or a Law, or sin, or punishment, etc?


Lib. The Apostle called men presently to Believe in the Lord Jesus without
delay, Acts 2. and Acts 16. and Acts 8. etc. And so should we.


P. 1. What talk you of Delay? Are we for Delay, any more than you? The Angel,
Acts 12. that smote Peter and bid him arise and go forth, was not for his
delay, because he bid him not go forth before he arose, and before his fetters
were off. 2. And you forget that the Apostles spoke to Jews who had the
Preparatory belief of a God, and of the Law, and of the promise of the Messiah
before. 3. And yet they first humbled them for sin, Acts 2. 37. till they were
pricked at the heart; And the Jailer first trembles, and both say, What must
we do? Is this your kind of proof? And why did all the ancient Churches from
the Apostles days teach men the Creed or Christian Doctrine, and Catechize
them long before they baptized them? And I think the Anabaptists will do so
now: And I think you would be loath your selves to gather your Churches from
among Heathens, Mahometans or Infidels, till you had taught and prepared them
as much (at least) as we require. But let us hear whether in the second point
you have any better or wiser Doctrine to teach us?


CHAP. II.
Lib. II. You should teach men to believe that all our own Righteousness is as
filthy rags, abominable to God, and to be cast away with our sins: And that we
are neither to trust to, nor to look at any thing in our selves, for
justification, or acceptance with God, or to procure eternal life: But that
Christ has both satisfied for our sins, and fulfilled the Law of Innocence for
us. God imputed our sins to him, and he was by Imputation the greatest sinner
in all the world; the greatest murderer, thief, fornicator, perjured person,
rebel and ungodly man: For the sins of all the Elect did meet upon him, and
were his: Therefore he was forsaken of God, and suffered the same Hell that we
deserved. And God imputes all his satisfaction and righteousness so to us, as
that in Gods account all the Elect (or at least All believers) did satisfy and
fulfill all the Law in and by Christ: For he was our surety; and our Legal
Person, though not our Natural person. So that what Christ was we were, and
what Christ did we did, and what Christ suffered we suffered, in Gods ^^count
or imputation: And so we are as righteous as Christ himself, because all
Christ's righteousness is ours. And we have no other, nor need no other
Righteousness, at least in order to our Justification: This Righteousness of
Christ is it by which we are Justified by the Law of works, which says, [Obey
perfectly, or Do this and Live;] For we Did all that is required in and by
Christ: In this Righteousness only God accep^^th us: We have Right to it from
eternity by Gods Decree of Election: and our Consciences perceive our right
upon our Believing; And to set men on Doing themselves for Life, when they
should only Do from Life, is to deceive them and undo them.


P. If these words did offer me any Light which we had not before received, I
should gladly learn, and give you thanks. But if such talk as this, be all that
must show you to ^e wiser than your neighbors, and ^^^^rant you to rail at
them as Legal Preacher^, and such as ^^^^ ^^^^ on by works, my soul must pity
you, and all such poor sinners ^^^^ ^^^bled or seduced by you. But because this
Head contain^^^ many particular doctrines, I pray you let us speak to them in
order.

I. And first about our own Righteousness. And seeing I am the Lea^^er, I must
crave your answer as fi^ted to my own doubts. And Quest. 1. Do you know how
many times the words Just, Righteous and Righteousness are used in the Bible?


Lib. No; I have not taken such an account as to tell you.


P. Let us see the Concordance. Here you find it about six hundred and twelve
times used, besides the words [Justifie, Justifying and Justification.] Quest.
2. Show me how many of these six hundred Texts do not speak of such Inherent or
Performed personal Righteousness, as is distinct from such as you describe in
your sense of Imputation.

Try whether one of twenty or forty or an hundred have such a sense.


Lib. Not if such false teachers as you must be the expositor of them.


P. Let us try some of them, and be you the expositor. 1 John ^. 29. every one
which does Righteousness is born of God. 1 John 3. 7, 10. he That personal
Righteousness is necessary.
that does Righteousness is righteous. Whosoever does not righteousness is not
of God.


Lib. You choose out those texts which countenance your own ends.


P. My question is but, Whether Gods word talk of any Righteousness, which
consists in any thing that is in or of our selves:


Lib. Yes: that cannot be denied: But not in order to our Justification.


P. Of the use we must speak ^non. Quest. 3. I next ask you then W^^^ther all
these texts be not True? and whether we may not speak (...)


Lib. Yes: We question not the Truth, but the meaning of the (...)


P. Quest. 4. Is this Righteousness a^ such (in that (...) have it) abominable
to God* Does not God command it* and require^^ to obey his Laws sincerely? And
does he hate the obedience of his ^^^^ Is not Holiness his Nature and Image in
us: And does he hate his Image and the Divine Nature? Is it not the mark of a
Malignant to be a Hater of Holiness? yea of the Devil himself? And can you
think that God ^^^^ Hater of Holiness? What I he that has said, Be holy, for I
am ^^^^, and Without Holiness none shall see God*


Lib. If you were not an unholy deociver; you would not intimate by such
questions, as if I took God to be a Hater of Holiness.


P. Is it not Holiness which the Scripture and we mean by Inherent
Righteousness?


Lib. But God hates it not as Holiness, but as mixed with sin.


P. Do you Believe, and Love God sincerely, and Love the Godly, or not?


Lib. Better than such as you do, or else woe to me.


P. And does God Hate all your Faith and Love because it is mixed with sin? If
he do, What difference between it and wickedness? or between you and a wicked
man? God can but hate what they do: and does he so by all that you do also? Why
then may not your Neighbors imitate God, and hate all that you do? why may
they not then deride and persecute you, for that which is hateful to God? For
shame never more blame then your scorners or persecutors.


Lib. I do not say that God hates my Faith, Love, Humility and patience as
such, but as mixed with sin. Therefore properly it is sin that God hates, and
not my Faith and Love it self.


P. And is all come to this? What mean you then to rail at us that say the
same? We all say that God hates our sin, and the faulty imperfection of our
holiness and obedience? and what say you more?


Lib. But you say not that God hates your Righteousness for the sin that
cleaves to it, though not for it self; as we do. Your Goodness is like an
Apple fallen into the dirt or poisoned; and you are for wiping it, and keeping
it: but God and wise men abhor it for the filth, and cast it away.


P. Then it seems you cast away all Love to God and man, all faith, all honesty
and obedience, chastity and temperance, because sin cleaves to it.


Lib. By casting it away, I do not mean, giving over to Love God and obey him,
and turning wickedly to the contrary: but I mean that I count it dung in order
to my Justification.


P. I perceive by Teaching me, you are but Learning to speak your self. I
further ask you, Does not God Love the Faith, Love, Obedience and Holiness of
his servants, notwithstanding all their faults and imperfections? Joh. 16. 27.
The Father himself loves you, because you have Loved me and believed, etc. 2
Cor. 9. 7. God loves a cheerful giver. Psalm. 11. 7. The righteous Lord Loves
righteousness; with many the like passages. Does he not Love his Image?


Lib. That is, because we are in Christ; and our persons and graces and duties
are accepted all in him, being perfumed with his righteousness, and all our
sins and imperfections pardoned and covered thereby: And as our Graces are the
works of the holy Ghost, and not primarily as ours.


P. Are you come so far already? All this is held not only by us, but by the
Papists also. You confess then that for the merits of Christ's Righteousness,
our sins are pardoned, and not only our persons, but our faith, Love and
obedience, accepted and loved though culpably imperfect and mixed with sin. And
so all your noise is come to nothing, and you say as we.

II. But having found that we must have Inherent Righteousness, let us Of
Reward and Wor^thiness or Merit.
next consider What use we may make of it, and how far it may and must be
valued and trusted to. And Quest. 1. Tell me whether God has made any promise
of a Reward to it, or not? Turn to the word [Reward] in your Concordance, if
you remember not the Texts, and see.


Lib. Your Legal principles and spirits makes the Scripture a snare and a
stumbling block to you, as Christ himself is? When God talks of Reward
metaphorically, you take it properly, as if we could merit any thing of God.


P. I only ask you, Whether God has promised us a Reward?


Lib. Yes: But it is a Reward properly to Christ, by whose grace we live, and
not to our selves.


P. When Christ says, [Great is your Reward in Heaven: and your father shall
reward you openly,] Matthew. 5. 12. and 6. 4, 6. and [you shall not lose your
reward;] and Heb. 11. 26. [he had an eye to the recompense of reward;] and Heb.
11. 6. [God is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, etc.] is the
meaning, [Great is Christ's Reward in Heaven, and God will reward Christ openly,
and is a Rewarder of Christ only as diligently seeking him? etc.]


Lib. You would make me ridiculous. I mean that it is for Christ's Merits or
Righteousness which he did himself, and not for any thing in us or done by us,
that we are rewarded.


P. Say you so? Does diligent seeking him, Heb. 11. 6. and praying and giving
alms in secret, Matthew. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. and suffering for Christ, Matthew. 5. 11,
12. and feeding, visiting, etc. Christ in his members, Matthew. 25. etc. mean
only that which Christ did, and not we? Is it Christ's prayers, and alms, and
charity and sufferings that the text means? Look over many such texts and
judge.


Lib. Still you would make my words contemptible. It is our duties that are
rewarded, but it is not for themselves or any worth that is in them, but for
the merits of Christ only.


P. If God have no respect to anything in our duties in his reward, tell me, 1.
Why are they said so often to Please him? and we are commanded to do those things
that Please him? and 1 John he hears us because we do those things that
Please him. 2. And why then does he not as well, for Christ's merits or
Righteousness, reward our sinning, our folly and vanity, our idleness, our
dreams, or all our natural indifferent actions, as our Love, and holiness? 3.
And why do you and all men regard or reward a loving thankful obedient child,
more than one that will scorn you and spit in your face? And why do all Princes
and Rulers make any difference between the righteous and the wicked, a rogue
and an honest man? And why do Churches so strictly try the Godliness of their
members? Why do you make any difference in your Communion? What means Church
discipline? And why are you your selves so desirous to be esteemed Godly
persons, and differenced from others, if God himself do make no difference? And
how is the righteous more excellent than his neighbor? and called Gods jewels
and the apple of his eye, his peculiar people, a holy Nation, and his treasure?
And why is it made the mark of a faithful man, Psalm. 15. 4. that a vile person
is contemned in his eyes, but he honors them that fear the Lord, if there be
nothing in holiness and obedience any more than in sin, for God to reward?


Lib. You delight to make me seem foolish, by your Cavilling! You might easily
understand that I did not mean that good works are no more Rewardable than
Idleness or Evil: But that they are not rewarded for their proper worthiness,
as being faulty and so unjustifiable with God; but it is for the merits of the
Righteousness of Christ, imputed to believers.


P. When you understand what you should say, you will speak intelligibly: But
be not angry that your confusion is laid open to you. About Merit and
Imputation we must speak distinctly afterward. That no works of ours are
Rewardable till their faultiness is pardoned, nor Rewardable according to the
Law of Innocence, nor upon any terms but those of the Covenant of Grace, which
freely gives salvation to penitent believing accepters, which free gift, and
acceptance of our duties, is purchased by the meritorious righteousness of
Christ; all this we hold as fast as you do. We dream not of any access to God
but by a Mediator, nor of any acceptance of our selves or our duties, works or
righteousness, but on the account of Christ's merits and intercession, by which
the sins of our best works are pardoned, and life eternal freely given to
obedient believers. Of the worthiness of our works we must speak more anon.


Lib. I smell whereabout you are: You make us hear the Pope that is in your
belly: You mean as the Papists, that Christ has merited that your works shall
be meritorious.


P. Has not Christ Merited that our holy Love and obedience be Rewarded?


Lib. Yes: but what is that to Merit?


P. Has he not by his Merit made them Rewardable?


Lib. Yes, or else how can they be Rewarded?


P. Do you not know that by Merit the Papists themselves profess that they mean
nothing but Rewardableness? At least do we Protestants mean anything else by it?


Lib. What the Papists or you mean, you best know your selves; but I know what
you say: And you both talk like the ignorant enemies of Grace.


P. Do you include the Jansenists who say that all Christ's Grace now is nothing
but his irrestible efficient operation of Holy Love in the soul: and that God
moves us to it necessarily or insuperably? and that he now gives no Grace
merely sufficient, which is not effectual? or merely effectual to make us Able,
but also to make us Act? and that now he leaves nothing to our Free Will in
Christ's gracious operations, but gives in act all the Will and all the merit
that men have? and that Fear and obedience of a Law written, is our own Legal
Righteousness, (though it respect the new Law;) but Christ's Righteousness which
he gives us as distinct from our Legal Righteousness, is only his Spirit, or
Love put into the heart?


Lib. I do not believe that any Papist is so much for free grace.


P. But if you deny it, and the book be opened, and it found there written, is
it nothing to you to be found in falsehood?


Lib. But I say not as Jansenius, that it is the Law written in us, but Christ's
Righteousness imputed to us, which is our Righteousness.


P. Did you not even now confess an Inherent Righteousness?


Lib. Yes; but not to our Justification.


P. Of that more anon: By Justification, they mean Making us holy.


Lib. But Jansenius is not a common Papist: why tell you me of him?


P. My business here is not to justify the Papists; but to understand your
mind: I do not think you know what the Papists hold in it.


Lib. I am not ashamed to be a stranger to their Books: But I will bring one
when you will, that shall open the abomination of their doctrine of merit; Till
then it is you to whom I speak.


P. Content: we will make another days work of that. Tell me then whether it
be Names or Things that you make so much ado about?


Lib. Both: we like not ill names: and worse false doctrine.


P. What are the Names that displease you? Is Reward or Rewardableness one?


Lib. No: if you will understand them well: For they are Scripture words.


P. Is worthiness one of them?


Lib. Yes; if you will say that we are worthy of the Reward or of salvation.


P. Do you not know that the Scripture usually so speaks? Rev. 3. 4. They
shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy: 2 These. 1. 5, 11. Worthy of
the Kingdom of God: 1 These. 2. 12. Walk worthy of God: Luke 20. 35. That are
accounted worthy to obtain that world -- 21. 36. That you may be counted worthy
to escape all these things, and to stand, etc. Matthew. 10. 11. Enquire who in it
is worthy -- 13. If the house be worthy, let your peace remain. If it be not
worthy, let your peace return -- 37. He that loves Father or Mother more than
me, is not worthy of me. Matthew. 22. 8. They which were bidden were not worthy.
Acts 13. 46. Ye judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life -- Is not this
Scripture?


Lib. By [Worthy] the Text means not merit, but fitness to receive.


P. Our question is not now of the Meaning, but the Name you know.


Lib. I am not against the Scripture names, if well understood.


P. Merit is a name I perceive that you are against. And we make so small a
matter of words, that you shall choose any other name of the same
signification, and we will forbear this, rather than offend you: But yet tell
me, Q. 1. What if the words (...) and (...) were translated Deserving and
Merit, would it not be as true a translation as Worthy and Worthiness, when it
is the very same thing that is meant? Nay, when Merit of Condignity is the
highest kind, which the Papists themselves mention and are reproved for, do you
not hereby imply that Condignity is a bigger word than bare Merit?

Quest. 2. And I ask you, Whether all the ancient Teachers of the Churches
since the Apostles, whose Writings are come down to us, do not familiarly apply
these names (...) and Meritum to believers? And if you persuade men that all
these Teachers and Churches were Papists, you will persuade most that believe
you to be Papists too. But such is the success of over-doing!

Quest. 3. And I would know, Whether in common speech, Reward and Merit or
Desert be not Relatives, as Master and Servant, Husband and Wife are? Is there
any Reward which is not Meriti Praemium, the Reward of Merit? What mean you
your self else by the word Reward?


Lib. I mean Gods free Gift without respect to merit or desert.


P. Does not the usage of the World distinguish between a mere Gift and a
Reward? What if you give money to the next man you meet without respect to any
thing in him, will you call it a Reward? Review all the Scripture Texts that
speak of a Reward, and see whether they have no relation to any foregoing act
in man. God gave Christ himself to the lapsed world: Was this Gift of Christ a
Reward? God gave some Prophets, some Apostles, etc. and gives the Gospel to
Infidel Nations: Is this Gift a Reward? or ever so called? Your humane nature
is Gods Gift: but is it a Reward? Nay, will you say, that the first Grace is a
Reward; which is said to be Pelagianism?


Lib. Well: but Rewards are Gods second Gifts as they follow the former,
without respect to Worthiness or Merit.


P. That cannot be neither: If God first Give the world a Savior, and then
give them the Covenant of Grace and Pardon through him, is this a Reward? If
Christ first heal the sick man, and then cause him to walk, or if Peter and
John first heal the lame man, and then cause him joyfully to leap, etc. is the
second a Reward? If an Infidels Life be first preserved, and then the Gospel
given him, is this a Reward?


Lib. No: but a Reward supposes only our Fitness to receive a free gift, which
is called our worthiness, and not our Merit.


P. Do you mean our Natural fitness or our Moral? A man is Naturally fit for
his food, when he is hungry: Will you say therefore that his food is his Reward
for being hungry?


Lib. Well; Let it be then his Moral, or rather his Spiritual fitness.


P. Your explications are but darkning: Spiritual is either Natural or Moral as
well as corporal. The soul as a Spirit is in its nature fit to understand
common things here in the body; Is this understanding its Reward for being a
Spirit? But Heaven is a Reward.


Lib. Well: Call it a Moral fitness if you will: but what is that to Merit?


P. It is so much to it, as to tell the world that such as you, do revile
others for holding the same which you are forced to profess your self, and
wrangle about mere words, and know it not. For by [Merit] is meant nothing else
but [A moral aptitude for Reward] or that Rewardableness which consists in
Moral Good or Evil, as freely done and had, and so acceptable to God as our
Governor.

But tell me next what word will you choose to serve instead of Merit, that we
may agree in it?


Lib. I know not what words to use that please you, when we are not agreed
about the thing signified: I hold not any Reward in proper sense, but only free
gift, and therefore how can I tell you what word to use instead of merit? I
think the word Reward is used but figuratively.


P. Christ says, [Matth. 6. 4, 6. Your Father which sees in secret shall
Reward you openly: Col. 3. 24. Ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance:
Heb. 10. 35. Cast not away your confidence which has great recompense of
reward: Heb. 11. 26. He had respect to the recompense of reward: v. 6. He that
comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them
that diligently seek him: Mat. 16. 27. He shall reward every man according to
his works.] I ask you again, What is meant here by Rewarding?


Lib. I tell you again, the meaning is, that as men show their liking of a
thing that pleases them, by a proper Reward, so God shows his liking of our
duty by a free gift of some greater good, which therefore after the manner of
men he calls a Reward.


P. If it be a Metaphor, I ask you but the Meaning and Reason of the name. If
it be because it follows our duty, then every gift that follows our duty,
is a reward, without any further respect to that duty, but the order of time:
but that you denied before; Else Christ's Incarnation, and the Apostles, and the
Gospel, and all that ever follows our duty, should be a Reward. But if you
mean, that it is called a Reward, as it is a sign of Gods approbation of our
duty only, then if God should tell men that he Approves of their duty, it
would be a reward, though he immediately annihilate them, or should never do
them any good: which I think you will not say. If you say, that all three must
concur, viz. that it be 1. A Benefit or Gift, 2. Following duty, 3. Signifying
an Approbation of it, you come almost up to all that is asserted by them that
you quarrel with: If God should by some benefit to one man signify that he
approved the duty of another, or of a thousand more, and should annihilate them
all; this were no reward to them. Therefore when you have talked all that you
can devise to say, you must say, that there is some Fitness in the duty for
that approbation and benefit, and that the Relation of the Gift to that
Fitness, is it that denominateth it a Reward: And that though there be no Cause
in man of any Acts of God ex part agentis, yet are there Causes in man of our
Reception and of the effects, ex part recipientis; And so that man's Rewardable
duties are his Moral aptitude, cause or condition, why he rather than one that
does otherwise receives that Gift, which is called the Reward.

But we are gone from our question de nomine, and have already dispatched also
that de re: Have you any more to say of any Matter besides words (in which you
confess we speak as the Scripture does) in which we differ?


Lib. Seeing you like not my explications, tell me fully what you hold your
selves, and then I shall better know whether we differ in sense or words only.


P. It Is great pity for the Churches sake, but you would have understood that
first, before you reviled us as Legal, and not have spoken evil of what you
understand not. But it is better now, than not at all. Our judgment is as
follows:

I. That God has three Essential Attributes, which he expresses and
glorifieth in his works; His Vital Power or Activity, his Wisdom, and his Will
or Love: That all these are and operate conunctly; but yet each appears in
eminency in its special effects: That Gods Power eminently appears in the
Being and Motion of things; and his Wisdom eminently in the ORDER of things;
and his LOVE in the Goodness and Perfection of things: That accordingly he is,
1. The first Efficient, 2. The chief Dirigent, 3. The ultimate Final Cause of
all.

II. That as to man, he is Related to us, 1. As our Creator, the Cause of our
Being, Nature and natural Motion, as the Fountain of Nature: where Power is
most Eminent. 2. As our Governor, and the God of ORDER, and the Dirigent
Cause; where (all Attributes concur, but) Wisdom is most Eminent: 3. As our
most Bounteous Benefactor, and most Amiable Good and End, where Goodness or
Love is most eminent.

III. That accordingly God is the Author of Nature, Grace and Glory; and since
the fall, of Natura, Medela, Sanitas, of our Nature, our ORDER and Gracious
Government, and of our Holiness and Happiness; and so is our Creator, Redeemer
and Sanctifier.

IV. That neither Man, Angel or any Creature can possibly have any good, but by
Gods gift, any more than they can make themselves or a World: And this Gift
must needs be free, seeing the Creature has nothing that is good, but what it
has of God, and nothing to give him that can add to him, or but what is
absolutely his own.

V. God is to us 1. Our OWNER, 2. Our RULER, 3. Our BENEFACTOR antecedently.
And no man can Merit of God as he is an Owner or a mere Benefactor; for so he
freely disposes as he pleases of his own: But only of God as a Ruler, as is
after opened.

VI. Therefore it is blasphemy to hold that man or Angel can Merit of God in
point of proper Commutative Justice, which gives in exchange one thing for
another, to the benefit of the receiver: For as is said, God cannot Receive any
addition to his perfection, nor have we any thing but his own to give him. Luke
17. 10. we are thus unprofitable servants as to a Proprietor in point of
Commutation; though the unprofitable servant be da^^ned, Mat^h. 25. 30. in
another sense; that is, who improveth not his Masters stock to the benefit of
himself and others, and the pleasing of his Ruler.

VII. Man's Duty therefore meriteth only in point of Governing distributive
Justice: And not every way neither in respect of that; For Governing Justice is
distinguished according to the Law that governs us: which is either 1. The
Law of Innocence, or 2. The Law of Grace: And no man since the fall can Merit
of God according to the Justice of the Law of Innocence, which exacteth
personal perfection.

VIII. The Law of Grace is in its first notion, a free gift of Christ, Pardon
and Right to Life Eternal by Adoption, to all that will Accept it believingly
as it is offered, that is, according to the nature of the Gift. And this Gift
or Conditional promise and pardon no man can merit: For Christ's perfect
Righteousness and Sacrifice has already merited it for us; and so has left us
no such work to do: Nor is there the least place for any humane Merit or
Rewardableness from God, but on supposition of 1. Christ's Merits and
Meritorious Righteousness, 2. And of this free gift or Act of Oblivion and
Life, already made to us without our desert.

IX. But yet this is not a mere Gift, but also a true Law: God is still our God
and Governor, and Christ is Lord of all, Romans 14. 9. He that is a King and
Ruler has his Laws and Judgment: That which is a Gift in the first respect,
has 1. Its condition, 2. Many commanded duties, and so is a Law of Grace in
other respects. And it is only in respect to this Law of Grace that man is
Rewardable, or can Merit.

X. The Gift is from God as Benefactor, considered as Good and in it self. But
it is from God as Sapiential Rector quoad ordin^m conferendi, as to the Order
and Reason why one man rather than another receives it. So that we Merit not
of God as Benefactor nor as Rector by the Law of Innocence or Works; nor yet as
to the Value or Goodness of the Benefit, which is a free Gift: But only of God
as Rector by the Law of Grace, which regulateth the Reception of his free
gifts, merited by the perfect Righteousness of Christ, and so only as to the
Order and Reason why one more than another receives that free gift.

As if a Father has many Sons, One living obediently, Others playing the
prodigals, and upon his freely-offered pardon and grace one receives it
thankfully, and the other refuses it scornfully: Here both the obedient and
the penitent son, have all upon free gift, as to Commutative Justice; but on
various terms: And yet both merit in point of paternal Governing Justice; but
very differently: One meriteth of strict Fatherly Justice; The other only of a
forgiving Father, quite on other terms: And it is a Comparative Merit, by which
he is fitter for pardon than the Sons that despise it, and spit in the Fathers
face.

XI. God as a Benefactor and a Governor, gives some benefits Antecedently to
any duty of man: And these are never a Reward to us, (but of Christ perhaps, in
some instances.) As Legislation, so the benefits of it, and that attend it, are
before Reward and Judgment. But other benefits are given by God both as
Benefactor and Legislator, upon condition of some duty of ours in the
Antecedent gift, and so in the Judicial sentence and execution that duty is
rendered as the reason of our actual Right to them: And these are a Reward.

XII. Our first Grace is no Reward, nor merited, because it antecedeth all
conditional duty of ours.

XIII. Our first Reception of Right to Christ, Pardon and Life, being given on
the condition of penitent Acceptance in faith, may be called a Reward, because
they are consequent gifts on condition: But because the condition is so slender
a thing as the thankful Acceptance of a free gift, Divines agree not of the
fitness of the name [Reward and Merit] while they wholly agree about the thing.
But our after-mercies and final Glory, being promised on the condition of such
a faith as works by Love, obedience and improvement of Gods mercies in good
works, and patience, perseverance and conquest of the Flesh, the World and the
Devil; therefore they have more unanimously agreed not only de re, but that the
names of Reward and Rewardableness or Merit and Worthiness are here fit; but
used only in the fore explained sense.

XIV. And though the Scripture oftest use the word (...) which most properly
signifies wages, which sounds as more than praemium a Reward, yet we wholly
grant you that this is figuratively used, and that no man deserves wages or
any thing commutatively of God: But every Scripture Metaphor has its reason;
And the reason of this is evident. Though God cannot be Profited, he can be
Pleased. And his Will or Pleasure is the End of all his Government and Works:
And he is Pleased most in that which does the World, the Church and our selves
the most good, for in that he is most glorified: Now he so makes his Laws and
Promises, as if our own and other men's good were his, and his Reward for our
Pleasing by Order, Justice and Goodness, he calls wages metaphorically, being
instead of profiting him.

XV. By all which it is most obvious that we are not at all the less, but the
more beholden to God, for the Merit or Rewardableness of our actions: For as
all the Benefit is free Gift, so it is of his Grace that we do any thing that
is good, and that he accepts it as Rewardable: And if it be any honor to a
man to be good rather than bad, and the Righteous be more excellent than his
neighbor, it is an addition of mercy, that God will honor those that honor
him, and commands others so to do, Psalm. 15. 4.

XVI. And now the case is very plain, both that Reward and Rewardableness
(called Merit) there is, and why it is and must be so.

1. How can God be a Governor, and have a Law, and be a Judge, and Righteous
in all this, if faith and godliness be not Rewardable? It is the second Article
in our faith, and next believing that There is a God, that He is the Rewarder
of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. And when you would extirpate all
faith and godliness on pretense of crying down Merit, you may see what
over-doing tends to.

2. The very nature of all Gods Laws and Promises evidently infer a Reward:
Without it there were no such thing as Faith, Hope, Desire, Joy, Content,
forsaking all: Psalm. 19. 11. In keeping them there is great reward. 58. 11.
Verily there is a Reward for the righteous. --

3. There is notoriously a Reward even in this life, Matthew. 19. 29. Who would
change the profit and pleasure of a holy life here, for that of the unholy?

4. Reward and Rewardableness are found in the very Law of Nature it self: In
that we are made for God as our end, and it is God himself who is our Reward:
And holiness has a natural tendency to happiness, yea, is the beginning of it
it self: And as God is said in Nature to make sin punishable, in that he has
so formed Nature, that sin shall bring suffering in and with it (as poison
brings pain and death); so in Nature he has made our duty and holiness
Rewardable, in forming man so, that health, peace and happiness shall be in and
after it. Prove. 9. 12. If thou be wise, thou art wise for thy self.

5. The Light of Nature teaches Parents, Masters, Princes and all Governors
to take Goodness to be Rewardable, and Crimes to be punishable: And nothing is
more universally approved by the common notices of humane nature than Justice,
or abhorred than Injustice. Nature says as 2 Samuel 23. 31. He that rules over
men must be just: And as Isa. 10. 1. Woe to them that decree unrighteous
decrees: And as Prove. 17. 13. Whosoever rewards evil for good, evil shall not
depart from his house: Conscience will rebuke him that rewards evil to him
that deserved it not, Psalm. 7. 4. The better any man is, the more he is for
Justice, and abhors the unjust, (and Alexander Severus, and Antonine, and
such Just Princes and Judges, are honored by all Subjects and Historians.) And
as all Power is of God, and Rulers are but his Officers, (Romans 13. 4, 5, 6.) so
their Righteous Government is but the inferior part of Gods own Government,
(as the King governs by his Judges and Justices): And therefore it is God
that Rewards and Punishes by them. And indeed by the same reason that men
deny a Reward to duty (the faultiness being pardoned through Christ) they would
infer, that there is no Punishment for sin: But God says, Isa. 3. 10, 11. Say
to the Righteous It shall be well with him, and say to the wicked It shall be
ill with him. He will plentifully reward the proud doers, Psalm. 31. 23. Yea,
they reward evil to themselves, Isa. 3. 9.

6. Holiness is Gods Image, and the product of the Holy Ghost; and the Devil
and Malignants labor to dishonor it: And contrarily God honors it, and by
his Rewards will honor it openly before the world, Matthew. 6. 4, 6. And Christ
will come in glory to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that
believe, even because they have believed, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

7. God will Govern man according to man's nature and capacity; else what need
of Scripture, Ministry, etc. And man is naturally a Lover of himself, and God
will make him know that he has no need of him, but it is himself that shall be
the gainer if he obey, and the loser if he sin: even to Cain after his first
sin God says, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? but if thou do
evil, sin lies at the door. Man is an Intellectual and free agent: and
therefore God will set before him life and death, good and evil, Deuteronomy. 30. 15.
and whether they will hear or not hear, he will send his word, Ezekiel. 2. 5. and
they shall be told of such Motives as should suffice to prevail with men of
reason.

8. Man has many and great Temptations to overcome; And as they work morally
toward his deceit and ruin, so God will suitably give him such Moral motives
as are fittest to move him to resist them: And therefore he will offer man so
full and sure and glorious a Reward, as is fit to disgrace all the offers of
the Devil, and will make men know that his Rewards are such, as no pleasure or
profit of sin should stand in any competition with. Yea, he himself who is God
Allsufficient will be our exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15. 1. No wonder if
Moses (like other believers) despised the honors of Pharaoh's Court, and chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season, because he had respect to the recompense of reward, Heb.
11. 25, 26. And Paul went toward death rejoicing in these hopes, that having
fought a good fight, and finished his course, henceforth a Crown of
Righteousness was laid up for him by God the Righteous Judge, 2 Timothy 4. 8. who
is not unrighteous to forget his servants work and labor of Love. And all
believers are therefore steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, as knowing that their labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15. 58. And they work out their salvation with fear and trembling, laying up a
treasure in Heaven, Matthew. 6. 20. and laying up a good foundation for the time
to come, and pressing forward for the prize, Phil. 3. 8, 9. and laying hold
upon eternal life.


Lib. All this leads us to our own works, and sets up the Law, and takes
down Christ and his righteousness, and is mere Popery, for humane Merits.


P. If this be Gods Word, and Christ's own Law and Doctrine, then you infer
that Christ takes down himself, and his own righteousness, and sets up man and
humane merits. But give me leave to tell you, that if you deny [the Reward of
Evangelical duty, and the Rewardableness or Worthiness (or Merit) of such duty,
as it is but our Merit or Worthiness of the free Gift of Christ and Life, given
by Paternal Love and Justice, to believing Penitent accepters, according to the
tenor of the Covenant of Grace,] 1. You do contradict so much of the most
express Texts of Scripture, as allows us to suspect that really you believe
not the Scripture to be true, or that it is not it, but your own contradicting
fancy, that is the measure of your belief; and you may on such terms hold the
vilest absurdities, even what you list, as in despite of Scripture, while you
pretend that it is for you.

2. You will deny the honor of Gods Image on man, and the work of the Holy
Ghost, and the design of Christ, who came to destroy the works of the Devil,
and save his people from their sins, and purify to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works.

3. You will disgrace the Church of God, which Christ washes and sanctifies,
and render it too like to the unsanctified world.

4. You will leave man no ground for true assurance of Justification or
Salvation, while the difference between the worthy and unworthy is taken away.

5. You will harden the wicked in their false presumptuous hopes, and teach
them to say, We are but unworthy, and so are all.

6. You will destroy the comfort of well doing, by denying the reward, and
making it seem to be in vain.

7. Hereby you will take down all holy diligence in our Christian race and
warfare, while you deny the prize, and recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 26. We
run for an incorruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 25. Phil. 3. 14.

8. You will strengthen all Temptations, while you take down that which should
be set against them. See Luke 12. 4. Heb. 4. 1. and 12. 28, 29. Matthew. 6. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 19, 20, etc. Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 12.

9. You will disgrace the Word and Ministry and all Means, if after all we are
never the more accepted.

10. In a word, you deny Gods Government, in denying his Governing Justice and
Judgments, and that is to deny God to be our God: Yea, you deny all Religion,
all the Kingdom of Christ, all Law, all Judgment, all Retribution, Heaven and
Hell, all the true difference between Good and Evil, Holiness and Sin, all
Praise and Dispraise, while you deny the Reward and Rewardableness of holy
obedience by the Paternal Government of the Law of Grace: and that glory,
honor and peace is to every one that does good, both Jew and Gentile, Romans 2.
7, 10.


Lib. You would persuade us that holiness is good for nothing, if it be not
Rewardable; as if you knew of no other use of it; so ignorant are natural men
of the things of God which are spiritually dis^erned: I will tell you that
which your carnal mind cannot understand; 1. Holiness, Faith, Love, Obedience,
etc. are Gods free Gifts, excellent in themselves without a Reward: 2. They are
Fruits of the Spirit, and marks and signs of our future felicity, though they
deserve it not. 3. I told you that they are Rewards to Christ, and Gifts to us.


P. 1. That they are Gods Gifts we doubt not: But are not Faith, Love and
Obedience also the Acts of man by that Grace which is the gift of God?


Lib. Yes, they are man's acts; but it is God that works them in us.


P. And tell me if you can, 1. Why God cannot Reward those acts which are done
by his own Grace? Cannot God make the Promise of a Reward to be a fit Moral
Means for his Spirit to work by? Nay, does not the scope of the Scripture tell
you that he does so?

2. Is there ever the less worthiness in it, because God causes it? Tell me
without shifting, Is an honest man no more worthy of a Princes favor than a
Thief? If you are no more worthy of liberty, and protection, and life, than
Atheists and Rebels, why do you call men Persecutors for using you as if you
were such? Why call you men Malignants for hating, deriding and opposing godly
men, if they deserve no better than the worst?


Lib. They deserve better from men, but not from God.


P. Do you deny Rulers to be Gods Officers, and that they are to make this
difference by his appointment, and therefore it is done by God? 3. But without
shifting tell me, Does not every good action or inclination deserve praise from
God and man? Does it not deserve to be accounted and called just as it is?


Lib. All our Righteousnesses are as menstruous rags: and what praise then do
they deserve? Can that deserve praise, which deserves Hell?


P. 1. Come on then, let Conscience be a while unmuzzled: Why do you so much
praise those of your own Church or Opinion? Why praise you so much the
Ministers and people that are of your way? Why do you make a difference between
them and such as are against you? 2. Why do you so aggravate the sin of those
that vilify, deride and persecute you? Why call you the Saints, the precious
ones on earth, Gods treasure and peculiar people? 3. Why were you lately so
angry with the Ecclesiastical Politician, the Debate-maker, and other such
Books, which vilify men whom you and I have better thoughts of, if they
deserve no more praise than the vilest men? 4. Why were you so angry lately
when you heard of one that reproached you? and so pleased with one that
proclaimed your wisdom and goodness, and took your part? 5. And if good actions
deserve not praise from God himself, why does he praise them so greatly in his
Word? Why will he say before all the world, Well done good and faithful
servant? etc. 1. Dare you call God Ignorant Legalist? or charge him with
mistakes? 2. Does not every thing and person deserve to be thought and called
just as it is? Else lying or silence must be the virtue, and Truth the Vice. 3.
Is there no more good in a Saint than in a Devil? If there be, does it not
deserve to be called just as it is? 4. May not he who deserves Hell by the Law
of Works or Innocence, be yet Morally fit for, that is, Worthy of Heaven,
according to the Law of Grace, which pardons his sins, and freely gives him
Christ and Life? 5. Does not God praise his Servants more than the Devil or
wicked men do? And will you not please the Devil and Malignants, to tell them
the contrary? And is it not the mark of a just man, that a vile person is
contemned in his eyes, but he honors them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4.
Does not God himself praise Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Joshua, David,
Job, etc. Wrangle not against the unresistible Light. Our light must so shine
before men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our heavenly Father,
Matthew. 5. 16. Christ will come at last to be glorified in his Saints, and
admired in all them that do believe, because the Gospel was believed by them, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10, 11. No man has seen God at any time in his Essence; but we see
him here in a glass; and that is, in his Works and Image; in which it is that
his glory shines: And to say that Gods Works and holy Image are not worthy (or
Morally fit) to be praised, is to deny God his praise and glory on earth: He
that despises you, despises me (says Christ) and consequently him that sent
me, Luke 10. 10.


Lib. Faith, Love, Holiness, Obedience, Patience are worthy that God should be
praised for them, but not Man: for they are worthy as Gods works, but not as
ours.


P. 1. They are none of our works as the chief agents, but only second causes
under God: And are not second causes to be praised in their places and degree?
Will you not praise Sun and Moon and Stars, and all Gods works, that he may be
praised for them? Do you not praise a good Servant, a good Horse or Dog, a good
House or Land? yea, and your Friend or Teacher? Do you not praise your own
party, when you say that they are wiser and better than others?

2. Believe and regard the Word of God. Do none of these Texts following speak
of Praise as due to men, in subordination to God? Deuteronomy. 26. 18, 19. The Lord
has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, and to make thee high
above all Nations, in Praise, and in Name, and in Honor, and that thou may
be an holy people to the Lord thy God. Prove. 27. 21. As is the fining pot for
Silver, and the furnace for Gold, so is a man to his praise. Isa. 62. 7. Give
him no rest till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. Zeph. 3. 19, 20. I
will get them praise in every land, etc. I will make you a name and a praise
among all people of the earth. Romans 2. 29. Whose praise is not of men, but of
God. John* 12. 43. They loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. 1
Cor. 4. 5. Then shall every man have praise of God. 2 Cor. 8. 18. The brother
whose praise is in the Gospel, etc. Phil. 4. 8. If there be any praise, think
of these things. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Governors are sent by him for the praise of
them that do well. See Prove. 27. 2. and 28. 4. and 31. 30, 31. 1 Cor. 11. 2.
Prove. 29. 23. Honor shall uphold the humble in spirit. and 21. 21. He finds
life, righteousness and honor. Psalm. 149. 4. This honor have all his Saints.
Prove. 3. 16. and 4. 8. and 8. 18. and 15. 33. and 20. 3. and 22. 4. Eccles. 10.
1. John 5. 44. Romans 2. 7, 10. They that by well doing, seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life: Glory, honor and peace to every man
that works good. and 9. 21. and 12. 10. and 13. 7. 1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders
that rule well are accounted worthy of double honor. and 1 Timothy 6. 1. 1 Samuel
2. 30. Them that honor me, I will honor. Psalm. 91. 15. John 12. 26. If any
man serve me, him will my Father honor. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Prove. 13. 18. Do you
believe and regard no one of all these words of God?


Lib. I grant that God will praise the good, but not because we are worthy of
it.


P. 1. Have I told you that he himself calls his servants worthy? and will
you contradict Gods Word? 2. Dare you yet deny any thing to be worthy to be
called what it indeed is? Is not a Christian worthy to be called a Christian?
and a sober man to be called a sober man, and an honest man to be called an
honest man? Must humility make us liars? Tell me, Are you worthy your self to
be accounted and called an Infidel, a Heathen, an Apostate, a Heretic, a
wicked ungodly man, that never repented, nor did good?


Lib. That were to lie or slander, to call one what he is not.


P. Are you not worthy then to be called contrarily, that is, what you are?


Lib. ^^ought so to be called, but not for my worthiness.


P. Must God and man account you such as you are not fit or worthy to be
accounted? And will you go on to accuse and contradict Gods Word? Your fancy
has got some harsh conceit of the sense of the word [Worthy] and that comes
still into your mind, as if it meant a worthiness which supposed not that all
that we have is of mercy and grace: when the Scripture means no such
worthiness, but such as is that of a loving, dutiful, thankful Child, of the
inheritance; A moral fitness.


Lib. Well, suppose that our actions and we are worthy of Praise, that is, to
be called as they are; yet they are worthy also of dispraise, that is, to be
accounted as menstruous rags, defiled with sin, and deserving Hell; and is not
this a pitiful praise?


P. Did you ever hear us deny any of this? Why talk you of that which we are
all agreed in? But 1. It is not holiness, but the faulty imperfections of it,
and the sin that is contrary to it, which deserves Hell. 2. And the faults of
sincere believers deserve not Hell according to the Law of Grace, by which we
are to be judged, so as to be liable to it, but only so as to be accounted
condemnable, had we not been pardoned.


Lib. But if our faith and holiness deserve some praise, what is that to the
deserving of salvation? or being worthy of Heaven?


P. All these words your obstinacy has put me to use, to convince you that
Faith and Holiness is worthy of any thing at all, and that the word [Worthy]
which God himself uses of them, is not abused by God, nor false. But what it
is that God will account the righteous worthy of, the Scripture must determine;
where I have showed you before that the words are plain. They are counted
worthy of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. and of his Kingdom, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Worthy to
obtain that world, and the resurrection, Luke 20. 35. They shall walk with
Christ in white, for they are worthy.


Lib. Still I grant it in the Scripture sense, but not in yours.


P. To end this tedious talk with one that seems loath to understand, say Yea
or Nay to these two questions. 1. Do you allow of the use of the word [Worthy]?


Lib. Yes: because it is in Scripture.


P. 2. Do you deny it to be true in the sense I have opened, that is, that we
have that worthiness which is nothing but a Moral aptitude for that promised
Reward, which as to the worth of it is but Gods free gift, merited for us by
Christ, and is only a Fathers Reward as to the ordering of it as our Governor,
even a Reward of grateful Children.


Lib. No: I cannot deny this sense to be sound.


P. Then you grant both Name and Thing: And are not you ashamed then to have so
long traduced and reviled such as hold and say but that which you are forced to
justify? and to make poor souls believe that works are cried up, and Christ is
injured, and men's salvation hazarded by it, when yet you confess that all is
true, in word and sense.


Lib. But when the Papists abuse such phrases to error, though the Scripture
use them, we must do it sparingly and with caution.


P. 1. But is that a good reason for you to revile those that use them in the
Scripture sense? 2. And if you will forsake Scripture words as often as men
misuse them, it will be in the power of any Heretics to drive you from all
Scripture phrase, by abusing all. 3. And how can you more effectually promote
Popery, than by forsaking Scripture language, and leaving it to their
possession and use? Will not men think then, that the Scripture sense is liker
to be with them, than with you? Were it not better for you to hold to the Word
of God, and only detect and disclaim men's ill expositions of it?


CHAP. III. Whether our own Righteousness be any way necessary and conducible
to our Justification before God? Or Whether we are any way justified by it? and
how far?
Lib. BUt if I grant you, that salvation is the Reward of our own faith and
holiness, I shall never grant you that we are Righteous by it before God, or
that it is any part of that Righteousness by which we are justified: for that
is only the Righteousness of Christ.


P. I hope you are not willing to wrangle about words not understood. Quest. 1.
Do you think that the words [Righteous, Righteousness and Justification] have
but one sense in Scriptures, and in our common use?


Lib. No: you proved more before.


P. Quest. 2. If the Devil, or Men, or a mistaking Conscience, should say that
you (or any Saint) is an Infidel, or has no faith, how must you be justified
against that charge?


Lib. By denying it, and by maintaining that I do believe.


P. Very good: Then faith it self as faith does so far justify you.

And Quest. 3. If you be charged to be Impenitent and never to have truly
Repented, how must you be justified against that charge?


Lib. By denying it, and averring that I did Repent.


P. So then, your Repentance it self must so far justify you. And Quest. 4. If
you are charged to have been an ungodly person to the last, or not to have
loved God, or your neighbor, not to have called on God, nor confessed Christ
before men, nor to have fed, clothed and visited him (as you could) in his
members, or not to have mortified your fleshly lusts, but to have lived after
the flesh, in murder, theft, whoredom, drunkenness, etc. What is your
righteousness against this accusation?


Lib. I must defend my self against a lie by denying it to be true: I must be
so far justified, that is, vindicated against Calumny by my innocence in those
points.


P. Very good: so far then you must be justified by your godliness, love,
obedience, mortification, innocence and works. And what if you be charged as an
Hypocrite to have done all that you did in mere dissimulation, how must you be
therein justified?


Lib. By denying the charge, and appeal to God that I was sincere.


P. So then, your sincerity is so far your justifying righteousness. And what
if you are charged with Apostasy, that you fell from Grace, must you not be
justified by pleading your Perseverance?


Lib. These are none of the Justification which the Scripture speaks of:
which is only against true accusations, and not against false ones.


P. Say you so? What if one be truly accused, that he has no part in Christ?
and that his sin is unpardoned? or that he is under the guilt of damnation by
the obligation both of the Old Covenant and the New? or that he never truly
repented or believed? or that he is unsanctified, and never sincerely obeyed
Christ, etc. Is this man justifiable?


Lib. No: I say not that all men are justifyable: But who ever is Justified in
Scripture sense, is justified only from a true Accusation.


P. What is that true Accusation?


Lib. That he is a sinner, and deserves damnation according to the Law, and
that he has no righteousness of his own.


P. Must he not confess all this to be True, if it be True? And is not
confessing the Guilt which he is accused of, contrary to justifying him? Do you
not see here what Confusion you cast your self into for want of noting the
various senses of Justification? If by Justifying we mean Making an unjust man
just, then it is true that he is justified from his Guilt, that is, he is
pardoned; and he is justified from the Laws condemnation, that is, a man
condemned by the Law is pardoned; and he is justified from his reigning sin,
that is, he is sanctified: But this Justification is not opposite to
Accusation, but to Being unjust. But if you speak of Justification by Plea or
Sentence, it is contrary to Accusation of Guilt: And so no man is justified
that is not Just, or Guiltless in the point of which he is accused. God will by
no means clear the guilty, or justify the unjust, Exodus 34. 7, 8. nor say of
the wicked, Thou art Righteous, Prove. 24. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 17. and 2. 23. Jer. 11.
20. Romans 1. 32. and 2. 2.

But that you are quite mistaken in saying, that Scripture never mentions
Justifying man from a false accusation, these and many such Texts show, Romans 8.
33. Isa. 50. 8. Prove. 17. 15. 1 Kings 8. 32. James 2. 21, 24, 25. Romans 2. 13.
Luke 7. 29. Matthew. 11. 19. and 12. 37. Isa. 43. 9. 26. Luke 10. 29. and 16. 15.
Deuteronomy. 25. 1. Exodus 23. 7, etc.

And how widely differ you from most Protestant Divines, who say that
Justification is a Judicial Sentence of God as Judge? Though indeed it is of
diverse sorts.


Lib. But it is not Scripture Justification, unless it be perfect: And all that
we do is Imperfect. To justify him in some one thing, is not Justification by
faith, but another thing.


P. 1. No doubt but Scripture mentions both particular Justification as to
some particular causes, and a more large Justification from all things that
would damn him in Hell. And this latter is the Great Justification by faith,
mentioned so often in Scripture, that is, Upon and by believing we are first made
just, by free-given pardon and right to life, (and true sanctification with
it); and we are sentenced just, because so first made just. But this is not
without our Faith and Repentance. 2. And that Faith and Repentance are a
Righteousness Evangelical, that is, a performance of the conditions on which
the Covenant of Grace does freely give us right to Christ, pardon and life; and
so are the Constitutive causes of that subordinate Justification.


Lib. But your subordinate Righteousness has no hand in our Justification.


P. This is but singing over the old Song, by one that will not consider what
is answered. Have you thought on all the Texts even now cited* Has faith no
hand in our Justification? Has the performance of a Condition, and the Moral
Disposition of the Receiver, no hand in the Reception of a Gift? What think you
is the meaning of Christ's words, Matthew. 12. By thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned? What means St. James,
that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only? Are men justified by
that which has no hand in their Justification?


Lib. Christ means [before men] and so does James, and not before God.


P. This is notoriously false, as contrary to the plain Text: Christ speaks
of the Account to be given of our words in the day of Judgment, verse. 36. And
James speaks of that which men are saved by, verse. 14. and that Justification
which Abraham had, and that in an instance where Man did not justify him, and
of that which was faiths life and perfection, verse. 17, 22. and of Gods
imputing faith for, righteousness, as to a friend of God, verse. 23. And is this
nothing but Justification before men?


Lib. This is not the justifying of the man, but of his faith?


P. 1. You contradict the Text which says [Abraham, Rahab, A man is justified
by Works]. 2. You contradict your self; For if the faith be justified, the man
is justified to be a true believer: For how could a man that fulfilled the Law,
as Christ (and Angels) did, be justified, but by justifying his actions? And
how can he that fulfilleth the Gospel conditions, be justified in that point,
but by justifying that he fulfilled them?


Lib. At least I may say, that this is not the great and notable Justification,
which is only by Christ's Righteousness.


P. We are not contending for its pre-eminence, but its truth and necessity in
a subordinate place. Indeed we have one Justification by our Judges sentence,
which has many parts and causes: God as Donor is one cause, and God as Judge
another; And Christ as meriting is the only meritorious cause of the Justifying
Gift and Covenant, and Christ as Intercessor another cause, and Christ as Judge
another; And our Righteousness as it is our Right to Impunity and life another,
and our faith and Repentance are conditions: All this is sure.


Lib. But the Justification by faith is our Universal Justification; and that
can be only by Christ's Righteousness: And we are not to trust to a
Righteousness mixed of Christ's and ours; nor does Christ's Righteousness need to
be patcht up with our menstruous rags.


P. 1. No question but Christ's Righteousness is perfect, and ours imperfect,
and ours is no patch or supplement to Christ's: He is not made righteous by our
righteousness, but we by his.

2. But that which is perfect in him, is not made perfectly ours; nor formally
ours in it self, as distinct from its merited effects. It is not ours as it is
Christ's. Christ that is our Righteousness, is also made of God to us wisdom and
sanctification: And will you say therefore, that we are not to be Wise or Holy,
by any Wisdom or Holiness of our own, for fear of adding our patch to Christ's?

3. You use to say that Christ's Righteousness is ours as Adams sin is ours; and
say some, as Adams Righteousness would have been, had he persevered. But 1.
Adams Righteousness would have indeed made an Infant initially just by
propagation, that is, the innocent Child of an innocent Parent: But as soon as
that Infant had the use of Reason and Choice, he must also have a Righteousness
of his own, or perish: And this is no patch to Adams righteousness. And indeed
in his Infancy he must have a seminal Holiness of his own to justify him, as
well as the relation of a Son of Adam.

2. So also, though we are guilty of Adams sin by propagation, yet we have with
that guilt, 1. An inherent pravity of our own, 2. And at age our actual sin:
And both these are our unrighteousness, as well as Adams sin imputed to us.

Even so Christ the second Adam is a Root of a righteous seed: Our Contract by
faith is as to him, what our Natural propagation is as to Adam; that is, the
Condition of our Interest in his merits: We have as believers an initial
righteousness in our relation to Christ; But we have also from him, 1. Inherent
habitual righteousness; 2. The actual righteousness of faith, and true
obedience and love. And these have their proper use and office, without which
we must perish.

4. And I must tell you, that the word Universal is too big to be properly
given to any man's justification or righteousness, but Christ's: Properly he only
is Universally justified or righteous, who has no unrighteousness at all
imputable to him, and is justifyable in all things: But the best believer, 1.
Was once a sinner originally, 2. Did often sin actually, 3. Has still sin in
him, 4. And for some sin may be punished by the Magistrate, 5. And for sin is
judged and punished by chastisements and death by God, 6. And the earth still
cursed for our sake: 7. Yea, which is worst of all, we are still under the
pena^ty of some privations (alas! how great) of Gods Spirit and its Grace, and
our Communion with God. And all this must be confessed; And such a one is not
Universally justified or just.


Lib. But still our own Righteousness does but make us such as thankful persons
must be for their Justification by Christ, and is no part of that Justification
by faith: For if faith it self be that Righteousness, we have not faith by
faith, and faith is not imputed to faith, but Christ's Righteousness is it that
is imputed.


P. Of Imputation in due place; 1. What need you talk against that which none
of us assert? Do we not all hold, that our personal Gospel-Righteousness is
subordinate to Christ's, and is by his Gift, as ou^ Wisdom and Sanctisication
is? Who dreameth that our faith is any part of Christ's Righteousness? But why
do you waste time in vain cavilling against plain certain truth? Is there any
thing in Name or Thing asserted by us that you can deny or question?

Quest. 1. Do you deny that Scripture commands us to Believe that we may be
justified?


Lib. No.


P. Quest. 2. Or that we are commanded not only Thankfully to Accept, but
Thankfully to obey our Lord, Redeemer and Savior?


Lib. No.


P. Quest. 3. Date you deny, that life or death eternal depends on this as a
Condition or Moral means? and that we shall be judged according to it?


Lib. No. I deny it not.


P. Quest. 4. Is it not a Law that thus commands us, and by which we must be
judged?


Lib. Yes, If it were no Law; there were no duty and sin in belief and
unbelief.


P. Quest. 5. Is not a man so far just and justifyable by that Law, as he
keeps it? and justifyable against the charge of being one that must be
Damned, by producing the Condition of pardon and life performed?


Lib. Yes, I deny it not.


P. Quest. 6. And does not the same Law virtually justify the performer now,
whom it will justify as the Rule of Judgment at last?


Lib. Yes, no doubt.


P. Quest. 7. And is not the Name of Righteousness many score times given in
Scripture to our own actions done by Grace, and measured by the New Covenant?


Lib. Yes, I cannot deny it.


P. Why then while you deny neither Name nor Thing, what wrangle you about?

And let me plainly tell you, that such men as you by indiscreet everdoing are
not the least of Satan's instruments to bring the Gospel under scandal, and
harden the world in Infidelity and the scorn of Christ; while you would so
describe the Christian Religion, as if this were the very heart and sum of it
[Believe that all the Elect have fulfilled perfectly all Gods Law by another,
and that Christ did it as personating each of them, and therefore no crime of
their own is imputable to them, nor any kind or degree of Goodness or
Righteousness in and of themselves, is at least required of God, as any means
or condition, of their present or future justification by their Judge, or as
having any hand therein.] As if God were become indifferent what we all are, so
that Christ be but Righteous* for us: when as it was Christ's grand design to
restore lapsed man to God, which he does not only by Relative benefits, but by
Renewing them to his Image in love and holy obedience.


Lib. Have you not lately and often been told, that holiness and obedience are
necessary now; but it is to other Ends than to justify us; (as for Cratitude,
etc.)


P. 1. We easily grant it is for other Ends than Christ's Merits were, and not
to justify us as they do; nor in that Causality. They are not to purchase for
us a free gift of pardon and life, nor the Holy Ghost, etc. as Christ did. 2.
But again tell me, Has not Christ a Law that commands our obedience to those
ends (as Gratitude) which you mention? And is not the keeping that Law a thing
that the same Law will so far justify us for? Yea, a Condition that life
depends on? And if the Cause in Judgment be, Have you kept it or not? must
you not in that be accordingly Justified or Condemned? Give over cavilling
against plain necessary truth.


Lib. By this you will fall in with the Papists, who take Justification to be
partly by Christ's Righteousness, and partly by our own: and partly in pardon,
and partly in faith and holiness.


P. Tell not me of the Names of Papists or any, to frighten me from plain
Scripture truth. 1. Why may not I rather say, Why go you from all the ancient
Writers and Churches, even Augustine himself, by your new and contrary opinion?
Was true Justification unknown for so many hundred years after the Apostles? 2.
The most zealous Antipapists do confess that some Texts of Scripture do so take
the word Justification: And multitudes of Texts so take the words Righteous and
Righteousness. And he that will impartially consider them may find, that more
Texts than are by us so confessed, do by Justifying mean [Making us Just, and
so Accounting us] on all these causes conjunct, 1. As being Redeemed by Christ's
Merits, 2. And freely pardoned, 3. And having Right to life, 4. And renewed to
Gods love and Image, 5. And so justifyable at the Bar of Grace by the Law of
faith and liberty.

3. And the reality of all the Matter of this Doctrine is past doubt, if the
Controversy de nomine Justificationis were not so decided.


CHAP. IV. Whether the Gospel be a Law of Christ?
Lib. III. YOu bring in your doctrine of personal Righteousness to
Justification, by feigning Christ to have made a new Law; whereas the Gospel is
but a Doctrine, History and Promise, and not a Law, and so no Rule of
Righteousness and Judgment; And this many Protestants have asserted.


P. I have read some such sayings in some men: And some I think meant no more,
but that Christ did only expound, and not add to the Law of Nature, called by
them the Moral Law: And these I have excused for their unhappy kind of
expression. But for the rest, that mean as the words sound universally, they
subvert Christianity, and as the Arrians denied Christ's Godhead, so do they his
Office and Government, and are somewhat worse than the Quakers, who say, that
the Spirit within us, is the Law and Rule of Christ; which is better than none:
I pray answer me,

Quest. 1. Is Christ the King and Ruler of the Church?


Lib. Yes.


P. Quest. 2. Is not Legislation the first and principal part of Government?


Lib. Yes.


P. Quest. 3. Do not they then that deny Christ's Legislation, deny his
Government?


Lib. Yes.


P. Quest. 4. Is it not essential to Christ as Christ (the name signifying
Relatively his Office) to be King?


Lib. Yes.


P. Quest. 5. Do they not then by this deny Christ to be Christ?


Lib. No: for they confess that he has a Law, but not that he made any since
his birth.


P. We grant 1. That the Law of Nature now is His Law: 2. And that the first
Edition of the Law of Grace to Adam after the fall, was his Law: 3. And Moses
Law was partly his. But you will not say that we are under this last, nor I
hope that he has no other than the two first.


Lib. Why, what other can you prove?


P. It is the Name or the Thing that you deny; (for you use to confound the
cases:) 1. Whether the name be fit, judge by these Texts.

Gal. 6. 2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

James 1. 25. The perfect Law of Liberty.

Romans 8. 2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, etc.

Romans 3. 27. Boasting is excluded? By what Law? Of Works? Nay, but by the Law
of faith.

Mic. 4. 2. For the Law shall go out of Zion, etc.

So Isa. 2. 3. and 8. 16, 20. and 42. 41. The Isles shall wait for his Law.

1 Cor. 9. 21. We are under the Law to Christ.

Heb. 8. 10, 16. I will put my Laws into their minds -- and hearts.

James 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver, etc. Isa. 33. 22.

2. For Name and Thing note the terms of Equivalence and Connotation:

1. All the Texts where Christ is called a King, and his Kingdom named, (why
should I needlessly recite them?)

2. All the Texts that mention his Commanding and Commandments, the same which
we mean by a Law. Matthew. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatever I
have commanded you.

Acts 10. 42. and 13. 47. Acts 10. 33. 1 Cor. 7. 10. John 15. 14. If ye do
whatsoever I command you. 17. These things I command you.

So John 15. 12. and 14. 21, 31. 1 Timothy 1. 1. Titus 1. 3. 1 John. 3. 23. and 4.
6. John 13. 34. 1 John 5. 3. and 2. 4. and 3. 24. 1 Cor. 14. 37. Acts 1. 2.
Acts 17. 30. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, and c. Rev. 22. 14.

3. All the Texts that mention his Covenant, ((...) being a Legal institution.)
Heb. 8. 6. He is the Mediator of a better Covenant, and 8. 13. and 8. 10. and
10. 16. and 12. 24. Gal. 4. 24.

4. All those Texts that not only call him Lord of all, but say that All power
in Heaven and Earth is given to him (therefore Legislative power) Matthew. 28.
18. and all Judgment committed to him, John 5. 22. The Government is laid upon
his shoulders, and of the increase of his Government there shall be no end,
Isa. 9. 6, 7.

5. De re, how can that man be a Christian, that denies that Christ has made
us any Law, and so denies his Kingdom and our obedience?

I argue from the definition: That which has the essential parts of a Law is a
Law: But Christ has made that which has the essential parts of a Law:
Therefore he has made a Law.

The Major is past dispute; The Minor I prove: That which has a Precept making
Duty, and a Promise and Threatening, instituting the Retribution by Rewards and
Punishments, as an Instrument of Government, has all the Essentials of a Law:
But such is made by Christ: Ergo --

The Minor (which only needs proof) I prove by parts and instances. 1. There is
a Command to believe in God as our Reconciled Father by Christ: 2. To believe
in Christ as Incarnate, and the Mediator, conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, fulfilling all righteousness, dying, buried, for us,
justifying us by his blood, rising, ascending, glorified, interceding, that
will raise the dead, and judge the world, etc. We are commanded to believe all
the Gospel: And to give up our selves to Christ in the Covenant of Baptism, to
trust in him, to pray in his name, etc. We are commanded to believe in the Holy
Ghost as the Spirit of Christ, and to live in Communion with the Christian
Church, to observe the Lords day (the first of the Week,) to preach and hear
the Gospel, to receive the Lords Supper, to imitate Christ, to receive his
Apostles and Ministers, to relieve his members as such, to take Moses Law as
abrogated or ceased; And do you that are so strict in condemning all humane
impositions as bold additions, believe that Christ himself has made no Laws
for Ordination, Sacraments, Preaching, Worship? and why fear you adding then?
can one add to Nothing? And what a lawless sort of persons are you, if you will
neither have Christ nor Man to make Laws for you?

2. And as to Promises and Threats or Penalties (of a far sorer punishment,
Heb. 10.) I am ashamed to stand to prove them to you. [He that believes shall
be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned] is sure a Law. How shall
we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? See that ye reject not him that
speaks -- Heb. 4. and 10. These mine enemies that would not that I should
reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me, Luke 19. 27. with
abundance such.

Pardon here that my indignation suffers me not to be longer or colder, but
shortly to tell you further, that to deny Christ's Law is, 1. To deny him to be
a King, and to be Christ, 2. To deny his Kingdom, 3. And his Government, 4. And
his Gospel, 5. And his Officers power, both Kings and Pastors, 6. And your own
subjection, 7. And all duty and obedience to him, 8. And the being of all sin
as against his Laws. 9. And all Judgment according to his Laws, 10. And all
reward for keeping his Laws, 11. And all punishment for breaking them, 12. And
all duty to preach, learn or meditate on them, 13. And all blame on such as
silence such preaching, 14. And indeed the very being of all Law and Government
in the world: For since the Promise Genesis 3. (or at least now) there is no Law
of God in the world, but what is the Redeemers Law: Even the Law of Nature now
is in his hand, and is the Law of the Redeemer to lapsed Nature. And all the
world had a new Law of Grace made to Adam in the first Edition; and the Church
has it now in the second Edition. And now what part of Christianity do you not
destroy?

Choose you now whether you will come off by confessing that you erred and
differed from us but in a word not understood, or whether you will allow us to
take you for downright Heretics? And bethink you whether those rash and
self-conceited Divines that have reviled Papists and Arminians for saying that
Christ's Gospel was a Law, or that he made a new Law, have done good service to
the Christian or the Protestant Cause* or have rather done much to harden the
Rapists into a more confident conceit that Protestants are Heretics?


CHAP. V. Whether Christ be the only Party in Covenant with God? and not
Believers, or lapsed man?
Lib. IV. Mr next Charge it, that you feign the Covenant to be made with us,
which is made only with Christ. Do you not remember that even the Westminster
Assembly say in their larger Catechism, that [The Covenant of Grace was made
with Christ as the second Adam, and in him with all the Elect as his seed?] But
you feign it to be made with the Elect, nay, to others immediately, and not
only as Christ's seed, in him, nor to Christ at all.


P. I will not waste time in expounding or censuring other men's words: but as
to the matter, is it not a most shameful thing, that a man of your profession
and pretensions to knowledge, should confound those two Covenants which
children should be taught in their Catechism to distinguish?

By [a Covenant] here we mean, 1. A Covenant offered and imposed, which is also
a Law: 2. A Covenant consented to and mutual. And now tell me,

Quest. 1. Was it not a distinct Law that was made to us, from that which
Christ was obliged by? I mean the Law of Grace and Faith? Was Christ commanded
to Repent of his sin? or accept a Savior? or pray for pardon? or mortify his
lusts? or trust another to reconcile him to God? or be Thankful for such
mercies? or any such like Remedying means and duties for himself?


Lib. No: that must not be imagined.


P. Quest. 2. Is not all this commanded by the Law of Grace?


Lib. Yes: If it be a Law.


P. Quest. 3. Was not Christ under a Law, which bound him, 1. To obey all the
precepts of nature perfectly without sin? 2. To obey all the Mosaical Law as
far as he was capable? 3. To do all this a sa Mediator to reconcile God and
man, And to dye for sinners, to work Miracles, to send out Apostles, to gather
a Chruch, to intercede for us, and to present us Justified and perfect to his
father? And are we obliged to do so too?


Lib. No one so imagines.


P. Quest. 4. Did not Christ as a Covenanter undertake all this? And do we do
so too? And do not we in Baptism our selves, consent and promise, to take God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for our Father, Savior and Sanctifier, and to
forsake the flesh, the world and the devil? Is it Christ only that is Baptized?
Nay did Christ ever receive such a Baptism as this, to wash away his sins, and
deliver him a pardon? Is it Christ or we that at Baptism make these promises to
God? Is it to Christ or us that Christ himself says, If thou believe and
repent thou shall be saved? Does Christ as King make Laws and Covenants to bind
himself only? Who sees not, that has any sense of Scripture matters, that The
Mediators case, office and work is one, and ours another: that It is one Law
that was given him, and another to us: yea, that which seems the same was
another, being not formally but materially only the same (and forma denominat:)
For he was to fulfill the Law of Moses and of Innocence, to such ends (as a
Redeemer) and with such difference from our case, that it was not formally but
materially (and that but in part) the same Law: and so his Baptism was formally
another thing from any ones Baptism else in the World. It was one thing that
Christ promised and undertook in his Covenant with the Father, and it is another
thing that we undertake and promise. It Is one thing that God promises to
Christ upon his Merits (that he shall see of the ^ravail of his soul and be
satisfied) and another thing that he promises us (that our persons shall be
Justified, sanctified and saved.) In a word, by the Law given to Christ, Christ
himself is Governed as a Subject, and Justified and Rewarded by God as his
Judge for fulfilling it. By the Law given to us, we are the subjects and Christ
is the Governor, Lawgiver and our Judge, who will Justify, reward, or condemn
and punish us.

I know not how that man can preach the Gospel that knows not the difference
between the Law and Covenant made to and with Christ as Mediator, and the Law
and Covenant made to and with us, and in Baptism solemnly prosessed! Children
should not be ignorant of it.


Lib. But it is the same thing which is promised to Christ and us, viz. that we
shall be justified and saved; and this is promised first to Christ, and
therefore the words cited may be justified: Christ is the seed of the woman who
is first to break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15.


P. 1. The same thing may be promised to different persons, in different
Covenants: To promise to Christ that his elect shall be saved, and to promise
Believers that they shall be saved, are two promises.

2. What one word do you find in Genesis 3. of a Covenant or promise made to
Christ? It Is true that he is the principal Seed there meant (though not the
only:) But he is the Promised Seed: It Is one thing for a promise* to be made to
Christ, and another thing that Christ as the vi^torious seed ^ be promised to
man. There is no promise in Genesis 3. to Christ mentioned ^^ (and what can be
meant by a Promise of God to God himself?) but a prophecy and promise of a
Savior to man: But if there had, that would not have proved these two to be
one.

Understand the tenor and difference of these several Laws and Covenants of
God, or pretend not to understand the Scripture: viz. 1. The Law and Covenant
of Innocence made to Adam. ^. The Law and Covenant made to and with the
Mediator for our Redemption. 3. The promise, Law or Covenant of Grace of the
first Edition, made to Adam* and all in him, and renewed with Noe and mankind
in him. 4. The Law* and Covenant both of Common Grace and of Peculiarity, at
once given to Abraham, and perfected in the Law and Covenant of Works made by
Moses with the Jews. 5. The Law and Covenant of Grace made by the* Incarnate
Mediator (and the Father by him) in the second perfect Edition, with eminent
peculiarity.


CHAP. VI. Whether the New Covenant of Grace have any Conditions?
Lib. V. BY feigning the Covenant of Grace to have Conditions, you make it to
be a Covenant of works.


P. Either by works you mean [any humane acts;] And so all Gods Covenants with
man (and his Laws) are of works; that is, It is some act of man that they
require: For what else can be commanded? Or you mean as Paul does, when he
calls the Jews Law, a Law of works: And if so, you falsify his doctrine or
ours. Prove if you can that by works he means every humane Act, and that
Faith it self is either no Act of man, or the works meant by him.


Lib. Faith is a work, but it is not put in the Covenant as a work required of
us, but as a gift to be given to us freely.


P. Judge whether it be required of us, and that formally as a condition, by
such texts as these: (yea whether obedience be not required as a Condition of
our salvation, which is promised thereupon?) 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. Mark 16. 16. He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall
be damned. Romans 10. 8, 9, 10, 13. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead (N. B.
this is an act distinct from accepting his Righteousness) thou shall be saved.
For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth
Confession is made unto salvation. -- For whosoever shall call on the name of
the Lord shall be saved. Matthew. 6. 14, 15. For if ye forgive men their
trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if etc. Rev. 22.
14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have Right to the
tree of life, etc. See Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. and 55. 6* 7. Luke 13. 3, 5. 1 John
1. 9. Act. 3. 19. Heb. 5. 9, etc.


Lib. God promises a Reward to our Actions, not as ours, but as h^ own gifts.


P. 1. Enough is said of Rewards before: We shall not by such talk as this
believe either that God Rewards himself, or that he Rewards not us. But we
easily grant that he rewards us for nothing which comes not from his free
bounty: For no creature can have any other good.

2. But if Faith, and Love, and Obedience be not commanded to us, but only
given us, then they are no Duties, but Gifts only; and unbelief, hatred of God,
and disobedience is no sin, nor brings no punishment.


Lib. At least they are no Conditions of the Covenant.


P. Do you think that they are any proper Means of our Justification and
Salvation as their End? or not?


Lib. Yes: I dare not say, that they are no means at all; Faith and Repentance
are Means of our Pardon, and Holiness and Perseverance of our Glorification.


P. What sort of means do you take them to be?


Lib. They are such Gifts of God as in order must go before Salvation.


P. Going before, signifies only Antecedency, and not any Means.


Lib. One Gift makes us fit for a thankful improvement of another.


P. This speaks them only to be a Means to our Thankful improvement, and not
to our Right to the things to be improved.


Lib. I do not think that they are a means of our Right or title.


P. Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
Right to the tree of life, etc.


Lib. It may be translated [that wash their garments] and [that they may have
power upon] as Dr. Hammond notes.


P. 1. The Alexandrian Copy which gives him this occasion, is singular, and
not be set against all other (though the Vulgar Latin go the same way). Beza
who yet thinks that a transposition of two Verses has darkened these Texts,
this Book being negligently used, because many for a time took it not for an
Apostolical Writing, (or Canonical,) yet says, that it is contra omnium
Graecorum codicum fidem, that the Vulgar goes.

2. But all is one in sense: For [to wash their Garments] is [to be sanctified
or purified from sin] and not only from guilt of punishment: And (...)
signifies such a Power as we call Authority o^ Right (usually.)

But what makes you deny Conditions on man's part?


Lib. Because, 1. It is supposed that a condition is profitable to him that
requires it. 2. It is some Cause of the benefit. 3. It is to be done by the
performers own strength: whereas God giving ^s Faith, that can be no condition
on our part which is first a Gift from him that requires it: For to give it
first, makes it no condition of ours.


P. Here we see what it is to quarrel about ambiguous Words: No one of these
is true that you say, of the common nature of a condition; or at least as we
mean by that word.

1. Civilians define a Condition to be Lex addita negotio, qua donec praestetur
eventum suspendit. As it is Required it is only Modus promissionis, donationis
vel contractus: as Performed it is only a Removal of an Impediment, and a
Disposition of the Receiver. So that as the Nonperformance is but the
suspension of a Causation, so the performance of a Condition as such, is no
Cause efficient: But it is dispositio subjecti, which you may call a necessary
Modus of a Material Cause, as the Recipient may improperly be called; Dr.
Twisse therefore calls faith Ca^sa justificationis dispositiva.

2. So it be an act of our own, it is no way necessary that it be done without
the Commanders help or gift: For he that gives us to believe, does give it by
this means, even by commanding it, and making it a Condition of his further
benefits, that so he may induce us as rational free agents, to perform it ex
intuitu mercedis, or by the motive of the end or benefit. For he causes it by
suitable means. And no doubt, but faith, and the rest, are free acts of ours,
though caused by Gods grace.

3. And it is accidental to a Condition, that it be any way commodious to the
Imposer. What profit is it to a Father that his Child put off his Hat and say,
I thank you? And yet he may make that a condition of his gift. What profit is
it to a free Physicion, that the Patient observe his order in taking his
Medicines? And yet he may give them on that condition.

But yet I will add, that as usually men make that the condition of a Gift or
Contract, which the person obliged is backward else to perform, and that which
is somewhat either for the Donor or Contracters Interest, or the Ends of his
contract: so God who takes his Glory and Pleasure in his Childrens Good, to be
as his Interest, and the End of his Gifts, and knows how backward we are to
our duty, does on these accounts impose on us our duty and conditions, his
Pleasure and Glory being instead of his Commodity.

But if [If] be a conditional Particle, and if Gods suspending by the tenor of
his Donation, our Right to Justification upon our free believing, and our Right
to Salvation on our free obedience, do prove Conditionality (as it does all
that we mean) then you see that the new Covenant has conditions.


Lib. Does not God promise us the first Grace, even to take the hard heart out
of our bodies, and give us hearts of flesh, and new hearts, etc. And I pray,
what condition can the first grace have, unless you will run in infinitum, to
seek Conditions of Conditions?


P. 1. This is a Cause of great moment, of which I have my self had darker
thoughts than now I have. 1. If one Benefit of the Covenant have no Condition
(viz. the first,) will it follow, that none of the rest are given upon
condition? May not God in Baptism give us a Right of special Relation to the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, his Love, Grace and Communion, Pardon, Adoption and
Glory, on condition of Faith and Repentance, and yet himself give us that Faith
and Repentance which is the condition of the rest?

2. But upon fuller consideration it will appear, that It is not the first
Grace that those promises mean, by a new and soft heart: For who ever will
examine them, shall find that the Texts mention Conditions and also antecedent
Grace: And indeed, [A new and soft heart] is but the same thing which the New
Testament calls Sanctification. And yet that Sanctification is promised as
consequent to Faith as its condition: And our ordinary Divines do accordingly
distinguish of Vocation and Sanctification; holding that in Vocation the Act of
Faith and Repentance are caused by Gods Grace, before proper Habits; and that
Sanctification is the Habits (specially of Love and Holiness) following them,
(vid. Ames. Medull. de Vocat. Rolloc. de Vocat. Hookers Souls Vocat. and Humil.
Rogers of Faith, etc.) And this is the new and fleshy heart.

But what need we more to prove that Covenant Conditional which I mean, when it
is nothing but the Baptismal Covenant? where sure the condition is notorious,
and every Baptizing Minister prerequireth the profession of it.


CHAP. VII. Whether Justifying Faith be a Believing in Christ as a Teacher,
Lord, etc. or only a Receiving of his Righteousness?
P. VI. AS to this your sixth Charge, I have said so much elsewhere, in my
Disputations of Justification, and in other Books, that I cannot justify the
tiring of Readers by repeating it: And will say now but this little following:

1. That Paul does not distinguish between justifying faith, and saving faith,
but excludes the Works excluded by him, from being the causes either of
Justification or Salvation.

2. That if [Receiving Christ's Righteousness] be meant by them properly and
physically, it is no sort of faith at all; but only [the effect of the
donation,] which they call [Justificari,] or passive Justification: But if it
mean a moral metonymical Reception, that is nothing but [Consent to have the
offered gift]; And if only Consent to have Christ's Righteousness be Justifying
faith, then all the Assenting part is excluded (in which Scripture much places
it, and most Divines in part, and many in whole, besides Cam^ro and his
followers). And so also all the Affiance or Fiducial ^cts are excluded, which
almost all include; even that which they call Recumbency being distinct from
Consent.

3. All these acts following are essential to Justifying faith, as well as this
Consent to be Justified:

1. An Assenting belief in God, in the baptismal sense. 2. An Assent to the
truth of Christ's Person, Office and Doctrine. 3. A belief in the Holy Ghost. 4.
A belief of Pardon, Sanctification and Glory as possible, purchased and offered
by Christ. 5. A Consent that God be our God in Christ. 6. And a Consent that
Christ be our Teacher. 7. And our King, and Ruler. 8. And our Intercessor. 9.
And our Judge and Justifier by sentence (and as our Advocate). 10. A belief of
his Resurrection, Power and Glory. 11. A Trusting to the Father and the Son
according to these forementioned Offices. 12. A Consent to be Sanctified by the
Holy Ghost.

4. Plainly our Justifying and Saving Faith in Paul's sense is the same thing
with our Christianity, or becoming Christians: And the same thing with our
Baptismal faith and consent.

5. To believe in Christ as Christ is in Scripture Justifying faith: But to
accept his righteousness only, and not to believe in him as our Lord, and our
Teacher and Intercessor, etc. as aforesaid, is not to believe in him as Christ.

6. In my Answer (ubi sup.) to Mr. Warner, and elsewhere, I have detected the
fraud of their quibling distinction, who say, that All this is in faith quae
justificat, but not qua justificat, as supposing a falsehood, that any act of
faith qua talis justifies.

7. They that say that only our Acceptance of Christ's Imputed Righteousness is
the Justifying act of faith, and that to expect to be Justified by any other
(viz. by Believing in God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, and believing a
Heaven hereafter, and believing the Truth of the Gospel, and of Christ's
Resurrection, Ascension, Glory, etc. and by taking him for our Teacher, Ruler,
Intercessor, etc.) is to expect Justification by Works in Paul's disclaimed
sense, and so to fall from Grace; I say, they that thus teach, do go so far
toward the subverting of the Gospel, and making a Gospel or Religion of their
own, as that (I must tell them, to move them to repentance) not only the adding
of Ceremonies is a small corruption in comparison of this, but many that in
Epiphanius are numbered with Heretics, had far lesser errors than this is.


CHAP. VIII. Of Faiths Justifying as an Instrument.
P. VII. ANd I have said so much in the foresaid Disputations of Justification
and other Books, of Faiths Instrumentality and the reason of its Justifying
interest, that I cannot persuade my self now to talk it out with you all over
again; but only to say,

1. That I have fully often proved from many plain Scriptures, that pardon and
salvation are given (with Christ) in the Covenant of Grace, on Condition of a
penitent believing fiducial acceptance. And therefore that it is most certain
that faith is a Condition of our Justification; and so to be professed in Baptism.

2. The name of An Instrument given to faith, and its Justifying as an
Instrument, are of men's devising, and not in Gods Word.

3. But as to the sense, It is certain that faith is no Instrument of our
Justification (Gods or Man's,) if it be meant properly of an Instrumental
efficient cause.

4. But if it be taken Metaphorically, for an Act whose Nature or essence is An
Acceptance of a free Gift, and so by Instrumentality be meant the (...)
credere, that is, Faiths very Essence in specie, then no doubt it is what it is.

5. Or if by an Instrument be meant, A Moral aptitude or Disposition of the
person to be justified (answerable to the Dispositio Recipientis vel materiae
in Physics) then it is such an Instrument. But how well this is worded, and
what cause there is to contend for a word both of humane invention and
metaphorical, and this as if it were a weighty Doctrine, I leave to sober
judgments.

6. But it is certain that the Accepting Act of faith is but its Aptitude to be
the condition of the Gift, and therefore that its being made by Christ the
Condition is its Moral nearest interest in our Justification.


CHAP. IX. Whether Faith it self be imputed for Righteousness?
Lib. VIII. WHat do you but subvert the Gospel, when you put faith instead of
Christ or of his Righteousness? When the Scripture says that we are justified
by Christ's Righteousness Imputed to us, you say it is by faith imputed.


P. Do you think any sober Christians here really differ? or is it only about
the Names and Notions? Which ever it be; 1. Of the name, Is it not often said
that Faith is and shall be imputed for Righteousness, Romans 4. 22, 23, 24. James
2. 23.


Lib. Yes: I must grant the words, but not your meaning.


P. Where does the Scripture say, that Christ's Righteousness is Imputed to us?
Remember that it is only the Name that I ask you of.


Lib. It says that Righteousness is Imputed: and what Righteousness ^an it be
but Christ's?


P. I tell you still, it is only the phrase or words that we are first trying.
Are these the same words [Righteousness is Imputed] and [Christs Righteousness
is Imputed?] If not, where are these latter words in Scripture?


Lib. Grant that the words are not, and your words are.


P. Then the question is, Whether Scripture phrase or man's invented phrase be
the better and safer in a controvertible case? And next Whether you should deny
or quarrel at the Scripture saying, that [faith is imputed to us for
righteousness] and not rather confute our misexpounding it, if we do so?


Lib. Well, Let us examine the sense then: What Righteousness is it but Christ's
that is said to be imputed to us?


P. It is none but what we have from Christ: But the phrase of Imputing
supposes it ours: And the meaning is no more, but that [we are reputed
Righteous]: And the causes are not included in the phrase of [Imputing
righteousness to us]; but in the words before and after. As Imputing sin to us,
(and not Imputing it) is but to Repute, reckon or judge us sinners, or by sin
guilty of punishment (or not guilty); so is it here. So that it is supposed, 1.
That Righteousness, that is, This Relation of being Righteous, is the thing
imputed: 2. Christ's Righteousness is the meritorious cause: 3. The Gospel
Donation is the instrumental Cause: 4. Our Faith in Christ is the condition,
and as such the subordinate matter necessary on our parts. And that faith is
imputed for Righteousness, plainly means but this, that Christ having merited
and satisfied for us, all that is now required on our part to denominate (or
primarily constitute) us Righteous, is to be true Believers in him, or true
Christians.

And I further ask you, Do you thus paraphrase the words [Faith, that is,
Christ's Righteousness, is imputed to us for righteousness?]


Lib. Yes: I do so: because the act is put for the object.


P. Were it so said but once, and otherwise often, you had some color for this:
But when it is never said [Christs Righteousness is imputed to us] and so often
said [Faith is imputed for righteousness,] how shall ever the Scripture be
understood at this rate, if still by [faith] it mean not faith at all, but
Christ's righteousness? And why must not all other places that mention faith, be
so understood also?

But read the Texts, and set all together, and see what sense thus will be made
of it.

Romans 4. 3. [What says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it, that is,
not his believing, but Christ's Righteousness, was Imputed to him for
righteousness.] Is this a sober and modest paraphrase, or a shameless violence?
Does not [it] refer to [believing God] before mentioned?

Verse. 4, 5. [To him that works is the reward not reckoned (or imputed) of
Grace, but of debt: But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith (that is, not his faith, but Christ's
righteousness) is counted for righteousness.] Is this a modest Exposition?

Verse. 10, 11. [We say that Faith (that is, not faith, but Christ's
righteousness) was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness: How then was it,
(that is, not his faith, but Christ's righteousness) reckoned? -- In
uncircumcision: And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of the fiath, (that is, not of the faith, but of the
righteousness of Christ's righteousness) which he had being uncircumcised, that
he might be the Father of them that believe, that righteousness (that is,
Christ's) might be imputed to them also -- who walk in the steps of that faith
which Abraham had, etc. (does faith here also signify no faith?)

Verse. 13. When the promise is said to be [through the righteousness of faith]
and Verse. 14. [faith made void] is it no faith that is here also meant by faith?

And Verse. 16. [It is of faith -- to that seed, which is of the faith of
Abraham] is not faith indeed here meant by the word faith?

So Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. [Who against hope believed -- And being not weak in
faith -- he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong in faith -- And being fully persuaded that what he had promised he was
able to perform] is it no faith that is meant in all these words? yea, or no
act of faith, but accepting the righteousness of Christ?

So next Verse. 22. [And therefore it was imputed to him for Righteousness] that
is, Not his faith; but by [It] is meant only Christ's Righteousness, though it
was faith that was over and over mentioned as the antecedent.)

So Verse. 23, 24. [It was not written for his sake only that it (that is, not
faith, but Christ's righteousness) was imputed to him; But for us also to whom
it (that is, not faith) shall be imputed if we believe (is not that faith
neither?) on him (that is, God the Father) that raised up Jesus our Lord from
the dead (which is a distinct act from Consenting to have his righteousness:)
who was delivered to death for our offenses, and was raised again for our
Justification;] Is the meaning that we are justified by the Imputation of
Christ's Resurrection so to us, as that in Law sense we rose again in him, and
by Rising fulfilled the Law of Innocence?

I will not for shame and weariness thus go over other such Texts: but I must
be so faithful as to say, that if good men, and wise men, and men that cry down
the Papists and others for adding to Gods Word, and corrupting it, and calling
it a Nose of Wax, and introducing new Articles of faith, will yet own such
Expositions as these, and accuse those that own them not, they are as great
Instances as most I remember, except the defenders of Transubstantiation, how
far education, or custom, or humane dependence, or faction and partiality and
prejudice, may blind the reason of professed Christians and godly men. And that
man that dare lay his comforts and hopes of justification and life upon such
expositions of Gods Word, should be modest in crying down the false hopes of
others, and reproving them that build upon the sand.


Lib. You have made a long discourse to make us odious upon a false
supposition: We do not say, that in all or any of those Texts, by faith is not
meant faith: but only that it is not faith as faith, or as an act of ours, but
as connoting its object, the Righteousness of Christ.


P. 1. Alas! a great number of better men than you, have too often and plainly
said without distinction that [Faith is not imputed to us for righteousness]. I
hope they meant better than they spoke; but I would it could be hid from the
world, that these words are not only in the Independents Savoy Confession, but
even in the Confession of the Westminster Assembly, cap. 11. [Not by imputing
faith it self, the act of believing or any other Evangelical obedience to them
as their Righteousness: but by imputing the obedience and satisfaction of
Christ to them. -- ] So also in the larger Catechism [Not as if the Grace of
faith or any act thereof were imputed to him for his Justification.] How well
soever they may mean, Gods often repeated Word should rather have been expounded,
than denied.

2. But what mean your cloudy words, [It is not faith as faith, but as
connoting the object?] They that cannot speak clearly, seldom clearly
understand what to speak. The Question is, Whether it be really and properly
Faith, that is meant in all these Texts? or whether it be only Christ's
righteousness? If you say, that It is both in several respects, you grant then
that it is says it self in one respect, that is imputed to us for
righteousness. If it be only the object and not faith, why is it so often
called [faith, believing, being persuaded, etc.]

Will you say, that It is not faith as an act of ours only? Whoever dreamt it
was? For a quatenus ad omne: If as an act, then every act (even plowing, and
walking, and sinning) would justify us.

Will you say, that It is not Faith as a Moral Virtue or Good act only? Who
says it is? For then every moral good act would justify men.

Do you say, that It is not by faith as faith in genere? It is granted you: For
else (a quatenus ad omne) any act of faith would justify, even believing that
there is a Hell.

Will you say, that it is not any other species of faith, besides our baptismal
faith? We grant it you.

But if you will also say, that It is not this species, even the Christian
faith neither that is meant, but only the object of it, then, 1. Why say you,
that it is Faith as connoting the object; contradicting your self: for if be
not faith at all, it is not faith as connoting; that which is not, does not
connote. 2. And why say you, that it is not faith it self essentially? Is not
the object essential as an object to the act in specie? Is it not essential to
our Christian faith to be a Believing in Christ?

3. But what sober unprejudiced Christian that reads the Text throughout, and
has not been instructed to pervert it, can choose but see that it is Faith it
self that the Apostle speaks of? and that it is our personal Relation of
Righteousness that it is said to be imputed for? And who can believe that this
is the sense [Abrahams faith was imputed to him for Christ's Righteousness?] or
this either [His faith, that is, Christ's Righteousness and not his faith, was
imputed to him for Christ's Righteousness?] Undoubtedly by faith is meant faith,
and by Righteousness is meant our own Relation. But it is most easy to
discern, that the plain sense is [Christ being presupposed the Meriter of our
Justification and Salvation, which he has given the world conditionally by a
Law of Grace, (or Covenant Donation,) by which now he rules and judges us,
all that this Covenant, Gift or Law requires on our part to make us Righteous,
and entitle us to the Spirit, and everlasting life, is that as P^nitent
Believers we accept Christ and life according to the nature, ends and uses of
the gift; (and this also by his grace).]

Reader, hold close to this plain Doctrine, which most of the lower sort of
Christians know (who have not fallen into perverters hands) and you^ will have
more solid and practical and peaceable truth about this point, than either Dr.
Thomas Tullie, or Maccovius, or Mr. Crand^^, or Dr. Crispe, or the Marrow of
Modern Divinity (Written by an honest Barber Mr. Fisher (as is said) and
applauded by diverse Independent Divines.)
, or Paul Hobson, or Mr. Saltmarsh, or any such Writers do teach you in their
learned Network Treatises, by which (being Wise or Orthodox overmuch, being
themselves entangled and confounded by incongruous notions of man's invention)
they are liker to entangle and confound you, than to show you the best method
and grounds for the peace of an understanding dying man.

Christ's Righteousness is Imputed or Reckoned to be as it is, the total sole
Meritorious Cause of all that Grace and Glory given us in and by the
Conditional Law or Covenant of Grace, and of our Grace for performance of the
Conditions; and it needs nothing at all of ours to make it perfect to this
use; nor has our faith any such supplemental Office. But this condition of our
part in Christ, and of our Right to his Covenant-gifts, must be performed: and
the sentence of Absolution or Condemnation, life or death, must be passed on us
accordingly; it being not Christ, but we by this very Law, that are to be
Judged, Justified or Condemned. And this is the Condemnation that light is come
into the World, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds
were evil: But to as many as Received him, he gave Right to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe in his name: And there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit: For being perfected, he is become the Author of eternal Salvation to
all them that obey him: And it is not they that cry Lord, Lord, that shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of our heavenly
Father: For Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that to
come.


CHAP. X. Whether Gods justifying those to day that were yesterday unjustified,
signify any change in God?
P. IX. OF this also I have said so much in my Apology to Dr. Kendall, and in
the two first parts of this Book before, that I shall now put you off with this
short notice:

1. There is nothing changed, or new in God: That which on his part is in God
the Cause of our Justification, is his eternal simple essence.

2. But Gods Essence, Understanding, or Will considered simply in it self is
not to be called, Man's Justification: But the effect produced by it; And partly
the extrinsick object as terminating Gods act, and so by extrinsick
denomination or connotation, Gods Essential Intellect and Will is said, de novo
to justify. But it is only man that is really changed.

3. The New effect in man from which God is said de novo to justify him, is 1.
A new Right or Relation to Christ, pardon and life, and to the Father and the
Holy Ghost: 2. A new objective termination of Gods estimation, acceptance and
complacency: And 3. A new heart hereupon at the same instant given us. I think
none of this is from eternity: And that as God did de novo make the world, and
judge it existent, and love and order it as existent, without any change in
him, (as also millions of creatures proceed from his simple Unity) so is it
here. And this needs no more words with knowing or teachable men: And to
others there is no end.


CHAP. XI. Whether a Justified man should be afraid of becoming unjustified?
L^b. THis fear of losing our justification, which you teach men, is most
injurious to Gods free grace and immutability, and a rack for Conscience to
destroy men's peace.


P. I have said so much of this before about Perseverance and Assurance, as
forbids me tedious repetitions. Here needs no more but this explication of
the matter which you confound:

1. Fear is either Causeful or Causeless.

2. Fear is either such as hinders comfort, or such as helps it.

3. Fear is either a Duty, or an unavoidable natural passion, or a sin of
unavoidable infirmity, or a more deadly or heinous sin.

4. It Is one thing to cause and cherish Fear, and another thing to teach men
that cannot avoid it, how to deal by it. And now I assert,

1. Too many are confident that they are justified, who ought not only to Fear
that they are not, but to know it.

2. Too many that are Justified fall into such decays of Grace, and heinous
sin, as that it becomes thereupon their duty to fear lest their hearts should
deceive them, and they prove unjustified, till they rise by repentance and
revived Faith. The uncertainty becoming unavoidable, some Fear in an uncertain
person is a duty, without which he would show a contempt of God and his
salvation.

3. Too many Justified persons have Grace so weak and unactive, and sin so
strong, as that in that case, both uncertainty and fears are unavoidable to
them: A Certainty beyond fear, supposes a very high proportionable degree of
all other Graces; (For the new creature in the chief parts uses to increase or
decrease together:) But few have such high degrees of Grace.

4. A fear of particular great and heinous sins (which must be Repented of, if
you will be saved) must be moderately feared by all Christians; none being
certain that they shall escape them.

5. A believing lively apprehension of the dreadfulness of Gods Judgment, as
he is a consuming fire, and one that can cast soul and body into Hell, with so
much as is necessary to vigilance and labor for prevention, is all men's duty,
Luke 12. 4, 5. Heb. 12. 28, 29. And on this consideration if we will serve God
acceptably, it must be with reverence and godly fear. And we must keep under
our bodies (with Paul) and bring them into subjection, lest having preached or
professed, we should yet be cast awayes.

6. Needful cleansing, repenting and preventing fear, does secure and further
our comforts, by removing the sin and danger that would hinder them.

7. All our enemies and dangers are not overcome till the end. And danger must
be escaped by moderate fear. God who brings his servants over all their
dangers, will save them by a sober fear and vigilance, and not by fearlesness
of the evil.

8. But all that fear which includes error or unbelief, or distrust of Christ,
is sinful, and to be resisted with all our care; And the more distrust, the
greater is the sin.

9. All Fear that drives from Christ, and faith, and hope, and love, and true
consolation we cry down daily, as injurious to God and man.

10. We teach all Christians to contend with utmost diligence, to get up to the
highest Trust, Love, Joy, Thanksgiving and Praise, as the proper Evangelical
excellency, nearest Heaven: and to get as fast as they can above that fear
which has torment, which is cast out as love grows perfect: and to pray and
seek for the Spirit of Adoption, of Power, and Love, and a sound mind, instead
of the Spirit of fear and bondage: And not to place too much of their Religion
in that very fear which in its season is a duty, much less in hurtful sinful
fear: But always and in all things to Rejoice in the Lord, with Love and
Gratitude, and confidently to cast all their cares on him.

11. But as all men here are imperfect in Holiness, Faith and Assurance, and in
their doubts, some fear of the event (besides mere reverence of God) is their
duty, so we teach men how so to live in an uncertain fearing state, as
safeliest to get above it.

12. And we know that sin, wickedness, presumption, self-deceit and pride are
so common in the world, that Fear is very needful to the most; and we have
cause to call with Paul to many proud Professors, Be not high minded, but fear
(even lest God should cut them off as he did the Jews); and Having a promise of
entering into his rest, let us fear lest any of us come short of it, Heb. 4. 1.
And Christ thrice over recites his urgent exhortatory words, Luke 12* 4, 5. I
say to you my friends -- I will tell you whom you shall fear -- Fear him who
when he has killed, has power to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto you (the
third time) fear him: Is not this authority full, and these words plain and
very earnest, even to his friends?

13. And it is not fit to make such a Doctrine a fundamental certainty, which
we find none of all the Churches of Christ held from the Apostles days for
many and many hundred years (that ever I could read or hear of,) I mean that
[all the Justified persevere]. Be it never so clear to you, that which now is,
and so long was thought so far from clear and sure to the Churches of Christ,
as it is no fit foundation for the Churches Concord, so neither for a
Christians everlasting hopes, to be so much laid on it, as by some they are.


CHAP. XII. Of Man's Power to believe; and of calling the unregenerate to Duty.
P. X. and XI. OF the first of these I have said so much before, that I will
here pass it by. And as to the second, you are a man of pernicious principles,
and downright heretical and damnable, if indeed you would have us call no
unregenerate persons to any duty whatsoever. Answer me these Questions:

Quest. 1. Would you not have your Wife, Children and Servants taught, that it
is their duty to love, honor and obey you? and your neighbors to deal justly
with you? and the Rulers to protect you, and the Judges to do you Justice?


Lib. I speak only of Religious and not Civil duties.


P. You are indifferent it seems as to the Interest of Gods honor and men's
salvation: Let those alone, so be it your own interest be secured. Duty to you,
must be preached, but not to God. But would you not have them taught to do you
service as to the Lord, and as such as from him shall have punishment or
reward? and to submit themselves to the Higher Powers for conscience sake as to
the Ministers of God? and ^o Honor Father and Mother in obedience to God, and
that by his reward their days may be long? Should not all be done to the Glory
of God?


Lib. Yes, it should be; but the wicked cannot do it: Therefore they must be
first made Godly, and the Heart renewed, that the life may be amended.


P. We are as much and more for Heart-work, and for beginning there, than you
are ^^ we know that God accepts not the hypocrite, that draws near him, and
honors him with the lips, when the heart is far from him: The outward
actions are no further Good or Bad, than they are ^^^^ or from the Will. The
Divine Nature, and Image of God, and life of the new creature, is the new heart
by the Love of God shed abroad upon it by the Holy Ghost. But,

Quest. 2. Are we to call men to no duty at all, to the getting of a new heart?
Should we not persuade them to hear Gods Word?


Lib. Ye^: How shall they believe unless they hear?


P. Quest. 3. Must we call them from the Tavern, Alehouse, Gaminghouse,
Playhouse, Whore-house, yea, from their lawfuiler employments that they may
hear in season? and call Martha to choose Mary's part, and those that say, They
cannot come because of their Oxen, Farms and Business, to change that mind?


Lib. Yes, no doubt of it: Zaccheus must be in Christ's way.


P. Quest. 4. Must we not persuade them to take heed how and what they hear?
and to set their hearts to all Gods Words, and to see that they despise not him
that speaks? but he that has ears to hear, let him hear; and to consider of
the truth and weight of all, and to search the Scriptures to see whether the
things be so?


Lib. I deny none of this.


P. Quest. 5. May we not persuade them to come and talk and reason the case
with Friends or Ministers, that we may convince them?


Lib. Yes no doubt, as well as to hear in public.


P. Quest. 6. May we not Catechize them, and teach them the Principles of
Christianity, that they may understand them?


Lib. Yes, as to the Matter; but to teach them your forms of Questions and
Answers, is but formality and deceit.


P. What? May we not teach them the words of Christ and Scripture? How shall
the matter be understood without words? And what better words, than the words
of Scripture?


Lib. But a Form of the same words is but formality.


P. Has God forbid us to use the same? Are Children and ignorant people fit to
understand the mysteries of God, if you speak them every time in new or other
words? or can they so remember them? And when the use of words is to signify
Things, and the Matter is one and the same (for we have but one God, and
Christ, and Gospel) what wild work will you make of it, if you speak the same
things every time in other words? Are all those words equally fit to signify
the same Things? Certainly some particular words are more fitted to each matter
than other: And should not the fittest be most used? Does not Christ deliver us
a form of Baptism, and a form of the administration of his last Supper, and a
form of Prayer? Are there not forms prescribed in Gods Word, of the Priests
Benediction, and what the people shall say when they offer Sacrifice? Are not
all the Psalms forms of Prayer and Praise (and were indeed the Liturgy of the
Jews)? Does not Joel put a form of prayer into the mouths of Penitents? Does
not Paul teach us to use Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, singing and
making melody in our hearts to the Lord? Ephesians. 5. 19. Doubtless it is not only
David's Psalms that are meant by these three words; but Hymns and Songs fitted
to Gospel Worship: And if you would have none of them premeditated, nor be
twice the same words, you would soon make your self ridiculous to the world. If
you say that this Precept was for them that could do so being filled with the
Spirit, I answer, 1. It Is true that they had their extraordinary endowments,
which made a difference in the manner (as also in Praying and Preaching): But
shall we dream that therefore the same duties belong not to us to be performed
in the best manner that we can? 2. A man may from the Spirit pour out his soul
to God in forms of Prayer and Praise, though the words were premeditated.

In a word, if you would have all forms of Creeds, Prayer, Praise and
administration of Sacraments, and Catechisms cast away, you are an enemy to
Gods true Worship, and the safety and edification of the Church, yea, you must
cast away all the Scriptures, which are Gods form of instruction, recorded for
the Churches use to the end of the World.

Quest. 6. But I further ask you, May we not persuade bad men to examine
themselves, and to find, know and confess that they are bad and ungodly? and to
lament it?


Lib. Yes, that cannot be denied.


P. Quest. 7. And may we not persuade them to believe that there is a God, and
that the Scripture is his Word, and true? and that Christ is the Messiah?


Lib. Yes; the Devils believe all this.


P. Quest. 8. And may we not exhort them to Repent, and Turn to God, and so to
believe in Christ as to receive him, and give up themselves unto him?


Lib. Yes, you may exhort them: but they cannot do it of themselves.


P. Must we exhort them to nothing but what they can do of themselves? Quest.
9. Is not Exhortation Gods means to bring them to Repentance and Faith in
Christ?


Lib. Yes; I deny none of this; But that which you abuse men by, 1. Is bidding
the ungodly pray, when the prayers of the wicked are abominable to God. And 2.
In that you do not first call them to believe and come to Christ, before they
do any other duty.


P. 1. You granted me before that hearing and considering and searching the
Scripture, and other things named, are to be done before Believing in Christ,
by those that are yet unbelievers. He that believes that there is a God, must
behave himself accordingly in obeying God. 2. Men that believe in Christ but by
Assent, that he is truly the Christ, and the Gospel true, and that there is a
life to come, surely, if they love themselves, must do somewhat in order to a
fuller Justifying Belief. 3. And are you so much against the very Law of
Nature, worse than the Seamen that bid Jonas call upon his God, worse than the
Ninevites, and than almost all mankind, as that you would have no men pray but
godly men? Did not Peter bid Simon Magus repent and pray, Acts 8. And does not
God command the wicked, Isa. 55. to seek the Lord while he may be found, and
call upon him while he is near? Should no graceless man ask Wisdom of God, who
gives liberally to all men, and upbraideth not, James 1. and gives his Spirit
to them that ask it? Must they not pray for Grace, Faith and Repentance, that
want them? 4. But yet let me remember you, that we use not to exhort men to
draw nigh to God with the lips alone; nor to pray without Desire. For Praying
is but Desiring, and presenting that Desire to God. And when we bid men pray
for Grace, we bid them desire it. And so bid them Repent and Pray, Believe and
Pray; for Praying is a Returning act; And if we may not call them to pray, we
may not call them to Turn to God. Mr. Eliot in New England teaches the Indians
another lesson, whose great work is to call them to pray, and the title that
his Converts have, is the Praying Indians.


Lib. But without faith it is impossible to please God, or do any thing which
is not abominable to him.


P. 1. But it is not impossible for one to have a common and temporary faith,
and another a saving faith. 2. And one that believes that God is, and that he
is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and this not savingly, may
yet less displease God, and be less abominable than he was before without it:
and also may do something that tends as a means, to that Faith by which he
may please him.

1. A total unbeliever, and a wicked man as wicked, whose prayers are animated
with wicked principles and ends, utterly displeases God, and his prayers and
all such actions are abominable.

2. A convinced wicked man that does somewhat from self-love for his own
salvation, and specially one that is not far from the Kingdom of God, in the
use of common grace, is less abominable, and pleases God secundum quid, or
less displeases him, or seeks that grace with which he may please him: And
Christ is said to love such a man; Mark 10. 21.

3. But only the true Penitent believer so pleases him as to be an Adopted
heir of life.


CHAP. XIII. Of the Witness of the Spirit, and Evidences of Justification.
P. XII. I Will spend no more time with you on this, than briefly to open your
error, and then to tell you what we hold as certain truth.

I. It is your gross Error to oppose Evidences to the Witness of the Spirit;
for in the principal respect they are the same: as you may find by studying
these Texts well: Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 23. 1 Cor. 6. 17.
and 12. 4, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 3. 3. and 4. 13. and 12. 18. Gal. 4. 6. and 5. 5, 16,
17, 18, 25. 2 Timothy 1. 7. John 3. 3, 5, 6. Ephesians. 1. 18. and 2. 18, 22. and 4. 3,
4, 16, 23. and 5. 9, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 22. 1 John 3. 24. and 4.
13. Zech. 12. 10. Romans 7. 6. Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 18. 31. and 36. 26. Ephesians. 1. 13,
etc.

Our having the Spirit, and our being sanctified by the Spirit, are the
Witness, Seal, Pledge, Earnest, and First Fruits, and the Evidence of our
Adoption and Right to life. It is not chiefly An inward voice or persuasion
that we are Gods Children, that is the Witness.

But II. As a man's Rational soul does witness that he is a Man, so the Spirit
of holiness witnesses that we are Christians; and adopted 1. Constitutively,
making us such. 2. And thereby differencing us from all that are not such. 3.
And then helping us to discern that we are such: As the Reasonable soul
perceives it self. 4. And helping us to exercise our Grace that it may be the
more discernable. 5. And lastly, Comforting us by such Exercise and discerning:
As Life and the Intellectual Nature are pleasing to themselves.

The Conclusion.
P. ANd now Saul what think you of the Cavils that have puzzled and troubled
you? Have you heard any thing that should change your mind?


S. I have heard that from you that confirms and satisfies me: But I have
heard that from L. which grieveth my very soul, 1. To think what temptations
and perplexing trials poor ignorant Religious people are assaulted by, and how
hard a thing it must needs be for such to escape deceit and sin, and great
distractions. 2. To think in how sad a condition the Church of God is, that
besides what they suffer from men of Violence, and the flatteries of the World,
must be thus troubled and ensnared by men of high professions of Religion, and
even drawn to corrupt the Word of God, and almost to preach another Gospel. 3.
And that ever men of such professions should be guilty of so much evil: We to
the World because of offenses, and woe to them by whom they come.


P. Alas! it is no new thing: Do you not remember that Paul had such and worse
to deal with. Read Gal. 1. and 3 and 4. Read Rev. 2. and 3. Jude, and 2 Pet. 2.
and James 2. and 3. and Acts 15, etc. and you will see, that even those purest
times when they had Apostolical Gifts and Authority to restrain and settle
them, were yet thus tried and troubled by men of high pretensions, so that Paul
wishes that they were cut off that trouble them; and Christ proclaims the
hatred of his soul against the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans; and Paul tells the
Corinthians, that Heresies must be among them, that those which are approved
may be manifested among them; and the Ephesians, Acts 20. 30. that of their own
selves should men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after
them. And ever since in all Ages to this day, the Church has been as Christ on
the Cross, between two Thieves, between the Tyrannical and the Superstitious
Heretical dividing sort of professed Christians. But hold fast plain primitive
SIMPLICITY and serious PRACTICE of a sober, righteous, godly and peaceable
life, and you will get safe through all such snares.


The Twelfth Days CONFERENCE. L. A Lutheran: R. A Reconciler.
Whether the Difference between Papists, Arminians, Lutherans and Calvinists
about Man's Merits, be as Great as many think it?

L. I Am greatly scandalized by a Sermon that you lately preached in London, in
which you said (as many good people assure me) that the difference between the
Protestants and the Papists was little more than in mere words: The City
ringeth of it, and it is a common scandal, and offense.


R. Seeing you heard it not, you are unfit to receive satisfaction about it,
save only by telling you that the Report is false, and that which I said of
some particular Controversies only, they seign to be spoken of all, or most, or
others: But of this when you bring one that heard it, I will give you a further
account.


L. However I perceive by your words and writings, that you extenuate our
difference about Man's Merits: And what is there that we more differ from the
Papists about, than Merits; and from the Arminians, than their placing our
Righteousness in our own Believing and Repenting? Is there any thing that more
evacuateth the Righteousness of Christ? and destroys the honor of free
grace, and justly entitleth them to the name of Antichristian?


R. Forget not that before I further discourse with you, I premise, that I
speak not a word to justify or excuse the Papists in general, or any one of
them in particular, for any unsound word about this subject, nor to abate your
just dislike of any of their errors: And before we proceed, I desire your
promise that you will hear and speak with as little partiality, passion, and
unrighteousness as you can, (for to lay by all, I cannot expect,) and that you
will be true to what evidence of truth shall appear to you.


L. Do you think that I love not Truth and Sobriety? Why do you so suspect me?


R. Alas, how strange are our hearts often to themselves! and how much of our own
ignorance, temerity, passion and unjust partiality is there, in many a cause
which we (sinfully) father upon God, and his Truth and Grace! But in order to
our better understanding, I ask your answer to these Questions.

Quest. 1. Had you rather it did truly appear to you, that the Papists and
Arminians do less differ from us, than most conceive, or not*


L. I had rather they did differ less, and if it be so, I had rather know it
than not; But I would not hear that it is so, when it is not.


R. Take heed that your heart deceive you not, and that you be not averse to
know the truth, lest it should cross your own and other men's former censures.

Quest. 2. If it prove true, that the difference is less than most take it to
be, is he that falsely aggravateth it to the procuring of unjust odium, or he
that truly opens and extenuateth it, the more to be commended or approved?


L. If you have the Truth on your side, no doubt but you do well, because Love
and Peace also are on your side, and our fault is great that quarrel with you.


R. Quest. 3. Do you think it is justice in any Papists to charge the crude
unsound expressions of particular Writers, on the Protestant party as their
Doctrine? (as Mr. Parker, Mr. Patrick, Mr. Sherlock are blamed for doing by the
Non-conformists:) or for us to do the same by them?


L. No: but where their Doctors agree, we may go further.


R. Quest. 4. Do you think that the bare name of Merit, is cause enough to
accu^e any of false Doctrine, who means by it nothing that is unsound? or
that the name is reason enough for sharp accusations of such men?


L. I am willing to difference the controversy de nomine from that de re, and
not to make a greater matter of a name than there is cause: But yet ill names
do tend to introduce ill Doctrines.


R. Quest. 5. Do you hold that well-doing has any Reward from God?


L. It is not vain* It has that blessing freely given which is improperly
called a Reward.


R. It is figuratively called Wages: And yet this is the commonest Scripture
title, (and cannot you bear with Gods Word?) But it is not improperly called
Praemium a Reward: that is, A benefit given to one for well doing. Indeed if
with the new Atheistical Philosophers, you take God but for a Physical Motor,
and his Government, and Laws, and Judgment to be all but Motion, improperly
and popularly so named, then you may say the same of his Rewards and
Punishments.


L. Well: you know that Protestants deny not Reward.


R. Quest. 6. Is not Reward formally Related to some well-doing as the moral
aptitude of the Receiver?


L. Yes: it is such a Relation formally.


R. Quest. 7. Are not they then of your judgment as to the Matter, who hold
Merit in no other sense, than as it is [Rewardable well-doing] or [a Moral
aptitude for Reward?]


L. I deny not that with such I differ but in the Name.


R. Quest. 8. Do not you know that it is the common usage of the word, in Civil
and Ecclesiastical Writers, to take Meritum and Praemium so far for Relatives,
as that omne Praemium est meriti praemium; though omne meritum be not Praemii
meritum. Reward and Rewardableness are thus meant as related.

It Is true that Meritum is sometime taken less properly for any Dueness; ^s a
man is said to Merit his Fathers Legacy, that is, has right to it: sometimes
it is taken for any Moral Congruity: sometimes in malam partem for Commerit of
punishment: and sometimes for a fault it self. As Calvin notes on the word.
But still every Reward is formally related to Merit or Rewardableness.


L. But (not only our late Lectures against Popery, but) many Protestants say,
that It is not Merit, unless there be an Equality of it in worth to the Reward;
And therefore their Arguments against Merit are (as there). 1. The Reward is
merely of Mercy and Grace: therefore not of Merit. 2. It is Gods Gift:
therefore not deserved. 3. It is by Inheritance. 4. We owe all to God; and
therefore cannot Merit. 5. Our works are imperfect. 6. We need pardon. 7. Our
works are not equal in Goodness and Value to eternal life. 8. We cannot
recompense God for what we have. 9. We cannot profit God. 10. Grace and debt
are opposite. 11. We may not Trust our works (faith or love) therefore they
merit not. So that the question is but of such a Merit as by equal worth makes
the Reward due in point of Justice.


R. All these reasons sufficiently confute Merit in point of Commutative
Justice: But they go upon a mere mistake, as if this were the state of the
controversy between us and the Roman Church, or they took Merit in any such
sense; unless it be some rare ignorant fellow (such as Romaeus seems by some
words, and some few others): But do you grant that you differ but de nomine and
not de re with those that take not Merit in any such sense, but mean as you do
de re ipsa?


L. That I must needs grant.


R. Before we proceed then, let me briefly and plainly open the case.

1. God stands related to Man, 1. As the Owner of us and all things: 2. As
our Rector by Laws: 3. As our Benefactor.

2. To Merit, 1. Of a Proprietor or Owner, must be giving him somewhat to his
gain or pleasure, for the worth of which he is bound by Commutative Justice, to
requite us. 2. To Merit of a Ruler is to do that which he is bound to Reward in
Distributive Justice, to perform his Rewarding promises, or at least for the
Ends of Government. 3. To merit of a mere Benefactor is no more than not to be
incapable of his Gift, which is improperly called Merit.

3. All our controversy is about the second: God as our Governor rules us 1.
At first by the Law of Innocence, 2. By the Law of Grace; and that 1. As
delivered to the World in Adam and Noe, 2. Or to the Jews with the addition of
the Mosaical Law of Works, 3. Or as delivered in the Gospel by Christ and his
Spirit.

4. To dream of that Merit from God as a proprietor in point of Commutative
Justice which our Arguments militate against, is tantum non madness: and is not
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome (that I know of.)

5. To assert our Meriting of God as Rector by the Law of Innocence is dotage.
And I know none that hold that we do so (by our selves, though some hold that
we do so per alium.)

6. Nor do any but Jews that I know of assert Merit after the Jewish Law of
Works.

7. But they that hold that Christ has Merited and freely Given a Conditional
pardon and right to life to all mankind, even on condition of a penitent
believing acceptance of the free gift, and this by a Law of Grace, which we
must now be Ruled and Judged by, do hold that this Law has its Reward, and
man's acts accordingly their worth or Merit.

8. This Merit in point of Distributive Justice, is to be conceived of and
defined according to the Regiment which it respects, which is Gods Paternal
Government of freely Redeemed sinners, by a Law of Grace freely pardoning and
saving them if they will believe and accept the gift. So that it is only
Meriting under a Law made by a Governing Owner and Benefactor, for the
sapiential orderly disposal of a free Gift. As a Father will teach a Child
Obedience by telling him that he will give him Gold or Meat, if he will
thankfully accept it.

9. It is not true therefore that it is only a free Gift: For as it is a free
Gift in regard of the Value and quoad rem, so that Gift is a Reward in regard
of the Order of Conveyance, and tenor of the Donation, and the moral capacity
of the Receiver, which men call Merit.

10. That we cannot (per impotentiam voluntariam moralem) perform the
Condition, without Divine Grace, is nothing against the Tenor of the Donation,
nor the nature of the Relation of a Reward.

11. But Reward and Merit in this case are furthest from that of Commutation,
and leaves least to man to boast of.

12. Yet may he truly glory in the effects of Grace with thankfulness to God,
as Paul did, 2 Cor. 1. 11, 12. that in simplicity and godly sincerity, etc. and
2 Timothy 4. 8. that he had fought a good fight, etc. And he may justify his
sincerity with Job, chap. 13. 15, 16. And Christ will say, Well done good and
faithful servant, etc. Let him that glories glory in this, that he knows me,
(says the Lord,) etc. And Paul would rather dye, than any should make his
glorying void, as to his free preaching the Gospel.

13. And it is very false that in this sense a Christian is not bound to trust
to his Faith, Repentance, Love, Obedience, only in their own place and office
assigned them by God; but no further: As we may trust to the Bible, Preacher,
Parents, so to hearing, reading, praying, etc. for their proper part: else we
shall take them all to be in vain. Are they Means, or no Means? If Means, they
must be judged and trusted as they are, and no further: And people are not to
be frightened from necessary truth, by putting an ill sense upon words.

14. And though here be nothing of Commutative Justice, yet there is that which
Justifies the name of Wages used analogically in the Scriptures: Because Love
in a Father makes a Child's interest to be partly his own; and the Pleasure of
his Will, is that to God who is Love it self and delights in his Childrens
good, which Profit is to a humane proprietor.

And now I will proceed with you in my Questions.

Quest. 9. Do you think that Papists or Arminians do believe, that either Man,
or Angel, or Christ can merit of God by Profiting him, in Commutative Justice?
Or that it is possible for any creature to have any Good which is not the free
gift of God? supposing man a free agent in his duty.


L. I have hitherto thought that they so judge: Why else talk they of Merit of
Congruity and Condignity, and that say some, ex dignitate, yea, and ex
proportione operum?


R. It seems you think not that you hold all this your self. Let us try.

1. By Merit, they still mean a subordinate Merit, which supposes the Benefit
1. To be Gods Gift, 2. Merited by Christ.


L. How prove you that?


R. It is the express words of the Trent Council de Justif. Can. 8, We are said
to be Justified gratis, because nothing that goes before Justification,
whether it be Faith or Works, does merit the Grace it self of Justification:
For if it be Grace, it is no more of Works; else Grace is not Grace.

Can. 16. Though so much be given in Scripture to Good Works, that Christ
promises him that gives but a Cup of cold Water to one of the least, that he
shall not lose his reward, -- yet far be it from a Christian to trust or glory
in himself, and not in the Lord, whose Goodness is so great to all men, that he
wills those things to be Their Merits, which are His Gifts.

And Anath. C. 26. they thus open their Doctrine of Merit: If any say, that the
Righteous ought not to expect eternal retribution from God by his Mercy and
Christ's Merits, for the good works done in God, if by well doing and keeping
God Commandments they persevere to the end, let him be Anathema.


C. 31, 32. If any say, that a Justified man's good works are so Gods Gifts,
that they be not also the Justified man's good merits, or that the Justified do
not truly merit increase of grace and life eternal by the good works which are
done by Gods Grace and Christ's Merit (of whom he is a living member) etc.
Anath. sit.


C. 16. To them therefore that do well to the end, and hope in God, Life
eternal is to be proposed, both as Grace mercifully promised to the Sons of God
through Jesus Christ, and as a Reward faithfully to be given by Gods own
promise to their Works and Merits.


L. Yes, this ridiculous Doctrine of our Meriting by Gods Grace and Christ's
Merits I have often read and heard of in them.


R. It is somewhat bold to deride that which Scripture, Reason and all the
ancient Churches do accord in. That Christ merited that we should subordinately
merit, that is, be Rewardable, as before explained, has no less consent. And
Contra Rationem nemo fobrius: Contra Scripturam nemo Christianus: Contra
Ecclesiam nemo Catholicus.


L. But if the Council of Trent deny that Justification is at all merited, what
is meant by the Papists Merit of Congruity*


R. II. I think you hold not only as much of that as they, but (do you think
it?) somewhat more.

1. As much: For 1. De nomine some of them deny that this is any merit at all,
as well as you. And their Council asserteth it not (that I see.) 2. De re: They
mean the same thing by Merit of Congruity, which Mr. Rogers, Bolton, Hooker and
the rest call Preparation for Christ or for Conversion; And so the Council of
Trent calls it: Which makes a man a more Congruous Receiver of Grace than the
unprepared, but does not prove God obliged to give it him as a Reward. And do
not you hold all this de re?

2. Yea and more: For the Council of Trent takes Justification for Remission
of sin and sanctification together, as after Faith: And so hold that Faith it
self does not merit Justification. But do not you hold more, de re, that Faith
has a flat promise of Justification (which is true)? And so God has as it
were obliged his fidelity to give it? which is it they mean by Merit.


L. But what is their Merit of Condignity then? Is not that abominable?


R. III. 1. You know that the words [Worthy] and [Worthiness] are used in the
Scripture? Bear therefore with Scripture words. 2. And de re, they mean not all
one thing, or use not the same expressions at least: Some (and many) with
Scot^^ say, that it is ex pacto, from Gods Promise that the Merit and dueness
do result; or from Gods Decree and free acceptance.


L. I am sure your own friends say, that [These are few, and too modest, and
indeed half Heretics for their pains.]


R. I love not to persuade the World that men mean worse than they speak: What
you mean by [too modest] I know not; but it is not true either that they are
few, or taken by their Church for half heretics. And truth is well served by
nothing but truth. But the author you mean, does well in not opposing those
that are of this mind, nor those that deny all merit of congruity; and in
acknowledging that such there are. He is a stranger to the Popish Doctors who
either takes the Scotists themselves to be few (or judged half heretics) or
else that it is they only that are of that opinion: of which more anon.


L. But what mean they that say it is ex Dignitate, if not as profiting God?


R. 1. I tell you they almost all conclude against commutative merit, and who
is so mad as to think that we profit God? 2. I tell you that you may also ask
what the Scripture means by worthiness; And how else will you translate (...)
but worthy or deserving? And what is (...) but Mer^^ 3. They mean [the Moral
aptitude of Well-doing for the promised Reward:] And do you deny that?


L. But some of them say plainly that it is of Debt?


R. Yes: they often say with Augustine that God by his promise has made himself
as a Debtor.


L. But some say that Merit of condignity is ex proportione operum to the
reward.


R. It Is impossible to know what every man means, and impossible to make all
men speak congruously: But as far as I can discern, most of them that so speak,
mean, that the most wise God does all things in order and harmony, and as he
suiteth natural causes and effects, so he does gracious ones: And that his free
grace puts into man's holiness, a suitableness to the Reward, which is but a
suitableness of the habit and act to the object: And that he that Loved God
much shall be much happy in that Love, and be much beloved by him: And so every
Saint enjoy God according to the proportion of his Love or holiness; and Glory
be varyed according to the degrees of Grace.


L. This we all hold: But you make them sounder and wiser than they are.


R. Many of them and us want skill to speak very clearly: Confusion and
darkness is found in all our conceptions and expressions so far as we know but
in part: Those that you can prove to me are worse, prove it by them. I take
this to be the common sense of those few that talk of Meritum ex proportione:
For they most commonly disclaim the word equality, and all disclaim it as to
commutation: And what else can they mean?

And here I offer you an argument for Reward even in this sense of proportion
which all the world cannot answer: supposing that God will freely continue man
in life and immortality. If the Reward be essential to or necessarily
inseparable from true love and obedience, then true love and obedience have
certainly a Reward (and a moral aptitude for that Reward, or a Rewardableness,
called Merit:) But the former is certain. For 1. To Love God is the souls
health, pleasure and felicity it self (including the Knowledge of him;) And
perfect Knowledge and love is perfect happiness. 2. To obey God is formally to
do that which Pleases him pleasedly because it pleases him: And to Please God
is man's ultimate End and Reward. 3. It is impossible but that God, by his
perfection, should Love and be pleased with every thing that is Good according
to the proportion of its goodness; and therefore with the Love and obedience of
his Children. So that all those arguments of Protestants which well prove
Holiness to be Happiness it self, prove the Reward to be essential or
inseparable.


L. If this be all that those few highest Papists mean, then they are but more
zealous in commending holiness than the looser sort, as the Religious Preachers
with us are: And if this be indeed their meaning, they are unhappy in
expressing themselves, or we in understanding them, and our hearers unhappy
that upon such misunderstanding are taught to abhor them.


R. You know 1. That by Justification they mean Remission of sin and Holiness:
2. And that they hold that no works merit, but those that are done by the
members of Christ and by his spirit, in love and holiness: 3. And that they
merit nothing but what is primarily Gods Gift: 4. Nor any thing but what is
merited by Christ by another sort of merit, to which ours is but subordinate;
5. And that they commonly say that even faith it self does not merit
Justification (or Holiness;) because though it have a Promise of it, and so ex
pacto it is due; yet there is in the nature of the things no necessary
connection between them: And now what can they mean after all this by condignity
ex proportione * operis ad pr^mium, but this which I have described? Holiness
is happiness and connexed to happiness, in its various degrees.


L. But some say that they are so Impudent as to say that from the intrinsic
worth of the work, setting aside the consideration of the promise, it is
meritorious.


R. 1. Their commonest opinion is that the natural Aptitude of Holiness and
obedience, and the Promise of God set together make them rewardable (or
meritorious as they call it:) which is most certain. God promises not his
blessings and happiness to men for things evil, or worthless and indifferent.
But 2. Some among their Doctors say that Were there no promise Holiness would
be Rewardable; that is, that Gods perfection proves that he is Pleased with it
and Loves the holy: 2. And that it is happiness it self as is aforesaid: And
as this does but speak the suitableness of Gods Image to be the object of his
Love, and of obedience to be the Pleasing of his will; so it seems to me only
to mean that Were there no Positive supernatural promise, yet the very Law of
nature (which is Gods first Law) contains such a signification of his will
[that he will love, and bless those that love him and obey him] as is indeed a
kind of natural promise.

And it is to be noted that all the Heathen World, who know not the written
promise do agree in this as a natural Verity, that God loves and is pleased
with Goodness, love and obedience, and that it shall go well with them that are
so qualified. And if we should forget the Papists, and preach to religious
people with us, that there is no Goodness in the Divine Nature and Image of
God, and in Holy love and obedient fruitful lives, for which God would love or
be pleased with such as have them (supposing Redemption and the merits of
Christ) any more than with the wicked, if it were not that he has promised*
(as if he had been surprised into a promise, not suited to the nature of the
thing,) this would be abhorred by the same professors, who in other words, as
it seems to be against Popery, will applaud it.

But in all this you must remember, that it is presupposed that man's soul is
before made Immortal by God as Creator; and that he might anni^^^late the most
holy Creature if he will: But he has declared that he will not, partly by the
Nature of his soul, and partly by his natural and positive revelations: so that
it is presupposed that God will continue us men; and then Holiness will be a
proportionable Happiness.


L. But I pray you give me further proof that the Papists mean so well and near
us ^s you describe the case. Cite me the Authors.


R. 1. You must take nothing for their Religion but what is in their Councils:
And you must charge no error on them but what you can prove: For the Accuser
is the prover. And I before cited to you the words of the Trent Council.

But I justify not all that they there say: And one passage as it sounds I
greatly abhor; which is, that a Just man does not venially sin, much less
deserve hell in every good work, Can. 11. de Justif. whereas I doubt not but
the very culpable defect of Love to God and other holy qualifications defiles
our best works with sin: and every sin deserves some degree of a hell,
according to the Law of Innocence: But if they mean, 1. That Good works as such
are not sin, 2. Or that our infirmities are not such as to which the Law of
Grace threatens hell and will condemn us; we are then of their mind, but we
much mislike their words: For were there not an antecedent desert of hell, and
a sinfulness so deserving (though not by an unremediable guilt) there would be
no need of pardon. But to speak freely, the Council Doctors seemed not well
studied in the doctrine of the Covenants (even Suarez de Legibus, one of the
best, is herein short,) and so to speak confusedly of these matters: But they
seem mostly to take notice only of the Law of Grace, and because that accepts
sincerity, and condemns none for mere Infirmities, therefore they thence
measure both fault and guilt (which they should not do:) For I find that they
still presuppose Redemption and Pardon of sin, in the present case.

But to proceed to their Doctors: Vega q. 4. defines Merit thus, [Meritum est
actio libera, acceptata ad aliquod praemium.] And de re, do you deny this?

Davenport thus amendeth it [Meritum de condign^ est actio libera ab homine in
gratia elicita, qua ex Justitia acceptatur ad praemium, etc.] (meaning Justitia
promissoris.)

Scotus 1. d. 17. q. 1. etc. will not have it meritorious because is done by
grace, but by Divine decree, promise and acceptance. And this he calls
Justice, ex suppositione decreti and promissi: Non igitur ex natura actus
oritur obligatio ad praemium, says S. Clara: facta autem pactione est debitum
ex justitia: And thus say the generality of the Scotists.

Yet some will not yield that God is so much as a Promiser lest he be obliged,
but only an Assertor: as S. Clara notes.

Tho. Waldensis and some others deny all merit fitly so called. De sacram. tit.
1.

Eckius, Marsilius and Bellarmine says S. Clara deny all merit of congruity.

Greg. Arim. 1. d. 17. q. 1. a 2. says that there is no merit of blessedness
by condignity.

Durandus 1. d. 27. q. 2. says there is no merit of condignity with God, nisi
largo modo.

So Marsilius in 2. d. 27. Brugensis in Psalm. 35. Eckius in Cent. de Pradest.
Cusanus, Stapleton and others, of whom S. Clara refers you to Suarez in 3
Tho. disp. 10. sect. 7. q. 3.

Bradwardine c. 39. fol. 338. labors to prove that the increase of Grace or
Glory is not merited de condigno, but de congr^o, and that all Catholics so
hold. And next denies merit de congruo, and all by reasons which S. Clara
takes to be valid.

Soto a Thomist denies all merit de congruo, and says the Fathers held it
not. 4. d. 14. q. 2. a. 5. and l. 2. de not. and Great. c. 4.

Bonaventure 2. d. 28. a. 2. says Pelagius erred. 1. In holding that the first
grace was merited; 2. That by the strength of Free Will we can dispose or
prepare our selves for grace.


S. Clara says, Aestimo esse omnium Scholasticorum, non dari ex part
peccatoris ullam causam meritoriam, dispositionem, aut conditionem ad primam
gratiam. For which he cites August. P. Innoc. 1. ad Council. Carth. Council.
Arausic. 2. can. 3, 4, 5. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. c. 5. concluding, Et sine
dubio hoc est de fide apud omnes Catholicos Doctores, nec ullus unquam
oppositum tenuit. Et Bradward. optimus divinae Gratiae propugnator dicit
express -- esse Pelagianismum, licet intelligeretur solum de merito de congruo.

Yea Aquinas denies all merit de congruo as to Justifying grace, 1. 2. q. 14.
a. 7. and in Romans c. 4.

Vega's judgment is commonly known. See Carthusian in Jac. 2. etc. I may
conclude then with S. Clara, that Cassander spoke not unreasonably when he
said, [Quo sensu hoc vocabulo Meriti and Merendi usi sunt Patres and Catholici,
obscurum non est, nempe ut per illud gratiae Dei ex qua merita omnia oriuntur,
nihil detrahatur. Quare nil est cur aut Ecclesiastici a loquendi forma and
sententia in Ecclesia jam olim usitata discedant, aut Protestants eam tam
odiose repudient aut condemnent.]

And that Bucer said well, colloq. Ratisb. [Si sancti patres aut alii
intelligunt Promereri, facere ex fide gratiae dei bona opera quibus Deus
mercedem promisit; hoc sensu usurpare illud verbum minime damnabimus.]


L. Thus you seem to like the very word merit; which in your confession you do
not.


R. 1. I like the Scripture word (...). And they that translate it worthy, and
account condignity the highest notion of merit, seem to allow that it may be
translated [Meriting.]

2. I would fain find a word to serve instead of merit, answering Reward, and I
cannot: What word can you find? Premiability and Rewardableness are long and
unhandsome, and I remember no other, without using many words.

3. Yet I wish it disused, to avoid abuse and offense.


L. But when Cassander says, It is used as not encroaching on grace, I take
all merit to encroach upon it and injure it.


R. I ask you, Quest. 1. If you preach that [a Holy Lover of God is fitter for
Heaven and Happiness in Gods love, than a wicked man, and has a promise of it]
and another preach, that [the Saints are no fitter for Gods love and happiness
than the wicked, but only it is promised them without any fitness;] which would
good men more dislike? I think that the first is but the very thing that most
of the School Doctors mean: And that we at once abhor their words, and abhor
the contrary, as they are variously presented to men.

Quest. 2. And I ask you, Whether do you think it a greater Grace or Gift of
God, to give a man that Holiness which shall fit him for Heaven (or as they
call it Merit it,) or to give him Heaven without such Holy fitness (or merit?)


L. Heaven without Holiness is a contradiction. But if God could make a beast
or bad man Happy without it, doubtless yet both is more than one. I had rather
God would make me here fit for Heaven by holiness, than not, and so all
Christians. But we all take Merit to signify somewhat which profits God and
which is our own, and not of his gift and grace: In which I see we are mistaken.


R. Doubtless, as that God who can relieve your poor or sick friend without
you, shows you a double favor if he will make you his instrument in
relieving him; so if he cause you to work out your own salvation, it is a
greater mercy than if he would carry you asleep to Heaven: And it is strange
that men that know that all that we have is of God, should think his grace
dishonored by giving us the greater mercy.

But to return to my account of the Papists. I will mention Aquinas farther,
because you know who numbreth him with the grosser sort.

1. 2. q. 114. a. 1. He concludes that man meriteth not at all of God
according to absolute or simple Justice, which goes by equality; sed secundum
divinae ordinationis quandam praesuppositionem, as man obtains that as a
reward by his operation for which God gave him the operative virtue. And so
that here is but modus quidam Justitiae, as a Father has to a Child, and merit
only secundum quid, at non simpliciter. And he adds, that our voluntary doing
our duty is our merit, not as profiting God, but manifesting his glory, and
pleasing his will; and so God is not a Debtor to us, but to his own will or to
himself.

And a. 2. he concludes that without Grace even man in innocence, much less in
sin could thus merit life eternal. When after therefore he speaks for merit of
condignity as the acts are from the Holy Ghost, it is such a merit as aforesaid
that he means. But the first Grace he says none meriteth.

But I desire you for the understanding of Aquinas and such others to take
notice, that the foundation of many confused speeches of theirs, is their
confused notions of Gods Laws or Covenants. For Aquin. q. 106. a. 1. does go
the way of Mr. Sterry and Sr. H. Vane and the Quakers, and conclude that the
New Law (of Grace) is not written but in the heart, that is, that Lex nova
principaliter est ipsa gratia spiritus sancti in cord fidelium scripta;
because unaquaeque illud videtur esse quod in ea est potissimum: and so that
Lex scripta is called a Law secondarily as a means to the former: Now this is
gross abuse of an equivocal word by a vain pretense: For the word Law does not
first signify another thing because that other is most excellent; but less
excellent things (as media ad finem) have their proper notions: And the world
knows that the famosius significatum here is a Law ut signum voluntatis
imperantis constituens debitum, as an instrument of Government; And that
Sanctity of heart is the effect of the doctrine, and a disposition to obey; and
is called a Law but in tropical sense.

But indeed Paul often describes the Gospel as in the heart, and the Law as a
thing; But that contradicts not what I say: but it was because the New
Testament was not then much of it, if any, written and received in the Churches
as Gods Law: But Baptism expounded by word of mouth (in the three Articles) was
the Christianity which Paul bid Timothy keep and commit to faithful men that
might teach it. The Christian Religion was by word committed to men's memory
first, and so to their hearts before it was put in writing: But yet it was
primarily and properly a Law, ut signum obligans, and but metonymically as the
soul was holy by it. The Law was one thing, even in the mind and memory, and
the Love of God and it another, though called a Law.

But from this notion (that the old Law was a writing, and the new Law was the
spirit in us) no wonder if Aquinas gathered, that the word Justify chiefly
signified to make us Good and holy persons; and that our Holiness being our
real aptitude for our Glorifying and pleasing God, and so for our Happiness
therein, was to be called our merit; meaning thereby but that same fitness for
the End o^ Reward, which Scripture calls worthiness, and all religious
Preachers and people among us zealously defend in other notions, where the
Papists are forgotten.


L. It can never enter into my thoughts that so many Godly Learned Protestants
would make odious the Papists, if some of them at least meant no worse.


R. Know you not that judicious George Major was made the head of Heretics, by
Gallus, Amsdorfius, etc. for but saying, Bona opera sunt necessaria ad salutem:
Read your Schlusselburgius of his heresy, and judge as you see cause.

But whereas our Divines in confuting merit, do still describe it as of
commutative justice, and not as of paternal Governing distributive Justice
according to the Law of Grace, I will yet tell you what is said by Vasquez the
Jesuit in 1 Thom. qu. 21. disp. 83. c. 1. and 2. and sequent. Which when you
have read, I will appeal to common Reason and Christianity, 1. Whether it be
not a sinful thing for ignorant Protestants to take it upon one another
reports that the Papists hold that doctrine of merits, which they do not, and
so to make them unjustly more erroneous and odious than they are? 2. Whether it
be not a very sinful serving of the Devil, for unlearned Divines that have read
little of the Papists writings, to backbite and calumniate those of us who
truly state the Controversy, and narrow the differences, as if we made the
Papists better than they are, and took their parts, merely because we would
have no good men belie them? 3. Whether it be not the way to harden and
increase the Papists, to find such false dealing among their adversaries?

Cap. 1. Vasquez falls upon some late Doctors who say that [Commutative Justice
is properly and formally in God:] yet they say that it is not in God as it is
in men, nor as including any imperfection: In the second Chapter he
maintains, that Commutative Justice is not in God, according to propriety of
speech: and that this is the judgment of all the former School Doctors to a
man; He cites many whom I recite to show that he is not singular: [Alex.
Alens. 1. p. q. 39. m. 1. Scot. in 1. d. 46. q. 1. in solut. arg. Richard. art.
1. qu. 1. Durand. q. 1. Palud. q. 1. art. 1. Capreol. in 1. d. 45. q. 1. art.
1. Concl. 14. and art. 3. ad arg. S. Thom. 1. contra g. c. 39. and ibid.
Ferrariens. Hosius in Confess. Polon. c. 73. Ruard. art. 11. Sot. 3. de not.
and great. c. 7. and 3. de Justit. q. 5. art. ult. ad. 1. Cajet. in hunc art.
Joh. Bunder. in Compend. Concert. tit. 6. art. 7. Gabr. Biel supplem. in 4. d.
49. q. 4. art. 4. dub. 3. Bonavent. in 4. d. 46. art. 2. q. 1. ad 2. S. Thom.
1. 2. q. 114. art. 1. Conrad. ibid. Durand. iterum in 2. d. 27. q. 2. Perrar.
cont. Gent. 3. c. 179.] Then because some words of Medina and Cajet. and Romaus
seem for Commutative Justice, he shows that it was not their meaning: Next he
vindicateth Scotus and Gabriel as having no such meaning in some words of
theirs: Then he comes to the case of Christ's own Merits, and says, that some
say [Christ satisfied for us in rigor of Justice.] But that Aquin. Bonavent.
and such ancients use not that form of speech; but only teach, that Christ's
satisfaction was perfect, that is, needed no Acceptilation: but to this it is
not necessary that it be according to Justice properly, but that it was of
equal condignity by way of Merit. And other Schoolmen that speak as aforesaid
mean not that in Christ there was proper Justice toward God; but that the
equality which he kept by the way and similitude of Justice in his
satisfaction, was according to rigor: that is, needed not Gods liberal
acceptance, but was altogether of equal condignity; which is true: I except
but some late ones, who contend that in that satisfaction there was proper
justice; (whom he opposes;) But they speak only of Imperfect Justice, such as
is found in Creatures, which is not in God.

In Cap. 3. he lays down several foundations against Commutative Justice, and
confuteth Cajetan and Medina who said that indeed between God and man there was
no Commutative Justice, but inter res, that is, inter meritum and praemium
there is; which he shows is a contradiction of the former.

In Cap. 4. he disputes against commutative Justice in God to man, and that 1.
Because there is not aequalitas dati and accepti; and to be short, he brings
against it the very same arguments as Protestants urge against Merit, which
shows that both sides mean and oppose the very same thing: And he is so much
against any Merit of ours from God in Commutative Justice, that he labors to
prove that Christ's satisfaction was not such, nor can any* Creature so merit of
God; much less is man's penance or satisfaction such: yea indeed he goes too
far in his reasons, as I think: For he argues that where there is no Damnum
(damage) in the sin against God, there is no proper injustice, but a common
sort of it: and therefore there can no merit in proper justice by satisfaction
(by Christ or us;) and that our sin brings no damage to God, ergo, etc. But I
deny his Major: There may be injury where there is no Damage; and consequently
injustice: Suppose a King or Father so far above his subject or son, as that
all his disobedience would no way hurt or damnifie him: yet it would injure
him; because the father has Right to the sons obedience (and love,) and Juri^
denegatio est injuria. So that I confess that God cannot possibly give us
anything by Commutative Justice, in a strict and proper ^ence; because we can
so give him nothing in commutation: But I see not but that by sin, man sins
against proper Justice, in not giving God his Own or Due, to his Injury, though
not to his damage. But I confess the term Commutative nothing mutual Right, is
improper; and their distinction of Commutative and distributive Justice is
narrow, ambiguous, inep^, and therefore ^eedeth and not ends Controversies:
The true distribution of Justice is from the three Grand Moral Relations,
Dominii, Imperii and Beneficii vel Amicitiae. 1. God has the true proper Right
of Propriety in us, and to our service: 2. He has a proper Right of Imperium
Rule, and so to our obedience: 3. By his Goodness, Love and Benefits, he has a
proper Right to our greatest Love and Gratitude. And he that sins denies
God all these, and so does violate proper Justice, denying him that to which he
has Right.

But to return to Vasquez, having said, That our Merit and Satisfaction can be
no benefit to God, nor our sin his damage, nec ulla inaequalitas inter ipsum
and nos constituta est, quae sit objectum injustitiae propr^ae, he adds that
his punishments are no parts of commutative justice in resarciendis and
vindicandis injuriis, because here is no reparation of damage, as Thom. 2. 2.
q. 108. art. 2.

And Cap. 5. he proceeds to prove his doctrine, from the Condition of God and
the Creature, we being as Children and slaves, absolutely his own; therefore
there can be no proper justice between us: And he comes to the great
objection, that As free, our Actions are our own, and so may merit of Justice:
and answers No: because the Value of our works to which the Reward is given
depends on Gods grace, which he freely gives and conserveth to us, though
as* free the actions are of us as Causes: And because that Liberty is only a
fundamentum of merit, but gives not the work its Value (or worth;) therefore
we cannot make God our Debtor, by any meritorious work of which he himself is
the author and Cause.

And hence he is so much against this merit of Justice, as to infer, that
[Christ himself could not satisfy God according to strict Justice properly, by
the works of his Humane nature; because the whole Value came from the Godhead
it self, sanctifying the humanity and making his works worthy.

Cap. 6. he proceeds to show that though it be not true that some say, that
full equal satisfaction may be refused, it being not the ipsum debitum, and
that he proves that a full equal satisfaction to proper justice cannot in
justice be refused, and if it be refuseable, it is unequal; (though it may be
equal condignitate meriti quae ad justitiam proprie non pertinet;) Yet even
from Gods promise it self, it is no obligation of proper justice, that is on
God to us. Confuting Sotus that says that Gods Fidelity is not to be referred
to the virtue of verity, but properly belongs to commutative Justice.

If this be not enough, Disput. 86. he comes to the other branch, Whether God
have distributive Justice to us? and denies this also in proper sense. And
proves it by the authority of Bonavent. in 4. d. 46. art. 2. q. 1. ad 1.
Scotus qu. 1. Durand. ib. q. 1. and in 2. d. 23. q. 2. number. 5. Palud. in 4. d.
46. q. 1. a. 1. Gabriel supplem. in 4. d. 49. q. 4. a. 3. dub. 3. Alex. 1. p.
q. 39. in 1. and Thom. etc. and ex Anselm. and Aristot.

Cap. 3. he proves it by many Reasons. Yet Cap. 4. grants that Justice
distributive is in God, secundum quandam rationem generalem, non autem secundum
propriam; concluding, Distinguendum est; Aut enim Proprie opponitur
Metaphorice, aut opponitur Communiter: si priori modo, Deo Proprie convenit
Justitia distributiva; si posteriori, non convenit.

If in all this you can justify this Jesuit and all the Schoolmen who he
says agree with him, from giving too little to humane merit, and Gods Justice,
I suppose few Protestants will accuse him of giving too much.


L. But yet this Jesuit elsewhere is one of the greatest defenders of merit,
for all that he says in the words recited.


R. Do you mean the Name or Thing? If the Name 1. Sure you will not make that a
matter of much quarrel: 2. If you do, you must quarrel also with all the
ancient Fathers; even with Augustine who (as Melancthon says, Loc. com. de
Lib. arb. of his use of the word free will) does use it throughout all his
Volumes. 3. And if (...) be well translated Worthiness or Merit, you must
quarrel with Christ and his Apostles also, (of which before.)


L. But Aquinas his followers use the word Merits in a worser sense, and many a
volume they have written partly to assert it and defend it.


R. I hope you your self would write to defend Gods retributive Judgment, and
that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. If you
would let an Infidel carry it, that pleads that obedience and patience have
no Reward, the Christian cause is little beholden to you. Justice, Reward and
Merit are Relatives in their sense; and you must deny All or none: For nothing
can be Rewarded but a Rewardable act, which they mean by meritorious, (as
nothing can be Punished, but a real or imputed sault; Poena and Culpa being so
related also:) Though as Affliction may be without the commerit of culpability,
so a mere Gift may be without Laudable merit. And Judicial Justice is the
virtue of equal Judicial retribution, according to laudable or culpable actions.

But what Aquinas and his followers hold, it is easy to see in himself, in
Cajetan, in Ferrariensis and abundance such: I will now turn you but to such an
Epitomizer as Carbo, (or Vignerius,) where it is soonest found. Carbo 1. 2. q.
21. art. 4. says [Actus humani habent rationem meriti and demeriti per
comparationem ad Deum; Quia omnes actus sunt referribiles in Deum ut est
ultimus ^inis, and ut regi^ communitatem universi, and ita debet eis pro
justitia retribuere; alias non haberet universi procurationem. 2. Homo quantum
in se est, aliquid subtrahit vel exhibet Deo, cum servat, vel non servat
ordinem a Deo constitutum. 3. Homo sic movetur a Deo ut Instrumentum, ut etiam
moveat seipsum; and ideo meretur and demeretur. 4. Homo non ordinat se totum ad
rempublicam, secundum omnia sua; and ideo non omnes ejus Actus sunt meritorii
respectu reipublicae: sed totus ordinatur ad Deum, respectu cujus omnis actus
est meritorius vel demeritorius.

So that here is a meriting of God in the same sense as there is a demeriting
and a meriting of God as the Rector of the Universe: not for any real profit to
God, but for a free referring all our actions to him as the end, and keeping
the order he has constituted in the World, and quantum in nobis with a loving
and honoring mind returning to him that which is his own. And do you deny any
of all this?


L. No, not the Matter, but this is not to be called Merit.


R. If you will needs be the Master of Language, openly profess then that it is
the Name that you contend about.

Indeed Aquinas defends that which Vasquez seems to deny, that in God there
is Distributive, though not Commutative Justice (quia a nullo accipit.) And
that though God do all according to the good pleasure of his will, yet he does
all things Righteously, because his Will is the Rule of Justice, and he wills
what his Wisdom dictateth. And that he gives himself his Due, in that he does
all to the glorifying of his goodness: and he gives the creatures their due,
in that he orders one for another, as its end, and the parts for the whole:
yet he is not called a Debtor to any, because all are ordinated to Him: which
Justice is called, The Condecency of his Goodness. And is there any thing to be
blamed in all this? I am sure that English ears are so used to hear that God is
Just, yea, that the Glory of his Justice is a great End of his Government, that
good men will hardly endure you to deny it: Though yet through prejudice they
hardly digest the name of that Merit or Rewardableness which is the object of
that Justice; because of other men's abuse of the word, and some men's hard
interpretation of it. But God the Righteous Judge will give the Crown of
Righteousness (2 Timothy 4. 8.) not according to Names and Logical Notions, but
men's works.


L. But are other Jesuits of Vasquez 's mind, or many other Schoolmen of
Aquinas his opinion? We commonly suppose them to give more to Merit.


R. There are many School Doctors so strict herein, that they will not grant
that there is any such thing properly as Legal or Governing Justice in God.
Ruiz cites for this Argentin. 4. d. 46. q. 1. a. 1. Bassolis ibi q. 1.
Brianson in 4. q. 8. cor. 3. sol. 152. says [Nullus fidelium fuit ita fatuus
quod quaereret si peccator possit dare aliquid condignum, vel aequivalens
gratiae Dei] speaking of Commutative Justice; But Ordinative Justice (which is
that which we call Governing) only he defends in the case
a. 1. Suarez (a Jesuit) de Just. Dei sect. 4. n. 8. Pesant. 1. p. q. 21. a.
1. disp. 1. concl. 2. But he thinks that they differ but in words from others
that assert Gods Legal Justice (vid^licet Scotus, Sotus, Rubellus, Lorca,
Navarret.) Yet all agree, that God is (in some sense) Just. And Ruiz says that
Suarez (passim) maintains that Gods Promises are but naked assertions, by
which he declares his will to give the benefit. And Durandus 2. d. 27. q. 2.
n. 15. faith that Gods promises signify not any obligation, but the mere
disposition of Gods liberality. And Greg. Arim. 1. d. 17. q. 1. a. 2. says,
that the Crown of Righteousness is not a debt, but only of Gods free
ordination. And Marsil. 2. q. 18. a. 4. absolutely denies, that God is a
Debtor, or does any otherwise accept men's deserts, than by the free disposition
of a gift. Scotus holds our acts are called Merit as relating to Gods free
Covenant or Promise to reward them, and not otherwise, but he absolutely
denies yet that God is thereby made our Debtor, 4. d. 46. Major. 2. d. 27. not
only follows him, but says, God may deny Glory to good works; (but he
means as the rest.) Richard. 2. d. 27. q. 3. a. 2. ad 3. seems to deny even
Debt upon the title of promise. Bon^vent. 2. d. 27. a. 2. q. 3. says but that
God is quodammodo, in some sort obliged to glorify them that love him. Ruiz
who is against all this, and makes Gods Promises to be proper promises and
Covenants, and more than bare assertions, and that God is become a kind of
Debtor by his Promise (and so it is not his Veracity only that is our security,
as Suarez thinks) yet holds, that It is but the Things promised that are
Due or obliged to us, and that Gods obligation is properly to Himself: that he
has indeed true Governing or Legal Justice, but tanquam objectum Formale and
primarium respicit universalissimum bonum and praestantissimum quod est Ipse:
and tanquam Materiale and secundarium objectum respicit universale bonum totius
mundi constantem ex omnibus creaturis, quod praeponit particularibus bonis
singularum creaturarum. Indeed he says, that this Justice in God, is that
[Quae solo nature lumine demonstrari potest: ac proinde nullam supponit liberam
Dei promissionem aut pactum, nullumque supernaturalem concursum aut gratiam.]
But this is mere confusion by ambiguous words. These men talk as if they
considered not, that Creation was a free act of God, and made man a Law in the
Nature of himself and the circumstant creatures; And in this Law of Nature is a
signification of Gods will to do good to the good, and reward the obedient, and
this is a Natural promise. There could be no obedience, and so no merits, were
there no Law: And if there be a Law of Nature, (and so God even by making us
Rational free Governable Creatures was himself our Governor), these things
supposed to be done by the very act of Creating, it is a contradiction to say
that God is our Governor, and not a Just Governor, (being perfect as he is
God) or to be Just, and yet not Resolved to use the obedient better than the
disobedient. To be Governor, is to be the Orderer of Moral Agents: And what
Moral Order is there, where the good and bad are not differenced in
retributions? But the Papists conceits of all Promises to Adam and his merits
being merely supernatural, confound them in many such dispu^ati^^s.


L. But do they not hold that a man may merit the remission of his own sins?
(yea, and of the sins of others?) and justification also?


R. Let Medina answer you in 12. q. 113. a. 1. p. 651. [Ad authoritates
sonantes quod non meremur Remissionem peccatorum nec vero justificationem, non
oportet satisfacere: Nam omnes convenimus, in hanc sententiam Catholicam and
irrefragabilem, quod non meremur remissionem peccatorum. -- ut Augustine.
Nullane sunt merita justorum? Sunt plane quia justi sunt. sed ut justi fierent,
merita non fuere.] None merit Remission or Justification, with them.


L. Not by merit of Condignity; but they say, that by merit of Congruity a man
may merit Remission and Conversion and Justification.


R. Medina ibid. p. 652. [Sed cum Meritum de Congruo non innitatur Justitiae,
sed Congruenti^, proprie appellationem meriti non meretur.] And so say many
others of them.


L. But at least they hold that we may prepare our selves for Justification or
Conversion without Grace, or special Grace.


R. Preparatory Grace is not the same that the Grace to which it prepares us:
But let the same Medina answer you, q. 109. p. 592. Deus expectat nostrum
consensum (inquit Pelagius) ut nos convertat: ergo ex part voluntatis nostra
est pr^paratio ad gratiam suscipiendam. Sed h^c sententia est haeretica and
contra Scripturas and Concilia; Veritas Catholica est quod Gratia Justificans
datur sine meritis, and quod nemo se valet ad ^am praeparare sine auxilio
speciali. Et p. 593. Ultima dispositio ad gratiam ad quam infallibiliter se
quitur Gratia, non habetur ex facultate naturae, sed tantum dono Dei speciali.
Do you say any more against Preparation for Grace without Grace, or against
man's power to prepare himself? or against merit than all this?


L. But sure Luther and his fellow Reformers had never so much inveighed
against the Papists in the point of Works, Merits and Justification, if they
had all taught no worse than these which you have cited; There are sure many
others that say worse.


R. No question but the Ignorance of the Priests was so great, and the carnal
ends so powerful with covetous proud men, which were served by the abuse of the
Doctrine of Merits and Good Works, that multitudes of such did ordinarily abuse
it: If all Protestants taught the Protestant Doctrine uncorruptly, we should
not have had so many differences and divisions as we have had; nor would one
condemn another as you do us.


L. But though the old Schoolmen might mean better, those that Luther had to do
with, did sure speak much worse.


R. I tell you, the Carnal and Ignorant sort of Priests and Friars did each man
talk according to his model, and so do all Sects: Few had the Wit and Skill to
open aright the common Doctrine: But 1. Our Dr. Field (of the Church)
undertaketh to prove, that (excepting the tyrannical Papal faction, and the
carnal and ignorant that served their ends, and by violence bore down the rest)
the chief of the Doctors in the Church of Rome it self, did hold the great
Doctrines which the Protestants against the Papists do assert. 2. To tire you
now with no more, I will cite but two of Luthers own adversaries in his days.
1. The first is the Learned Cardinal Contacenus who lived in the time of
Luthers Reformation: Read but his Notes on Luthers Articles, and his Tract. of
Justification, Free Will and Predestination, and you will see that he says
almost as much for what you plead, as you would do your self. I am loath to tire
the Reader with the citation of his words at large; Turn to them and read them,
and see where he differs from us. I confess the man was moderate; but never
accused as differing herein from the Church of Rome, as in an Article
determined of by their Councils: But their Doctors variously express themselves.

The other is Fisher Bishop of Rochester one of the chief Martyrs of the Roman
Cause, beheaded by Henry the Eighth for denying his Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical: who in Opuscul. de fiducia and misericordia Dei (Printed Colon.
1556.) speaks as much and plainly for the interest of Faith and Mercy and
Christ's Redemption as Protestants use to do. fol. F. Fide in Christum sola quis
etiam citra quaevis opera justificatur. Nam si propriis operibus quis
justificatus fuerit, is habet unde glorietur apud se: gloriari enim potest de
operibus suis quibus justificatus est: Caeterum qui non suis operibus, sed fide
justus effectus est, huic de se neutiquam est gloriandum, sed de Deo qui fidem
ei dedit qua justificatur. -- Introducit itaque Scripturam Paulus quae non per
opera, sed per fidem Abrahae justificationem imputat; nimirum ut ita non sibi
sed Deo totam referat gloriam -- Ecce quia credidit Abraham, ideo per fidem
justificatus est: Nam si per opera sua justitiam fuisset consecutus, jam non
gratis ei Justitia fuisset dat^, sed magis operum respectu. -- Si justificatio
propter opera conferatur, jam ex debito confertur potius quam gratis, hoc est,
quam per gratiam and ex gratuita Dei liberalitate. -- Caeterum e diverso quando
citra opera quis ob id tantum quod credat in Christum qui justificat impium,
justificationem adeptus est, jam so^a fides sua illi ad justificationem
imputatur. Ecce jam hic audis cui jam fides ad justitiam imputatur; ei viz. qui
non operatur sed credit in eum qui justificat impium sola fide.

Et ^ol. G. passim. and H. Per fidem in illum sic expurgaremur, ut ille nostra
peccata ferret, nos ejus justitiam assequeremur: -- Non dicit factum fuisse
illum Peccatorem, and nos justos per illum, sed illum Peccatum, and nos
Justitiam Dei: See the rest -- Nec est ut quisquam secum haesitet number pro suis
peccatis Christus seipsum tradiderit: Immo credat, and securus sit ad eorum se
catalogum pertinere pro quorum peccatis Christus semetipsum donavit: Nam si
istud non crediderit, plane sejunctus est ab eorum consortio: fides enim ea res
est, qua nos agglutinamur ita Christo, ut meritorum ejus facti simus
participes: and per hanc constituti sumus una cum eo filii Dei pariter and
cohaeredes -- fol. I. Hoc tu quisquis es peccator persuasissimum habeas, quod
si resipueris ac in Christum constanter credideris, jam Christum induisti, jam
ejus spirit^ donatus es, ^am denique communem cum illo patrem nactus es -- See
the rest. Et fol. I. 5. Nam satisfaciente pro nobis hoc potentissimo sanguine,
quotquot in Christum credimus a peccatis omnibus abluimur and justificamur,
insiti Christo, atque in unum cum ipso ferruminati, sic ut omnia mala nostra
per ipsum deleta sint, bon^ vero ipsius cuncta nobis effecta sint communia: Is
not this high enough?

Fol. K. L. Is cord accedit quem veteris vitae poenitet -- Quare fides in
Christum una cum resipiscentia te justificat ab omn^ peccato.

Fol. M. Gratis confertur nobis ista redemptio; non ^llis meritis nostris --
Namque ante quodvis Meritum justi constituimur, nimirum ut inde prodeant opera
nostra justa: fiunt utique opera nostra justa per justitiam fidei -- Quisquis
igitur peccator fueris (nihil moror quo^ quantaque and quam gravia peccata tua
fuerint) si teipsum vere converteris ad Deum, teque ipsum in ejus misericordiam
totum projeceris, credens Jesum Christum pro te mortuum, jam haud dubie primam
istam Justificationem adeptus es. Sed cave te fallas, te conversum simulans
quum non integre convertaris. Is quidem integre convertitur, qui toto cord
peccatis renunciat, fiduciam plene suam collocans in Deo -- What think you of
all this? Do you differ from it?


L. I will not be so malignant as to disown the truth, because a Papist
speaks it: But still you shall give me leave to believe that so many
Protestants would never have said so much against their Doctrine in this point,
if they had indeed held what these words import, which are as much as any
Protestant herein says. And you your self in your Confession cite abundance of
them speaking for man's Merits.


R. 1. I cited them as using commonly the term [Merit] which I told you I had
rather (because of men's misunderstanding) were disused, so we could agree of
some fitter safer word. 2. And I told you that one Rom^us foolishly pleads
for Merit in point of Commutative Justice, which the most reject. 3. And I told
you, that the paltry phrase of Merit [ex proportione operum] is used by some,
and rejected by others: And some that use it, it is like, have an unsound
meaning in it, and others mean but that different degrees of Glory or Reward
shall be given according to different degrees of holiness, which Protestants
approve.

But as I justify those Protestants who reprehend the unsound asscrtions of
any Papists Writers, so I must advise you to charge nothing on any Sect or
party of men, upon the words of particular men, but what that party owneth: nor
to charge men with opinions, because others have so done before you, without
finding what you charge them with in their own words.


L. Would you have me so uncharitable as to suspect so many Protestant Writers
of Calumny?


R. 1. It is no Calumny to charge that on some Papists, which those some do
hold. 2. It is perverse charity to receive unproved accusations of others, for
fear of suspecting the accusers of calumny. By that rule all the false reports
that now fly about in London should be received, if a good man or woman
(specially many) have once spoken them. 3. And tell me whether you would have
others observe the same rule toward you* For instance, you may see in Tolet (a
Cardinal Jesuit) on the Romans, that he charge the Heretics (as he calls
us) with holding that God does only Hide or forget our sins, and not impute
them to us, but does not mortify them. Whereas we all hold, that he Remitteth
actual sins past by Pardoning them as to the punishment; but that he mortifieth
the present habits of sin, and preventeth the Reign of future sin (called Moral
sin by them) in such as shall be saved. Which is the same in sense as they hold
themselves. So he charge us as holding, that we have no Inherent
Righteousness after Justification (no not Imperfect) but only Christ's
Righteousness imputed; and that we hold obedience unnecessary as to our final
or continued Justification: All which are false. And shall all the unlearned
Papists believe this of us, for fear of an uncharitable suspicion of their
Teachers? Multitudes of their Writers falsely charge us with these same errors.


L. The Papists are Liars, and therefore to be suspected, but so are not our
Divines.


R. If once you fall upon such Rules as those (as that Accusations against
adversaries are to be believed without proof, on one side and not on the other)
Gods Rule against receiving evil reports will be cast out; and Charity and
Justice will be cast away; and mere siding and saction will possess the place:
And then all the question will be, Who are those Accusers that are to be
believed? And if you think that it is your Teachers, the Papists that have many
more, will think that they have more reason to believe them: And ^^ the
Anabaptists will believe theirs, and the Separatists theirs, and the Quakers
theirs: and what falsehood and evil will not then be believed against all
parties? and how odious will they appear to one another, and consequently all
(Christians) to Infidels and Heathens?


L. A man that is set upon a sodering design, may palliate any Heresy in the
world, and put a fair sense on the foulest words; but God hates such cloaking
of sin, and compliance with it.


R. May not Papists, Familists, Seekers, Quakers and all Sects say the same
against Concord and Compliance with you?

I pray you tell me what you think of these following words, before you know
who wrote them; and take heed what you say of them, lest you strike you know
not whom.

[Quest* How is Justification free, seeing faith and repentance are required to
it? Answ. There are two answers given; One is from Augustines doctrine Epist.
105. the sum is, As Justification is taken inclusively, taking in Faith and
Repentance as its beginning, it is free, because faith is free: But as it is
taken narrowly for Justification following faith that is, for Remission of sin,
and Reconciliation with God, it is merited by faith. But the other solution I
more approve, and it seems more agreeable to Scripture: to wit, that even
Remission of sin it self and Reconciliation with God, are given freely, no
Merit of ours going before, and that neither by faith nor repentance we do
merit the gift of this grace: For understanding of which, Note, that Faith has
not of it self any efficacy as it is our act, to Remit or Reconcile; but all
the Virtue proceeds from the object it self, that is, Christ; who^e Virtue
and Merit God has determined to apply to a sinner for his justification by
faith in him: And what I say of Faith, I say of Repentance, and other
dispositions, as in the example of them that looked to the Brazen Serpent, who
were healed by looking: not that looking as it was an act of the eye had such a
healing force* but the effica^y was from the Serpent, which God had appointed
for the Ioure. So we say* of Faith, which has not in its nature and from its
entity any power to Remit and Reconcile, but as the Virtue of Christ does this
in believers: And so I answer, that If Faith justified as an act and of it
self, Justification were not free; But so it does not, but is a Medi^m by Gods
good pleasure, by which the Virtue of Christ Justifies believers: therefore
faith (or repentance,) make it not l^ss free* ^. g. I give a Beggar a gift: He
puts forth his hand and takes it: If one tell me, Thou gave it not freely,
because he took it, or else had not had it, it were a ridiculous objection: For
putting forth the hand does not of it self bring him a gift: else every time
that he puts forth his hand it would bring in a gift: But it is from the virtue
and bounty of the giver. So is it as to faith and the dispositions by which the
virtue of Christ and the free mercy of God do give Remission and Reconciliation
to believers and disposed persons: so that it takes not away Christ's Merit,
nor makes Grace less free, that faith or these dispositions are asserted.


L. I know not how much men may mean worse than they speak: but these words are
such as the best Protestants use.


R. They are the words (translated) of the aforesaid Fr. Tolet a Jesuit and
Cardinal on Romans 3. page 157, 158, 159.

But still remember, that by Justification they mean the holy effect of the
Spirit on the soul; and indeed by Remission of sin, they most commonly mean the
destroying or mortifying sin within us, and ceasing to commit the act: And they
are dark and confused in these matters.


L. But do not Papists hold forgiveness of deserved punishment?


R. Yes: but they bring it in disorderly, and on other occasions: But if they
did not, how could they hold, that any sin past from our childhood till
Conversion is Remitted or pardoned? For the Act is past as soon as done, and
factum infectum fieri non potest: and so such past sins can have no remission,
but forgiving the penalty, and healing the effects. And wrangling Papists
consider not that this is the Remission that Protestants mean, who call their
kind of Remission by the name of mortification: And so we endlesly quarrel
about words, through our unhappy imperfection in the art of speaking, and words
being arbitrary signs, the world is come to no agreement of their sense.


L. You confess then their confused Doctrine, and you cannot excuse many of
their Doctors from gross error herein.


R. No, nor many honest pious persons that go for Protestants: What Papists
have more plainly subverted the Gospel by their Doctrine on these subjects,
than many of those called Antinomians have done by the contrary extreme? And
who can justify all the sentences and phrases of many eminent Divines among
us? yea, or of many of the most wise and accurate? For when all are much
ignorant, who can say, I do not err?


L. But undoubtedly you will be as bitterly censured for these your favorable
interpretations of the Papists in the point of Merit, as if you were half a
Papist your self, and were but such a Mongrel as Erasmus, Wicelius, Cassander,
or Grotius, or as if your Conciliatory designs would carry you as far at last
as Grotius, Mileterius, Baldwin, or at least, as Mountague, Guil. Forbes, and
such others went. And others will then say, that you are justly served for
writing so much against Grotius and his followers on this account as you have
done, of which Bishop Bramhall and his Epistoler have already told you.


R. Truth, honesty and Gods approbation change not as men's interests, minds or
tongues do: Time will come, that Truth will be more regarded, when Love and
Peace are to be revived; unless God will forsake this contentious and
unrighteous World. And I am so near, so very near that World, where there is
nothing but Truth, Love and Righteousness, and where God is All, and the
Fullness and felicitating object of holy souls, and where the censures of men
are of no signification, that I am utterly unexcusable, if I should betray the
Cause of Truth, Love and Concord, to avoid the obloquy of men, who speak evil
of the things which they never understood.


The Thirteenth Days CONFERENCE. Of the great errors, sin and danger which
many Ignorant Professors fall into, on the pretense of avoiding and abhorring
Popery. Between S. A Sectary, and P. A Peacemaker.
P. Neighbor, I understand that you are one of those that divulge your
desamatory Lamentations of me as inclining to Popery, for some passages which I
lately Preached in the City: I pray you speak that to my face which you so
freely speak behind my back.


S. Sir, the City ringeth of you as one that greatly wrongeth the cause of God,
And my own ears heard you say that the difference between us and the Papists is
little more than in ambiguous words, and points unsearchable.


P. And this I hear you are one that have divulged, and so it is by such as you
that the City is made to ring of it. But if this be an untruth of great
aggravation, do you then deserve the title you assume, or are you a fit
defender of the truth? or can your Conscience tolerate you herein? That which I
said was this: I distinguished the Controversies between us and the Papists
into such as depend on a Carnal Interest and Mind, and such as do not, but
arise from the mere difficulty of the subject: In the former sort I said our
difference is very great, and like to be so; and such are the differences about
their Papal power and Church state, their Government, and worship as fitted
hereunto; and many doctrines, as that of Purgatory, Indulgences, Auricular
Confession abused by them, Transubstantiation, etc. But the other sort of
doctrinals are made by many the matter of greater difference than there is
cause; such as I named, Predestination, Providence, the cause of sin, man's
power, and fre-will, Grace, certainty of salvation, and I might have added,
Justification and Merit as held by their Church and most of the Schoolmen: not
that here is no difference indeed; but that long study has made me certain
that it is more in words than is commonly conceived: And this Truth is fit to
be spoken though the mistaken be offended by it. Yea in these matters the
Papists differ among themselves as much as with us.

Dare you deny that these were my words? If you do you are a falsifier.


S. When you speak so clowdily, who can remember every word you say?


P. Is not this plain English? Peruse it and consider. And dare you carry false
reports abroad on pretense of pious zeal, and then say, You cannot remember?
Why would you report that which you cannot remember? Why would you not stay
till you had helped your memory, by speaking with me or some one that could have
informed you? But are not we in a hard case with such hearers as you, when we
must look to be as often belyed as your understanding or your memory fails?
because your loose Conscience fails with them: which is very often.


S. I am not alone in judging thus of you; City and Country ring of it: what
company can one come into where you are not talked of? I daily hear good people
lament you: and the best they say is, that God uses to let those men fall
foully in some things who have been extraordinarily serviceable, that men may
not idolize them.


P. They that know me but half as well as I know my self, will know that I have
enough to abase me before God and man: But will that warrant a course of lying
and backbiting in others? Do you partly receive, and partly make and propagate
false reports, and then plead the Commonness for your excuse? He that set
London on fire might so have excused himself because the flame was common when
he had caused it. The effect and prospering of your sin should humble you, and
not seem to justify you. But yet I must tell you that Backbiting Sectaries are
not the greater part of London: There are many sober people that are ashamed of
your sin and folly.

I will make this friendly motion to you: Instead of backbiting, Let us here to
one another faces, so friendly admonish each other of that which we take to be
sin, as may help to bring each other to repentance: And do you begin, Tell me
of all the evil that you know by me.


S. I have nothing to accuse you of, but that your Principles are too large,
and you vent them too freely, and thereby you harden Papists, and dishonor the
Protestant cause, and wrong free grace, and the Righteousness of Christ, by
your doctrine of Justification and man's Righteousness; And by coming so near
Conformity, you grieve the hearts of good people, and may bring persecution on
those that cannot do as you can.


P. 1. About Conformity, forbear me here, for I must deal with you of that by
it self elsewhere.

2. As to my doctrine of Justification, if I have not fully justified it
elsewhere, I shall not now on this occasion.

3. But whether you or I be righter about Popery, let us now debate. Have you
read my Safe Relig. and my Key for Catholics, and my Treatise of the Certainty
of Christianity without Popery, and my late Dialogue, and my Treat. against
Johnson of the Visibility of the Church? and others against Popery?


S. I have somewhat else to do than read all your Writings.


P. Why have you not then somewhat else to do than hear me, and backbite me,
and judge of things which you have not leisure to understand? Do we not still
deal on hard terms with such men as you? that neither speaking nor writing can
make them know our minds? Have all your party that revile me, done more each
one against Popery than I have done?

But if this be all that you have to call me to repentance for, I have a great
deal more to say against my self; And now I will deal faithfully with you: I
beseech you try, whether it be not necessary that you speedily repent of all
these following sins:

1. What a shame is it for one that would be taken for a Religious man to be so
Ignorant as you are, and no better know the truth of Christ, from the errors of
Popery, than (it appears) you do?

2. What a sin for one so Ignorant to be so rash and bold in venturing to judge
of that which he understands not?

3. What a sin is it for one so Ignorant to be so proud of his pretended
knowledge, as to venture to defame his Teachers for contradicting him in his
er^oneous conceits? Have you studied these things as long and hard as I have
done? or are you sure that you have done it more in partially; and that God
has illuminated you so much more, as your confidence would import?

4. What an unchristian crime is it, to make lies and carry them abroad of your
Teachers, and then be forced to confess, that it was the failing of your memory
as to what you heard?

5. What a sin is it to be a backbiter? Neither you, nor any one of your
quality did ever come to my face either to know my meaning, or to hear what I
had to say, nor to reprove my sin, or convince me of my error.

6. Is not unrighteousness a sin, in your judging and reports, as it is in
public Judgments? Should not a man be heard before he be condemned?
especially a Minister of Christ?

7. What a sin is it to receive false reports from others, and encourage
backbites whom you should rebuke and frown away?

8. What a heinous sin is it thus to destroy the Hearers souls, and as those
that have the Plague, to carry your infection from house to house, and kill
men's Love, and breed in them false conceits and bitter injurious thoughts of
others?

9. What a sin is it with such unthankfulness to requite Christ's servants that
spend their days, and strength, and estates in laboring for men's good? When I
take none of your money, when I have these twelve years preached (as I had
liberty) freely without hire; when I had been put on to plead the
Non-conformists Cause in the costlies^ circumstances, and to bear the greatest
odium for it; when I was I think the first that was silenced on such accounts;
when I have been twelve or fourteen years deprived of all Ecclesiastical
maintenance; when I refused a Bishopric* when I have labored in Writings and
other duties to the consuming of my flesh in daily and hourly pain and
weakness, and now look every Sermon for my last, and am ready to appear before
my Judge: to be to the very last thus calumniated and reviled by pievish
Sectaries, would be a sad reward, were your favor my reward! But is this just
or grateful? or shall the unrighteous and unthankful be accounted the best men?
I know I could have been one of the highest in your favor and applause, if I
would have humoured and followed you: But I had rather that God should keep me
from your honor, than buy it at so dear a rate.

10. And is it no sin thus to hinder the success of our labors, by making us
odious or suspected by them that should profit by us?

11. Is it not hypocrisy, to cry out of the Bishops for silencing us, when you
show that you would fain do it your selves? Would not you silence me now if it
were in your power? Yea, I doubt not but when I die, some of you will rejoice
and say, that God did it in judgment on me.

12. And thus to make divisions among Christians, that should hold the Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace, will one day be known to be a sin.

13. And so it is hereby to harden the enemies of Religion, by your clamours
and the divisions which you cause; and tempt them to hate both you and us.

14. And it is worst of all to father all this on God, and Truth and Godliness,
and use such holy Names for so bad a Cause.

15. And it aggravateth your sin, that you take no more notice of all those
plain and terrible Scriptures, which as openly condemn your sin, as the sin of
Drunkards or Swearers is condemned: were it but James 3. it would leave you
utterly without excuse.

16. Yea, and that you can see the sins of such Drunkards and Swearers, yea,
and see the Mote in the eyes of one that does but use a Form or Ceremony which
you dislike, and cannot see these Beams in your own. For all these sins I
admonish you presently to repent.


S. Who is it that is censorious? you or I? It is sin with you to open your
sin.


P. I desired you to open it: But see now how hard a work Repentance is, when
in a Professor such sins as these will not be confessed.


S. Well, come to the cause it self: Is it I or you that comply with Papists?


P. I make that the business of this Conference with you: It is not you only,
but some wiser men than you, that look so much at the evil of Popery, that they
forget the evil of an unrighteous opposition, and of the other extreme: And
they do as one that by laboring to cure another of a Dead Palsy, casts
himself into a Frenzy or a Fever: or like one that to avoid a Carrion that
stinketh in the Ditch, does run himself into the Ditch on the other side the
way. Gods Truth must be vindicated only by Truth; and Wisdom is best justified
of her own children by Wisdom. God has no pleasure in fools, no^ does his
Glory need our lie. There is a time when the Devil will seem to be against
error and sin (and so against Popery): but it is in a way which shall promote
it: which commonly is by ill-doing and over-doing. I tell you plainly, the
Cause of Truth and Reformation gets nothing by some men that se^m most zealous
for it. For an unstudied half-wise honest Minister or private man to believe
false reports of the Papists, and to mis-state Controversies, and to rail on
them on such suppositions, and to mix many errors of his own in his opposition,
and to backbite those that know more of the matter, as symbolizing with the
Papists, this is certainly serving the Devil, how honest soever the instruments
in the main may be.


S. I perceive that you have an aching tooth at the Protestant Divines as well
as at me: Are you wiser than all they? or are you not warping to Grotianism
which you have written against?


P. Among the Protestant Divines there are well studied, knowing, solid men,
that understand what they say, (such as Bishop Usher, Dr. Chaloner, Dr. Field,
Dr. White, Chillingworth, Morton, Davenant, Andrews, and many such; and abroad,
Camero, Dallaus, Blondell, Drelincourt, Amyra^dus, Placaeus, V^ssius, Junius,
Martinius, Crocius, Bergius, Bucer, Musculus, Melanchthon and many others:) and
there are ignorant, hotheaded, self-conceited men, that rave in extremes, (as
Gallus, Ambsdorsius and their companions did against Georg. Major, for saying
[Bona opera sunt necessaria ad salutem]). And it is no wonder, that the best
Churches have many such; and if such are the forwardest to judge and cry down
all that are not as ignorant as they. And in our times, the World is more
beholden to the fewness of buyers, and the wit of Booksellers refusing to Print
them, than to the humility or modesty of such men, that the Shops do not abound
with such furious Writings, ^s Mr. Brownes Antichristomachus, Mr. Danvers, Mr.
Bagshaw, etc. and that Antichrist, Antichrist, is not made in Print the
Universal Consutation of sober truth, as commonly as it is bawled out in words.


S. Is it not safest to get far enough from Antichrist and Popery? Your study
is to teach men how near they may come to sin without sin; and how to dance
about the brink of Hell: For my part, I will be one of them that shall come out
of Babylon, and partake not of her sins, nor touch the unclean thing, and that
keep their garments undefiled; and not one that like you is grown Lukewarm by
being over-fond of Unity and Peace: You will follow Grotius it is doubt at last.


P. Uncleanness must not be touched, nor sin partaked of, nor lukewarm
indifferency to sin entertained; we must go as far from sin as we can. But,
poor deceived souls run into it, under the conceit of going far enough from it,
and sometimes into greater than they avoid.


S. What sin have such Protestants run into in their opposition to Popery?


P. I will tell you some, I. In Doctrine: and II. In the consequent^ and
practice.

I. It is more than one injudicious Protestant Divine that has printed such
unfound Opinions as these in opposition to Popery for want of judgment.

1. While they plead against the Romish false Tradition, they have weakened
faith, by denying that necessary use of Historical Tradition of Scripture which
Christianity does suppose: (As others have denied the necessary use of Reason
unto faith.)

2. They have wronged the Church by undervaluing the Tradition of the Creed and
the Essentials of Christianity, by many means besides the Scriptures.

3. They have much wronged the Protestant Cause by denying the perpetual
Visibility of the Church, and almost given it away, as I have showed against
Johnson.

4. And their d^nyal of its Universality, and confining it long to the
Waldenses and such others, is an exceeding injury to the Church and Truth.

5. And so is some men's over-doing as for the Scripture, who teach men that
they can be no surer of Christianity, (as delivered many years in Baptism
before any of the New Testament was written,) than they are that there is no
one error in all the Bible, by the carelessness of the Scribes and Printers, nor
any humane frailty in the phrase.

6. And also their feigning the Scripture perfection to consist, in its being a
particular determiner of all those circumstances of which it is only a general
rule.

7. And those that make every form of prayer, or Ceremony to be Antichristian.

8. And those that make Justifying faith to be a certainty or full persuasion
that we are elected and pardoned and shall be saved.

9. And those that say, that To believe that I am justified is to believe Gods
Word, or ^ides divina; either (as most say) because one of the premises is in
Scripture, or (as excellent Chamier says) because the Witness of the Spirit is
Gods Word.

10. And those that say All that have true faith, are sure they have such: (as
Keckerman and too many others.)

11. Those that deny Christ to have made any Law.

12. And those also that assert Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in that
sense which I have proved to subvert the Gospel.

13. And those that deny Faith it self to be Imputed for righteousness.

14. And those that deny that there is any personal Evangelical Righteousness
in our selves that is any way necessary to our Justification.

15. And those that lay all the stress of Faiths Justifying us on the notion of
Instrumental efficiency.

16. And those that say we are Justified by no act of faith, but its receiving
Christ's Righteousness; and all other acts of faith are the Wor^s by which none
is justified.

17. And those that say, that Evangelical obedience is not meritorious as it
signifies only Rewardable in point of Paternal Evangelical Governing Justice,
and as all the ancient Fathers used that word; because we merit not by
Commutation.

18. And those that say, that man has no free will (at all, of any sort) to
spiritual good.

19. And those that say, that Christ was in Gods reputation, the greatest
sinner, or wicked man, Adulterer, Murderer, hater of God in all the world.

20. And those that say, that he suffered in soul Pain altogether of the same
kind with those that the damned suffer in H^^.

21. And those that in opposition to the Popish Government, Confession,
Austerities, and several acts of Worship, do run into the contrary extreme,
against due Government, Confession, Austerities, etc. And those that from dark
uncertainty or a minus noti^ do gather many conclusions against known truth.

I pass by such as the Antinomians, who as I have proved* subve^t the Gospel it
self, by running into the contrary extreme from Pope^^^.


S. You are as ^ad as Parker, or the Debate-maker, that th^s l^y s^^ndal on the
Reformers themselves. If these were their faults, you ^^^^ cover them, and not
open them. This had been enough for ^ Romish R^bshakeh.


P. You know not what it is that you say. This is to a^ho^^ ^^^^tance, and to
prefer the honor of man before the honor of God: yea, to let the shame be
cast on Gods Word and Religion, lest the erro^ of ^^^^ be shamed. But all men
are liars (that is, fallible) and God is ^^^^* He that confesses and forsakes
his sin shall have mercy, but he that hides it, shall not prosper. Are there
not with you, even with you also (says the Prophet) sins against the Lord our
God? Why has God recorded in Scripture the faults of so many of his servants,
and fome^ them to such open Confessions? Did Paul wrong Peter and ^^^^, Gal. ^?
or the Ministry when he said, All seek their own things, and no^e the things of
Jesus Christ? or did the Evangelists wrong all ^he Disciples, by saying, that
They all forsook him and fled? or James all C^^stians, saying In many things we
offend ^ll? I think the Prou^ Impe^itence of many Professors, that will not
confess sin, nor endure to be ^^led to it, lest Religion be dishonored, is
that great dishonor to Religion which God has been long punishing us for.
When such evils have ^^^^ held and done as our age has known, either it must
be said that they are not evil, or that they are* If we deny it, and say they
are God ^^^^ and m^ns duty, we feign God, and Scripture, and Religion to be for
all that evil, (which is to blaspheme). If we say It is evil, we must sa^^ that
we are the guilty causes of it. God will teach Ministers and Professors instead
of Pharisaical self-justification, to take open shame to themselves that he and
Religion may be vindicated, before he will deliver us from shame and sorrow:
And he that will save his honor against this shame shall lose it, and he that
will thus lose it and cast it away shall most effectually recover it.


S. I think you would fain persuade us, that Protestants are as bad as Papists,
and persuade us into the Roman Tents.


P. That is but your pievish inference: But little do you know how much of
Popery it self you have, while you think that you hate it more than I.


S. You would make me believe any thing, if you make me think that I have more
of Popery than you.


P. 1. Do not you agree with them in consining the Catholic Church to one Sect
or Party? only They to their Sect, and You to yours.

2. Do you not agree with them in your vehement condemnation of dissenters?
only they excommunicate and burn them, and you deny them your communion and
reproach them: But their charity extends much further than yours, and you
condemn more dissenters than they do.

3. Do you not agree with them in being superstitious, by a great deal of
self-made Duty and Sin? only theirs and yours are not in the same things: They
say, Touch not, taste not, handle not some things, and you other things, while
you say that God has forbidden forms of prayer, and many lawful circumstances
of Worship, and other such like.

And I now entreat you and all the servants of Christ soberly to consider,
whether a wild injudicious calling sound Doctrine and Practices Antichristian,
and using that name as a bugbear for want of solid argument, and an injudicious
running from Papists into the contrary errors and extremes, has not brought on
many the guilt and misery which in all the following particulars I shall open
to you.

1. Such men have corrupted the Gospel of Christ, by bringing in many doctrinal
errors, and opening a door to the heretical to bring in more. Almost all the
Libertine Antinomian errors, have come in by an injudicious opposition to
Popery, as if they were the Vindication of Election, Free Grace, Christ's
Righteousness, Justification by faith, Perseverance, against man's Works and
Merits: And it is not to be denied, that the said Libertine Doctrines do more
contradict the Doctrine of the Gospel, even Christianity it self, than the
Doctrine of the Papists about the same subjects do. I know this to be true, who
ever is offended at it: Aquinas, Scotus, Gabriel, Bellarmine, Pererids, Tolet,
yea, Vasquez, Suarez and Molina are not near so erroneous about Justification,
Grace, Faith and good works, as Richardson, Randal, Sympson, Town, Crispe,
Saltmarsh, and many such others are. Yet how many Religious people have I
known, that have gloried in these errors as the sweet discoveries of free grace!

2. Such erroneous extremes in opposition to Popery have greatly dishonored
the Reformers, and Reformation. When it cannot be denied but such and such
errors are found among them, it makes all the Reformation suspected: as
Illyricus his Doctrine of the substantiality of sin, and the non-necessity of
Good works to salvation, and as Andr. Osianders Doctrine of Justification by
Gods essential righteousness did; and as many harsh passages in Piscator and
Maccovins do, to name no more besides those before named. What a stir have our
later Divines still with the Papists in defending some few harsh sayings of
Luther, Calvin and Beza about the Cause of sin, and some such subjects? But
downright errors cannot be defended.

3. Your injudicious opposition greatly hardneth the Papists, and hinders
their conviction: When they find some errors in your writings, (as that all
are bound to believe that they are elected and Justified; that this is the
sense of the Article, I believe the forgiveness of sin; that this is sides
divina, that we are Reputed of God to have fulfilled all the Law of Innocence
habitually and actually in and by Christ, etc.) and then when they read that
such men lay the great stress of the Reformation upon these, as the very cause
of our rejecting Rome, and the artiouli stantisaut cadentis Ecclesiae, what can
more harden them to a confidence that we are heretics and that they are in the
right? As I have known the persons that had been in danger of turning Papists,
if the error of Transubstantiation and some few more, had not been so
palpable, as to resolve them, These men cannot be in the right; even so many
Papists were like to have turned Protestants, had they not met with some
notorious errors in such injudicious adversaries.

4. Yea we too very well know that your extremities have occasioned diverse
Protestants to turn Papists: Yea some Learned men, and such as have zealously
run through many Sects in opposition to Popery themselves; (And some of my
acquaintance that went as far in the profession of Godliness as most that I
have known.) They have been so confounded to find partly palpable errors taken
for sound doctrine, and sound doctrine railed at as Popery, and partly to see
the shameful diversity and contentions of all the Sects among themselves, that
it has drawn them to think that there is no prosperity of the Church and
Godliness to be expected but where there is unity, and Concord; and no Unity
and Concord to be hoped for among Protestants; And therefore they must return
for it to Rome: And Grotius professes that it was this that moved him, to go
so far toward them as he did. And I must needs say, that I believe from my
very heart, that the shameful divisions, contentions, backbitings, revilings,
censurings, persecutions, errors and scandals of Protestants among themselves,
is a far stronger temptation to turn men to Popery, than any thing that is to
be found among the Papists to turn men to it: and that many are thus driven to
it, that would not have been drawn.

5. And by calling good and lawful if not necessary things, Antichristian and
Popish, you have made Religious people ridiculous and a scorn to many that have
more wit than Conscience; as if we were all such humorous Novices, as would run
mad by being frightened with the name of Antichrist: And as they deride you for
it as Fanatical, so they the less fear Popery it self.

6. And by these extremities you corrupt the peoples minds with a wrathful and
contentious kind of Religion; which ^s easily taken up in comparison of a holy
and heavenly mind. When you should kindle in them a zeal for Love, and Good
Works, the mark of Gods peculiar people, you are killing Love and kindling
wrath: Gunpowder may be set on fire without so much blowing of the coal: Long
experience assures us that a siding angry contentious zeal is easily kindled,
but a lively faith, a confirmed hope of Glory, a Love to God and man, needs
more ado.


S. Stay a little in the midst of your reproofs; Would you persuade us to a
Union with Antichrist, and to live in Love and Concord with the members of the
Devil? Are not the Papists such? Have you no way to reconcile us to Rome, but
by pleading for Love and peace? Must we not contend earnestly for the faith
once delivered to the Saints, and not be Lukewarm to the doctrines of Jezabel
that seduceth the people of God to Idolatry?


P. 1. Were you perswadable I would persuade you, not ignorantly to contradict
the truth of God, and call it Popery; nor to set up certain false or
incongruous notions, and pretend them great and necessary verities; nor to make
a stir for some odd unsound opinions, received upon trust from those that you
thought best of, and to buzz abroad suspicious of Popery, against those that
have more understanding and conscience than to imitate you; nor to fly in the
faces of Gods faithfullest servants (much less to use your tongues to backbite
them) as if they were Antichristian, because they are not as shamefully
ignorant and deceived as you are: And I would persuade you to study and digest
well what you take the boldness to speak against; and not to talk confidently
and furiously against that which you never understood: for it is the fool that
rages and is confident, Prove. 14. 16. I should think I had not a greater work
than to build twenty such Cities as London or to conquer all the Turks
dominions, if I could but persuade all that seem Religious to bridle their
Tongues, lest their Religion be in vain, and instead of rash and busy talking
of things that they understand not, and of rash judging and reviling men wiser
than themselves, but to SUSPEND their JUDGMENTS, and stay till they have taken
time to hear, read or consider what is necessary to the true understanding of
the case, and not to shame themselves, and abuse their brethren, and God
himself, and wrong and corrupt the hearers minds, by railing at that to day,
which if they study hard and grow wiser, they will afterward believe
themselves.

2. And I would not have you think it good or lawful to belly a Papist, and say
that he holds what he does not; nor to pretend that they differ in the sense
and matter, when the difference is but in the words: and then to think that all
your injustice and false-dealing is excuseable, if you do but say that some
Godly Divines, or Religious people, said so before you, and you can prove out
of their writings that you are not the first that did the wrong: Nor would I
have you charge the unmeet or unsound expressions, of every ignorant, railing
Papist, on all that are called Papists, no nor on all their Church: And
therefore I would have you well read and understand their writings before you
venture too far in your accusations. You would not be otherwise dealt with your
self; nor have the Protestant Religion (or the Non-conformists) charged with
every unseasoned or unwarrantable sentence, of the many weak Writers that have
self-esteem enough to obtrude their sentiments upon the world. The Papists have
too many errors, and too great: you need not feign them to be more or greater
than they are.

3. And I would persuade you not to take all that live under the Roman power
and are called Papists to be of the same mind or rank, nor to damn any more
than you are sure Christ will damn: but to consider what the Judicious Dr.
Field undertaketh (and B. Morton in his Apology has performed) even to prove
that there are no considerable doctrines which constitute the Protestant
Religion as different from Popery, which were not before Luthers Reformation
defended by the greatest Doctors in the Church of Rome, though the defenders of
them were discountenanced and born down by the Papal faction by power and
violence.

4. And I would persuade you to believe that the name of Antichrist will not
warrant you to lay by that Love and meekness and Justice which is due to
mankind, yea and which heathens used to each other, and which you would have
all men use to you: The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to
all men, apt to teach, patient (or forbearing,) in meekness instructing
opposers, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. and if it be possible, as much as in you lies, you
must live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18. and therefore follow peace with
all, Heb. 10. 14. At least make Conscience of rash calumniating and slandering
the worst.

5. And as to the texts that you referr to, I wish you better to study them,
and you will find that they were not spoken of the Papists then, but of the
Heretics or Sectaries of that age: It was the Nicolaitans and such others that
are likened to Jezebel, as the text shows you: And it was such as they,
called Carpocratians, and Gnostics that denied or subverted the faith which
Christians were earnestly to contend for: And we would have you zealously
defend Christianity, without Lukewarmness: but not to abuse the world so much,
as to ^eign all your dreams or opinions to be Christianity or the faith.

And so I still say that though Popery must be faithfully rejected, yet your
over-doing and mistaking way of opposition to it, endangereth the peoples
souls, by tempting them into factious wrath and unrighteous calumny, and
destroying that Love and common justice which is due to Papists themselves, and
much more to those Protestants whom you ignorantly calumniate.

7. Yea I add, that hereby you make false glasses for the people to see their
own faces in, and cheat poor souls, with a carnal sort of Religion and zeal, as
if it were that which is true and saving. Men are loath to know that they are
indeed unholy: and therefore will be pretending to some kind of Religion to
cherish their presumption, for want of ^ounder comfort: And O how many
thousands are there that think that they are Godly persons, because they can
rise up in the dark with confident reproach against this or that opinion or
practice as coming too near to Popery! O that they hated all that comes too
near to a fleshly, worldly mind and life! or to selfishness and pride and
overvaluing an ignorant understanding! It Is pitiful to hear how many learned
Preachers in Germany among the Lutherans, live in drunkenness, and worldliness,
and how little of the spirit of holiness appears in their Sermons or lives,
and how they make up all by a ^ervent preaching against the Papists and the
Calvinists. Were it as easy to get faith, hope and Love, as to talk against
other men's opinions, or to call that Popery which is contrary to your raw
conceits, how happy were it for such men! But you little think that they that
have a Religious zeal for forms and ceremonies, and they that are as zealous
against them, may be of the same spirit and temper of Religions, being both but
Formalists, though ones formality work for, and the others against such kind of
things. And you are not aware that If you are wiser than those that you talk
against, you must show it by your works and meekness of wisdom, and that the
envious wisdom and zeal which is not from above, but is earthly, sensual and
diabolical, may work as well by crying down other men's opinions as Popish and
Antichristian as in other ways.

8. And under pretense of zeal against Popery, you turn the peoples minds from
the great matters of their salvation, which need their daily and most diligent
study, and their most intense affections and regard: And so you starve our and
destroy true piety, by calling off the peoples minds to Controversy: And when
they should be edifying one another in the comfortable hopes of another world,
they are backbiting one another with accusations of Popery.

9. Yea Preaching it self is thus corrupted: And that which is appointed of God
to be the means of men's edification in Love and holiness, (Ephesians. 4. 14, 15, 16.)
is turned to be the bellows of keeping hot the furnace of wrath and injury.

10. Yea Prayer which should be most holy is thus also corrupted and profaned
by too many; while they boldly bespeak the holy and dreadful God against one
another, and against those things, which their ignorance misrepresenteth to
themselves.

And so Gods ordinances are made a snare to souls, which are appointed for
their salvation: and the man that can kindle in his hearers a transporting
passion against this or that opinion or form as Popish, is cried up for an
excellent preacher, and seems to edify the people while he destroveth them.

11. And by this means you seem to justify the Papists lies and calumnies
against the Protestants, by doing as they do: They belie Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin, Beza, etc. with just such intentions and such a kind of zeal, as some
over doing Sectaries belie them. And is it bad in them and good in you?

12. You teach the people a dangerous and perverse way of reasoning a minus
notis, which will let in almost any errors: From a dark text in the
Revelations, or Daniel, or from the supposition that the Pope is the
Antichrist, and all Papists have received the mark of the beast, you gather
conclusions against the notorious duties of Love and peace, which the light of
nature does commend to all: Not that I am persuading you that the Pope is not
Antichrist; but that all things be received but according to their proper
degree of evidence.


S. Now you open your self indeed: All that revolt to Popery begin there, with
questioning whether the Pope be the Antichrist, and telling men of the darkness
of the Book of Revelations.


P. I tell you I will abate no certainty that you have, but increase my own and
yours if I could: but I would not have any falsely to pretend that they are
certainer of any thing than they are: And no certainty can go beyond the
ascertaining evidence: And if all Scriptures be equally plain, St. Peter was
deceived, that tells us of many things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned wrest as other Scriptures to their own destruction. And if the
Revelations be not one of the hardest, I crave your answer to these questions:
1. Why are five Expositors usually of four opinions in the expounding of it?
when it is those that have spent much of their lives in studying it (as Napier,
Brightman, etc.) who are the Expositors? 2. Why will none of you that find it
so easy at last write one certain Commentary which may assure which of all the
former (if any one of them) was in the right? 3. Why did Calvin take it to be
too hard for him, and durst not venture to expound it? 4. And if you take it to
be so necessary as you pretend, tell me whether it was so necessary, and so
taken by all those Churches, that for a long time received it not as Canonical
Scripture? Surely they were saved without believing it. Though no doubt but the
book of Revelation is a great mercy to the Church, and all men should
understand as much of it as they can. But all that I blame you for here, is the
perverting of the order of proof, in arguing a minus notis.

13. And these over-doers that run things into the contrary extremes, do most
injuriously weaken the Protestant cause, by disabling themselves and all men of
their principles to defend it, and arming the Papists against it by their
errors. When it comes to an open dispute by Word or Writing, one of these men's
errors is like a wound that lets out blood and spirits, and puts words of
triumph into the adversaries mouth: A cunning Papist will presently drive the
ignorant disputant to resolve his cause into his mistake, and then will open
the falsehood of that, and thence infer the falsehood of all the rest: And what
an injury is that to the souls of the auditors, who may be betrayed by it, and
to the cause it self? For instance, If one of our overdoers hold that we are
reputed to have kept all the Law of Innocence and merited salvation our selves
by Christ, or that no act of faith is Justifying but the accepting of his
righteousness, or that faith Justifies only as the efficient instrumental
cause, or that we have no righteousness which has any thing to do in our
Justification, but only Christ's imputed Merits, or that man's faith, Love or
obedience are not rewardable, etc. how easily will a Papist open the falsehood
of such an opinion to the hearers, and then tell them that they may see by this
who is in the right. And, alas, what work would one Learned Papist make in
London by public disputing, if we had no wiser men to deal with him than these
over-doers? They may call Truth and Sobriety Antichristian, and talk nonsense
as against Popery successfully to their own party; but I hope never to see the
cause managed by their public disputes, lest half the Congregation turn
Papists on it at once. If Chillingworth had not been abler to confute a Papist
than those that used to calumniate him as Popish or Socinian, he had done less
service of that kind than he did.

14. And it is an odious injury that these Over-doers do to the ancient and the
universal Church, while in many cases, they (ignorantly or wilfully) reproach
and condemn them, as if they were all the favorers of Popery, and call their
ancient doctrine and practice Antichristian. Some of them ignorantly falsify
the Fathers doctrine, and upon trust from their Leaders aver^ that they held
that which they plainly contradict: and that which they held indeed, they cry
out against as Popery. Such an instance we have newly in a Soldier, Major
Danvers, an Anabaptist, which I have detected. And will Christ take it well to
have almost all his Church condemned as Antichristian?

15. And hereby what an honor is done to Popery, and what a dishonor to the
Reformed Churches, when it shall be concluded that all the Churches heretofore,
even next after the age of the Apostles, and almost all the present Churches,
were and are against the doctrine of the Protestants, and on the Papists side?
And yet how many do us this injury, and the Roman Church this honor? About the
nature of Justifying faith, and its office to Justification, and about the
nature of Justification it self, and Imputation of Righteousness, and
free will, and man's Works and Merits, and about assurance of salvation and
perseverance, how many do call that Popery, which the whole current of Greek
and Latin Fathers do assert, and all the ancient Churches owned, and most of
all the present Churches in the world? And those that call all forms of prayer,
Popery, or the English Liturgy at least, when almost all the Christian world
have forms, and most such as are much worse, do but tell men that the Christian
world is on the side that they oppose, and against their way.

16. And it is a crime of infamy to be taken for Separatists from the universal
Church; And in doctrines and forms of Worship, not only to avoid what we take
to have been a common weakness, but also to condemn them as Antichristian, or
as holding pernicious errors, is but to persuade men that we are not of the
same body, and to own a sinful dishonorable separation.

17. And by all these means these Over-doers do greatly increase Atheism and
Infidelity and profaneness among us, while their zeal against Truth and
reproaches of sound doctrine, do make men think that our Religion is nothing
but proud humor and self-conceit; and while they see us so boldly condemn
almost all the world except our selves, they will think that so few as we
deserve not to be excepted.

18. By this injurious extremity against the Papists, we do but kindle in them
a bitterer enmity to us, and hatred of them breeds hatred in them of us, and
so we set them on plotting revenge against us, as implacable injurious enemies;
when we should deal soberly and righteously with all men, and seek to win them
by truth and gentleness.

19. I And such dealings with them do draw Persecution on the Protestants that
live under their Dominions; and if we refuse to use them here as Christians, no
wonder if abroad they use not the Protestants as Men.

20. And by such great abuses of Reformation, men hinder Reformation for the
time to come, and do their part to make it hopeless, while they discourage such
attempts, by dishonouring the Reformation which is past Even as David George,
and Munt^er, and the Munster Do^ages and Rebellions, do hinder the ^eviving of
Anabaptistry in the world, and the shame of their old practices and successes,
is as a Grave stone upon the Sepuleher of their Cause; so do these men do their
part to make it with the whole Reformation, that none hereafter may date to own
or meddle with such work.

These that I have opened briefly to you, are the real fruits of false,
injurious and ignorant zeal and over-doing against the Papists: And if Popery
revive, it is like to be by such men.


S. But Popery is an heinous evil; and corrupt nature is so prone to evil, tha^
you need not thus dissuade men from going too far from it, or from over-doing
against it, no more than from being overmuch religious.


P. You may say the same as truly of the errors on the contrary extreme: All of
them are evil, and men are prone to evil: But 1. Little know you how common it
is in the world to spend men's zeal against the real or supposed evil of other
men's Opinions, and thereby to strengthen the mortal evil of their own carnal
affections and passions, and worldly lives, and to take a zeal for Truth and
Orthodoxness for real Holiness, while usually such miss of Truth it self. 2.
And you know not the wiles of Satan, how ordinarily he betrayeth a good Cause
by the ill management of its most zealous friends, and does undo by over-doing.
When he will play the Devil indeed with Eve, he will seem to be more than God
himself for Knowledge of Good and Evil, and for the advancement of mankind to
be like God; and God shall be accused by him as if he were untrue, and envyed
our perfection. When he will play the Devil indeed with Christ, he will seem to
be more for valiantness and trusting God than Christ was, and pleads
Scripture for tempting God. When he will, play the Devil indeed in the
Pharisees, he will be stricter for the ^abbath, and for Discipline in avoiding
the company of the Publicans and sinners, and stricter in fastings and diet and
other observations than Christ himself; And he will be a zealous enemy to
Blasphemy, and a zealous Royalist for Caesar, and a zealous honourer of the
Temple and the Law, when Christ, or Paul, or other Apostles are to be destroyed
by it. And when he will play the Devil in the Nicolaitans, Simonians, and
Gnostick Heretics, he will seem to be for higher knowledge, and greater
liberty than the Apostles were. And so when he would sow discord among
Christians, and would kill their Love, and divide Christ's Church, and set them
in a mental and oral War against each other, he will aggravate the errors and
faults of others, and he will seem a more zealous friend of Truth, and enemy to
Popery, Heresy, Error, Superstition, false Worship, or other faults than
Christ is: But he knows why.


S. But God tells us himself, that he is jealous about his Worship, and has
in Scripture more severely executed his Justice upon the corrupters of his
Worship, than almost any other crime.


P. No doubt but God is jealous against Idolatry. He that knows not the true
God from Idols, cannot honor him. And he that worshippeth him not as a most
Great and Holy God, dishonors or blasphemeth him on pretense of worshipping
him. And to worship him by an Image, is to persuade men that God is like that
which that Image does represent; which is to deny him to be God. And no doubt
but the Jews great temptations to Idolatry from the Nations about them, were to
be oppugned by great severities of God. And no doubt but Moses Law was to be
honored by Gods severe executions on the breakers of it.

But when you come to Christ's preaching, you find how often he teaches the
Pharisees to go learn what that means, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice.
When he conferreth with the Woman of Samaria, John 4. she presently turns
from the doctrine of faith (as Sectaries do among us) to the Controversies of
the times, [Our Fathers say, In this Mountain, and you say At Jerusalem, men
ought to worship.] But Christ calls her off such low discourse, and teaches
her to worship God as a Spirit, in spirit and truth, if ever she would be
accepted of him.


S. But it is a time now when Popery is striving to rise again, and how
unseasonably would you abate men's zeal against it?


P. No more than he was against his Lawyers Zeal, who grew hoarse with
senseless bawling for him, saying, I am glad he has lost his voice, or else I
might have lost my Cause. I am so much against Popery, that I wish it wiser and
abler adversaries, than self-conceited unstudied Zealots, who will honor
Popery, by entitling it to the Truths of God, and the Consent of the Ancient or
Universal Church; or would make people believe, that it consists in some good
or indifferent things, as in some Doctrines, Forms or Government, which others
can see no harm in; And so teach men to say, If this be Popery, we will rather
be Papists, than of them that rave as in their sleep, against they know not
what. Could these men be persuaded to lay out their Zeal and diligence, in
propagating the practical knowledge of Christianity it self, and let things
alone which they understand not, and SUSPEND TILL THEY HAVE THOROUGHLY STUDIED,
or at least to forbear hindering wiser men, and calumniating and backbiting
those that would by wisdom defend that truth which by folly and rashness they
go about to betray, they might be meet for their share of that honor which now
they forfeit.


S. You strive against Gods Judgments by which he has often times disowned
Popery among us; and would make that less odious, which God by wonders has often
called us to abhor.


P. You still mistake: It is only your strengthening them, or sinning against
God by false and ignorant accusations, and calumniating wiser men as favoring
them, that I speak against. God has often marvellously preserved us from their
attempts. But if you will use untruths against them, they will repay you two
for one, and with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you. Little
know you how odious they render us by lies abroad where they are believed: and
I would have no honest man to imitate them. I will instance to you in a few of
their Stories.

Says Thom. Waldensis (a Learned man) against Wickliffe, citante Tympio, page
104. [I will tell you a Story which I saw with my own eyes in the Cathedral of
St. Paul in London: where Tho. Arundel a Venerable Prelate of happy memory, a
Son, and Brother of Earls (the Bishop of Norwich and others assisting him)
sitting in judgment, proposed some questions of the Eucharist to a certain
Tailor of Worcestershire taken in Heresy; and when he could not be moved, and
would call the most Sacred Host nothing but Blessed Bread, at last being
commanded to do reverence to the Host, he blasphemously answered, A Spider is
worthier of Reverence. And presently a great and horrid Spider descending from
the top of the room by his thread, made directly to the Blasphemers mouth, and
labored to get in while he spoke. The Illustrious Prince Thomas Duke of Oxford
then Chancellor of the Kingdom, saw the prodigy: which so confirmed them of
Gods revenge, that they burnt the man]

Says the same Tympius Theatr. p. 148. [Oecolampadius an Apostate married Monk
an. 1528. was strangled by the Devil in Basil, (as Luther reports in his Book
of the private Mass): a death worthy his life. Luther writes that he had
proved it (explor atissimum esse) that Oecolampadius was killed by the fiery
weapons of the Devil.]

Carolostadius an. 1530. strangled by the Calvinian God went quickly to Hell,
as Erasmus Albertus reports.

John Calvin was consumed of the lousy disease, the Worms eating through all
his body, with blaspheming words, cursed God and called on the Devil, and
committed his soul to him, an. 1567. says Bolsec in vit. Calv. c. 22. Beza
writes, that Calvin tormented four years miserably at last eaten with swarming
Lice dyed unhappily and filthily. Page 154. Luther having supped daintily and
gone merry to bed, was strangled in the night. Th. Bozius de sig. Eccl. l. 23.
sig. 96. ^. 3. says that he was certified by a Boy that served Luther and
turned to them, that Luther hanged himself, but they swore all the house to
conceal it.

Ibid. id. [They say (says Bozius) that when Bucer was dying, a horrid Devil
stood by and almost frightened all present to death, of whom he (Bucer) was
stricken that he might carry away his soul; for being pulled out of the bed,
his bowels being scattered all about the Bedchamber, and he killed with many
torments, did expire.]

How like you such work as this? such horrid lies, of things fully known?
Should not the detestation of them make us afraid of coming near them by any
imitation, and to take heed what we believe or say of others? Abundance more
such Stories, Miracles and Progidies you may find in Tympius and Caesarius
besides many others. Read but those two Books and you will see who be the great
pretenders to Prodigies and Miracles, and readiest to proclaim Gods Judgments
on others, when they that think they do it for the honor of God, alas, are
unawares moved to it by the interest of that Cause and Party which is so much
their own, as that it may be called Their own Interest.


S. Well, for all this, I take it to be Gods Mercy to possess the unlearned
Professors themselves, with so great a zeal against all that savoureth of
Popery; so that were it not for them, the Ministers themselves would comply
further than they do: But when they see that it is the sensus communis
fidelium, and they must lose all the good people if they comply, it holds them
in. Many that cannot dispute against Popish errors and practices, can hate them.


P. No doubt, but the habit of Divine Love, does hold many good Christians much
faster to God and the certain Essentials of Christianity and Piety, than the
strongest disputing Reason would do without it. But if you will say the same of
doubtful disputations, you will much mistake. In many such things the stricter
professors go with the stream of their party, and follow them that carry it for
the reputation of most godliness, or those leaders or friends that have most
advantage on them. And do they not use the very same argument as you in
different Countries for different and contrary causes? In Germany the Communis
sensus fideliu^^ is one thing, and in England another, and in France another in
such matters. Yea, in the same Country in several times. I can remember since
among the Religious stricter party, it was abominable to wear long hair, even
to cover the ears, and now these twenty years they many of them exceed those
that then were accounted Ruffians. It was then a crime with them to take
Tobacco, and now it is none: and thus custom changes the matter with them. And
now in some Congregations they will not sing Psalms, in others they will not
read the Scripture; In others these can be endured, but not the use of the
Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalogue: In others that much, but no Forms of Prayer
of man's devising: In others, the Ministers own self-imposed Form, but none
imposed by Superiors: In one Congregation they are commonly for Universal
Redemption and Free Will, and in another commonly against it: And why then
would you persuade us, that in such things as these, the common sense of the
faithful goes all one way, when they usually are carried down the stream of
pious reputation where they live?

And indeed you have small reason to be glad, that Ministers have the
temptation of popular esteem or censure to conflict with, or that so many are
conquered by it. Is it a lovely thing to hear silly women (ever learning, or
rather hearing, but never coming to a competent knowledge of such matters) to
cant out against their Teachers [Antichristian] and [Popery] upon words or
actions not understood, which suit not with their vain conceits?


S. It is one of the artifices of the Papists which you have learned: when they
would draw men to set light by the purity of Religion and the Worship of God,
to cry up Love and Concord and Peace instead of it, and so to tie all men's
tongues and hands from resisting their wicked Church-pollutions, by the fear of
Schism, or being uncharitable to the polluters. And so you will draw men to an
indifferency in Religion on pretense of Peace and Charity.


P. I am certain that the Wisdom from above is first pure, and then peaceable,
and gentle, etc. James 3. 17. and it ever takes in both. And I am sure that
Christ first and his Apostles after him make Love the sum of our Religion. I
think it not amiss to tell you, of this, what an old Nonconformist says in a
Latin Treatise called De vera and genuina Jesu Christi Religione, Authore
Ministro Anglo, p. 36, 37, 38, 39. The words are too large to recite, but in
short he labors to prove, that next Faith in God and the Redeemer, Love is
the Christian Religion it self, and set up instead of Ceremonies and penal
Jewish Laws, as the Great Law of Christ, and the fulfilling of all Laws,
answering his own Office, and so his new and great Commandment and the
Character of his people, and so the Communion of the Saints is our faith and
life. And that to believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and Love him
and one another, is the Gospel, and our true Religion: And that when it comes
to Ceremonies, Rituals and externals, this still is Christ's voice, [Go learn
what this means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice.]

But know you not that you come up to the worser part of Popery, when you
imitate the bloodiest men among them in your degree, by pleading for Sacrifice
against Mercy? A cruel Religion, and burning and destroying men, and setting
Kingdoms on fire, on pretense of keeping out Heresy and Schism, and preserving
the right Faith, and Government, and Worship, is the malignity of Popery. When
either They or You grow wrathfully zealous against your Brethren on pretense of
purity of Faith or Worship, and to make you a Religion which quenches Love,
you know not what manner of Spirit you are of.


S. Is not the Church of Ephesus commended, Rev. 2. 3. that could not bear them
that were evil, and that tried false Apostles and found them liars; and are
they not blamed that did bear with the woman Jezabel and the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans? And if God hate such doctrine, so must we.


P. All this is true and good; but do not you misapply it to defend your
uncharitableness, or error? I am not persuading you to Indifferency as to truth
and falsehood, good and evil, nor to abate your hatred of Idolatry or such
doctrine of wickedness and uncleanness as the Nicolaitan's was; nor yet to
corrupt the Churches by neglecting Discipline. We would have a man that is an
Heretic rejected after the first and second admonition: Bear not with any such
evil in your Church Communion which should be cast out, and makes men
incapable of Communion, (so far as it is in your power regularly to cast out
such.) But as you must not take such for enemies, but still afford them a
common sort of Charity, so you must not on this pretense, in your ignorance and
rashness rave against truth or harmless things, or your Brethren that think not
in all things as you do; nor call that Popery which sober wiser men than you,
(yea, almost all Christ's Church on earth) do take to be sound doctrine, or
laudable practice. It is the shame of the party among us that most inclines to
separation, when sober understanding men shall hear an ignorant fellow or woman
with confident boldness, rail at a controverted Doctrine, or a Form of Prayer,
or Ceremony as Popery, and admonish their Teachers not to receive the Mark of
the Beast, when they do but show their pride and ignorance, in overvaluing
their own conceptions and unfurnished understandings, and vilifying the
knowledge of others in their dark presumption. If you would bring such lesser
errors under Church Discipline or Separation, on pretense of not bearing with
them that are evil, it is you your selves that would soonest be found worthy to
be separated from or cast out, who credit Popery by placing it in sound, good,
decent or harmless things, and corrupt Doctrine and Worship by your* Errors and
Superstitions, which you run into on the contrary extreme.


S. Your laxe and loose principles would cast out all Discipline out of the
Church.


P. You know not how much in your pretenses to overmuch strictness of
Discipline, you agree with those Papists and Prelatists whom you seem to be
most averse from. How has the Pope subdued Emperors and Princes to himself,
and captivated the World, but by the pretense of Discipline, by his
Excommunications and Absolutions? How else have his Prelates disturbed this
Kingdom in former Ages? And I my self had lately to do with one of the greatest
Clergymen that has had a hand in our ejection, silencing and present
Church State, against whom I am fain to defend, that Kings and Chief
Magistrates are not to be excommunicated: And I find the aforesaid English
Nonconformist in the said Latin Tract. de Vera and Genuina Relig. page 280,
281. put upon the same task, and performing it by the same arguments which I
used. I confess, the Papists and Worldly Tyrannical Clergy do corrupt
Discipline, and cast out the true cleansing useful exercise of it; but for so
much and such use as is conducible to maintain the interest of their Sect and
Party and Carnality, no men are more hot: and is it not so with you?


FINIS.

