Mr. BAXTER Baptized in Blood, OR, A SAD HISTORY OF THE UNPARALLED CRUELTY OF
THE ANABAPTISTS In NEW ENGLAND.

Faithfully Relating the Cruel, Barbarous, and Bloody Murder of Mr. Baxter an
Orthodox Minister, who was killed by the Anabaptists, and his Skin most cruelly
flead off from his Body.

WITH An Exact Account of all the Circumstances and Particularities of this
barbarous Murder.

Published by his mournful Brother Benjamin Baxter Living in
Fen-Church-Street, London.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1673.

A Sad History of M. Baxters Bloody and Cruel Death by the Anabaptists.
COuld any man believe that Phanatick Fury had such power to impell and force
any that pretend to that Sacred Name of Christians, to perpetrate such
villainies which the Myrmidons and Scythians in the midst of Barbarism it self
never heard of? But its a Maxim in Philosophy, Corruption optimi est pessima,
The best things corrupted are the worst; So as the profession of Christianity
is a most sacred thing, the doctrine of the Gospel a most holy Rule, the
Author of our Religion an exemplar and pattern of meekness; so when Christians
renounce this sacred profession, lay aside this Holy Gospel, and abrenuntiate
Christ the pattern of meekness, they soon become the most desperate villains in
the world; as may be instanced in Julian the Apostate, and Sergius the
Associate of Mahomet, and compiler of the Alcoran. And we daily see that among
the Turks none are such implacable persecutors of Captive-Christians as
Renegade-Protestants. When I seriously consider these things, I forbear to
wonder at the great and desperate Villainies perpetrated by the Anabaptists
those Renegade-Christians, who deny Baptism that initiating Ordinance and first
Sacrament of Christianity. Dares any man affirm the Anabaptists to be
Christians? For how can they be Christians who deny Christning, deride Christ's
Institution of Baptism, and scoffingly call it Baby-sprinkling, and in place
thereof substitute their profane Booby-dipping? But what need words be
multiplied when deeds cry out so loud? And are not such unparalled Villainies
enough to un-Christian the stoutest Professors in the world?

Mr. Josiah Baxter in the year 1661. was solicited with much importunity by
some Virginia Merchants to leave England, and imbarque for Virginia; He
condescended to their requests, not upon the account of any earthly concern,
but because he thought in those New Plantations they might not be so well
provided of Laborers in the Lord's Vineyard, and in this Nation (God be
thanked) there was good store both of able and painful Ministers: He also
proposed to himself the effecting some good upon the Indians, as he often
intimated to me before his departure.

He lived many years in Virginia, and did much good among those people; But
seeing that his health was much impaired by his Studies and Labors, and that
the Air of that Country did not at all agree with his body, he began to think
of removing, and especially seeing he had such a fair opportunity as the most
courteous and loving Invitation of M. T. M. G. and M. O. very considerable
Merchants in New England, and his ancient and intimate Friends and
Acquaintance; He therefore in the year 1672. with his Wife and Family left
Virginia and settled himself in a solitary house about a mile and half distant
from Boston: The Merchants and good people of Boston and the circum-jacent
Country received him with all the kindness and tenderness imaginable.

He had not been long in these parts but all good Christians had him in great
veneration, for his great learning, his diligent preaching, and for his great
zeal; He had not been many Months in New England but he understood there was a
notorious Sectarian by name Richard Batt (who formerly had been a Tailor in
Coventry, but some two years after the happy Restoration of his Majesty, under
pretense of a tender Conscience he left Coventry, and came to New England.)
This Batt was a fellow of a prodigious confidence, a good wit, a voluble
tongue, and an insinuating carriage and comportment: M. Baxter therefore
quickly found out this Fox, and was very apprehensive of his designs against
Christian Religion for the advancement of his unchristian Sect, and was also
informed that he had already seduced many well-meaning people; He thought it
was now high time to oppose this Son of Belial, to discover from Gods Word the
falsity of his Tenets, the wickedness of his principles, and the danger of his
practices, and also to confirm good Christians in the Truth: He therefore
omitted no pains, but constantly in all his Sermons evidently declared and
proved from God's Word the Divine Institution of Baptism: he answered all
Objections, and most solidly proved, that the Anabaptists were most
sacrilegious persons, who endeavored to rob Christ's Church of that Holy
Sacrament which Christ her Spouse had left her; and that the very denying of
Infant Baptism was a denying and renouncing of Christianity it self, because
Christ had instituted Baptism to be an initiating Sacrament whereby such as
embrace Christian Religion were to be admitted within the Communion of his
Church,; but these wicked Sectarians deny this Sacrament, and compel their
adherents to renounce their Baptism, and to be dipped again in their profane
waters: He told them also, that the waters wherein Batt dipped his followers,
were not (as he falsely told them) the pure waters of Jordan wherein the holy
sons and daughters of Sion were baptized, but the stinking and profane waters
of Egypt wherein none but Babylons children were dip't and profaned: He also
charged and conjured all good Christians if they had any care or regard for
their souls, not to associate with those profane and Sacrilegious persons the
Anabaptists, but to consider their personal vices, their scandalous lives, and
their bloody and dangerous practices in foreign Countries, but especially in
Germany, Holland, Poland and Switzerland; and he would often instance many of
their high misdemeanors in several places in England, and pressingly urge his
hearers not to have any commerce or society with men of such bad principles and
detestable lives.

Thus did this zealous Minister of the Gospel like a good Shepherd diligently
watch over the Flock which Christ had committed to his charge.

Good men were much edified by his zeal, and the weaker and wavering Christians
were most solidly confirmed in the Truth: But this good man thought it was not
enough to edify the orthodox, and confirm the doubtful, but he did most
earnestly thirst after the conversion of misbelievers; he was resolved to try
all means for the conviction and conversion of the Anabaptists themselves; He
did endeavor to bring M. Batt to a personal conference; He openly challenged
him in the Church, and openly protested that if he would come to a public
dispute and conference, all things should be managed with Christian lenity and
brotherly love; but in case he should refuse such Christian-like Proposals of a
public conference and dispute, the whole world would conclude he was conscious
to himself both of the badness of his Cause, and also of his own disabilities
to manage and maintain it, especially seeing he was so openly, so often, and so
pressingly moved to it by his Antagonist: Batt and his Partisans used all the
Artifices imaginable to avoid the conference; and when M. Baxter's friends
urged him to it, he would reply, that Disputes and Debates were altogether
unprofitable; that he could find no Warrant or Example in Scripture of any
public Dispute between parties; that Disputes in Religion did but incense
Christians one against the other, and heighten animosities; that they did no
ways conduce to the conviction of Dissenters; and that tender Consciences who
had left their Native Country for Religion, should endeavor for peace and
mutual love, and not by disputes to divide themselves in parties, but every man
sit quietly under his own Vine, and enjoy the Liberty of his Conscience. These
were the specious pretenses that M. Batt used to avoid the dispute; But M.
Baxter was not at all satisfied with these excuses, but himself in public, and
his friends in private continually pressed them to admit a conference, where
both parties might make out their Tenets to prevent all miss-understandings,
and that the truth might be confirmed by the Word of God.

When the Anabaptists saw they could shift off the business no longer, and that
their own party were unsatisfied with this constant declining of the dispute,
they began now to see the necessity of admitting a conference, and resolved
upon the time and place.

The day appointed for this solemn dispute, was Jan. 10. the place was M.
Smith's House, the two Disputants were M. Baxter and M. Batt: When the Company
were met, M. Baxter desired they would all make their humble Addresses to
Heaven, that God would grant a happy success to the whole business: When prayer
was ended, they began the Dispute.

But not to trouble you with a tedious rehearsal of circumstances, Mr. Baxter
managed the dispute with so much Prudence, Learning, and Zeal, that Batt and
his Partisans were most learnedly confuted, and by unanswerable Arguments
deduced from Holy Scripture fully convicted, and Infant Baptism confirmed: M.
Batt did desire that the further prosecution of the whole matter might be left
for another day, for now his spirits were spent, night was drawing on, and many
of the company had a great way home. Hereupon the company concluded the
Anabaptists were worsted, and signified as much by a general outcry, that M.
Batt was confuted. When the Dispute was ended, every man went to his own home.

In this Conference the Anabaptists received such a deadly blow, that many of
their followers began to open their eyes, and upon the next Lord's Day brought
their Children to be baptized, which was a very pleasing sight to all good men,
but a heartbreaking business to these Sons of Belial. M. Baxter was extremely
glad of this happy success, and was resolved to prosecute the business to the
utmost, hoping now that a full conversion of that wicked Party might easily be
obtained. He omitted therefore no pains, but ever after made it his whole
business to preach against that ungodly Sect, to lay open their dangerous
Tenets, and also to persuade his Auditors to detest that party as being men of
wicked principles and worser lives.

The Anabaptists could by no means digest this disgrace, they now therefore
consult the Prince of darkness, and are resolved to, put in execution the
hellish counsels that he suggests to their malicious and wicked hearts.

On Feb. the 4th about 11. of the clock in the fore-noon there came four
Ruffians to Mr. Baxters house (the solitariness of the house gave too much
opportunity to these hellish Designs;) They had vizors upon their faces; as
soon as they were entered, they severely charged them under pain of death not to
cry out, or cause any disturbance: hereupon they bound Mrs. Baxter and her
three daughters (for this was all Mr. Baxters family.) When they had done this,
they went to Mr. Baxter, and rudely tore the cloths from his back, when he was
stripped they most cruelly whipped him. Then they told him he must die. He desired
some time for prayer, and also that he might be permitted the liberty to speak
to his wife and children before he died. All which they denied, and told him
that 'twas in vain for him to pray, or think on heaven, for that was a place
appointed for the Elect, but he was a vile Reprobate, and from eternity
destined to damnation. You are, said they, a most wicked villain and have done
much hurt in these parts, your sins cry to heaven for vengeance, and God has
sent us to punish you; you have been an Incendiary, you have endeavored to
persecute good men with fire and saggot; you have been a most bitter persecuter
of Gods servants, who have left their native Country for their Conscience,
these poor souls you have persecuted to death, you must therefore for these
ungodly practices submit your self to Justice. When they had said these words,
like so many Hell Hounds, they most barbarously fell upon this innocent Lamb,
and with knives cut open his belly, and violently tore off his skin from his
body. And when this holy Martyr by reason of his torments cried out in a most
dreadful manner, they said, 'twas excellent Music. One of them said, now the
Rascal is urging the point against the baptists. When they had perpetrated this
most execrable villainy they fled. Oh! what a sad house is here? The Good man is
flead alive, bleeding and crying out in the midst of his anguish and pain, the
house swimming in blood, the wife and children bound, and roaring out to see
this poor Martyr wallowing in his blood, and they not able to afford him any
assistance. Things continued in this doleful posture until three of the clock
in in the evening: and then by a signal providence one Thomas Smith of Boston
came to the house, he unbound Mrs. Baxter and her three daughters. The youngest
of the three was so consternated with horror, that she fell into
Convulsion-fits, and dyed the next day, About six of the clock at night this
holy Martyr dyed, and was carried to Abraham's bosom. And this is a full sad
Account of this man's sufferings and martyrdom for his Zeal for the true
Religion.

The Murderers are not yet found, but we hope that heaven will not let such
horrid villainies go unpunished long. The Anabaptists were examined, but did
deny the Fact, and have since published a Writing, endeavoring thereby to
persuade the world of their Innocence, and that this Fact was done by the
Indians. But it is utterly improbable, that these Assassines were Indians, for
had they been strangers, what needed any disguise? And it is more then probable,
that they were some of M. Batts party by their reproachful words to M. Baxter:
And this is the general opinion of New England. The Widow and her daughters
were forthwith removed, and kindly entertained at the Ministers house, until
further care is taken of them.

I have penned and published this Narrative in perpetuam rei memoriam, that the
world may see the Spirit and temper of these men, and that it may stand as an
Eternal Memorial of their cruelty and hatred to all Orthodox Ministers.

FINIS.

