Catholic Communion Doubly Defended: By Dr. OWENS VINDICATOR, AND RICHARD
BAXTER. And the State of that Communion opened, and the Questions discussed,
whether there be any Displeasure at Sin, or Repentance for it in Heaven. With a
Parallel of the case of using a faulty Translation of Scripture, and a faulty
Lyturgy.

Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13. When Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed. For before that certain came from James, he
did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated
himself, fearing them which were of the Circumcision: And the other Jews
dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with
their dissimulation. Acts 11. 2, 3. They which were of the Circumcision
contended with him, saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and did eat
with them. Jud. 10. These speak evil of those things which they know not.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Three Bibles and Crown, at the
lower end of Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappel. 1684.

THat the Primitive Churches had some Responsal Forms (which our Psalms in
Meeter, and Tune, do now supply without offense or disorder) and that it is the
declining of Zeal, and the badness of men, that is become their disgrace, and
not the forms; for the use of men of both extremes (passing by Cyprians Sursum
Corda) I shall recite an evidence out of Chrysostom, on 1 Cor. 14. page 652.
When we begin to say -- the People answer [with thy Spirit,] showing that they
so spoke of old; not moved by their own Wisdoms, but by the Spirit. But I speak
not now of my self: But the Church is now like a Woman, which is fallen from
her ancient prosperity; and in many places retains only the Symbols (or
tokens) of that ancient felicity; and shows only the Cases (or Boxes) and
Cabinets (or Tills) of her Jewels (or Ornaments,) but is deprived of her
Riches. The Church is now like such a Woman. And I speak not this only as to
(her loss of) gifts; (for if this were all, the matter were the less,) but also
as to Life and Virtue. When in the fourth Century the old Custom is thus
reported, it must be very ancient: And this shows that Zeal then caused the
peoples Responses; And were they now used by good men with the like holy Zeal,
they would be less scrupled.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. 1. THE Vindicators healing Concessions and Silence. SECT. 2. What
Catholic Communion is, which I plead for in 40 Positions. SECT. 3. Our
Doctrinal Differences. I. What knowledge Souls in Heaven have. II. Whether
those in Heaven (yea, God) be not displeased with sin. Aff. III. Whether there
be no repentance in Heaven. Aff. IV. Whether it be true that doing what a Law
requires so far as the intention is moved by the Law, is a justifying of it,
and that submitting to any Law on consideration of its Penalties, is so far to
justify the Preceptive part, and not so great an Evil as the Penal. Neg.
SECT. 4. Short strictures on his words for the use of the Vindicator. SECT. 5.
A Parallel, or Comparison of the Case of using a faulty Translation of Gods
Word (as Christ and the Apostles did the Septuagint) with that of using a
faulty Lyturgy. SECT. 6. An Expository Advertisement about naming Men.
The Consent of Dr. Owens Vindicator to the Catholic Communion, defended by
Richard Baxter.
SECT. 1.
SIR, Your Book called, A Vindication of Dr. Owen, I find contains four
distinct Parts or Subjects.

I. A Vindication of Dr. Owens Personal Worth: which you and I agreeing in, I
have nothing in that to say against you. II. Your Consent to the main of the
Cause which I defend, and your dissent from the Persons whose words I Confute:
Of this I shall thankfully take notice. III. Your blaming of me for my naming
the Dr. and for my manner of defense against his Arguments. IV. Your dissent
from me in certain Doctrinals.
Having dismissed the first, as to the second, I thank you,

1. That you profess your self a hearty friend to all good men, and to the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

2. I thank you that you say, p. 3. [ I do not pretend in what follows to
maintain against you that it is unlawful to use a form of Prayer, or comply
with an imposed Lyturgy, or under some circumstances to join in the use of ours
in Worship.] Neither shall I undertake to justify altogether the 12 Arguments
you have printed as Dr. Owens, in order to refuting them.

3. I am pleased that you expound the Doctors words, p. 24. as signifying only,
[ It is not lawful for us to go and join in public Worship by the
Common Prayer,] He does not say it is not lawful for any: and for ought you
know this [Us] whom he concerned in it, might be a very few to whom this
Manuscript was imparted, and they might be under such circumstances as your own
resolutions often in Print would discharge from that Worship as a duty.]

Were I never so well able to prove from this, and the Doctors many printed
Writings, that he meant more, I would not now do it. I only here desire the Men
and Women that have been with me, and professed that they thought the Doctors 12
Arguments to be unanswerable against the Lawfulness of joining in the use of
the Lyturgy, to take notice of what his worthy Vindicator says.

4. You grant, p. 25. that you [ Conceive that the Author does not mean by
these words, [ Because that Worship itself -- is not lawful] that it is simply
unlawful, which must render it so at all times, and to all Persons, under what
circumstances soever: But that taken with all its modes, as well as matter, and
the manner, severity, and universality of its imposing, it is so: Besides, it
is not said that according to the rule of the Gospel it is Unlawful, but
[according to the rule of the Gospel it is not lawful, [which may fairly be
construed thus; The rule of the Gospel does not authenticate, or warrant it;
and I think it ought to be so construed: It being the defect of the rule, not
its Opposition, which he lays the great stress of his Cause upon.

Remember Reader, that I was mistaken that thought not-lawful, and unlawful had
been all one, and that the Doctor said not that the joining in the Lyturgy as
aforesaid, was unlawful, but only not lawful, not as in opposition to the rule,
but without it, (and so are the 20 circumstances which I named.]

5. When he says [ It is not in our power to make use of any part of it as we
shall think fit.] And I maintain that though man has not put that in our
power, God has put it in our power to join in the good part of tolerable
Public Worship, without owning the faults (or else we must join with none;)
you deny not this, p. 27. but say that he meant it of man's giving us power
(which I never denied.) But it is God that we serve.

You say [ When men pray, they bid us pray -- in extempore prayer, both are
required to what is good.] True: And I may join with the good in an extempore
prayer, without owning any evil in it.

Indeed you say, p. 28. [ The Mass is not more twisted in all the parts of it
by Law, than the Lyturgy, nor left less to our power to pick and choose: If
this Union do render the far greater pollutions, the Idolatry, and Heresy of
the Mass infectious to the whole Worship, who can prove that the pollutions of
other Worship, when we are likewise commanded not to distinguish or divide,
does not in their kind and degree diffuse the taint alike.]

Ans. God is the Master of his Worship: I do what he bids me, tho man
contradict it: If God bid me hear and believe the Scripture, and man say, hear
also, and believe the Apocrypha, I will openly profess I obey God, and you, no
further than you contradict not God: Rather than not hear the Scripture, I will
hear also the Apocrypha, but not believe it to be Gods Word. But if they bid me
also hear the Alcoran, I will withdraw. 2. It is not the Conjunction, but the
kind of the thing joined that makes it unlawful: An honest weak man, an
Antinomian, an Anabaptist, a Presbyterian, or whoever you dissent from in
tolerable cases, may mix his Opinion, and faulty expressions and methods, with
his Prayer and Sermon, as intimately as evil is mixed in the Mass, and yet you
will not refuse Communion with him: It is lawful to drink beer that has bad
water mixed, rather than none, but not to drink that which has poison equally
mixed.

To p. 29. I think if a Turk pray against Idolatry, Murder, etc. that Prayer is
materially good: But as to Goodness from a Holy Principle, no Hypocrites is
good. The insufficiency of my answer you no way manifest, till you prove that I
must join with all that is in public Worship, or with none.

6. Page 32. You say [ Does he say a word of owning Parish Churches, and
Worship.] Ans. If you or he say nothing against these, we shall leave the
Diocesan case to others: But if you be the man that I have lately privately
written to, I doubt not but I have proved to you, that Parish Churches that
have good Ministers, are true particular Churches, and those Ministers true
Pastors, and that any Bishops holding the contrary, does not disprove it.

7. When you recite my words, describing the Cause I plead, viz. [I have
written over and over, that I persuade no man either to, or from a public
Church, till I know his Circumstances; And that I doubt not but it is one man's
duty, and another man's sin.] You add [ I believe dear Sir, that though this
concession may displease those who may best bear it, it may reconcile you to
most of those that are called Dissenters.]

If so, those Dissenters it seems by you do not much differ from me: But I
think ten to one of the people accounted commonly Dissenters through England,
are of my mind, and are for Parish-Worship rather than either none or worse.
But by Dissenters, I suppose you mean those of the Doctors mind, or your own:
And if so, I thank you for your own Charity and Reconciliation: But if you did
not know them better than I, I should doubt that your said Friends are not
altogether so reconcilable.

Sir, You add, p. 39. [ And if (as you allow) the practical determination
depends on the circumstances of the Persons, you reduce the Controversy to a
far narrower room, than was by most supposed: And every one being best capable
of understanding his own circumstances, it will not bear great heat or
importunity from another.]

But whence came those wrong Suppositions of the most? If after 20 years
Communion in the Parish Churches, I venture on the Censorious so far as to give
my Reasons for my own Practice, and defend those Reasons, and that Practice
against contrary Writings, and such wise Men as you are so reconcilable, and
see how narrow the Controversy is, whence comes it that most think it to be
what it is not, against such frequent plain expressions? You and I may
conjecture at the Cause.

Your Conclusion is a pious Profession of that Love, and the main Principles of
that Concord for which I write.

10. You wisely leave the Vindication of the Doctors words, when it comes to
the case which I oppose him in: As [ That neither God, nor good men will allow
of, judging our Profession and Practice by any reserves of our own;] when I
have proved that our reserves against owning mixtures of evil, are necessary in
all Communion.

11. You vindicate not his words, that [ He that joins in the Worship of the
Common Prayer, does by his Practice make Profession that it is wholly agreeable
to Gods mind and will. And that to do it with other reserves is Hypocrisy, and
worse than the thing itself, without them.

12. You vindicate not his grand Argument [ Religious Worship not Divinely
Instituted and Appointed, is false Worship,] without excepting any secondary
sort of Worship.

13. You defend not his saying [ That there is nothing accidental in the
Worship of God: and that every thing that belongs to it is part of it, or of
its subsistence.]

13. You defend not that, [ Because outward Rites and Modes of Worship Divinely
Instituted and determined, do become necessary parts of Divine Worship,
therefore such as are Humanly Instituted and Determined, are thereby made parts
of false Worship.] What work would this Argument make? If all outward Modes are
false Worship, when determined by Men, if Divine Determination would make them
necessary.

14. You do not vindicate that [ All Prayers and Praise in Church Assemblies,
merely as such, are prohibited by the Lyturgy,] unless you do it by denying
Parish-Churches.

15. You do not defend [ That the Lyturgick Worship was in its first
Contrivance, and is in its continuance, an Invention, or Engine to defeat, or
render useless the promise of Christ to his Church, of sending the Spirit in
all Ages to enable it to the due discharge, and performance of all Divine
Worship in its Assemblies, and therefore unlawful to be complied with. That the
very being and continuance of the Church, without which it is but a dead
Machine, lies on this.

Does this speak only of the English Lyturgy, which is not 200 years old, think
you? When next he tells us, that [ It Is the way of Worship by a prescribed
Lyturgy, and that it was insensibly brought in (when in several Ages the Church
had lived without it) and that to render the promise of Christ, and the work of
the Holy Ghost in the Administration of gifts useless.

16. You defend not that [ Hence followed a total neglect of all the Spirits
Gifts in the said Administration -- Nor that [This produced all the Enmity --
of the said work of the Spirit, which the world is now filled withal -- that it
arises from hence alone. Nor that the Worship Treated about, consists wholly
in the Institutions, and on the Authority of Men, and therefore is false
Worship -- and to renounce the Kingly Office of Christ in the Church.

Nor that [ It belongs to the faithfulness of Christ to appoint and command all
things in the Church that belong to the Worship of God -- in the Forms and
Modes of them -- (Does this speak only of the English Lyturgy.) --

Nor that liberty to use gifts in Prayer and Preaching, is ridiculously
pretended, and they are excluded in all the solemn Worship of the Church.

17. You defend not that [ This Practice (joining in the Lyturgy) condemns the
suffering Saints of the present Age, renders them false Witnesses of God, and
the only blameable cause of their own sufferings.] And if all the
Nonconformists that 1660. gave their Testimony for a Reformed Lyturgy, were not
Saints, at least they have been Sufferers: And does not this as much make them
false Witnesses? And if both you and we were mistaken, I am confident you will
not justify all that we suffer by, and say we are the only blameable Cause? As
if every such mistake were worthy of all the punishment undergone? Nor will you
think that every good Man's Opinion must be justified, which he suffers for,
lest he be made the only Cause.

18. You defend not that [ All the Promises, Aids of the Holy Spirit, with
respect to the Prayer of the Church, whether as to the matter of them, or
ability -- or the manner -- are rejected and excluded by this Form of Worship.]
--

19. You defend not, I hope, that your Church Covenant is to observe -- nothing
but what Christ commands in the Worship of God.

20. Nor that [ The Practice inquired into contains a vertual renunciation of
our Church State, and of the lawfulness of our Ministry, and Ordinances
therein.] If you do, it is no renunciation of ours.

I thank you that you defend none of all these. For truly they be not things
Indifferent, but if they be not true, they are of confounding, dividing,
unpeaceable Consequence.

SECT. 2.
III. AS to the third thing, which takes up most room, viz. your blaming me,
1. For using the Doctors name, 2. For the manner of my Confutation, I say
distinctly.

1. I confess I think that the name of Christ and Religion, and its Honor is
to be preferred before all men's: And I had many years ago heard a Conformable
Preacher before a very honorable, and learned Auditory, charge the
Nonconformists with holding that [ A thing lawful in itself, in Gods Worship,
becomes unlawful, if it be commanded by the Magistrate. And that Forms and
Liturgies were unlawful, because they be not made in Scripture by Christ.] And
I have read too many such Charges: And I always answered that we were slandered.

2. I quickly heard that the Manuscript was commonly spread, and he that
brought it me, said, he believed a thousand were confirmed by it against going
to the Parish Churches and Lyturgy.

3. Several of my Friends and Acquaintance had got it, and told me they thought
it unanswerable. And all named the Doctor as the Author.

4. I was suddenly told of a very able Conformist that was going to answer it,
and I feared he would lay it on us all.

5. I made no doubt but Pulpits and Press would loudly say, these are the
Nonconformists Principles: and if I denied it would cite the Doctors Paper and
Name.

6. I knew diverse of his Printed Books have the same Opinion of the
unlawfulness of Imposed Forms; what now should I say against such reporters of
the Nonconformists Opinions? Must we all bear the Accusation of so many
Errors, and be published with Scorn and Contempt to be such, to make us odious
to all, rather than one Man should be Confuted.

I purposed at first to conceal his Name, till I saw that all took notice of
it, and none denied it, (and after (I conjecture it is your self) that in the
Letter to me affirmed it.) I know that multitudes of Men of Name, Learning, and
Power, scorn us as they do the Quakers, as believing them that say [ We make
all this noise and Schism as a distinct Party, and suffer silencing, and
Imprisonment, because we will not Communicate with the Lyturgy which the
Martyrs owned:] I dare not suffer the Innocent to lie under such a slander for
one [or many] Man's Name; we gave them our public Testimony to the contrary,
1660. and 1661. If a few that would not come in then, and be seen among them
that pleaded the Cause of the old Nonconformists, have now by our distempers
got so many of their mind as that we must be) thought intolerably to wrong
them, if we (necessarily) give our reasons against them, and shall pass their
Excommunicating Sentence against the Cause of the old Non-Conformists, and
yours, I cannot be one that shall betray the Truth and Cause of Catholic
Communion* by silence* at such a time, when the Erroneous expect that their
Opinion should be so necessary to our Union, that none must contradict it.

Therefore your saying that you have met with none that approves my writing,
if it were for the Cause, as well as my faultiness, will make me see the
greater necessity of bearing my Testimony against them; Epidemical diseases
most need Physicians, if not to cure the sick, yet to preserve the sound. Paul
wanted not Love nor Prudence to Peter, when he not only reproved his
Temporizing Separation to his Face, but left it with his Name on Record to all
Generations, when they were both dead. Christ had immediately before abundantly
honored, and praised Peter, who yet for his miscarriage speaks to him, as he
did to the Devil, Get thee behind me Satan, etc. Mat. 16. And yet the
miscarriage was done in Love to Christ, by a prime and dear Disciple; and his
name must be thus left under this most sharp reproof, to be read from Age to
Age by all. James and John were choice Disciples, and yet their Ambition, and
their Uncharitable Zeal for Christ, must be recorded with their Names, as men
that desired they knew not what, and knew not what manner of Spirit they were
of. We are not so much better than they, as the Passions of some Applauders
intimate: Christ will not be more tender of our Names, than of his Cause, and
the good of Souls. If David will cause Gods Enemies to blaspheme, his sin shall
be punished in the sight of the Sun, though the sharpest part of the punishment
be pardoned.

But as for my naming the Dr. and your intimation, that it is long of me that he
is named as the Author of those Arguments, I further say, 1. Is not a Man named
openly, till his Name be Printed? Was not the uncontradicted report, (still
continued) a publication. Was there no publication of Names till 224 years ago,
when Printing was invented? 2. All that I yet desire, is to be able to deny it
to be his, that the next Man that hits the Non-Conformists in the Teeth with
it, as the Doctors, may but be told it is not his: If you can and will but tell
me that you believe it not to be his, that I may have but so much to say, I
will thank you, and make it publicly known.

Either the Cause and Arguments are true, or false: If true, defend them. If
false, are they not dangerous in so great a Cause; and at such a time, when
they tend to drive hundred thousands from all Church Worship and Communion, and
to persuade Men into scandalous suffering for ill doing.

I think it laudable in you to honor the Doctor, and if you be the Man I
conjecture you are, I think it is specially incumbent on you; As to your hints
of suspicion of my sense of old differences, if I know my heart, I forgave, and
fully put up all Personal Quarrel long ago: But the National Concerns made so
deep a wound in my heart, as never will be fully healed in this world: But this
leads me to the second part of your reproof.

II. I do but tell you my reasons for naming the Doctor, but I undertake not to
justify either that, or the manner of my writing, from mistake, imprudence, or
other such faultiness: I suppose you to be a Man whom I take from my heart to
be far wiser, and better than my self: And therefore, as I thank you for your
gentle, friendly reprehension, so I profess that my very esteem and reverence
of your judgment makes me suspect that I have done amiss, when I see it not in
the Cause itself: That I could have defended the Cause of Love and Communion
against those Arguments, without taking notice of the Author, and without
wronging the Non-conformists who will be charged by his name I did, and do
wish; but I thought it could not well be done. If in this I mistook, I ask
pardon of God and Man; for so I must do for my sins known and unknown.

And as to the manner of my writing again, I say, I am convinced that all that
I do is faulty, and cannot but have some favor of the ignorance, and
imprudence, and forgetfulness, and other faults of the Author. I read over your
Animadversions, and, 1. I see at present some words of my own, that I much more
blame my self for writing, than you for blaming. 2. What I yet see not to be
faulty, your Authority shall make me yet suspect, and further consider. 3. I
see very many passages, where I am confident the mistake is yours, sometimes
mistaking the matter, and sometime my words. What good will it do the Reader,
or you, or me, to give the world an account of all these, and to drown the
Cause in abundance of self-defending words? Indeed I have neither time nor mind
to write a Book now for my self-defence. The greatest Affliction I have by this
Controversy as Personal, is this diverting of my thoughts so near my last hours
from things more agreeable to my Case: And far be it from me to be confident in
justifying my (faulty) writings, when I am going to the Judge that will take
that for an aggravation of my sin. But I durst never forsake public Communion,
nor my own work, because I cannot have one, and do the other without fault: I
am suspicious there may be more faults in me and my writings, than either I
discern, or you, or any such have told me of. And if I could prove that your
mistakes are the ground of your Accusation, I see by your noting my numbering
the mistakes in matter of Fact, in the private Letter to me, how you would take
it.

Therefore, instead of writing for my self, I will give the Reader this
concession and advice.

Readers, I think it is little of thy concern to know whether I be wise or
unwise, good or bad, or whether I did well or ill in naming Dr. O. or whether
the manner of my writing be much, or little to be blamed: On condition you will
agree with me in the cause of Love and Concord that I defend, Lonly then
entreat you, that what imprudence, unskil fullness, rashness, or other faults
you find in me or my writings, you will the more carefully your selves avoid
them, and do better: And if you judge me to do ill, when I do my duty, and
think very hardly of me for being against your way, I unfeignedly forgive you;
and if you forgive not me, I can bear that. I was aware that I should be ill
spoken of by many whom I love: And I am not Ambitious to be ill spoken of: If
Folly make me exercise self-denial, it is for somewhat that I thought had been
better then all the Love and Praises which I deny. I flatter no Party, and I
look to gain by none: I have gathered no Church to depend on for kindness, nor
is the fear of displeasing them a by as to my judgment. And if it be otherwise
with any, I think, were they like to have need of men in this world as short a
time as I, they would make as little of men's good or ill thoughts and words as
I do, except for the sake of other men.

Therefore Reader, think of all the rest what you see cause, so you will but
agree in the Cause that I am defending: That is,

I. That GOD IS LOVE, and he that dwells in LOVE dwells in GOD, and GOD in
him, 1 John 4. II. It is the Prayer of Christ that all who shall believe may be
one, that the world may thereby be brought to believe that the Father sent him,
Jo. 17. 21, 22, 23. And that they must love one another, even as he has loved
them, by which it is that all must know that they are his Disciples, Jo. 13.
34, 35. III. This Love must extend to all that are of one Body, one Spirit, one
Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all: And this
Unity of the Spirit must be kept in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. And if it be
possible, as much as in us lies, we must live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.
18. IV. Christians must love one another with a pure heart, fervently, 1 Pet.
1. 22. with a Love which suffers long, and is kind, envieth not, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things, believes, hops,
endures all things, Romans 13. V. Yet must they not be so tender of each others
Honor, as of Gods, nor justify the sin of any, nor make men's names a snare to
draw the weak to sin, nor think that Love and Peace can be justly vindicated
without gainsaying the Errors which oppose them, nor that Christ broke the
Law of Love by his sharp rebuke of Peter, that tempted him to forbear the work
of Love; nor by rebuking the hurtful zeal of James and John, nor by being angry
with those that forbad little Children to come to him; nor Paul by withstanding
Peter in his Separation. VI. Christian Love must extend to those that differ
from us, though faultily in Cases of tolerable infirmity, so as not to judge or
despise them, but to receive them to our Communion, as Christ receives us,
Romans 14 and 15. Approving all so far, that serve God in that which his Kingdom
does consist in, Romans 14. 17, 18. VI. All Christians must earnestly oppose
Divisions, and Sects, and sidings with Strife and Envy as a sign of Carnal Men,
and must labor to be perfectly joined together in the same mind and judgment,
and to glorify God with one mind and mouth, 1 Cor. 1. 10. and 3. 3, etc. And
must not forsake the assembling of themselves, Heb. 10. 25. VII. It is by Love
that the whole Body of Christ must edify itself, and win, and overcome their
Adversaries, even those that curse, and hate, and persecute them, as God does
good to the just and unjust, Love being the most powerful Conqueror of Hearts,
Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Matthew. 5. 44, etc. VIII. No excellency of one Party above
others, nor no faultiness of any Christians, must be pretended against any duty
of Love and Communion; But we must not sin for Communion with any. IX. Though
we must not by profession, word, or subscription own the sin of any Church, we
must join in their Communion in the Worship of God, with those whose Worship is
mixed with sin in matter and manner, so it be not sin that is by its evil
predominant against the good of the duty, to make the work rejected of God
(like Poison in our food, which makes the hurt greater than the good) because
else we must neither Worship God our selves, nor join with any in the world:
All the works of sinful men being mixed with sin. To deny this, is virtually to
separate from all the Christian world. X. Therefore our bare presence is no
signification that we approve all that is done in that Assembly. The very
nature of Christian Communion is a profession of the contrary; we being bound
by God to communicate in good, and not to own the evil: And if men command us
to own all that they there do, their command cannot bind us against Gods, nor
make our presence a profession that we obey them against God: It being God that
is the Master of us, and our work. And Christianity itself being a profession
that we obey God before Man. Else Man by commanding us to own some ill word, or
circumstance, might drive us from all Christian Communion. If Men should
command us in our private Meetings, to do it for an ill end, or an ill
Principle (as in Obedience to Usurpers) we must not therefore forbear all
private Meetings, nor will our bare meeting signify our Obedience to such
Commands. If the Pastor of a single Church (or many Associate) tell the people,
your meeting must be to own e. g. Anabaptistry, Antinomianism, Presbytery,
Erastianism, Separation, etc. this binds them not either to own it, or to
withdraw, without some greater reason. He is no Master of their Faith. XI. Nor
will the bare knowing beforehand that the Pastor will say or do somewhat
unlawful, make our presence guilty of approving it. We know beforehand that we
and all Men are sinners, and shall sin in what we do: And we may suppose Men
will speak as they think: And as we know not but any Man may speak amiss till
we hear what he says, so when we know that the Pastors have tolerable Errors,
and will vent them, it will not make us guilty of their sin, nor bind us to
depart: We meet to own Christianity, and not all that the Man will say or do
(known or unknown) I know before that I shall have many faults in my own Prayer
(disorder, dullness, etc.) which I do not own, though herein I am guilty. XII.
Yet no Man should prefer worse before better, if all things set together, it be
better indeed to the Person at that time. XIII. God has by his Son Jesus, and
his Apostles, instituted all that in Doctrine, Discipline, Worship, and
Conversation, which is obligatory, or necessary Universally to all the Church,
over and above, what is required by the Law of Nature. And no Man or Men have
power to add any thing of universal obligation. XIV. God has by Nature and
Scripture obliged Men themselves to choose and determine diverse subordinate
expressions, significations, modes, circumstances, or accidents of this
universal Religion, which are not themselves meet for an universal, and
unchangeable, obligation, but local, temporary, and mutable: Some of which
every Man may choose for himself, some the present Pastor must choose, some the
associated Pastors may choose, and some the Magistrate may choose. These must
be added to the universal Duties, so far is such addition from being sin: I
have often named many particulars; As the Translation of the Scripture, which
to choose: The version of the Psalms in rithme, or meter, the common use of new
made Hymns, the dividing the Scripture into Chapter and Verse; the words of
Sermons; their method; the particular Text to be chosen; what Chapters to read;
at what hour to begin; how long to Preach; in what words to pray, whether the
same often, or changed; whether fore-studied, or not, whether written, or
unwritten: whether studied, and written by our selves, or by others; where the
place shall be, where the Pulpit, Font, Table, etc. shall stand; what Ornaments
they shall have, Linen, Silk, silver Vessels or otherwise? Whether we be
bare-headed, or covered at Prayer, Sacrament, etc. Whether we shall kneel,
stand, sit, or be prostrate at Prayer, etc. what distinctive Garments Pastors
shall use. By what signs of consent and obligation Men vow, and swear, whether
by putting the hand under the Thigh, lifting it up, subscribing, laying it on
the Book, kissing the Book, etc. what Catechisms to use, with many more such.
God has commanded men to choose such things as these by the Rules of
Edification, Love, Peace, Concord, Order, Decency, winning those without, etc.
XV. These may be called Worship in a sense subservient to Gods Ordinances of
Worship (as we Worship Men, by putting off the Hat, kneeling, bowing, etc:) But
if any will not call it Worship, they must not call it false Worship, nor
pretend that the Controversy is any more than about the bare name. XVI. They
that feign such things as these to be sinful additions, and an invading of
Christ's Office, and denying his faithfulness, etc. condemn the Scripture that
commands such determinations, and contradict the Law of Nature, and the
practice of all Churches on Earth, and would exterminate all Gods Worship,
which cannot be performed without some such determinations. XVII. As God has
not tied us to words in Prayer or Preaching (though he have recorded many forms
in Scripture) but left all to choose what words, time and circumstances make
fit (by Book, or without,) so the conveniences, and inconveniences both of set
forms, and of free speaking, are on each part so great and undeniable, that we
have no cause to censure that Church which uses both; that is, which agrees
on a set form, to show what the Church professes to own, if the Minister
should blutter out any Error or Undecency, and yet not restrain Ministers from
the due use of free speech. XVIII. It is a great sin out of a fond Conceit of
the excellency of either way, above it is due value, to think and speak with
unjust vilifying of the other way, when God has tied us to neither alone: It
is contrary to knowledge, love, peace, and concord, out of a
self-conceitedness, peevishness, or false prejudice received from others, to
think, and speak worse of other men's words in Prayer, than they deserve: and to
frighten the ignorant from lawful Communion, by calling that sin, or false
Worship, that is not so. XIX. Not meddling with Ministers Subscribing,
Declaring, Swearing, nor with the Discipline, By-offices, Baptizing as by our
sort of Godfathers Covenanting without the Parents, Crossing, and undue
application of words at Burial, and such like; I know nothing in the common
Lord's Day Worship spoken in the name of the Church, which a godly Christian may
not join in, with the exercise of the Spirit of Prayer with faith and comfort;
if prejudice, and false apprehensions of it, affright him not, or put not his
Soul out of relish with it. (As on the other side prejudice distasteth many too
much with the faulty methods and words of many men's extemporate Prayers.) XX.
There are so few Churches on Earth that Worship God without all set Lyturgies
or Forms as are next to none. And there are very few in all the World so good
as the English Lyturgy, and that have so few faults: Which Martyrs composed,
and joyfully used. And it is unchristian to renounce Communion with any one
Church, for a reason that is common to all, or almost all. It being contrary to
the Communion of Saints in one body, and far worse than to slander any single
man. XXI. It is great self-condemnation in them that cannot bear to be
censured, nor scarce be contradicted, yet thus to censure almost all the
Church. XXII. They that think that Conforming Ministers are guilty of great
Sin, must consider what diversity of Education, Company, and Interest may do,
even on men of Conscience, and that we have all our sins. And it is sinful
uncharitableness to think, and speak worse of them than they deserve, and to
talk against all, for the faults of some. XXIII. So great is Gods mercy to this
Land, in yet giving many Godly able Ministers to the public Churches, that it
is sinful ingratitude to overlook or deny it, though many others be never so
bad. XXIV. The Religion that keeps possession of the Parish Churches will be
the National Religion: Mourn therefore before God, that ever any men professing
Godliness, should either labor to get all sound Protestants to desert the
Parish Churches, or that any such have been against the restoring of
Nonconformists, by that called a Comprehension, which was but the withdrawing
of such Impositions as these very men thought sinful; and all this, lest it
should diminish the number and strength of the private Churches. By this we see
what we are doing against our selves, if God save us not. XXV. They that say
Conformists Convert no Souls, take on them to know that of thousands which they
know not: and forget that before 1640. there were few but Conformists to
Convert them in the land, and that all the Westminster Assembly, save eight,
were such. And that the Parliament kept near 7000 in the Ministry, that all
Conformed on Aug. 24. 1662. XXVI. In most Counties of England, many hundred
Persons to one must have Church Communion in the Parish Churches, or have none
at all: And to renounce all Church Worship and Communion, rather than join in
the Parish Churches, and with the Lyturgy, and to persuade all to do so, is
almost to draw the Land to live like Atheists: And is so pernicious to Souls,
that no good Christian should favor it. And it is a-gross breach of the
Covenant, which renounceth Profaneness, Schism, and all that is contrary to
godliness. XXVII. So much are Papists angry at Protestant Ministers that keep
them out of the Parish Churches, reviling them as Trimmers, supposing that
Conventicles can do them less harm, that all that love the Protestant Religion,
should do their best to encourage all such Orthodox Men, and to strengthen the
Protestant interest in the Parish Churches, and not join against them with the
Papists, however it be with other intents and minds. XXVIII. So great is the
peace and comfort of many Parishes, where the public Ministers, and all the
Religious People live together in Love and Amity, that it loudly tells us how
much better that is, than to study to render each other odious, or vile, and
excommunicable. XXIX. Such use of godly public Ministers may well stand with
the best improvement we can make of the private help of others. XXX. If we
would win any that we think worst of, yea, or ease our selves, it must be by
love to them, and not by condemning them on controvertible accounts, or by
causeless singularities. XXXI. It is lawful to have transient Communion with an
occasional Assembly of Christians that are no fixed Church, nor the Minister
the fixed Pastor of any particular Church. XXXII. It is lawful to have
transient Communion with a Church of Strangers or Neighbors, without taking an
account of the calling of their Pastors, or of their Discipline. XXXIII. When
we have right to Gods Ordinances, if many intrude that have no right, when we
cannot hinder it, we must not therefore forsake our right, or Gods Worship.
XXXIV. Though we must prefer better before worse, that worse may be best to us
at that time and place, when we cannot have better without more hurt than
benefit to the public or our selves. Among many Ministers, weak and strong,
all cannot hear the best, nor must renounce the weaker. To live under the
countenance of Government under an honest Minister of mean Parts in Peace and
Concord, though he use the Lyturgy, is more to the common advantage of
Religion, and to the profit of most particular Souls, than to hear an abler
Man, with the distraction of Disturbers, and to be Fined, and lie in Prison on
no better a Cause. XXXV. It is not only the Law of Man that makes the foresaid
Parish Communion a Duty, but it is Gods Law of Love, Concord, Peace, and
Universal Communion, if there were no constraining Law of Man. XXXVI. They that
constantly refuse Communion in the public Churches while it is commanded, and
while many write to prove it sinful, and many are in Prison, and ruined for
refusing it, are justly to be interpreted to hold it to be unlawful, unless
they openly profess the contrary, and give some better reason for their
forbearance. XXXVII. To hold that any Congregations are such, whose Worship is
faulty, but such as God forgiveth, and accepts, but that it is unlawful for
us to join with them, lest it make us guilty of their sin, this (though it
should be erroneous, and uncharitable, and sinful) yet is not to Excommunicate
that Congregation as no Church, or no Christians. But to say of any
Congregation, that they want any thing essential to Christianity, or to make
them capable to be loved as Christians, or that their Worship of God is
Idolatry, or so bad, as that God accepts it not, the evil of it being greater
than the good, (as poison in our food) and on this reason to declare that no
good Christian should Communicate with them, this is to Excommunicate such
Congregation, as far as one Church may Excommunicate another, which is but by
such renouncing their Communion. XXXVIII. There is no History that I have seen
or heard that tells us of any Churches on Earth that for many hundred years
together did Worship God without a Lyturgy as faulty as ours: To make them all
Idolaters, and such whose Worship God cursed and accepted not, is to make them
no true Churches; and if Christ had no Church, he was no Head and King of it,
and so no Christ. XXXIX. The use of faulty Lyturgies is no worse than the use
of faulty Translations of the Holy Scripture, which yet Christ and his Apostles
ordinarily used, (of which I shall say more anon.) XL. I have before proved how
faulty the Priests Calling was in Christ's time, and the Temple and Synagogue
Worship, and the Pharisees long Lyturgies, on pretense whereof they devoured
Widows Houses, and their corrupt Doctrine; and how great the faults were in the
Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Sardis, Laodicea, Thyatira, Pergamos,
and those that James wrote to, from which none were commanded to depart: And to
Condemn Christ or his Apostles, as favoring, or using sinful Communion* is
worse in Christians than it was in the Pharisees.
These are the Principles, and this is the Cause for which I write: And I
cannot defend it without opposing those that openly militate against it. If the
Woman of Tekoah could have told David that any one had held, or hindered her
Son from killing his Brother, she would not have called him unpeaceable. It was
hard measure that the striving Israelite offered to Moses, that said, Who made
thee a Prince, and a Judge over us? Intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst
the Egyptian? And all for saying, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? If we
could as charitably judge of a godly man that differs from us, as of our
selves, and most esteemed Partners, how much sin should we avoid?

But Reader, agree with me in this cause of Christian Love and Concord, and
then think of me and my Writings what thou see meet. The question is not
which of us is the Wisest, or has done best, but how we should all please the
God of Love and Peace, and avoid the Evils which have long threatened us, and
which with grief I must say, our mistakes, and miscarriages in Religion have
brought upon us, and are like to increase. Many seem like a Ship of Passengers,
whose Pilot has cast them by Error on the Sands or Rocks; and some that pity
them as they are sinking, tell them that their Pilots mistake has endangered
them, and they must take better advice* And instead of accepting help, they
revile the helpers as injurious, unpeaceable, dishonourers of their wise and
faithful Pilot. And if far worse be not yet at hand, Freegrace must wonderfully
frustrate this prognostic.

SECT. 3.
IV. BUt somewhat, Reverend Sir, you oblige me to say about my supposed
Doctrinal Errors, which you have found in my praises of Dr. O. (Had I
dispraised him as much, you might have found more.)

I said, that [ I doubt not but his Soul is now with Christ, and though Heaven
have no sorrow, it has great Repentance, and that Dr. O. is now more against
the receiving of this mistake than I am, and by defending it, you far more
displease him than me.] Here my supposed Errors are three.

I. That I suppose him to know so much in Heaven. This being but played with as
in jest, I answer the more briefly to it in earnest.

1. I am not of the Socinians mind, that lay the Soul as in nuda potentia to
sleep till the Resurrection: Nor do I believe that Souls in Paradise with
Christ, are more ignorant than they were in the Body. 2. And therefore I think
the Doctor knows what he wrote, and did on Earth, and is not fallen into
forgetfulness. 3. And that he knows into whose hands he gave those Papers,
and what mind the men were of, and how they were received while he lived, if
they have been so long extant as you seem to intimate, and that they were
justified then. 4. And if the Saints shall judge the world, and be like, or
equal to the Angels, I do not think that the concerns of this life are any more
below their regard, nor more impertinent to them, than to the Angels: Nor that
they live as unconcerned Strangers to Earth (when a Sunbeam can reach so far.)
The Souls under the Altar, that cried how long, knew that their blood was
unrevenged on Earth. 5. Nor do I believe that Christ, with whom they are, and
the Angels that here attended them, are so strange to them, as to tell them
nothing of the Earth. But lest you feign that I suppose them to have
News-books, Gazetts, or Post-letters hence, I only advise you that justly extol
his Learning, and Wisdom on Earth, not to bring him too low in Heaven, in
comparison of us imprisoned Sinners, nor make him an ignoramus: And then we
will but agree, that if he know of our faults here, he is against them, but if
he think you are all changed since he died, there is mistake in Heaven. It
follows not that Souls in Heaven know nothing by Angels, because they know
not all things: Nor that of themselves they know not what a man here may know
by common reason, that the effects will be like the Cause, and his many Friends
that owned his mistake on Earth, will some of them yet own them.

I can but be sorry (for I am not so presumptuous as to think to change your
Judgment) if the contrary supposition be [ your best Weapon] against the Popish
Superstition of praying to Saints: For all this I will hope that you do not
pray to Dr. O. for so much as you believe he knows, nor yet feign him stark
ignorant for fear of praying to him? Do you think he has forgotten the ^ase of
England? Or will you pray to him to intercede for it.

II. My second supposed Error is, that the Saints in Heaven have any
displeasure: And this is said to be [ a Contradiction to the generally received
Opinion of all that you have met with.] I doubt not but your Acquaintance is
large, but I perceive it is not with all sorts of men. I am sorry they should
generally deny so great and clear a truth.

1. Let us examine the Controversy, as of the Matter, and 2. As of the Name
[Displeasure.] 1. Complacence is the first act of the will upon Good as Good,
before it come to Election of Compared Goods, (which is usually de Mediis:)
Displicence is its contrary, and its object is Evil as Evil. One is called
Volition, or Willing, the other Nolition, or Nilling. As Pleasedness, and
Displeasedness are in the Passions, and signify Joy and Trouble, we have
nothing here to do with them, (having expressly excluded sorrow) but as they are
in the Will. I thought till now, that all sober Divines had been agreed
(Protestants and Papists) that not only in Saints and Angels, and Christ as
Man, but in God himself (who is most remote from imperfection) there is
Complacence, and Displicence, Willing, and Nilling, which though in Creatures
that have Accidents, they really differ as Acts, yet in God who is most simple,
they are (say the subtiler part of the School Doctors) but the Essence of God
by extrinsick denomination from relation of the effects, differenced from the
Essence simply considered, and from each other; or as the Scotists formaliter,
or as the Thomists ratione ratiocinata; but none deny these to be in God. I
suppose that Volition or Complacence you deny not: As to Displicence or
Nolition, answering the Judgments dislike, I prove that it is in Heaven, in God
and Creatures.

2. If the will of God, Angels, and Spirits, have any Act about Evil, it is
Displicence,: But some Act about Evil they have, Ergo, etc.

For the Major, if they have any Act, it is Displicence, or Complacence, for
the will has no other primary Acts before Election, (even frui and intendere,
presupposing this Complacence:) But God and good Spirits have no Complacency in
sin or evil as such: Ergo they have a Displicence: Aut placet aut displicet,
being the first in nature.

That God or Spirits at least have some Act of will about evil as such, is
commonly agreed: Else all the sin and evil in the world would come to pass,
without any Act of God, or good Spirits in Heaven about it: Sure they that for
Predetermination have written so many Volumes, (and one against me) are not of
that mind. They say this is to feign God, and all in Heaven asleep, or having
nothing to do with Earth: I have my self proved indeed (with others) that God
has no Volition or Complacency of Evil as such, but a Displicence I have
proved.

2. If God have no Displicence as to sin, then there is no effectual impediment
to it, but all the world would be drowned in wickedness: For the Creature would
presently run into evil. But sin is restrained --

If any in excess of subtilty say, that Nolitions are not in God, but Volitions
of the Good, are instead of Nolitions of Evil, this is bold, and at least the
language unfit, and reductively these Volitions are Nolitions of their
Contraries. And however none of this can be feigned of Souls.

3. If God be not disp'eased with sin, then his prohibitions are no signs of
his displeasure; any more than his Commands. But, etc.

4. Then his Judgments and Execution in Hell, are no effects of his displeasure.

5. Then Christ came not to reconcile us to a displeased God, nor is he any
more displeased with Persecutors then Saints, nor with Cursing than with
Blessing* nor with any man for doing it.

6. If the subtilty which I have taken notice of in my Catholic Theology,
asserting Volitions without Nolitions in God, were defensible, it would, as I
said, be of no truth as to Creatures; if Souls in Heaven have no displicence
against sin, how is their will holy in the Image of God, that hates Iniquity?
Devils love sin; Stones, and Brutes neither love, nor hate it. Saints in Heaven
hate it, and love it not: merely not-loving it is not their full holiness.

7. If Saints there are not displeased with sin, how can they glorify Christ
for dying for it, or God for punishing it.

8. Or how can they be everlastingly thankful to Christ for saving them from it.

9. What a change must they impute to Christ that came so low, and suffered as
in a sort forsaken, to destroy the works of the Devil, and now has not so much
as the least displeasedness with sin.

10. Then Christ and Saints there are no more displeased at Persecution,
Profaneness, Murder, Adultery, then at Piety and Love.

11. Then it no more displeases Souls there, that they here sinned, then that
they did well: Paul's mind is much changed then about his Persecution. The best
is, though you and yours are offended with me, it is not displeasing to Dr. O.
if he know it. But if your reason be, because that all displeasedness has some
suffering of the mind, or trouble, 1. As to my meaning you know I excluded
sorrow. 2. And it is not true that you suppose. Pure Displicency of the will in
God, and the blessed, has no trouble: It is not exercised in a body that has
a Heart, or Head troubled by commotion of the Blood and Spirits, nor yet in an
imperfect Soul that has hurting passions. It is the pure perfection of the
will; and nothing but its Aversation from sin; and contrary to Love: Love and
Hatred are names that may well here be used, but Complacence, and Displicence
being the same, sound as less to signify Passion. And if there be Passion in
Heaven, (which you cannot disprove) it might be without diminution of felicity.

II. But I am not hopeless that you will deny none of all this as to the
matter, but turn all into a quarrel at words, and say that the name of
Displeasure is not fit for any Act of God or Saints, or Angels in Heaven: If
that be the worst (which is bad enough) let us next try that wordy Controversy.
I. By Scripture. II. By School Divines. III. By common practical Divines.

I. Scripture use of words in Sacred Things is our best Dictionary. He that is
our great Teacher, knows how to speak: If you dislike his words, methinks you
should not accuse Men of Error, and that against the common sense of all that
you meet with, for imitating God, and speaking as he does: And that at the same
time when you are defending one that would have no Mode, or Accidentals in
Worship used, which God prescribes not. If by my words I must be Justified, or
Condemned, I hope God will not condemn me for speaking as he taught me, no more
then for doing as he bid me, though all your party should do it* And I can bear
their Condemnation.

The Hebrew phrase which we translate by Displeasing God or Man, is often [ It
was Evil in his Eyes] which speaks a positive Act of the Understanding de
malo: And that there was no answerable Act of the Will, let him say that dare.

Prove. 24. 17, 18. Rejoice not when thy Enemy falls, and let not the heart be
glad when he stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him -- ] No, say
you, fear not that any in Heaven should be displeased.

Genesis 38. 10. The thing that he did displeased the Lord, wherefore he slew him.

Number. 11. 1. When the people complained, it displeased the Lord -- his anger
was kindled --

2 Samuel 11. 27. The thing that David had done displeased the Lord, (Murder, and
Adultery.) No, say you, God is not displeased with any sin, there is no
displeasure in Heaven.

1 Chr. 21. God was displeased with this thing, therefore he smote Israel.

Psalm. 60. 1. O God -- thou have been displeased.

Isa. 59. 15. The Lord saw it, and it displeased him.

Zech. 1. 2. 15. The Lord has been sore displeased, or displeased with
displeasure -- I am very sore displeased with the Heathen -- I was but a little
displeased.

Psalm. 6. 1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.

Psalm. 2. 5. He shall speak to them in his anger, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

Deuteronomy. 9. 19. Moses says, [ I was afraid of the great anger, and hot
displeasure wherewith the Lord was hot against you to destroy you.] I am sorry
that you all differ from Moses.

And Expositors suppose that when God is said to have no pleasure in fools, or
in wickedness, etc. Eccl. 5. 4. Ps. 5. 4. it signifies displeasure.

But the Scripture ascribes to God not only Displeasure, but Hatred, which
signifies the greatest displeasure, Deuteronomy. 16. 22. Psalm. 11. 5. The wicked, and
him that loves violence, his Soul hates, Isa. 1. 14. Mal. 2. 16. Psalm. 5. 5.
Thou hate all the workers of Iniquity, and 45. 7. thou hate wickedness,
Rev. 2. 6. 15. The Doctrine of the Nicolaitans -- which I also hate, Zech. 8.
17. Amos 5. 21 and 6. 8. Jer. 44. 4. O do not this abominable thing which I
hate, Isa. 61. 8. Prove. 8. 13. and 6. 16. I thought those that overstretch
[Esau have I hated] would not have denied all displeasedness in God.

But if I should go further, and cite all the Texts that ascribe even Anger and
Wrath to God, and say he is angry every day, etc. and that his wrath shall
punish the Wicked, I suppose it would do more to weary the Reader, that knows
this already, than to convince your Party.

II. But my 2d Appeal is to the Accurate Scholastic Writers, because I suppose
you will say that the Scripture speaks popularly, and after the manner of
Men. Ans. (Or else it must not speak to Men.) But here I should much more
confound most Readers, if I should call them to Metaphysics, or Metaphysical
Writers; I should cite to them many sheets out of Aquinas, Scotus, Ockam,
Durandus, Bonaventure, and all their followers, who commonly ascribed
Displicency, as well as Complacence to God. If you need Witness in this case,
read them, and seek it, and pardon me for not abusing the Reader with such
Citations.

III. The same I say of the consent of Practical Protestant Divines. I do not
think the Reader would forgive me, if I should prove that Luther, Calvin,
Melancthon, Bucer, and all the Foreign Reformers, and all our Martyrs, and
English Divines, Episcopal, Presbyterian, and (whatever you say against it, to
their injury) Independants also ascribe Displicence to God: Sure they that
translated the Bible did. And surely the Writings of Hildersham, Dod, Greenham,
Rogers, Preston, Sibs, Bolton, Whateley, Allen, and hundreds such, are far from
disowning such expressions.

But methinks I should not need to suppose you to object that it is not God,
but Man that you speak of: No, I will not abuse you so much as to suppose that
you take man to be more perfect, and less Passive then God. Indeed Displicence,
and Complacence in God, are Active ad extra, and signify but the perfection of
his will, and exeunter, the expressions and effects, and no Passivity: But all
Creatures are Passive as well as Active, and they are receptive ab objectis,
both in their Ideal Conceptions, and their Appetites: And therefore Displeasure
in a far grosser Passive sense, must be ascribed to the Creature, then to the
Creator: and yet without any diminution of felicity.

And 2. It is certain that Christ himself was much displeased with sin on
Earth, Mark 10. 14 and 3. 5. And surely he is not any less perfect, nor more
reconciled to sin in Heaven. He was displeased with it, when he died for it:
and is his will changed since to favor it? Yea, if you should say that [ sin
is nothing, and therefore no object of a Divine Act] of Nolition, or hatred,
but God is said to will or hate it, only because he does not will or love it,
but punish it; yet the Church has long ago Condemned the Monothelites as
Heretics, and determined that Christ has two Wills and Operations: And
therefore as Man, his knowledge and will must have somewhat of Passivity,
though not of Pain.

2. And it is strange that Christ is made our Captain, and manageth a War
against Satan in the world, and Michael and his Angels are engaged in it, and
yet have not the least displeasure against Sin and Satan.

3. And that Christ has such terrible threatenings against Sin and Sinners,
even everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, the Worm that
never dies, and the fire that is not to be quenched, and that he shall come in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance, etc. that all they might be damned that
obeyed not the truth, etc. that the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of men, etc. that fiery
indignation shall devour the Adversaries, all Kindreds of the Earth shall wail
because of him, and he will say, Those mine Enemies that would not I should
Reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me: Depart from me all ye
that work Iniquity, etc. And yet has not the least displeasure at Sin or
Sinners. That most of the World must lie in Hell, and feel no effects of
Christ's displeasure, because he has none.

And Angels and Saints are not perfecter than Christ, but are of his mind, and
are displeased with Sin, and Persecutors, and Devils in conformity to Christ.

The Saints in Heaven have not forgotten their former sins: The remembrance of
them has some effect: It is not Pleasedness with the evil; therefore it is
Displeasedness; they are not ignorant of all the Wickedness, Injustice,
Violence, Persecution, and Bloodshed on Earth, and all the sufferings of the
Just: They love not this with Complacency: Therefore they hate it with
Displicence; or else they are senseless neuters.

Do the Angels pour out the Vials, do the Souls under the Altar pray for
revenge, are the Heavens and the holy Apostles and Prophets bid rejoice over
Babylon, Rev. 18. 20. and yet none of them so much as displeased at Babylons
sin, or the Churches suffering?

Sure you do not so far disagree from us in all this, as to deny the matter: I
hope it is but a false Conceit of the unfitness of the word: And if the word [
Displeasure] do displease you, why would not so accurate a Reprover once tell
us what word it is that he would have used instead of it? We that are accused,
know that [ Nolition, Displicence, Aversation, Hatred (or as Campanella calls
it Disamor) are words of the same signification as to the will, answering
dislike in the understanding, (yea, dislike often signifies both.) If you cannot
bear these, sure you are less patient at the words [ Wrath and Anger of God]
etc. what is it that you would have? Even Nothingness is an object of Nolition
to the blessed; for they are averse to annihilation, so that the quibble that
malum est privatio, will be here of no use to you; for what is more displeasing
than Privation?

Dear Brother, I am so far from perceiving any Conviction in your Accusation in
this matter, that I must say that you have in this made your self to me what
Dr. O. did in the case of Concord. You constrain me to bear my public
Testimony against you, when you pretend herein to speak the mind of so great a
number of your Acquaintance, when I remember the Sermons that are commonly
talked of, and the Collections made by the Friendly Debater, and many such
others, I look to hear e're long from Prefs and Pulpits, [ That the
Nonconformists teach that no Rebellion, Treason, Perjury, or Wickedness is at
all displeasing to God* to Christ, to Angels, or to any Saint in Heaven* Though
they call Adulterers, Murderers, and such others to Repentance, and Mourning
for Sin, and separate from others as too bad for their Communion, indeed at the
same time they tell all the wicked, neither God, nor any in Heaven is
displeased with them.]

Foreseeing this scandal, I humbly address my self to such Accusers with this
answer following.

[Take not verbal differences for real: No doubt but this Persons Error is
merely verbal: All Men's Studies go not one way: It Is like he is not versed in
Philosophers, and Schoolmens Writings, that use Displicence and Complacence for
mere Nolition and Volition, Hatred, or Aversation, and Love. And though he knew
that Scripture, and Christian Writers commonly speak that which he accuses, he
was someway biased to think that I used the same words in a worse sense than
Scripture, and all Writers do (though I excluded sorrow:) And his interesting
in his Error, [ The general received Opinion of all that he has met with]
does but signify what sort of Men, and how few he has met with, or how few
Writers on such Subjects he has read, and remembered, (for doubtless he does
not knowingly abuse them.) And when did all the Protestants, or Nonconformists
choose him to represent them? why is not my word as valid on the contrary, who
remember not one Man, Protestant, or Papist, or Heathen that is for the
Immortality of the Soul, that is, of the Opinion which he expresses; except
those few that hold that non datur vere malum, There is no Evil in the World,
but all that we call sin and punishment is good, and miscalled evil by us in
darkness, but all willed by God, and those in Heaven? yet even Hobbs, and Peter
Sterry confess a good fort of Evil. And I doubt not but this Brother is against
what he speaks himself.

And to stop your Censures, let me ask you, if one mistaker accuse us all, whom
we never authorized to represent us, does this lay so great a blot on us, as an
erring Council of Bishops does on the Clergy, whom they represent: And yet how
great a number of Councils have falsely reported the Doctrine of the Church.

I will stop your mouth now but with the last words of Sulpitius Severus.
History. [ Ac inter nostrios perpetuum discordiurum bellum exarserat: quod jam
per quindecim annos faedis dissentionibus agitatum nullo modo sop^ri poterat?
Et nunc cum maxim discordiis Episcoporum turbari ac misceri omnia cernerentur,
cunctaque per eos odio: aut gratia, metu, inconstantia, invidia, factione,
libidine, avaritia, arrogantia, somno, desidia essent depravata, postremo
Plures adversum paucos been consule^tes infanis conciliis and pertinacibus
studiis certabant: Inter haec plebs Dei and optimus quisque probro at que
^^dibri^ habebatur.] Read the Author, lest you think I made these words for our
times. And of their Captain Bishop he says, [ Certe Ithacium nihil pensi,
nihil sancti habuisse definio: Fuit enim audax, loquax, impudens, sumptuosus,
ventri and gulae plurimum impertiens, hic stultitiae eo usque processit, ut
omnes etiam sanctos viros quibus aut studium in erat lectionis, aut propositum
erat certare jejuniis tanquam Priscilliani socios in crimen arcesseret.] (And
yet says that the Persecution of the Priscillianists did but increase them.)
Pardon this digression, by which you may see that if you be not responsible for
all that Councils, and the Major part of Bishops say or do, much less are we
for the verbal Error of one or a few men, though fathered by them on many*
whereby they necessitate these our open disclaimings of their words.

III. My third supposed Error is much like the former, saying, that [ Though
Heaven have no sorrow, it has great repentance.] In this [ all Protestants]
are (falsely) said to be against me. Here also the Error is either Verbal or
Real. And, 1. He knows that as to the word all Protestants own the Scripture,
which ascribes Repenting to God himself, Exodus 32. 12. Deuteronomy. 32. 36. Psalm.
135. 14. Ier. 18. 8, 10. and 26. 3. 13. Ion. 3. 9, 10. Genesis 6. 6. Judge. 2. 18.
1 Samuel 15. 35. 2 Samuel 24. 16. Am. 7. 3, 6. Joel 2. 13. Ier. 15. 6. It Is true
that this is not spoken of God, as if he had any mutability as man has; But
God being infinitely more perfect then man, the phrase is further fetched, and
less proper of God then of man: Therefore it is not the Name that he blames,
seeing he owneth the Word of God.

II. And if it be not the Name, but my sense of it, do you find where he
proves any wrong sense that I express, or does he give a better?

I said in a Book [ There is not such a thing as grief or sorrow known in
Heaven.] The Vindicator cites this as if it were contrary to, [ There is no
sorrow, but displeasure and repentance:] If he mean not that [ no sorrow, and
no sorrow] are Contradictions, he need to have gone no further then the present
sentence for it. And if he had proved that [ no sorrow,] and Displicence, or
Repentance are Contradictions, he would have done that against the Scripture
itself, which he intended not, nor can do.

He has prevented my labor in transcribing other Authors that use (...) and
(...) usually for a mere change of the mind, purpose, and practice, without any
signification of sorrow, and he appealeth to Scripture use of the words: But is
there any thing besides sorrow, that by all his words he labors to exclude?
And did not I expressly exclude it: And yet is this Reverend man thus puzzled at
this as a dangerous Doctrine? Does he attempt in one syllable to blame any
thing but the word? When I excluded his misliked sense? And he will not deny
the ordinary use of the word as without sorrow? But let us willingly take the
Scripture use: which speaks of Repentance in Heaven, and on Earth. It is not
Repetance on Earth that we have now to treat of: And do you think its a good
Argument that there is no Repentance in Heaven without sorrow, because there is
none on Earth without it? But even on Earth, Repentance is either the Act of
the Intellect, and Will, alone, or an Act of these joined with diverse Passions.
It is sometime so largely taken, that the Passions of grief, shame, and fear,
and specially anger against our selves, are parts of it: But in all common
Authors, and ordinary use, and even in Scripture, it is taken for the change of
Mind and Will, the Passions being but effects, or concomitants of it. To
Repent, in the common and prime sense, is but to change our Mind and Will, and
wish we had not done what we did. When a thing was well done of us, and yet
sped not well, we repent and wish we had not done it for the sake of the event:
but we blame not our selves for the Act, nor grieve for that, but for the
event. But usually we have cause of Sorrow, as well as of Repentance, and must
join them together. But where the Gospel frequently promises Repentance,
pardon, and life together, and Preaches both Repenting and Believing in order
to present joy, there is little mention of the sorrow in the Converts, save for
the murdering of Christ, or some great sin. And Sorrow, and Repenting are
distinguished in Scripture as two things, 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10. I rejoice, not that
ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to Repentance -- For Godly sorrow
works Repentance to salvation, not to be repented of.] Is the sense [ Godly
sorrow works Godly sorrow?] No, but a change of mind and life, Heb. 6. 1. It
is not called [ Repentance for dead works,] but [ from dead works,] as speaking
the change, rather than the grief.

Exodus 13. 17. Lest the people repent when they see war, and they return to
Egypt: Hence sear is the moving Passion, and Repenting is wishing they had not
left Egypt, and returning is the effect. I am readier to think that sorrow is
no part, but an adjunct of Repentance in the strictest, properest sense, then
that it is no Repentance without sorrow: sure the specifying faculties of Man
are the Intellect and Will; and I think the specifying Acts of Rational true
Repentance; are the Acts of the same faculties, and Sorrow is but such an
adjunct as shame and anger at our selves are.

But it is Repentance in Heaven that is our subject: And I have cited you Texts
enough which speak of Gods Repenting: And do you believe that he has sorrow?
You Will say, that is but metaphorically spoken? Ans. No more is knowledge, or
will, or any such Act that we can speak of God: But if it be not a name unmeet
to be spoken of God; are Souls there greater, or happier then he.

But we find no talk in Scripture of any in Heaven Repenting, save God: No
wonder: How little has God told us of the particular state and action of
separated Souls, before the Resurrection; when it pleases God so sparingly to
mention their present state, (yea, and their immortality in the old Testament*)
shall we feign that he must tell us of all their thoughts?

But all these Acts of Repentance Souls in Heaven have. 1. They know more of
their sins both as to the matter and evil, then ever they did on Earth. 2. They
own their Culpability, that is, that they are the Souls that committed these
sins, and deserved Death and Hell for them. 3. They know the goodness of all
the ways that are contrary to their sin. 4. They love all that good, and hate
all their sin more than they did here. 5. They wish they had never committed
them. 6. If it were to do again, they would not do it.

This is proper true Repentance: Either you deny the Things, or but the Name.
If the Thing, which of these deny you.

1. If Saints in Heaven know not sin better then they did here, Heaven is to
them as dark as Earth.

2. If they know not that they themselves were the Subjects, and Actors of
these sins, they are ignorant, or erroneous.

3. If they know not that Gods way is better than sin, they are brutish.

4. If they love Good, and hate Evil no better then here, then they are no
better.

5. If their will do not wish that they had not done it, then their will is not
holy and averse to sin: Either they review it with approbation, (which you
believe not) or with dislike, or senselesly with no act of will. If with
dislike, and displicence, as before is proved, that hatred, or aversation
contains a wish, they had never done it. Else David, Peter, Paul, etc. were
better Men on Earth then in Heaven: For here they wished they had not been
guilty of Murder, Persecution, etc. And if they wish it not there, their wills
are more unholy than here.

Perhaps you will say, It Is a vain wish of an impossibility? Ans. No such matter:
I talk not of a prayer, or a desire that factum non factum fiat; but a Vellem
or Mallem me non peccasse: I had rather I had not sinned: And that is not vain,
which is the Wills perfection or Holiness itself.

6. And that they would not do the like again, I need not prove.

I were a greater dishonourer of Heavenly felicity, if I denied any of these,
then you feign me to be. I doubt not but those aforesaid that are disposed to
obloquy, will take occasion from your words (yea, the Papists from your
entitling all Protestants to it) to say [The Nonconformists (or the
Protestants) hold that Murder, Rebellion, Perfecution, and all sin is so small
a matter to their Saints in Heaven, that they do not so much as Repent of it,
or will or wish they had never done it. Therefore they either justify it, or
are neuters to it.]

They say that the Mother of Lombard, Gratian, and Pet. Comestor being a Whore,
said she could not repent of the Fornication that had begot three such Sons: If
any say that the Saints in Heaven do not so much as wish, or will that they had
not sinned, because Christ is glorified by saving them from it, they pervert
the Gospel Doctrine of Grace, and would teach the justified on Earth to be
impenitent.

But if you return to wordy Quarrels again, and say all these Acts ought not to
be called Repentance, if they have not sorrow. 1. I durst not so make my self
Master of Languages, against the use of all the world. 2. And against the
Scripture that speaks of Gods Repenting. 3. Nor against Etymology. 4. And
against the nature of the Case. Men in flesh have sin and danger, and Bodies
liable to sensible commotion of Spirits, and so to grief. Those in Heaven are
not such: They have no cause of grief, and yet have renewed faculties of mind
and will, which disgust sin, and hate it, and are turned from it to a contrary
love and life. Even here, if a man by his own sin and folly had shut up himself
twenty years in a Dungeon, or put out his Eyes, and never seen the light,
suppose this man suddenly delivered into the light, and he would not stay to
mourn for his former state, but the sudden joy would exclude sorrow: And yet
his change would be a true Repentance for what he did.

But as you have wronged all Protestants by fathering your Error on them, you
have made it my duty to vindicate them with my self.

But I am grown such a Prodigal of my Reputation with Men of such a judging
disposition, that I will cast away a little more of it on your Censure. The
Scripture speaks so much more of our Glory after the Resurrection, then
before, and purposely keeps us so low in our knowledge of the particular
state of Souls before, and Calvin, (whom I suppose you take not for an
Heretic) for all his Treatise against the sleep of Souls, did think the
difference was so great between the state of the separated Souls, and that at
the Resurrection, that I must profess my ignorance to be so great, that I am
uncertain whether this first state do set all the blessed so high, as that no
thought is consistent with it, that has the least degree of suffering.

For, 1. I know that all Creatures are Passive. 2. If felicity be imperfect
till the Resurrection, it must be privatively, or positively, or both. If
privatively, how can I prove that nothing positive may concur, when privation
is as bad. 3. I think that Protestants mostly agree, that Christ's own Soul,
while his Body was in the Grave, was in Paradise, in Joy, and yet in a state
that was partly Penal, as it was a separation from the Body by death. And that
all Souls in Heaven are happy, and yet in a state partly Penal in Heaven
itself, as they are separated from the body, and short of the Resurrection: For
not only the minute of dying, but the state of death is Penal, to a Soul that
desires a return to the body: And yet Heaven may be to it unconceivable
felicity. I only hence conclude, that we must not take on us to know more than
we do of separate Souls, nor to make a measure or manner of blessedness for
them of our own heads, nor to apply every Text to them that is spoken of the
state after the Resurrection: There is enough besides to feast our joyful hopes.

IV. Some few other practical Doctrines we differ about, as where page 30. you
say [ I doubt not to affirm that doing that which a Law requires, so far as the
intention is moved by the Law, is a justifying of it. And submitting to any Law
on the consideration of its Penalties, is so far a justifying its preceptive
part, as not so great an evil as the Penal.]

Ans. I first premise that this is little or nothing to the Cause I pleaded
for: For whereas you say [ None that I know of say it is a duty simply, or
without any dependence or human Sanction.] I have largely told you that taking
public Communion to be but do facto, what it is, and the Lyturgy as commonly
used, I take it to be a duty to hold such Communion (where no better at least
is) though there were no human Sanction, but voluntary Concord; and this by
virtue of Gods great Commands of glorifying him with one mind and mouth in
Unity, Love, and Peace; not an immutable duty, but a duty rebus sic stantibus.
It is in obedience to Gods Commands more than Men's, that I have gone to the
Parish Churches; and would have gone as much, if the Law had not commanded it,
but only had deprived me of better.

But as to your undoubted affirmation, I am as much past doubt that it is not
true as you unlimitedly express it. The intention may be moved by a Law for the
effects. or consequents sake, and not justify the Law, but only justify the Act
of the Subject: Yea, it may be moved by the formal Authority of the Lawgiver,
expressed by his Law, and yet not justify the Law.

Joseph and Mary were Taxed with others by Augustus Law: They were moved by
that Law, and its effects to pay the Tax: And yet justified not the Law, nor
decided the Case, whether it were by Right or Usurpation: All Conquered People
by unjust War, may obey a Taxing Law: The Israelites might obey the
Philistines, that forbad them Smiths, and Swords, etc. They may labor, and
Travel, and pay Taxes, moved by unjust Laws, and yet not justify the Law, but
only their own Acts. When Christ sent Peter to take a Fish with Money in his
Mouth, and pay Tribute, the Law moved his intention, because of the offense
that would follow the breaking of it: And yet his answer intimates that he
justified not the Law: If he carried his Cross at their Command, that justified
not their Command. If he bid us give our Coat to him that sueth us for our
Cloak, if the Law be against us, it proves not he bids us justify the Law. If
a Confessor go to Prison, or Banishment, or to the Gallows, or fire without
resistance, to do this as moved by the Law, is no justifying of the Law. If the
Protestants in France should pay each man a yearly Tribute for liberty of
Conscience, or the Christians under the Turk pay Pos^-mony, moved by the Law,
this justifies not the Law. I am persuaded your Church would gladly pay
somewhat for liberty of Worship, and yet not justify the Law that required it.

If the Law required us to meet for Gods Worship at an inconvenient place or
time, or to use a version of Psalms in Meeter, or a Translation of Scripture
that is not the best, he that uses these in obedience to this (because Concord
in these according to Law, is better then a better Version, Translation, Hour,
Place, with Discord, and because Obedience may do more good then better
circumstances would without it) yet does not hereby justify the Law. If the Law
bid you appear before Justices or Judges that are bad men, and unjust, you may
obey the Law, and not justify it.

Dear Brother, I will not aggravate your Error by its ill Consequences: But
you and I tell the world, what need all men have of pardon in our mistakes,
even when we are most confident.

2. And as to your second affirmation, it is not true without limitation, [
That submitting to a Law, on consideration of the Penalties, is so far a
justifying its preceptive part, as not so great an evil as the Penal.]

This is confused work: The pr^ceptive part of the Law is actus praecipientis,
the Commanders Act; The instances before mentioned tell you that this may be
obeyed for the Penalty sake, when yet the evil of the Command, or Law, is
sinful, and so worse than the Penalty or Obedience, which are not sin: Forgive
me for telling you that you should have distinguished the preceptive part of
the Law from the matter Commanded by it, and the evil of the Law and Lawmakers,
from the evil of the Obeyer; and then only have concluded that he that obeys
a Precept only to avoid the Penalty, professes the Penalty to be worse then
his Act of Obedience. But he does not make it worse then the Law, or the
Lawmakers sin.

If a Law did Command me to appear before a Lay-Civilian, who uses the Keys of
the Church, and this on pain of Death, or Imprisonment, I may be moved both by
Precept and Penalty to appear, as being better then either refusal, or penalty,
and yet not think that the Law or Precept is a less evil in itself, or its
ends, to the Lawmakers, or the public? (Whether this thought be right or
wrong, is nothing to our question) so if I were by Law commanded to join in the
Lyturgy, on pain of Death, or Imprisonment, or being deprived of all other
Church Worship, I may think this Law worse than my sufferings, and yet think my
Obedience to it my Duty.

Yea, if a Law bid me play with Childrens Bubbles, or any such trisling, on
pain of Death, the Case would be the same.

And if any should take occasion by your confident judgment to refuse to obey,
wherever he may not justify the preceptive part of the Law, the effect would be
worse then of my naming Dr. O.

SECT. 4.
I Told you I have no leisure to write Books for my self now: Thus far I have
written for Truth, and Love, and Unity. As to all your Charges against my self,
I say again, I will not justify my self: My naming Dr. Owen, which is so
heinously taken, I have told you the occasion of. To which I truly add, 1. I
did it as a distinctive note, that the Readers might know what it was that I
answered. 2. And I that use to put my Name to my Writing, never dreamt that it
would have been taken any worse to name him, than to confute a Writing that by
common, uncontrolled supposition bore his Name. Had I thought it would have
been taken so ill (while the Super-Conformists bear far more) it is two to one
but I had forborne it. And now it is done, I am yet but little wiser, when I
think of the public Cause fore-described, I am ready to think it should weigh
down all your contrary reasons: When I feel in my self an inward averseness to
strive with any by ungrateful words, and hear from you how ill it is taken, then
I dislike it: And my own selfish lothness to be the object of the hard
thoughts, and talk of so many of you, is some bias to my judgment. I wholly
follow the Rule you mention, to choose that which does most good, and least
hurt: And truly the reverence of your own, and some others judgment, telling me
that it does more hurt than good, does turn the Scales, and make me repent that
I named the Doctor.

And I leave your Charges against me to their best advantage, to the Reader,
though my inclination is much to open the mistakes.

I may give a brief touch to your self, for your information, which I expect
not should affect the Reader, suppose your Book to lie open before you.

Page 1. 1. If you thought them not good enough to be his, nor intended for
public view, why did you wrong him so much, (and the people much more) as to
divnlge them with his Name?

Page 2. Do good men take it for a privilege to hurt the Church uncontradicted?

2. The more are displeased with Truth, the greater is the disease that needs
it.

3. To be zealous for Love, against Hatred, and its Causes, is not so bad as to
need to be quenched. It is zeal for a Sect against Unity, which, corrupt nature
is for.

4. I doubted not but guilt would be impatient

5. It was your Party that wronged, his Name, by divulging that which you now
take for his disgrace.

Page 3. It Is wisely done not to own the Cause I oppose, and yet not let men
know whether it be for fear of the Law, or because you are against it.

O that I could have fore-known, that I might have confuted his Arguments
without his Name, and displeased no body? I thought you had taken them for his
Honor, and not his Disgrace, when so many value them.

Page 4. 1. If they are true, they are his Honor: If false, why should I
suffer them to do mischief.

2. I named not Mr. Ralphson, till all said he openly owned his Books in
Prison. Had you rather all that Worship God in Parish Churches, were persuaded
that it is Idolatry, than Mr. Ralphson should be confuted by name? I hope you
have better reasons for concealing your own Name; to do mischief un-named, is
not worth pleading for.

Page 5. If the work be faulty, why do you not join with me to save men from
it? And why did your private Letter own it his, conjunct with Fame? And not one
Man yet that I hear of, denies it.

2. I offered you to stop it.

3. Is it disingenuity in me to tell you of twenty untruths in your private
Letter (and many notorious,) and ingenuity in you to be offended for being told
of them, rather than for writing them? This is to comply with the World, that
takes the detecter only for the sinner.

4. Is a defensive confutation of Error, dealing severely?

5. Agreeing Copies confute you. To confute Error is not worse then to own or
defend it.

Page 6. If it be so heinous to confute it, why did you divulge it?

Page 7. My Reasons for Love and Concord were long before considered.

2. I had heard of them long in many hands, though till then I never saw them:
And you say you saw it a year before.

2. It Is strange so knowing a man should think that bad Arguments, with a
valued Name, are not dangerous! Yes, even against common sense, as those for
Transubstantiation. To confute your self, you add, that [ on all sides peoples
Opinions are mostly, and most strongly mastered by affections, and it is beyond
all our power to cure the disorder.] And yet is there no danger from Names?

Page 8. [ Must all appearance of Enmity, and bitterness, be laid aside, and
Love used, etc.] And yet must we let Men Excommunicate one another, and call
all to mutual avoidance, without contradiction? Let Churches and Christians be
taught to damn each others Persons, and Worship causelessly, and take each other
for Idolaters, for fear of breaking Love and Peace.

2. Do you believe that Dr. Owens Name was not known with them before?

3. Mr. Warners came out since, which I compared with Mr. Ralphsons.

4. Can you tell why I was to name Dr. O. in my Cure of Church Divisions, or
his Books: I told you great reasons against it, what now you call a brave
advantage, would have been otherwise called by yours. I was not inclined to
note a little evil among much good: If you cannot see the Doctors Arguments
there answered by me, I cannot help that: Must. I transcribe them to convince
you. Page 177. D^r. 32. [Obj. Where has God given any men power to prescribe
and impost Forms for others, or commandea others to obey them?] Read the
answer, page 178, 179, 180. At least not on Ministers, p. 181. Christ has
given gifts to all his Ministers, and commanded them to use them: They use them
not, when they use imposed Forms. So page 190. p. 196. of approving of sin, and
signifying Consent by joining. More fully, p. 201. (And in my Christ. Direct.)
If you never found these Arguments (there answered) in Dr. O. Book, I cannot
help that, others have. Page 11. I thought you had known how usual it is to
speak to the second person, in answering Books many hundred years old? If not,
you have free leave to take it for my folly: I Will not contend with Quakers,
whether we should say [ You] or [ Thou] nor with you, whether it be better to
say [ Him] or [ You.] You say, It displeases him not.

Page 15. If numbering men's Errors, used to do hurt, be worse than committing,
or defending them, I mistook.

Page 16. I consent that you do so by me, so you speak nothing but truth.

2. Repentance is a hard work, and the impenitent impatient; therefore we all
suffer what we do.

Page 17. My Pleas for Peace have been all ill taken by the other side: And
which of you therefore were so offended at them.

2. I am sorry that you seign the healing Parliament to have disowned our
Repentance: I preached to the Parliament but once, and it was for Repentance: I
have often publicly accused my self; and I hope I break not the Act of Oblivion
by it: They forbad reproaching, and troubling one another, but not remembering
our sin, nor seeling when we suffer, nor asking what caused it, to stop the
like again, if not for a cu^e. But, dear Brother, do you not know that it was
your divulged Writing that rubbed upon the sort, and broke the Act of Oblivion,
if this be breaking it? Did it not tell what work the imposing the Lyturgy had
made, against [ Reformation* for Ignorance, Rtviling, and Reproaching the
Spirit sit up ungifted Ministers, made great disolations in the Church,
silencing painful Ministers, ruining Families, destroying Souls etc.] Do you
think this broke the Act of Oblivion, or is condemned by the healing
Parliament, or does nothing break it but on one side. Look on both sides, and
tell me how such Arguments misused, should be answered, but by showing that
there was danger, and ill effects also on the contrary extreme. Did the
Parliament forbid one side only this Commemoration? I pray you if but one side
may be called to Repent, let it be us, that we may be forgiven.

Page 18. If you know not that the Principles of Separation were the great
cause (in Armies, and elsewhere) of the subversions, and confusions, which
brought us to what we have felt, I do: And you would not at once live under the
fruit of it as we now do, and I yet make so light of it, as to take it for a
noli me tangere, if it had cost you as many painful days and nights, as many
ungrateful disputes, as many groans and tears, and as much blood as it has
done me: And how little is my part to that which England, cotland, and Ireland
has suffered, even by that cause conjunct with Pride, and Ambition, these
sourty years? If I may not have leave to say as Bradford, Repent O England, you
should give me leave to Repent my self, that ever I preached one Sermon with any
bias of overmuch desire to please Persons of the accusing separating humor.

Page 19. I said of our late overturnings in England, that all this is
publicly known: Many late Volumes on both sides record it: were it but
Whitlocks Memorials, it were enough: The Nations ring of it (and I have ost
lamented it heretofore) and you mistaking all this, seign me to say, that the
passages debated in Dr. Owens Papers, and his words, were all known before; and
so bestow many reproofs upon a fiction of your own.

Page 20. You would put such terms upon me in dispute, a Veron devised to put
on the Protestants. I must oppose his Doctrine only as in the Syllables
written* Accidentals in Worship, signify you think at least an Integral Part.
Does [in] turn Accidents into parts? Are Accidents parts, because Inherent?]
Are not your Quality, Quantities, Immanent Acts, Passions, etc. inherent? Is
not Kneeting, putting off the Hat, Methods, Translations, Meeter, Tunes, etc.
in the Worship of God? And is it unlawful, because in it? If it be therefore a
part of Worship, you must conclude that either all these are unlawful, or that
it is lawful for men to make parts of Gods Worship.

2. Are all things duly belonging to it, parts of it? I believe you own none of
this your self.

Page 21. The Doctors 7th Argument was, that this [ practice condemns the
suffering Saints of the present age, rendering them false Witnesses of God.] I
answered; [ Let us not stand to any dividing Principle, or Cause, lest the
Saints be blamed, that have fathered it in God.] I used the word [ Saints] but
as repeating his own phrase: And this you make to have better become the
Observator. Is not this partiality? May the Argument use a term which the
answerer may not repeat? And, dear Brother, is it not a sad case, if among the
many ill causes fathered on God, any, or all of them should say, [ We must not
repent, ^or amend, lest we be blamed as false Witnesses of God.

Page 22. Sir, if telling me of any sin that ensnareth Souls, be using me more
scornfully then the most virulent adversaries, spare me not, but use me so: woe
to me, if Repentance become odious and intolerable.

But I must stop, lest I cross my purpose of not writing for my self, but you.

The conclusion of all is, dear Brethren, the longer I study the Gospel, and
the longer I live in the world, the more fully I am Convinced that Love is the
great work of the Spirit, and the Men that Love most, are the best Men, and
those the worst, that have least love: And I would write in golden Letters as
my Motto, GOD IS LOVE, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God
in him: And if Christians loved no more than others, they would be no better
than they: And that Love desires union and familiarity; and that
censoriousness, contempt, and flying from each other, both signify, and breed
hatred. Could we but so live as to make all our Enemies believe that we
heartily love them, it would conquer their enmity, and tie their Hands, and
Tongues, by reconciling their Hearts. I know many at this time, to whom God
marvellously performs that promise, Blessed are the Meek, for they shall*
inherit the Earth. No winds root up the grass, which overthrow the Oaks.
Humility and Love would Conquer all the world. These overcame Philosophy, and
Empire at first. Power may overcome Bodies, and Argument stop Men's Mouths, and
yet more enrage them unto Enmity: But Love Conquereth Hearts: Love the
Conformists, if you would do them good, or preserve your self from evil: Not
that all men must be loved alike, nor sin loved for the Persons sake; but every
one according to the measure of his amiableness. Young Christians are usually
like young fruit, harsher, and sourer than the mellow fruits of holy ripeness,
and experienced age. Who would think, that did read the Epistles of John, whom
Jesus loved, breathing out Love, Love, Love, that this very man had three times
offended Christ, by sinning against Love. First, by ambitious desiring to be
above his fellows: Secondly, by offering to call for fire from Heaven against
the refusers of Christ: Thirdly, by forbidding one to cast out Devils, (and do
good) in Christ's name, because he followed not with them, (like those that now
would have some faulty men forbidden to Preach.) Love grows as Grace grows.
If my confuting the Principles and Practices that are fitted to destroy Love,
by Censures, Contempt, and unjust alienation be interpreted as contrary to
Love, let but the Censurers love so much the more, so it be Christians as such,
and not a dividing Party only, and I have my end.

SECT. 5. A Comparison of the use of a faulty Translation of the Scripture, and
a faulty Lyturgy.
IN Queen Elizabeth's days the Bishops Translation of the Bible, and that called
the Old one being faulty, were only in use. King James procured a better, but
the Lyturgy still retained, the Old one. Suppose a Law were made that only the
Old faulty Translation be used; many refuse it, and suffer for it; the
Parliament comes and establishes the New Translation, and swear all men to
promote it as a part of Reformation; we are in possession of it for sixteen
years: then a Law is made that all shall go to Prison that use any but the Old;
two thousand break this Law, and use the New, and suffer part of the penalty,
and shift from the rest as long as they can. At last the State is resolved to
suffer them no longer, but, in Prison they shall lie: Hereupon many suffer
Imprisonment, many die there. Some few in London keep up secret Worship with
the New Translation, and others go to the Churches* where the Old is used. In
the Countries there is not past one Minister in twelve or twenty Miles that
keeps up a Meeting in the use of the New one. The few that yet do, say, that [
to use the Old one, or join with such as do, is Covenant Breaking, and false
Worship, and unlawful, and a going back from Reformation.] Some that live in
Countries where none in twenty Miles openly use the New one, come to R. B. for
counsel; he desires them to bring one of the contrary Judgment, and judge when
they hear both: He tells them, that, 1. They should keep up the New Translation
as far as they can in Gods Public Worship, while the hurt will not be greater
than the benefit. 2. That when they have no Public Church or Worship to join
with, but what uses the Old one, they should rather join with such than none*
As also when they cannot have the New one without more hurt than benefit. 3.
And that while they can have the New one, they should not renounce Communion
with the Churches that use the Old one, as separating from it as unlawful, but
only disown the faults of the Old one, while they disown not the Communion of
the Churches in the use of it.

The other say^ 1. That it is a cursed thing to offer God a worse, while we
have better. 2. That we are sworn against it. 3. That it is false Worship, and
obeying man before God. 4. That we do but keep our possession, which they would
put us out of, and it is* they that separate from us, and not we from them. 5.
That we keep to Gods Word, which is the only Rule. And therefore Communion with
the Old Translation is unlawful, and we should rather suffer death.

R. B. answers, I. 1. That it is a cursed thing to give God no Public
Worship, because we cannot have the New* Translation, and to live like
Atheists* if we cannot have what we would. None* is worse than the Old. Family
Worship without Church Worship, is worse than an Old Translation* 2. And that
it is not we that offer God* the worse before the better; it is they that
exclude the better, which we protest against, having not our choice.

II. That he that swear to give over all Church Worship, unless he have the
New Translation, swore wickedly li^e an Atheist; and he that swore to
communicate with no* Church that used the Old Translation, swore wickedly like
a Schismatic; and he that swore that Gods Providence should never return him
to a necessity of using the Old* swore blasphemously* as if he could have
governed the World against God.

III. That all Worship is so far false as it is faulty; That to forsake all
Public Worship when we cannot have the better Translation, is to be righteous
unrighteously, over much, and too little, and to disobey both God and man.

IV. Keep your Possession as long as you can without more hurt than good. I am
not one that ever strove to take it from you. But do your Brethren in Prison
enjoy Public Worship? You Will say, they do better. It Is easier bearing their
Imprisonment, Poverty and Death, than your own. But what shall ten parts of the
Kingdom do, that must have the Old Translation or none? You Will say, I suppose,
They may give over all Church Worship as impossible, and take up with Family
Worship.

But stay, 1. Must you not first prove the Old so bad, as that no-Church
Worship is better? Have you proved this? 2. Will not your Reason prove, that we
must also separate from you? Have not weak Ministers as bad faults as a weak
Translation? 3. What Is become then of your saying, We had Possession? Have they
Possession of better that have none at all? Or, will you be without all,
because you had once Possession of better? And will it excuse your ungodliness,
that you can lay the blame on them that dipossest you? Or if they be
Schismatics for so using you, does it follow that you are none, if you
persuade all to separate from all Gods Church Worship rather than join where
the Old Translation is used.

V. Gods Word is the Rule; but only a general Rule for words, modes and
circumstances. To love God and our Neighbor, and the Unity of the Church, are
his greatest Commands. Go learn what these mean: To violate these, and forsake
all Church Worship, if you cannot have the best Translation, is not to keep to
the Rule, but most grossly to violate it in the greatest Commands against many
Scripture Admonitions, which vehemently urge you to Love and Unity.

But, good friend, if really Christ and Scripture be your Guide, I desire no
more; tell me, and lay by partiality; Did not Christ and his Apostles use both
in the Synagogues, Church. Meetings, and Writings a faulty Translation of the
Old Testament, and as bad as ours* Deny it if you can for shame. Though
sometimes they varyed, they mostly used the Septuagint, according to which our
faulty* Translation of the Old Testament is made, as it differs from the
Hebrew. Is this no Consutation of you? Yea, Christ and the Apostles used it the
rather* because it was in common use. 2. And are you sure that among so many
Greek differing Copies as we have of the New Testament, that you use and follow
none but the best.

I would add a similitude, supposing that we had just possession of the Public
Church-place^ and Tithes, and they are taken from us, and we can blame them
that did it, and say over and over, We had Possession, and therefore it is
unlawful to meet in worse Rooms, for God must have the best; will this hold
when you cannot keep possession? *Will you rather worship no where? This is no
better than if you would tell all men, they should die rather than eat Brown
Bread, if force take all other from them, because it is unjustly done, and they
had possession of better. Good friends, keep your possession for me; but I own
not the famishing of all that are dispos^e^sed. If you do, I do not.

Obj. But this case is unlike to that of Lyturgies.

Answ. 1. The Scripture is Gods own Word: A mis-translation makes that to be
his word that is not; which sure is a tenderer matter than in what words we
speak our own minds to God. ^ure a depravation of Scripture is more than a
Ceremony: Were Lyturgies such an alteration of Gods own words, you would more
plausibly accuse them. One that said, God said this or that, which he said not,
was worse tha^ one that spoke his own words undecently to God. To say, this is
Gods word, which i^ not, is indeed adding to it; but so it is not to speak
words as our own. How much the Septuagint differs from the Hebrew, how many
Verses it leaves out, how many additions and alterations it makes, is
commonly known. Christ's and the Apostles use of this, was no approbation of its
faults, much less their presence in the Synagogues* when others read Moses and
the Prophets in them. And the Psalms in the Septuagint* Translation were part
of their Lyturgy. For man to speak faultily is no wonder: It has a more
plausible pretense for Separation, to say that men corrupt the word of God. And
yet when it is but such an Effect of Humane Imperfection, it is no just
pretense.

But yet a word more; Qu. 1. Do you think that the Pharisees and Scribes had so
much of the gift of Extemporate Prayer, that they could, and did use to make
long Prayers, as if it were by the Spirit Extempore? Say so, and you will
disgrace the Doctors Arguments, that lay so much on this manner of praying. No
doubt but it was Forms and Lyturgies that they used; yet when Christ condemns
them for praying in the streets to be seen, and using long prayer for a
pretense to devour Widows houses; Qu. 2. Did Christ speak one word against
them as Forms or Lyturgies? Did he want Zeal or Knowledge? Q. 3. Had they not
been good in themselves, what cloak could they have made for so great evil? Qu.
4. Did Christ or his Apostles ever forbear the Synagogues for the sake of these
long Lyturgies? Come friends, there is no end, nor much hope in disputing
against fixed prejudice, and wrong confident Conceits, how clear soever the
Light be against it. Hold your Judgment, and I shall hold mine, till God
irresistibly reconcile us; and if you cannot forgive me, I can forgive you, but
not own the guilt of your mistakes, and the Effects. I have too much already of
my own, I had rather you accused me, than Conscience, for wilful contracting
any more. The Lord save us from our Enemies, but more especially from our
Friends, and all their Temptations, and above all, from our selves.

It amazeth me to hear wise and godly men say, [ It is Popery that is coming in
upon us; Ergo, Let us all forsake the Parish-Churches, Quasi die. The Enemy
will take the City within these few years; Ergo, Let us all go out of it to
day. Like him that killed himself for fear of dying some years hence.
Dementation goes before Perdition. Who knows not that the Religion of the
Parish-Churches is like to be the National Religion? And shall we persuade
Protestants to leave them all? Passion provoked by some men's badness, has too
much conquered Love to Conformists in some men's minds, so that they scruple not
too uncharitable opinions and words of them. This is contrary to Christian
Love. I doubt not but there are hundreds of godly Conformable Ministers in
England, On Aug. 24. 1662. Seven thousand or more did Conform, that had been
kept in, in the Parliaments time; were all those seven thousand tolerable the
year before, and ungodly the next year? Many Conformists now in London were
taken for very good men in 1659. At once the other extreme, most study to get
them out; and shall we also call all men on pain of hazarding their Souls to
forsake them? A very great Churchman above 40 years ago was heard say to his
Brethren; The Non-conformable Puritans are Snakes: We have the Law against
them, and can tread them down when we will: But it is the Conformable Puritan
that is the Devil of England, to be cast out: And shall we second this, and
that as in opposition to it? Grace is lost as far as Christian impartial Love
is lost. And they that lose Religion themselves, which lies in Love, are like
to be no good Keepers of it in the Church. If a good Man that we value become a
danger to the truth, we are angry if his Error be but contradicted, lest his
Name be blemished: But some dare say the Conformists are all false, ready to
betray the Church to Papists: who nowdo far more to keep them out then we do.
This is against Iam. 3. 17. If there be any such Conformists high or low, I am
none of their Advocate; God will find them out, and judge them: But I am
confident that it is also Conformists (by the advantage of their Possession)
that will do more to stop their desired success, than Nonconformists can do. I
am sure Bishop Jewel, Usher, Morton, Hall, Downame, Davenant, etc. were far
from Popery. And what man living has written stronglier against it, than Dr.
Isaac Barrow, (against whose Book a Doctor has newly dashed his Reputation, as
a bubble against a Rock: And what the Bishop of Lincoln, the Bishop of
Hereford, Dr. Peter Moulin, Dr. Stillingfleet, and many more have done, is
known.

Your Mr. Mat. M^ad once commended a Conformist for a Benefice to me, with
these words, [ I take him to be the holiest Man I know,] I have loved him the
better ever since for his Candor, Charity, and Impartiality.

SECT. 6. An Expository Advertisement about naming faulty Persons.
AS all men ought to have a just regard of their own and their neighbors
reputations; so the overmuch tenderness of the guilty and the proud, does make
it a matter of much difficulty; for an impartial man to know whether, and when
he should name, or make known the persons whom he does oppose or blame: Though
the resolution seem easy both to them that have no charity to caution them,
and to them that will do no duty, that displeases others.

Being called to review my own practice, in this I shall give the World an
account; First, of my Judgment in it, and then of my doings.

I. I take such a nomination to be a duty in these cases following.

1. In case of necessary defense of the Truth, against some dangerous Error of
some men otherwise pious and tolerable, the greatest Pillars of the Church have
usually named them. I hope all those Iudaizers that Paul so sharply writes
against, were not in a state of damn^tion* Doubtless Peter and Barnabas were
not, Gal. 2. nor I hope Demas, nor all the rest that he says were not
like-minded to Timothy, but sought their own and not the things of Jesus
Christ* And I hope the like of Diotrephes, much more assuredly of John that
blamed him, though that beloved Disciple is thrice named as culpable (seeking
to be greatest, and offering to call for Fire from Heaven, and forbidding one
to do Miracles in Christ's Name.) And Peter often, and once tremendously ( Matthew.
16.) rebuk't by Christ. The sins of Noah and his Sons, Lot and his Wife and
Daughters, Sarah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and his Sons, Moses, Aaron, Miriam,
many Judges, Eli, David, Solomon, Rehoboam, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, and many
more, are left on Record in Scripture, with their names, by him who is LOVE it
self, and hareth uncharitableness.

And though we believe not all that Bernard, Walaf; Strabo, and such others,
though good men, believed of Peter Bruis, Henricus, and other Albigenses,
Waldenses and Bobemians, much less all that Tho. Waldensis says against
Wickliss* the wisest Reformers have seen cause to mention some of their
mistakes.

Luthers first mistakes while he disowned not the Papacy, and his after
sharpness, against Carolostadius, and Zuinglius, are recorded by many that
dislike them, as he records his distaste of those aforesaid, and many more
whom he dissented from. All that are contradicted by name are not taken by
sober men to be graceless or intolerable. Swenkfeldius was a man of honor, and
his Character was, that he had [ an honest heart, but not a regulated head;]
and yet the generality of Reformers cried down his Errors and Sect. The
Calvinists write for Communion with the Lutherans, and the Moderate Lutherans
love the Calvinists, and yet they write against each other by name, as too many
Volumes openly show. George Major was a wise and good man though
Schlusselburgius, and such others, number him and his followers as Heretics,
as Ca^^vi^^ does the Calixtines. Nicholas Gallus, and Am^sdorsius were noted
Divines and Century Writers* though they so used Major, and maintained that
Good works are not necessary to Salvation; for which wiser men did write
against them. Mat. Flac. Illyricus (the chief Century Writer) was a Learned
Zealous Protestant, and yet many more than Melancthon and Beza have left as a
blot upon his name, that he was so fierce against Ceremonies, and unpeaceable,
and that he maintained that Original Sin is the substance of the Soul. Andrew
Osiander was a very Learned Protestant* high in favor with his Prince, yet he
and all his followers greatly opposed by the Orthodox Reformers, for
maintaining that we are justified by Gods Essential Righteousness made ours.
And Fu^ccius sped the worse for following him (though it was for State-Councils
that he died.) How high a Character does Melancthon, and many other the
greatest Divines give of Hubertus Languetus, as an Honorable, Learned, Pious,
Excellent Man; and yet it is now scarce denied, but it was he that) wrote Iunius
B^^tus (though it was long falsely charged on Beza, and the Noble ^^ Plessis.)
Doubtless Cassander, Erasmus, Wicelius, and Gr^tius, were men of great worth*
that yet for peace owned the Roman Church and Corruptions, so far as is not to
be justified or overlookt. All the Germane Prophets or Fanatics that Chr.
Beckmans Exercitations name* and copiously confute, were not ungodly or
intolerable men. Whatever the Pa^^c^lsians, Weig^lians, and many of the rest
were, I know not; but sure Th^ulerus was a godly man; and Grotius commends
John Ar^di and his followers as men of piety and peace: and notwithstanding his
vain affected words, Jacob Behmen seemed a pious man; and I loved many of his
chief Followers in England, of my acquaintance, because their Spirit and
Writings were all for Love and Peace, (and their difficult Gibberish made me
fearless of their multiplying, or ever doing any great hurt.)

And the Papists quite outdo us in naming their Opponents, and their Errors,
and yet not renouncing Communion with them, but keeping them in the bosom of
their Church; as whole loads of Books written by the Schoolmen, and several
Sects and Orders against each other show: And specially the Controversies
between the Seculars and Regulars, sharply handled by Watson. in his
Quodlibits, and diverse others: And newly Peter Walsh, that calls himself
Valesius, and S^rjeants, and his Blaklows Controversies tell us more. But none
more than the Jesuists and Jansenists: did we differ about half as many and
weighty points as are recited in the Jesuits Morals, and their Charge against
the Iansenists, we should scarce think each other fit to be Members of one
Communion.

And naming Opponents is often necessary to make the Reader know what Books we
write against for distinction sake.

2. And there is yet another great cause of naming faulty men both (otherwise)
godly and heretical. The Duty of a Public or National Repentance often requires
the mention of public sins and sinners; (specially if they be our own) God
long forbeareth the public National sins of Ancestors, to see if Posterity,
(who are the same Na^ion, though not the same Persons) will prevent his
Judgments by Repentance: In which case they must confess their own, and their
Fore Fathers sins. This was the due practice of the Church of Old, as Psalm. 78.
and 107. and many other show; and the prayers of Ezra, Daniel, and others: they
named many, and bewailed more of their National and Fore Fathers sins* and if
they do not, Christ will name them for them, as he did the blood shed from
Abels till Zach^rias, and will revenge all together on the Impenitent
Generation Matthew. 23. It was not to call dead men to Repentance, that all the
forementioned faults of good and bad men are recorded in the Scripture: But it
is partly for the exercise of National Repentance, and partly for a warning to
the living, that good men's names tempt them not to sin* Yea that shaming them
is a mercy to us all to this day, is evident, in that where God records any
sin, without laying some reproach upon it, Satan makes a snare of it, to
persuade us it is no sin. What abundance have been emboldened to Lie, because
the Midwives in Egypt, and David's Lies are recorded without adjoined reproof.
Polygamy is pleaded for as lawful by that reason; and the Jews did so by
Divorce; and some by drinking to excess, or overthrow of reason: All of us take
it for a duty to bewail the Nations resistance of Reformation, and cruelty to
the Martyrs in Q. Mary's days, and such like as part of our National
Humiliation.

3. When pernicious Deceivers endanger the Church, by their Sophistry and
Reputation, especially by public Writings which survive them. God has named
in Scripture Simon Magus and Elymas, and the Party called Nicolaitans, whom his
Soul hated, and largely described many throughout the New Testament, especially
Epist. to Gal. Col. 2 Pet. 2. Jude, Rev. 2. and 3. And all that were faithful
to the true Faith did of old name with detestation the Ebionites, Cerinthians,
Gnostics; Valentinians, Basilidians, Manichees* Priscilianists, and Arians,
Sabellians, Paulinists, etc. And since the Reformation, the soberest Reformers
named with zealous renunciation the names of not only such as Caesar Vaninus,
and Pomponatius, Valent. Gentilis, Servetus (whom they burnt) but also those
Captains of Sedition, that were the Heads of dangerous Sects. Tho* Muncers case
they commonly mention with detestation; and Ionn of Leydens, and the rest at
M^nster as worse. (And yet Leo Juda tells us with what mavelous constancy
Knipperd^lling endured his flesh to be pulled off by pieces with red hot
Pincers, scarce groaning or expressing grief*) The case of David George, the
Father of the Libertines (as Beza calls him) and Henry Nicols's* (the Father of
the Familists) multitudes recite with detestation.

II. But there are many things that stand up against this duty, and turn men
from it, or make it doubtful in particular Instances.

1. One is the great abuse of it by the Ancients, and the mischiefs done by
that abuse* It calls for greatest grief to read it, and to feel the fruit of
it to this day, which while I have recited out of the Councils and
Church History, many cannot bear it. The case of the Easter Contention in all
the Christian World, even in Britain tells it us: The shameful Catalogue of
Heretics in Philastrius, yea many in Epiphanius tell it us: So do the
Controversies with the Audians, Novatians, Donatists, the Nestorians,
Eutychians, Monothelites, the tria Capitula out of Theodorite, Theodore Mops.
and Ibas: the Image Controversies, the Corrupti^ol^, and Phantasiasts, and many
more such: And since the heat of the Lutherans, (such as Marbachius, Heshasius,
Westphalus, Gallus, Ambsdorsius, and lately Calovius, and many still) against
the Calvinists; The over-violent usage of the Remonstrants in Holland, the
strife at the City of Frankford, between the Conformists, and Nonconformists;
the Violences, and Reproaches of Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independants,
Erastians, and Anabaptists against each other in England, with the evil means,
and long continuance, and woeful effects. The Scots Covenants excluding from
their public Union there and here, all the Diocesan Divines and Party, even
such as Usher, Morton, Hall, Davenant, etc. These great abuses of over-doers,
and dividers, make many charitable men think, that it is best to mention no
men's faults at all, save u^ter Enemies.

2. And another grand dissuasive, is the certain abuse that bad men will make
of it: Malignant Spit-fires do already write books full of palpable Lies
against other men (of which I have had a notable part:) And in common speech
and reproach* make many that they converse with, believe these lies? And if we
call each other to Repentance, or confess our own sin, impudent Malice will
turn it to a common scorn, and say, they are all alike, and worse than they
confess.

3. And another hinderance is, that we think controverted Cases are not matter
of Censure: And these are Controversies.

4. But the greatest impediment of all, is the Natural selfishness, Pride and
Impatience that is in all, so far as they are unmortified, and unhumbled, and
interessing God and his Truth, and Cause, more deeply than is just, in the
interest of our selves, our Parties, and our Opinions.

To these four Cases I briefly say, 1. The avoiding of the contrary extreme,
hindered not God and good men from mentioning Diotrephes, Demas, the
Nicolaitans, and all aforesaid.

2. If we shall omit all duty that men will abuse, we shall do none, or next to
none. Repentance is most honorable* except Innocence: And they would reproach
men less, if they more confessed their sin themselves: And a true Confession is a
true description of the Case, and shameth them that make it worse then it is,
or lay the fault of the Guilty on the Innocent.

3. What Heresy or sin almost is not controverted? Satan will make a
Controversy of all, if that shall serve: Arrianism is a sad instance, and
Socinianism, which is much worse, and Popery is more disputed for than they all.

4. God hates the Proud, and will abase them, and pardons none but the
Penitent, and he that sinfully saves his Credit, shall most lose it:
Repentance is a great, hard, necessary work, we can easily call other men to
repent.

III. Having told you my judgment, I will as this worthy Brother advises, yet
further review my own actions.

I am one of those that have formerly imitated Austin in some Confessions, and
Retractations; but I cannot make every scornful expectants Opinion my measure,
nor retract all that every extream'd Opposer, or Dissenter does dislike. And I
am one that long, and very dearly endeavored to have prevented those
Overturnings, which I bewail: and at that time I thought them a sin so great,
as I will not now describe, and took in the prognostic of their Consequents,
in which I have only been thus far mistaken, that Gods wonderful mercy has
hitherto made them much easier then I expected: I mentioned them most openly
and plainly then, to convince the Guilty, and save the Tempted; and I have often
since made some mention of them, not to call the dead to Repentance, but the
Societies in their humiliations, and the Nation, and to preserve the living
from the guilt of participation, and imitation. But I find that some much
mistake me, and think that all the Persons that I have named, I mention as
intolerable, or make them worse than they are, and equal the better with the
worse, yea, make the Welsh Itinerants worse then ignorant, vicious, mere
readers. All this is far from my words and thoughts.

When Clement Writer wrote two Books against the Scripture, the Ministry, and
me, I answered him modestly in my Book, called, The unreasonabless of
Infidelity: The Ranters I detested: The Quakers, when they bitterly reviled me,
I gave free leave to dispute with me in my Congregation as long as they would:
The Seekers, that said, Scripture, Church Ministry, and Sacraments were all
lost, till new Miracles restored them, I dealt with peaceably: But I confess I
took all these for such as were as unfit for my Communion, as they thought me
for theirs, and mischievous to the Souls of Men. But I never thought of as
equal with these the Persons that I then wrote against, as Antinomians, nor
those that I now name on such accounts. I know that the Libertines Opinions
called Antinomianism, by too near consequence subvert the Gospel. But I believe
that the good men did not see such Consequences, but believed the fundamentals,
which they so subverted, and erred through ignorance, and unskilfulness, and
confusion in managing Disputes, and zeal for Free Grace, drew them in the dark
to injure, and dishonor it: These erroneous Men, for ought I know, might love
God through Christ more then I; and if so, they were so much better men then I.
Amesius says, that Theology is so connext, that every Error by consequence
overthrows the foundation: If that be so, who is not guilty of it? I write
here against no man as Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Erastian, or
Anabaptist; but only against hating one another on such accounts, and doing
those things by alienation, excommunication, opposition, or other aversation
unnecessarily, which signify detestation, or want of Love, or tend thereto.

As to the men named by me, take not the knowledge of their Opinions from me,
but from their public Books: Mr. Erbury, Prince, Lilburn, and such others have
spoken too loud by the Press: I think much better of Mr. Saltmarsh, W.
Sedgwick, Den, Hobson, etc. and yet better of Mr. Powell, Cradok, Lloyd, whom I
named, whom you may know in print: [The last, by a Dialogue between Martha and
Lazarus, about his Soul, and Letters to Mr. Erbury.]

That which I say of such, I fully believe; that is, 1. That the Dr. greatly
mistakes in his intimations, as if Lyturgies had been the only cause, or at
least greater than they were, of a defective Ministry, when so many of its
greatest Adversaries have been so faulty, and defective.

2. Because those Errors may be dangerous to the hearers, which God forgiveth
to the ignorant speaker, I assert, that sound Doctrine read out of Notes or
Books, is less hurtful to the Hearers, then dangerous practical Erro^r
delivered with fluent extemporate fervency, and that when Calvin, Hildersham,
and such great, and holy men, prayed usually in the Pulpit by a Form, they
failed not of the Spirits help, so much as they that extempore pray
erroneously. And that Mr. Phil. Nigh spoke not mistakingly, when (to me) he
wished that the public Congregations in Wales had good Sermon books read to
them, (though men should call them Homelies in contempt; not to put down
Preaching, but where it is wanting: And that a very excellent Ministry beyond
Sea, use public Lyturgies, and Pulpit Forms: And excellent Holy Men in England
long used the English Lyturgy, from whom I never would have separated; even
such A. Bishops, and Bishops, as Granmer, Parker, Grindal, Abbot, U^her, etc.
Ridley, Hooper, Farrar, Jewel, etc. such holy Teachers as Bolton, Whately,
Preston, Sibs, Crook, Bifield, and abundance like them; Men of such rare
Learning and Piety, as Davenant, Gataker, Stoughton, Bishop Miles Smith, Dr.
Field, etc. And I do not believe that the Westminster Assembly were all, save
eight Ministers, void of the Spirit, or unfit for Communion, while they used
the Lyturgy: Nor yet that of the 9000 that were in the public Churches in
1659. or 1660. the 7000 that Conformed* Aug. 24. 1662. were suddenly made
insufficient, if they were sufficient before, (though I meddle not with the
question, whether they did well*) And yet against the contrary extreme, I say,
if many thousands be not in Heaven* whom Bishops have Excommunicated, and
thought intolerable, yea, whom great Councils have called Heretics, woe to
those Bishops that are worse than they.

I conclude with thanks to my Reverend Monitor, and tell him, that I would sain
(whose Censure soever I undergo,) avoid both their sin, who undervalue men's
Piety for tolerable Errors, and condemn those that are better than themselves,
(and themselves by consequence much more;) and theirs who in honor of good
men's names, extenuate their dangerous errors* and practices, and hinder
public Repentance, forgiveness, and deliverance, by hiding, or smoothing over
public sins. But being my self liable to forgetfulness, when I remember what
answer a false Argument calls for, and what notice young people need for their
preservation, I am sometime less sensible of the impatience of the partial, and
mistaken, and how much harder it is to bear blame, then to deserve it, and how
ill the effects of their impatience may be. Therefore while I stand to the Rule
that he mentions, if I have by ignorance, have, or any other Cause, done that
by naming, or confuting any, which has truly a greater tendency to do hurt,
than to do good, I repent of all that is so said and done, and ask forgiveness
of God and Man.

And if any be unhumbled for the public sins of the Land, or any Party of
their Minds, which have dishonored God and our Religion, and hardened
Adversaries, and brought us all into distress, and threaten yet worse to all
the Land, and our Posterity, the Lord humble them before it be too late.

And if any that are far worse themselves, take advantage from any men's
Errors, Misdoings, or Confessions, to feed their own, and others malice, to
reproach Piety, to oppress; or calumniate the Innocent, and lay the faults of a
few that got military advantages, upon them that were furthest from the guilt,
yea, on the Nation, and the Protestant Cause, the day is at hand, that God will
vindicate the just, and stop the mouths of false Accusers, with as great
severity at least, as we can well desire. And delay is no violation of his
promise: Though he stay long, he will avenge them speedily, Luke 18. And he
knows that their day is coming: And then we shall say, it was the fittest
time.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader, the sight of a Book of one Mr. Edw. Petit, called, Visions of
Government, calls me to tell you, that all his reviliu^ language needs no
reply, or confutation: But his story about Major Iennings, how I stood by while
he was wounded, and encouraged it, and took the Meddal from about his neck is
already by me confuted before my Defense of the History of Councils: which I
have made known to Mr. L'Estrange, and Major Iennings. And though the Rector of
Burton, in the Life of Dr. Heylin, publish it with Major Iennings affirmation,
I do here again, as in the presence of God, take a voluntary Oath, that it is
false; and that I was not near him at that time, nor never saw the man in my
life (unless I might see a man unknowingly in a Congretion, or distant crowd,
nor did I see any wound him, nor take any Meddal of him: But that in the house
where I was, I heard the Soldiers tell how they wounded, stripped him, and took
his Meddal (laughing at a silly Soldier that called it a Crucifix:) And the man
that took it, offering it to Sale, I gave him eighteen pence for it, and some
years after sent it Major Iennings freely; which it seems made him think, and
rashly affirm falsely, that it was I that took it from him. As for the rest of
the Diabolism of that Book, and his, and others uncessant charges from one Book
retracted so many years ago, and accused by my self, consenting to the Oxford
men that burnt it, it does but tell the world, what furious, implacable wrath
in the engaged Enemies of Love and Peace can do, and shows itself more
effectually then any other can. (As do three others that have taken the like
course.)

FINIS.

