Vulgar Errors IN DIVINITY REMOVED.

Qui erranti comiter monstrat viam quasi lumen de suo lumine accendit, facit
nihilominus ut ipsi lucet.

Mat. 22.29. Ye err not knowing the Scriptures.

2 Pet. 3.16. In St. Paul's Epistles are some things hard to be understood,
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took and Joanna Brom in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXIII.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


TO The Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of Sussex, Baron Dacres, One of the
Gentlemen of His Majesty's Bedchamber, Health and Happiness.
My Lord,
I Am bold to Dedicate these my first fruits to your Honor as a testimony of
my grateful mind for your Lordships favors toward me. Three things prompted
me on to this undertaking.

First, The great honor I bear to Almighty God, whose Nature being mistaken,
his Name is blasphemed, whilst he is rendered so unlovely, as fatally to doom
the greatest part of Mankind to everlasting fire, chiefly for his own glory,
and not for the bad usage of the Talents they have received at his hands by
making their sins but the subordinate cause of their damnation, and Gods
omnipotent power to justify such a Decree. Now I would fain know how these
fatal Dogmatizers could paint out the Devil in worse colors, than they do our
gracious God, if he had Gods omnipotent power to abuse, toward the far
greatest part of mankind. But certainly God is more merciful than these men
would have him be; else such blasphemers of his merciful nature had not died
the common death of all men.

Secondly, The great honor I bear to the King, and the great love I bear to
Kingly Government, as least subject to oppression; or renting the State in
pieces by Faction. In all Governments some body must necessarily be trusted
with the Supremacy upon their honesty; and who is fitter to be trusted than he
whom God and Nature shall design for so great a trust? If ungodly men have a
mind to change, still they must trust, or again rebel, and so in infinitum; for
unless somebody be trusted at last, there can be no peace. Who shall keep the
Keeper is an unanswerable question, unless you say God alone. If you say the
Law, that indeed ought to keep him in the Right, and to be the Kings Director,
but the Law cannot keep him as his Superior, so as to touch life or limb if he
be a Transgressour. He that has a Prerogative to save other men's lives, when
by Law condemned, must needs be supposed to be above Law for his own. And
blessed be God for the Kings Prerogatives, without which the Nation could not
long continue in peace and safety. If we revolve the English Histories of King
Henry III. in the Grant given the Douze Peers (as they were called;) or of King
Charles I. in the Grant to the Long Parliament, and consider the fatal
destruction of Simon de Montford their General, and most of the Peers in the
end; (although so triumphant at Lewis in Sussex at the first) as a consequence
of the one; and of King Charles of blessed memory; (after so much bloodshed,
and oppression) as a consequence of the other; it may teach us how unsafe it is
for the People, to desire any thing of the King, or for the King to grant away
any Prerogative to the People, which may make him too weak for Government, upon
any difficulty, or fair pretense whatsoever.

Thirdly, The great love I bear to the truth, as desirous to raise the decayed
credit of it; that so men may walk in it. For Error embraced debases the
understanding, as a Noble person his blood by marrying one of mean Parentage
and base conditions; and men acting generally according to those Principles
they have espoused; (for all their after reasonings, and deliberate actions,
are founded on those Principles) when they are erroneous they take false
measures of honor, and dishonor, of right and wrong, and the more zealous
they are for them, the wrose they are, as the Arrow ill levelled at hand, the
further it flies, the further it is off the Mark. That God would give your
Lordship length of days, riches, and honor, and at the end of those days
everlasting felicity, is the Prayer of,

Your Lordships obliged Servant, and Chaplain, Ralph Battle.

To the Reader.
AS I have seen a double or pleated Picture, on one side appear a beautiful
Woman; but if you go to the other side of the Room, it would appear an odious
Serpent: So (although truth be but one, and not double) yet it will appear
diversely, according as we look upon it. For if with solid judgment we behold
it, it will appear lovely, as it is; if with prejudice, being wrong biased
with interest or education it will appear a foul error. Wherefore thou art
desired that read this Book to lay aside all prepossession, and to weigh
what is said, with candor and ingenuity with naked and impartial reason. One
advises very well to suppress at least nine years, any Notions we have a mind
to make public, and if then upon so long consideration, we still like them, to
set them forth. I assure thee I have done so by most of these herein contained,
and upon mature deliberation bring them into light, and if God lend me life and
opportunity intend a Second part of a like nature. If any thing seem contrary
to the Church of England, I am confident it is thy error to think so: but if my
Superiors judge so: I here disown it, for I never thought any new Notion of
mine so good, but the authority and peace of the Church was much better, and to
be preferred before it. Shall I speak plain English? Those that are brought up
in Error I have but little hopes to recover, but rather think I shall provoke
such to produce their little exceptions, and vulgar plausible blinds, to keep
up their Party. But I nourish a good hope that those that are disengaged from
error (in the particulars herein mentioned) this Book may prevent them from
embracing it, which is the hearty desire of the Author.

THE CONTENTS.
Vulgar Errors concerning
1. REprobation Page 1 2. Kingly Government Page 25 3. Gods House, and Service
in it Page 53 4. Man's Will Page 71 5. Man's Redemption Page 99 6. Praying by the
Spirit Page 117
Vulgar Errors CONCERNING REPROBATION Removed.
THat some are Reprobates is out of question, broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be go in it: But how they come to be so; is not
without great controversy, nor without great mistake. Some say, that God
merely for his glory made some Vessels of wrath, according to the good pleasure
of his Will: So that the object of Gods Decree of Reprobation, was not mankind
considered as sinners, but merely as his Creatures, which is such a Doctrine,
that whosoever brings I shall never bid God speed. Now the Texts of Scripture
at which they have stumbled, and fallen into this unmerciful opinion are such
as these; First, that of St. Paul in the ninth Chapter to the Romans, ver. 11.
For the Children being not yet born, neither having done good or evil; that the
purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of works, but of him that
calls, it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is
written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have J hated: You see, say they, before
Jacob or Esau had done good or evil, one was loved, and the other hated. My
answer is: First, these words are not spoken of Jacob or Esaus persons; but by
a figure the person of either is put to represent, and shadow out the condition
of their Posterities. Secondly, the Election there mentioned is meant chiefly
concerning things Temporal, not things Eternal. That that saying, The elder
shall serve the younger, was not meant of their persons, but of their
Posterities may appear from Genesis 25.23. Two Nations are in thy Womb, and two
manner of People shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one People shall
be stronger than the other, and the elder shall serve the younger. Esau in his
own person never served Jacob; nay, Jacob called Esau his Lord, and bowed seven
times to the ground before him, Genesis 33.3. and was glad by a Present to obtain
his peace of him. If Esau had done so to Jacob, how would they have triumphed
in their personal sense? Secondly, that the love and hatred was meant chiefly
concerning things temporal, see Mal. 1.2, 3. from whence the words were taken.
Was not Esau Jacobs Brother, says the Lord? Yet I loved Jacob, and I hated
Esau, and laid his Mountains, and his Heritage waste for the Dragons of the
Wilderness. So that you plainly see the Apostle means not personal Election to
eternal life, or hatred to eternal death; but of choosing Jacobs Posterity, to
be a greater Nation than the Offspring of Esau; merely for his good pleasure
which no man can justly speak against; for he may do what he pleases with his
own good blessings. If it be said, the temporal blessings on Jacob's Posterity
did shadow out spiritual: it is not denied but they might, and certainly to be
brought so nigh unto God, as to be his peculiar People in Covenant was a
spiritual blessing, and if all that were in Covenant were elected, the Argument
were of force; but seeing they are not all Israel, which were of Israel, it
falls to the ground. The truth is, the words are here used by the Apostle, by
way of Allegory, and all that he accommodates them to, is to show that God
might justly cast off the Jews, the People of the elder Covenant of Works, and
take in the Gentiles, those minors, and youngers, into the Covenant of grace in
their rooms, as may appear from Romans 9.30. What shall we say then to these
things? That the Ghntiles which followed not after righteousness, have attained
to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith: But Israel which
followed after the Law of righteousness has not attained unto the Law of
rightehusness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the Works of the Law. And this he makes the conclusion, and is the chief, if
not the only thing he does infer from the whole Allegory, And what he says to
Moses is most equal, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy; that is, it
belongs to me to appoint upon what terms I will show mercy, and justify men,
whether by the Law of Faith or by Works: For as he that builds an Hospital has
an equitable right to appoint the qualifications of the persons that shall
partake in his gift, whether poor Children, or Widows, Aged persons, or the
like; so it belongs to God to appoint upon what terms he will justify men,
whether by the Law of Works, or by the Law of Faith; and seeing neither Works
nor Faith can deserve it at his hands, Justification is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. God has
reason enough for all his doings, but in distributing mercies which have no
foundation in merit, he need give no account or reason of it, but his Will. And
so likewise for his judgments upon Pharaoh (here used as a Type of the
obstinate Jews) although God had reason enough to raise him up, (I suppose out
of the former Plague, to reserve him for a more famous overthrow) because the
Hebrew has it, I have made thee stand; The Septuagint has it for this cause,
(...), Thou have been preserved till now. The Chaldee Paraphrase, and Junius so
likewise explain it. And although God had reason enough to find fault with him
for hardening of his heart, though now judicially hardened, and he could not
help it; yet the Apostle waves these Reasons, and says, Nay, but O man, who art
thou that reply against God? As if he had said, it is intolerable
presumption to quarrel at the ways of God as unequal when they clearly appear
to be his: You ought rather with reverence to presume there is wisdom and
righteousness in them, though you through ignorance cannot comprehend them: For
as his power in forming man ought not to be found fault withal, and none ought
to say, Why have thou made me thus? So neither his Justice, which is as
infinite as his Power, and renders to men only according to their Works.

A second Scripture is this: Has not the Potter power over the Clay of the
same lump to make one vessel to honor, another to dishonor, Ver. 21. Whence
they infer, God is the Potter, we the Clay; the Elect are the Vessels of
honor, the Reprobates the Vessels of wrath and dishonor; and if God make a
Vessel of wrath, shall the thing framed say to him that framed it, Why have
thou made me thus? To this I answer; We are indeed in Gods Hands, as the Clay
in the hand of the Potter, and when he framed man of the dust of the earth, he
might have made him the tail and not the head of the Creation; he might have
molded us Dogs, or Swine, or loathsome Serpents, and in that sense Vessels of
dishonor, but to make us Vessels of wrath, and in that sense Vessels of
dishonor, so the good God could not make us, no more than he can lie, or be
cruel, or deny himself. The nature of God cannot come so nigh the nature of the
Devil as to be a Murderer from the beginning. There can be no Vessel of wrath
without sin, Ephesians. 5.6. For these things sake, having forementioned many
sins, he says, the wrath of God comes upon the Children of disobedience. But
we cannot be sinful as we come out of his hands, and therefore cannot come out
of his hands Vessels of wrath; he like the good tree cannot bring forth corrupt
fruit, Jer. 2.21. God does avouch he never made a degenerate Plant, Yet I had
planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed. The Apostle says, God is not
willing that any should perish, 2 Pet, 3.9. But now if a man come a Vessel of
wrath out of his hands, it is senseless to say he would not have that man
perish: If he would have had him saved, he would have made him a Vessel of
mercy, and not of wrath: But the Apostle says, he would have no man perish,
therefore he does not make any Vessels of wrath, in their sense. God made man
upright, but he found out many inventions, Eccl. 7.29. Now as God says in
another place, What iniquity have you found in me, that you depart from me? So
say I, What hard dealing have you ever found from God that you should ever
entertain such hard thoughts of him? That you should embrace their opinions
that make him a hater of his Creatures, before they were born, or considered
them as doing either good or evil: and be angry with those that represent him
as a mild and merciful Creator unto you; he is so far from making a Vessel of
wrath, that he does what can be done in a rational way to keep men from making
themselves so: and does promise, that if any that has made himself such a one
shall purge himself from his defilements, he shall receive him as a Vessel of
mercy, and so use him, 2 Timothy 2.20. Show me that Creature, that has more
goodness in him than the Creator, says St. Ambrose; but if God should ruin an
innocent Creature, he should have less goodness in him in this particular than
a good man. For a good man would not do such a thing; for him not to have made
his Creature had been no injustice, but to forsake his Creature before his
Creature forsake him, is such a piece of unmercifulness as the Father of
mercies cannot be guilty of. Every breach betwixt God and man is still begun on
the Creatures part; God can hate no man as his Creature before he consider him
as a sinner. We read in Genesis 1.31. when God created the world he beheld all
that he had made, and it was very good: now what is not only good, but very
good, could not be the object of his hatred, for it has some small resemblance
of himself, who is good, and the chiefest good. Man above all Creatures here
below was made after his own image; now as God cannot love those that resemble
the Devil; no more can he hate those that resemble himself, whence it
irrefragably follows, that until man had defaced the Image of God in him, there
was nothing but mercy and goodness intended toward him. St. Peter calls him a
faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. ult. intimating, that there is an engagement on
him, the Author of being, to have a due care for the thing created, as a Father
by nature is bound to provide for the Child, which those that do not are below
the brute beast, Isa. 27.11. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he
that made them will not have mercy on them, etc. Intimating, if they had nor
strangely waxed out of kind, they had not been forsaken of him. But thirdly, it
is objected from Acts 13.48. when Paul and Barnabas preached unto the Gentiles,
as many as were ordained to eternal life believed; whence it follows, that they
that did not believe were not ordained to eternal life, and consequently, were
ordained to condemnation. I answer, the original word (...), which we translate
ordained, relates to the marshalling of an Army in rank and sile, or setting
any thing in order, and might as well have been translated disposed. In 1 Cor.
16.15. there it is translated addicted; the house of Stephanas addicted
themselves to the Ministry of the Saints; and so it might have been translated
there, as many as were addicted to eternal life believed. Our Savior compares
the preaching of the Word to the sowing of the Seed. Now that the Seed may
prosper it is requisite that the ground be prepared beforehand for the
receiving of it: even so it is necessary, that the hearers of the Word be
disposed and addicted to receive it, that they come with honest and good hearts
to hear it. Now the Gentiles, and some of the Jews came with such hearts and
believed; but the most part of the Jews coming with envy in their hearts, St.
Paul's Sermon to them was like the seed on the untilled soil; their
unpreparedness made them incapable to be wrought upon, by such a measure of
grace which wrought upon the Gentiles. Fourthly, it is objected, the Apostle,
treating of Gods absolute and eternal Decrees of saving some, and of damning
others, cries out Rom, 11.33. Oh the depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! But if
God damn men only upon foresight of their sin, and final impenitency, you have
searched out his ways, and found out that which the Apostle says is past
finding out; therefore no cause is to be assigned why they are Vessels of wrath
but only the good pleasure of his Will. I answer, if this part of the Chapter
treated of Gods eternal Decrees, not to be searched into, why men are saved or
lost to all eternity, their Argument were unanswerable: But they wrest this
Scripture, I dare not say, to their own destruction, but I dare say, to
establish a false opinion of the destruction of others. Read from v. 17. to
this exclamation in v. 33. and you will find he treats only of the breaking off
the Jews the natural branches, and grafting in the Gentiles in their stead: or
to speak without Allegory, of the casting off the Jews because of unbelief, and
of bringing in the Gentiles into the visible Church of God, and admires his
just judgments upon the Jews, and his wisdom upon taking this their unbelief as
an occasion of showing mercy to the Gentiles; and thereby provoking the Jews to
emulation. Fifthly, they argue thus: Although it seem unreasonable to us that
God should thus damn men by Prerogative, yet indeed it is not; for although
man's Will be ruled by Reason, yet Gods is not, but his very willing a thing
makes it reasonable and just: for a thing is not first reasonable and just, and
then willed by God; but upon his willing it, its become both. As for the Will
of God, I grant it is never separated from justice, and it ought to bind us at
all times to due obedience; but herein lies their mistake to think there is not
an intrinsical good, and an intrinsical evil in the nature of things
themselves; but only that Gods willing it makes it good, and his nilling a
thing makes it evil; one says most blasphemously, God out of the absolute
sovereignty of his Will may command all the wickedness he has forbid, and
forbid all the holiness he has commanded. But as there are eternal verities,
as that equals added to equals still make equals, and the cause is in order of
nature before the effect: So things eternally just, as to love God, and to give
him thanks; to hate God is so intrinsically evil that it is impossible but that
it should be forbid. If it were possible for this not to be forbid, it were
possible for this to be lawful, for where there is no Law there is no
Transgression; but it is utterly impossible it should be lawful, therefore it
must be granted there is an evil in order of nature before the prohibition of
it: and so some things must needs be good in their own nature, as bearing a
resemblance of the Image and goodness of God, before any external Law pass upon
them. These things premised, my answer is, Although the Will of God be a rule
of justice to us, yet it is not a rule of justice to himself: but his justice
is rather a rule of his Works, and of his Will; and he works all things
according to the Counsel of his Will; and that Counsel advises nothing rashly,
or unmercifully, unreasonably, or unjustly; but according to the greatest
Equity and Chancery in the world, and therefore cannot without the greatest
violence to Reason and Religion, be thought to make irrespective Decrees, to
torture for ever the greatest part of mankind chiesly for the pleasure of his
Will. Again, they say Omnipotent Power authorizes all actions. Now if God will
make Vessels of wrath, what has any one to do with it? May he not do what he
pleases with his own Creatures? My answer is, we must not magnify Gods Power
so much as to eclipse his goodness, or his truth; which does assure us that he
is loving unto every man; and that he delights not in the death of any sinner.
These men make God a Tyrant, rather than a King, and attribute such
Prerogatives to God as are broadly inconsistent with his nature. Acts of Power
are not good in themselves, but as they are accompanied with Justice and Mercy;
otherwise they are bad, and lay a man's honor in the dust; we must not so
magnify one Attribute in God, as to justle out all the rest. The Lord
proclaims his name to Moses, Exodus 34.6. after this manner, The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. Now
Gods name is every ways agreeing to his nature; which is (rather than his
Creature should perish) to forgive iniquity, transgression, and sin, and not to
decree everlasting fire to it, without the intuition of sin. Let us not
therefore entertain any hard thoughts of Almighty God. Rev. 20.12, 13. when the
earth and the Sea gave up their dead, they were all judged according to what
was found in the Books, and those Books were written only according to their
works. Conscience is one of those Books which shall be opened at the last day,
and it will acquit God of all hard dealing toward men that perish. When Moses
prayed thus, Exodus 32.32. Either forgive this People, or blot we out of the
Book which thou have written; The Lord said, Whosoever sins against me him will
I blot out of my book: Where you see sin only blots out of Gods Book, and not
any Fatal Decree. If it should happen to men according to their Lots to be
under such or such a Decree, and not according to their Works, there would
nothing be remaining for us to do, but only patiently to obey Fate: for if an
irrespective Decree do shut up the most of men under Condemnation, can any one
of those men by all his industry alter his Destiny? Surely no: unless he were
stronger than he that made that Decree. To what purpose then were all his
endeavors, or to what purpose should we beat the air, and persuade him to
impossiblities? Yes, to good purpose, say the Abettors of such a Decree,
because no particular man knows under which Decree he is. I confess, this
answer is the best they have to give, but it nothing enervates the Argument;
for it is not the knowing of a Decree, or the being ignorant of a Decree, makes
any thing to the altering of a Decree, for neither if I know it, will it be
repealed, neither if I be ignorant of it, will it cease to be accomplished: Now
then, although no particular man knows under which Decree he is, yet he must
needs know he is under one of them (if there be such Decrees) and under which
soever he be, he is bound with an Adamantine Chain unto it, and his end is fixed
by reason of it as unalterably as the Laws of the Medes and Persians: Who then,
believing this, can believe, that his fasting, weeping or mourning, renting
heart or garment can avail any thing to the altering of that Decree under which
it was his Lot to be born. So that he that has imbibed this Doctrine has cut
the Sinews of all industry, if he acts consequentially to what he himself does
believe. Nay, but the means are ordained as well as the end may some say! True,
they are so: But to the far greatest part of men, if their opinion were true,
God should command them to seek his face in vain; for those means could never
attain the end for which men should use them, namely, the Salvation of their
souls: For never any man from the foundation of the world under that Decreo was
saved, neither indeed can be, though Moses, and Samuel should pray for him; or
an Angel from heaven preach unto him, he could not believe. To what purpose now
was the means ordained to these, or the use of them? Nay, to what purpose
should God wish the conversion of such sinners? send his Ambassadors to entreat
and beseech them, expostulate the case with them, Why will ye die? swear unto
them, As I live, I had rather you should live; if in the mean while he has
decreed their death before they did good or evil, and in order to that Decree
was resolved, never to afford them power to perform any one act of saving
grace? Now, whether there be insincerity in these Expressions, or in their
Opinions, judge ye. Nay, let God be true, and every man a liar. Let us heartily
believe that every man's destruction is wholly from himself, and not from any
fatal Decree of God.

Lastly it is objected, the seventeenth Article of the Church of England says,
God has decreed before the foundations of the world were laid by his Counsel
secret to us, to deliver from Curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of mankind. From whence they thus argue, Before the foundations of
the world were laid, no man could do good or evil; but even then some were
chosen; and consequently, some not: therefore those that were not chosen were
rejected before they had done good, or evil. To this I answer; as some were
chosen in Christ, and consequently, others not chosen before the foundations of
the world were laid: so known unto God were all things before the foundations
of the world were laid. He knew the first man would fall, and all mankind in
him; so that when he chose them in Christ he looked upon them as sinners, for
the whole need not a Physician, but those that are sick. He that is not a
Sinner needs not a Savior; and so when the non-Elect were rejected, they were
considered as Sinners, and not as Creatures; my meaning is, not merely under
the Notion of Creatures. So that the Article, if rightly understood, does not
impugn, but rather confirm this great truth which I so much contend for:
namely, That God does not hate any man as his Creature before he consider him
as a Sinner.

These things have I written to show, that Gods ways are equal, and if we
perish, it is because our ways are unequal. To vindicate the mercy of God,
which does prolong our days, and fill our years with goodness, from the
malignity of that Doctrine that does insinuate, that to get himself glory God
from all Eternity had no good will to save the greatest part of mankind.
Lastly, To raise up the weak hands, and strengthen the feeble knees, and settle
the discomposed and fainting spirits of such as fear, there is an eternal
Decree of heaven gone out against them; in assuring them, that no irrespective
Decree of God, sends any man to hell; and that only their own sins can cause
their damnation: Which damnation to prevent, what could have been done more
than God has done? For so God loved the world, that he sent his only begotten
Son into the world that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.

Vulgar Errors CONCERNING Kingly GOVERNMENT Removed.
GOd is a God of Order, he has made Angels and Men in a wonderful Order. Now
Order is the disposing of unequal things to their proper places, as some to sit
on the Throne, others to grind at the Mill; Servants to be on foot, and Princes
on horseback. It is a Vulgar Error which some have imbibed, that fear first
made men into Societies; or else that strength only usurped a power over them.
This Principle is the fruitful mother of Rebellion; for it does insinuate, that
as soon as it will stand with their interests, men may free themselves from
their bonds. But how false and unnatural this Principle is may appear by this;
that God made our condition such, that no man is, or ever was born into the
world, but was under Father or Mother, which could not be usurpers of
Government over their own Children; but their Children by the Law of Nature
were bound to obey them, as one very well observes. When Families grew great,
the elder of the house was their natural Lord, and so it is likely they
continued till some mighty Nimrod invaded their rights, and usurped Government
over them, which when others heard of, it is rational to conjecture, that to
prevent that spreading Gangrene amongst them likewise, the wise and good men,
that were Fathers of several Tribes, gave up their right to one whom they
called a King. So that he came not to this height by Usurpation, or Ambition,
but by a free and cheerful conjunction of several Tribes to that Tribe, which
had so good and potent a Father over them, as was both able and willing to
preserve their Liberties and Laws. Justin, one of the most ancient of the
Latin Historians, says almost as much. So that Kingly Government is not only
the most natural, but it is the antientest Government in the world. It is
likely some were of old likewise for a Commonwealth; either out of ambition to
have part in the Government, or else moved to it by the ill administration of
Justice by Kings, or by their envy and discontent. But Homer, the ancient Greek
Poet, cries out, (...), the Government by many is not good; let there be but
one King, one Governor, indeed herein he resembles God; who being but one,
governs all the world. As Monarchy resembles God in Majesty; so likewise in
Mercy: All other forms of Government come short of Monarchy in Mercy. His
Prerogative can dispense with the rigor of the Law, where he sees there is
hopes of amendment for the future, or where the evidence was not so clear as
was to be wished against the condemned person, or where it should be very
tragical to take away the life of the offender. Considering how apt we or our
Children are to be tempted, and overtaken in a fault of a high nature, it is
our great privilege that we and they are born under Monarchy, which if it
please can show mercy to the condemned, and consider those favorable
Circumstances which the Law could take no notice of, nor Aristocracy or
Democracy do consider. The Beasts in the Fable were afraid, if they admitted
the Lion to be their King, that then he might prey upon them at pleasure; To
whom the Fox replies, If you do not, the Bear, and the Wolf, and every beast of
prey will tear us, whilst we have none that can, or will defend us. The Moral
of it is this, As there is no Government upon earth but may be subject to
inconvenience, if the Ruler be wicked, yet Monarchy is least subject to it; for
if one be thought troublesome, what ease or security can there be when their
name is Legion? It was certainly a great villainy, though, being successful, it
went for virtue in Brutus and his Confederates among the Romans to depose
Tarquinius, and afterward upon that to call all Monarchy Tyranny; but never
did the world know greater slavery than under the Aristocracy of Athens, where
instead of avoiding one, they set up thirty Tyrants; and an Historian tells us,
the Roman State could not long have been preserved, if it had not submitted to
a Monarchy; for the popular heats and factions were so great, that the Annual
Election of Magistrates was but another name for a tumult. Nay, it is
observable in the beginning of the Roman Commonwealth, when they rebelled
against Tarquinius, and set up Consuls; this example was so prevalent with the
Soldiers that they soon set up a Tribune of the People against the Consuls,
and this Tribune and the Consuls were often at daggers drawing who should be
uppermost, but at last Caesar threw them both out, and took the Empire upon
himself. It is likewise a Vulgar Error, that has obtained with many, that God
governed his own people in nature of a Commonwealth-Government until they
sinfully desired a King: From whence they conclude Aristocracy to be the best
form of Government: But when God delivered the Jews out of Egypt, he governed
them, not only as their God, but as their Sovereign also; and he gave them
Laws, not only for Piety, but for Polity also; and he set up his Deputies,
Moses, and Aaron, and Samuel, to govern them, according to those Laws which
himself had made to govern them by, both in Church and State. They could make
no Laws to govern the State by, as we do Acts of Parliament, nor abrogate any;
for as yet God was their Sovereign. When they were angry at this, and would
have a King to be like the Heathen; they angered God, not but that they chose
the best kind of Government, but they rejected God the best Governor, 1 Samuel
8.7. God says thus to Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me, that I should not reign over them. They preferred an earthly King
to reign over them before an heavenly; and Laws of his making before Laws of
Gods making. Samuel told them what Laws he would make, He will take, said he,
the best of your Fields and Vineyards, the tenth of your Seed and of your
Cattle and give to his Officers, etc. Nevertherless, they would have it so,
rather than God should reign over them any longer; and hence it was, that he
gave them a King in his anger. How ungrateful either Democracy or Aristocracy
has been to their greatest Patriots, and the defenders of their Country, the
Histories of Miltiades and Aristides among the Greeks, and of Scipio Africanus
among the Latins do abundantly testify. Indeed, eminency of virtue in their
Governors must needs create jealousies of introducing Monarchy, which, they to
prevent, did often unjustly imprison or banish their best Commanders. It is
likewise a Vulgar Error, that from the beginning of the world there was a
propriety of Law to make a Monarch; whereas to matter of fact, to any that will
not shut their eyes, it must needs appear a vain Hypothesis. For I would fain
know whether Adam held his Title over his Children so: or any other Hereditary
Prince at first; or whether rather the right to Government was not inherent in
his very Blood, Person, and the next of the Family. If it be said, but few
Nations have been so happy as to have the Succession derived to the eldest of
the Family long together, but one of these two things often happened, either some
Usurper obtained the Government by the commotion of a People, or some other
Nation got the Crown by Conquest: We demand in such cases, is not that
Government from God? I answer, God suffers the Devil to have a great power, but
is it therefore a lawful one? And will you from thence argue, that all men
therefore ought, as well as most most men do, obey him? A Permissive power is
one thing, and a just power that comes with Gods Commission is another. Where
the People rebel against their lawful Prince, and set up an Usurper, here is
Gods Permission: But as for Gods Commission to such a Power I am to seek, and
so I believe is every Usurper, as well as was Henry the Fourth of England on
his deathbed; who looking on his Crown, which stood on his Bolster, sighing,
said to his Son, What right I had to this Crown God only knows: Or as was
Richard the Third, the night before Bosworth Field was fought, as Polydor
Virgil relates. I will give it you in his own words, speaking how he was scared
in the Night, he says, Id puto non fuisse somnium sed Erinnem Conscientiae. I
do not think it a dream affrighted him so, but his guilty Conscience. Secondly,
where some other Nation by Conquest obtained the Crown, if it were unjustly
gotten, (as it was where the Conqueror was the Aggressor) it is no lawful
Power: For if Robbers of whole Countries be Gods Vicegerents, surely Thieves,
and Bandittoes are his under Officers. As a Bastard till the tenth Generation
might not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23.2. So such a
bastard Government, must have length of time to make it legitimate; but if it
was a lawful Conquest, as it might be where the Conquered gave just occasion of
a War; or else began the War first: Yet the Title is weak to the conquered
Crown, till by length of time, and death of all just Pretenders, it becomes the
true Title, beeause it becomes the only one. It is likewise said by some of
late times, that Kings have nothing to do to meddle in Ecclesiastical matters,
but only to govern in Civil Affairs; but it is apparent, that as the Fathers of
the Families in the beginning of the world were vested with a Kingly power over
their own Posterity, so likewise they were Priests to their own Households; and
Esau is called a profane person, because he sold his birthright, Heb. 12, 16.
to which the Priesthood was annexed. He is not called a Fool, or an Idiot, but
a profane person, one that did unhallow himself. So that from the beginning it
was not so as they would have it, neither is it so yet; for whatever things or
persons were not exempted from the power of the chief Magistrate before Christ's
time, are not by him exempted. Now, if we shall enquire what was the manner of
the Nations of the World, or of Gods People in this point, it will appear, that
the Magistrate ever regulated Religion, and religious persons: Witness the
Decree of Cyrus to build Gods Temple; of the King of Ninevey to proclaim a Fast
for all; and of Nebuchadnezzar, first, for Idolatry, and afterward, for to
worship the true God; all which are at large recorded in Scripture. And
although in the Jewish Commonwealth God separated the Prince from the Priest,
yet still the Priest remained subject to the Prince, as by the Stories of David
and Solomon sufficiently appear. The Kings were blamed if things of Religion
were amiss: which certainly they had never been, had not the affairs of
Religion appertained to their inspection. But it is objected, that in the
Primitive time of Christianity, the power to govern the Church was only in the
Apostles, and their Successors, and not in heathen Princes. To that I answer,
Those heathen Princes had a right to Christianity, and also to the Government
of Christian Churches in their Dominions, but they scorned to own their right
to either, or to subject their Scepters to a Crucified Savior. But when in
Constantine's time the Government became Christian, Socrates tells us, all the
Affairs of the Church returned to the Royal Authority, and Constantine
repressed the Arian Doctrine; and Justinian the Emperor established the Code
of the Universal Church, consisting of the four first general Councils, and
some ancient Provincial ones, and made them Laws of old reforming Kings, were
commended: now, God never commends busybodies in other men's matters; every
one ought to glorify God with that Talent which he has received. Now the
Sword is the Magistrates Talent, and with that he is to be an avenger of those
that do evil: But evil in the Church is evil, as well as in the State, and
tends to overthrow the State, and therefore it belongs to him to avenge it. He
goes against the Laws of our Land, and may make him too weak for Government,
who will not allow the King Supremacy in the Church, as well as in the State,
not as supreme Ordinary unless he please to go into Sacred Orders; which he may
at any time, but he always is Supreme Governor in his Territories, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil. It is no less dangerous to teach, that People may
rebel upon grievances on the outward State, and that Nature then teaches them,
by the mere force of rationality to constitute another Governor, or institute
another Government. My answer to this is manifold, first, Who shall be judge of
those grievances? If you say the Common People, alas, what incompetent Judges
are they in weighty matters; especially where they are concerned themselves? If
you say, the Nobles, and chief of the People, why, these are not infallible;
see Number. 16.1, 2, 3. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and two hundred and fifty
Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, men of renown, gathered
themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and said unto them, ye
take too much upon you. Wherefore lift you up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? Will ye put out the eyes of this people? etc. It is
as possible now adays people may be ignorant, or ambitious, as in former times.
But be it granted, for argument sake, there be a real grievance, is not the Law
open to redress it? Will not the great Council of the Kingdom, think you, move
the King to give him up to justice who durst advise the King to go against Law;
thereby weakening his Throne, which is upheld by Justice; thereby dishonouring
the King, and making him less valuable to his People? Will nothing serve but
stretching forth the hand against Gods Anointed, or rising up in Rebellion?
Certainly, both these courses are as plainly forbid in Scripture, as the Word
of God can speak it. If objected, But those that killed Tyrants were always
admired for sacrificing their own lives for the good of their Country. I
answer, It was greatly done for Lucretia, Cato, or Cleopatra in their
circumstances to kill themselves: but yet done wickedly; and so here; only the
greatness of the action causes men to take false measures of it, and so admire
and commend it; especially if good follow upon it, it more blinds their
judgments. But you must not judge by the good event the goodness of the action;
for sometimes a bad one has a good event, and a good one bad success; nor by
the good meaning, for Peter meant well, when he drew his Sword to defend his
Master: but by a lawful call they had to undertake it. Now, who made those
private persons judges or avengers in such cases? Or how can they be sure that
Anarchy and Confusion will not follow upon such attempts? Which if it do, they
have sacrificed their lives to the ruin of their Country. There ought to be
none but lawful courses taken to redress unlawful grievances: but Rebellion is
judged an unlawful course both by the Law of God, and the Law of the Land.
Again, grant it but lawful in any one case to rebel, and you give Rebels an
Inch, which they will soon make an Ell: And every small grievance shall be made
that very case, or cousingerman to it. As men we ought to consider humane
frailty even in Governouts, and bear with small faults; considering what great
benefits we still enjoy by their Government. I have read of a Nation, that upon
the death of their King would permit by a Law made to that effect, that every
body might do what was right in his own eyes for three days; but the
murtherings, and plunderings, and outrages in so short a time were usually so
many: that the next King needed not so much his own virtues as the remembrance
of the interregnum Vices to endear his Government to his People; even Tyranny
it self is not so bad as Anarchy. There is a mean between Rebellion and losing
our Liberty, even when it is intrencht upon, namely, a patient waiting until a
redress may legally be had, and Reason and Law be heard in cold blood to speak:
until we give away our Liberties, or give up our Laws, we have still a
birthright to them even under oppression. And if we repent of our sins, which
caused God to set such a Governor over us, he can change the Governor's
heart, for it is in his hands to turn whether he pleases: or he can change the
Governor for another, provided we change first. One way or other, we may hope
deliverance will come, for God does not willingly grieve the Children of men?
but, until it do come, we must patiently bear Gods scourge in this kind, as we
do sickness, ill weather at Sea, or Land, Pestilence, Famine, or the like. This
is Christian Doctrine of the Church of England; witness the first part of the
Homily against Rebellion; where having said, God gives a People such Kings
usually as they deserveat subjoyns for Subjects to deserve for their sins to
have an evil Prince set over them, and then rebel against him, were double and
treble evil: Nay, let us either deserve to have a good Prince, or let us
patiently suffer and obey such as we deserve. If People rebel, one of these
three things must happen, Either the King must conquer, and then the Subjects
have fairly mended the matter, have they not? If it were a Rod in his hands
before, they may justly now expect a Scorpion: Or else they must conquer, if
so, who shall keep them from tyrannizing over the King, and their fellow
Subjects? Or, who shall keep from Factions, and Change of Government every
month? I hope we have had too late experience in both these kinds to trust to
any fair pretense again in have. Or, thirdly, there will be an Accommodation:
if so, yet many dear lives are like first to be lost, and then we are at best
but where we are now; for at last some body must be trusted with the Supremacy
upon their honesty. So that to Rebel seems to me a remedy worse than the
disease at all times; for Rebels always go without a Commission; and therefore
whatever they do cannot be said to go beyond it; many times they complain
without a just cause, or upon a very slender one, not worthy of such a decision
as the Sword. It is usually said of the English man, that he never knows when a
thing is well; insomuch, that being overcurious, intending still to amend his
work, he often mars all, or at leastwise makes it worse. Certainly, our English
Constitution of Government is well enough in all reason. We are at this day,
blessed be God, and our gracious King, at least, as free as any Nation in the
known world; let us not screw the strings so high till they break, and all the
Harmony be spoiled; there remains nothing to make us happy under this
Government, but to think our selves happy in it, to bless God for it, and to
pay our duties unto it. Some of which are these that follow: First, To live
quietly under it. God and the Law has given the King the Sword, and whoever
else takes it, is an Usurper of another man's right, and deserves to perish by
it. Hazael was confident he should never do so wickedly with his power as the
Prophet told him he would. Why, those that usurp the Sword, as little know
their own hearts as he, and therefore are as little to be trusted. For Argument
sake, let us suppose it just in the beginning, yet to alter or change a
Government, men must be forced to take such violent courses, as would render
their actions unjust in the end, though just at first: But to resist thus the
lawful power, is to do evil that good may come on it; and I am sure that is
neither good nor just, first or last. Secondly, To honor the King as the
Father of our Country. Suppose then any weakness in a Father, should a Son
discover any nakedness? Cham was cursed for it; it is a part of that honor we
owe to a King to cover it when ever we find it, not to curse him in our
bedchamber, but always to speak honorably of him; the taking away a Kings
honor and esteem amongst his Subjects, is but a preparative to the taking away
of his life. Thirdly, To pray for him both in Public, and in Private; it is a
weighty matter to govern so, as to serve so many interests, and if any be not
served they will be angry and waspish. Moses complained, he was not able to
bear the burden of Government, and yet he was well-spirited for it by Almighty
God. He has need enough of our Prayers, and we have need enough to pray for
him, if but for our own sakes, for in his peace we shall have peace, and in his
trouble we shall have trouble enough. If God commanded the Jews to pray for the
life of the King of Babylon, and to seek the peace of that City whether they
were carried Captive: How much more should we pray for our own King, and seek
the peace of our Native Country? Fourthly, To pay Tribute without murmuring
proportionably to our Estates; most men mistake the Liberty of the Subject,
which is the true cause of complaining in this point. It Is not in having such a
property in our goods, as to exclude our Sovereign by Parliament from laying a
Tax for our own defense, but only in excluding any Foreign Power, or any
fellow-Subject from invading our rights; Should it consist in the former, the
Kingdom might sink for want of necessary support. It Is not enough for a man to
labor to build his house, but he must do something to defend his labors: Now
in regard a private man cannot defend himself against some mighty Nimrods, he
must be content to pay Tribute to those that can. Render therefore to all their
dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, etc. Fifthly, To
obey him and his good Laws; where Laws are good, passive obedience is not
enough; for such as will not obey for Conscience sake, but only for wrath,
bring an evil report upon his good Government, for by suffering they show what
an opinion they have of his Laws, and what they would have others think of
them, namely, that they are not good, and that godly men cannot live without
persecution under his Government; This must needs tend much to the dishonor of
the King. Some others will obey the King, only provided he be a godly King,
that is, (in their sense of godliness) one of their own Church; But Temporal
right to Dominion is not founded in grace. The Scripture makes no such
distinction of Kings, but commands obedience to them, whether Saul be King, or
David King, whether Nero be Emperor; or Constantine Emperor. O King live for
ever, said Daniel to Darius who cast him into the Lions Den. If any thing be
amiss in the Chief Magistrate, Advice, Prayers, and Patience are the most
Christian remedies, for all Judges under him are but his Deputies, and all the
power his Lieutenants have of the Sword is the Kings, and it can never stand
with reason that his Authority should be used to depose his Person. Nothing can
bring tyranny sooner into a Kingdom than the taking of an ungodly course to
keep it out. Solomon says, Against a King there is no rising up. If objected,
It was so indeed in Israel, but the Politic Laws of England differ from those
of Israel. My answer is, We are not for that Arbitrary Government of a King,
mentioned in the eighth Chapter of the first Book of Samuel, but where the Laws
of England command and prescribe obedience, there we may safely urge it upon
the Conscience, and there every Subject of England ought to yield obedience to
it. When the Law of the Land says, It is not lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever to take up Arms against the King; then we urge that of the Apostle,
Be subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether to the King as
Supreme; and that of St. Paul, Whosoever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God: For although men set the bounds; yet God curses those that
remove the Landmarks; and invade another rights, And blessed be God that he
has, even in our days, overturned, overturned, all Rebels and Usurpers of
Government till he came whose right it was to govern us, and he has given it
him. Now what remains, but that we bless God that there is a King again in
England, and that every one does not what is right in his own eyes; that Ashur
a stranger is not our King, but a perfect Englishman lineally descended of so
many famous Ancestors; a nursing Father of the Church, and a Defender of the
Laws and Liberties of his People, one that looks on us, as David on the Tribe
of Judah, to be his own bone and his own flesh; and that we earnestly pray,
that God would still long continue his gracious Reign over us; that we may lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty.

Vulgar Errors CONCERNING Gods House and his Worship in it Removed.
ALmighty God, who according to his nature, is infinite and incomprehensible,
dwells not in Temples made with hands, as it is written, Heaven is my Throne,
and Earth is my footstool, yet this infinite God is pleased to condescend so
low, as to behold the things which are in Heaven, and in Earth, and to dwell
with the Children of men: and though he has given us all that we have, and all
that we are: yet he accepts of any thing we shall in way of gratitude give back
again to him, to honor his Holy Name, and to make his praise to be glorious.
Jacob knowing this, vowed a Vow, when sent away by his Parents for fear of his
Brother Esau, Genesis 28.20. Saying, if God will be with me, and will keep me in
this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so
that I come again unto my Fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my
God; and this stone which I have set for a Pillar shall be Gods house, and of
all that thou shall give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee. We read of
several Altars before, but here is the first mention in the Scripture of any
House to be built to the honor of Gods Name. Afterward God bid Moses and
Aaron build him an Ark, and told them it should be the Covenant and Pledge that
he would go along with them, and that they should have his presence amongst
them, and so it was performed accordingly: When the Philistines had taken it,
it plagued them, their God Dagon fell before it, then they returned it; and
when Obed-Edom had it, the Lord blessed the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite, and
all that appertained to him, because of the Ark of God. After this, David
seriously considered with himself that he dwelt in an house of Cedar, but the
Ark of God was only under a Tent, and he vowed a Vow unto the Lord that he
would prepare a place for it. The very instinct of nature told him, it was a
shame that his own house should be handsomer than the Public place of Gods
Worship; and so it should teach us at this day. He prepares with all his might
a stupendous quantity of materials for the House of God, 1 Chronicles. 29.4. Three
thousand Talents of Gold, of the Gold of Ophir, and seven thousand Talents of
refined Silved to over-lay the Walls of the House withal, and Brass and Iron
without weight, and Marble stones, and other Materials without number; for he
considered that the House was not for man, but for God. Peaceful Solemon builds
this House and consecrates it, and God accepts of it, and heard the Prayers of
his People that were put up in it against Plague, Famine, Mildew, blasting, or
when the Enemy afflicted them within the Gates; when Nebuchadnezzar burnt this
house, and carried away all the goodly Vessels belonging to it to Babylon,
Nehemiah rebuilds it, and God stirs up the spirit of Cyrus the Persian to
send back again to this Temple five thousand four hundred Vessels of Gold and
Silver, which Nebuchadnezzar had taken away, and put them in the House of his
Gods; so the Temple was built, and beautified, and reverenced as Gods
Sanctuary, as it ought to be. But in our Savior's time men were grown to that
height of profaneness, that they brought Sheep and Oxen into that holy place
to be sold, they made a Market place of it to sell Doves, and to change Money;
but the zeal of Gods House did even eat our Savior up; that is, made him seem
to forget his mild and gentle nature, and use a Rod instead of the spirit of
meekness; he with a Scourge drove out the Oxen, overthrew the Tables of the
Money changers, and said to them that sold Doves, Take these things hence, and
would not suffer any to carry a Vessel through the Temple, because it was an
holy place, and left a lasting Lesson to us highly to esteem of places
dedicated to Gods Worship. But here three Questions may arise; 1. How comes one
place to be more holy than another? 2. What kind of holiness is a place capable
of? 3. Whether if it be granted that a place was so under the Law, it be so
still under the Gospel? To the first I answer, a place comes to be holy by
being separated from common use, and dedicated to the service of God, Exodus
13.12. Thou shall set apart all that opens the Matrix unto the Lord. Now St.
Luke, speaking of the same thing in Chap. 2.23. renders it thus, Every Male
that opens the womb shall be called holy unto the Lord: So that if a thing be
set apart for the Lord, upon that setting it apart it becomes holy. The
Israelites were called a holy people because God separated them from all other
Nations to be his own peculiar, 1 Kings 8.53. And when he would consecrate the
Levites to his service from among all the Children of Israel, He says thus to
Moses, Thou shall separate the Levites from among the Children of Israel, and
the Levites shall be mine, Number. 8.14. so that when a place is separated from
common use, and dedicated to the service of God, that place is a Sanctuary, a
holy place; and till the relation it has to God for his service is abolished,
it is to be accounted Sacred: So that the notion of Holiness consists in this,
in being separated and set apart for God. The Religious person, whilst he is
separated from sin and sinners, from the allurements of a wicked world, and the
sinful lusts of the flesh, he makes his Soul and Body a Temple for the Holy
Ghost. 2. If demanded what kind of holiness a place is capable of? I answer, a
place is not capable of any inherent holiness as man's Soul is, but only of a
Relative holiness; and if you will show so much reverence to a Prince as to be
uncovered in his Presence Chamber, certainly you ought to show as much to God
to be uncovered in his Sanctuary. If it be said, true, under the Law we grant
things had a Relative holiness, but how do you prove they have so under the
Gospel. I answer, Time and Place are receptive of holiness alike. We know that
all times are his: for he makes all our days, all things are his, for the Earth
is the Lords and the falness thereof. But now, if under the Gospel some time
may be more peculiarly his than as all time is his: and some things may be more
peculiarly his, than as all things are his; then those things which are so
peculiarly his may have a Relative holiness in them under the Gospel as well as
under the Law; for the Relative holiness consists in this peculiar separation
to Almighty God. Now that some Times may be peculiarly his is plain by St.
John's calling the first day of the Week the Lords Day, Rev. 1.10. that is, set
apart for his service by the Apostles and the Church instead of the Jewish
Sabbath: and some Things may be peculiarly his as does appear by St. Peter's
speech to Ananias, Whilst it remained was it not thine own? etc. Acts 5.4. but
to keep back what was dedicated to God was a robbing of God; A lying unto God,
and not unto men; so that you see God may have a peculiarity in things under
the Gospel as well as under the Law. And if it be in a Day, ye ought to keep it
holy; if in a House, God would have you keep your foot when you enter into the
house of the Lord. We have a Generation amongst us that cry up the holiness of
the Sabbath, and the strict observance of it, as if in its minute Appendages it
bound us almost as much as it did the Jew, and yet these very men will cry down
the holiness of the Sanctuary, and account themselves very holy in so doing:
Whereas, in Lev. 19.30. God joins them both together, saying, Ye shall keep my
Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. If the fourth Commandment of the
Decalogue bind us now according to the Letter as they contend, why does their
practice in kindling their fire, in dressing their food, contradict their
opinion? Have they never read, that when it was in force, according to the
Letter, a man was stoned for gathering sticks on the Sabbath day? But if the
Equity only of that Law be in force at this day, why are we accounted as
Transgressors by them, whilst we keep it according to the Moral Equity and the
Precepts of the Church? The truth is, they are superstitious in the one, and
profane in the other. Can these men see that a Day may be holy because set
apart for the service of God, and can they not see that a Place likewise may be
holy which is consecrated to his Worship? Even the light of nature taught the
Heathen, if once a Thing was dedicated to God, if it were a gift, to devour
that gift was Sacrilege, and brought a Curse with it, witness their Proverb
concerning the Gold of Tholoss: if it were a Place, to profane that place was
sinful; Procul hinc, procul este prophani Conclamat vates; and that they think
so still, I call the Morocco Ambassador to witness. If it be said, those times
for Public Worship are appointed by Gods immediate command as Moral, and so
are not public places, and in that respect we honor one more than the other:
I answer, it is one thing to say it, and another thing solidly to prove it; for
the set times appointed by God in the fourth Commandment were the seventh days
from the Creation, which on all hands is confessed we keep not. Again, in what
time soever the Church began to omit the last day of the Week, and keep only
the first, that Week there was no seventh day Sabbath, which could not lawfully
have been done if one day of seven be moral, and of perpetual Equity; for what
is Moral is unchangeable. The truth is, the fourth Commandment enjoins us to
set convenient times apart for Gods Service, and that is a moral duty, but our
Lords Day is not appointed by that, but by the Traditions of the Apostles, and
the Precepts of the Church. Now we have not only the Precepts of the Church to
esteem reverently of Gods House, but the Precepts of the Apostles to do all
things in Gods service decently and in order; and when they did not, St. Paul
chides them thus, What, have you not houses to eat and drink in? If any man
hunger let him eat at home. The dishonor that is done to God's House, reflects
upon God himself. When Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel, they brake down the
house of Baal, and made it a draught-house: And so it must needs tend to the
dishonor of Almighty God when we dishonor the place dedicated to his public
Worship, Learned Mr. Mead did believe, the instinct of nature taught the very
Heathen, that the Worship was dignified by the peculiarness of the place, and
the Magnificence of the Temple appointed for it. It is likewise a Vulgar Error
that possesses the minds of many, that to hear Preaching is the chief end of
coming to God's House, whereas joining together in Prayer is to be preferred
before it, that which carries the denomination of a house, is certainly the
chief thing that is to be done in that house. Now Gods House is not called the
house of Preaching in Scripture, but the house of Prayer. I confess, Preaching
is a great Ordinance, yet Prayer is a greater, how meanly soever it is esteemed
by many. If there were nothing but Preaching, they would come; but if nothing
but Praying, they will not come. But blessed Hannah was not of their mind; she
never refused to come to the Temple when there were Prayers there. Surely, the
Error in this point is very great, and one main cause I conceive is this,
people are lazy in the duties of Christianity, and will not strive to enter in
at the straight Gate; now to hear a Sermon puts them to no great labor; Nay,
happily the novelty of the Matter, the variety of the Phrase, may deceive that
little toil of sitting and listening to it: But Prayer is a lifting up of the
Soul to God, and our Souls are naturally tending downwards, so that we may find
it a weighty matter to lift them up long together, and we are quickly weary of
that work. A righteous man's Prayer does not avail much, unless it be fervent;
now fervency cannot be unless our Hearts pant after God as the Heart after the
Rivers of waters. And to bring our hearts to this, will cost us some pain.
unless we sigh and groan, and so Gods Spirit helps us to do; unless we mourn
and weep, so David often; unless we wrestle with God as Jacob, who wept and
made his supplications unto him: which things since they are so, no marvel
though a carnal heart had rather come to Preaching than to Praying: it is a
great deal the easier duty; take heed the Devil don't persuade you it is in a
manner the only duty, lest he keep you with a form of Godliness without the
power of it all your days. When Joseph brought his two Sons to Jacob to be
blessed, he thought his Father had been mistaken, in preferring Ephraim before
Manasses: and he went to remove his Fathers hands, saying, Not so my Father,
this is the Elder, lay thy right hand upon his head: but he answered and said,
I know it my Son, I know it, he shall be great, but truly his Brother shall be
greater. While some people think we are mistaken in preferring Praying before
Preaching, they are mistaken themselves, and we may answer them, We know not
what we affirm, we know it; Preaching shall be accounted a great Ecclesiastical
Ordinance, but truly Prayer shall be a greater. And as Public Prayer has a
more especial promise to be heard than Private, so likewise Prayers put up in
Gods House, have a more peculiar promise than if put up elsewhere, Exodus 20.24.
In all places where I record my name I will come unto thee, and will bless
thee. All Objections to the contrary are but like those made against the waters
of Jordan by Naaman, Are not Abana, and Pharphar, Rivers of Damascus better
than all the waters of Israel, may I not wash in them and be clean? No: the
Promise is made to the waters of Jordan, and not to those. Now, as the waters
cleansed not the Leprosy by any Physical operation, but by way of blessing; so
neither do our Prayers prevail for their worthiness, but are heard for his
Promise sake, and his gracious goodness. The Jews when they prayed at home,
were wont still to spread forth their hands toward the Temple, 1 Kings 8.38.
So Daniel, his Windows being open toward Jerusalem, he kneeled on his knees
three times a day and prayed, Dan. 6.10. Neither are people less mistaken
concerning their Praises, than concerning their Prayers in Gods House; whilst
they cry out of the Organ, the Lute, or the Harp, as if it were sinfully
ceremonious to sing Praises after that manner. The Ceremonial Law was given by
Moses, but this was not given by Moses, therefore no part of the Ceremonial
Law. Indeed, in the Levitical Law the Jew was commanded to blow with Trumpets
on the Sabbath and New Moons: But you never read Moses commanded to sing
Praises with Strings and Pipe. Again, the Ceremonies were shadows of things to
come, and most of them referred unto Christ, but this kind of service is no
ways typical of the Messiah, and therefore not Ceremonial. Neither is it
sinful, for it was first taught us by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; see 2 Chronicles. 29.25. Hezekiah set the Levites in the House of the Lord with Cymbals,
Psalteries, and Harps, according to the commandment of David, and Gad the Kings
Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, for so was the Commandment of the Lord by his
Prophets. So that to praise God with Instruments of Music in his House is so
far from being sinful, that it was instituted first of all at the command of
God himself by his Prophets. If it be farther objected, although it was
appointed of God, yet it was appointed under the Old Law, before Christ came,
therefore ought now to vanish. My answer is; so were the Ten Commandments, yet
they ought always to stand in force; we must not look so much to the time when
a Command is given, as to the intrinsic nature of a Command, if we would know
whether it be always to stand in force or no: For if the Law have in it a Moral
equity, though given under the Law, it may oblige us under the Gospel. Now,
that the great and glorious God should be praised with Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, sung after the best and skilfullest manner, to make his
Service more solemn, must needs be most equal; and having in it a moral equity,
cannot be displeasing to Almighty God still to be kept up by us. Instruments of
Music have great influence into the Affections of men, we use the Trumpet to
stir up the courage of men in War: Why should we not use these to stir up our
Affections to Gods Service, to make us sing lustily, and with a good courage?
If it be said, it will hinder our devotion by carrying away the mind to the
Music; I answer, this is not essential to it, but only accidental: So may a
pleasant Voice; but we must not take away the use of a thing because it may be
abused. Watch therefore more narrowly thine own Heart, and think these Wings
were added to thy soul, to make her fly the swifter up to Heaven, and not to
flutter here below. God loves no lukewarm drouzie service; that therefore that
will heighten our zeal, and take away our drouziness, will be a help and not an
hindrance to our devotion. To this end David prepared two hundred fourscore and
eight skilful Singers to praise God, being instructed in the Songs of the Lord,
as we read in 1 Chronicles. 25.7. And he made four thousand Instruments to praise
God withal, 1 Chronicles. 23.5. Thus he took order, that with Trumpets and Shawmes,
they should show themselves joyful before the Lord their King. The infirmities
of our nature, and the weaknesses of flesh and blood are much relieved by
Music. We read of a strange effect that Music had upon Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14.
Saul had forsaken God, and now Gods Spirit forsakes him, and an evil spirit
from the Lord troubled him, and it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God
was upon Saul, that David took a Harp and played with his hand, so Saul was
refreshed, and well, and the evil spirit departed from him. If it had been the
Spirit of God that had been expelled by Music, no question but this place
would have been brought by some against us: But seeing it was the evil spirit,
that was constantly chased away by it, why should it not make for us? For
whether it were a deep melancholy only, or a Devil possessing him, and stirring
and carrying that melancholy passion further than naturally it would have gone;
Expositors do doubt. But be it which it will, you see Saul was miserably out of
tune with it, till David's Harp composed his affections, and made him sedate,
and quiet, and fit for the Society of men again. If Music be known to heighten
our joy at a feast; Why may it not heighten our joy in the Lord, whilst we make
a cheerful noise unto the God of Jacob? If we are commanded, when merry to sing
Psalms: Surely, to make the tune more melodious with Harp or Organ can be no
offense. If to hear a Psalm sung out of tune hinders our devotion, and is apt
to move scorn and laughter, then by the rule of contraries, to be brought to
good time and tune by an Organ, must needs make the Service of God more solemn,
more devout, and more acceptable both to God and man.

Vulgar Errors CONCERNING The WILL Removed.
ALthough Faith and Hope be Gods gifts, and called Gods Armor, yet we must put
this Armor on. We must cooperate with the grace of God, or else his grace will
be offered us in vain. The Greek Proverb says, A man must defend his Weapons,
if he would have his Weapons defend him. And St. Augustine says truly, He that
made thee without thee will not save thee without thee. But how far, and after
what manner the Will of man concurs with the grace of God in things pertaining
to Salvation, is much controverted by the Learned; which that you may the
better understand I shall first explain the terms unto you: 1. Telling you what
the Will is. 2. What the grace of God is, and then shall consider of their
manner of concurrence in all gracious acts. 1. The Will is the rational
appetite, or a free power of choosing or refusing of a thing, or of preferring
one thing before another, when diverse things conduce to the same end. 2. Grace
is strength and assistance from God, to do something above nature. Without me,
says Christ, ye can do nothing; we are not able of our selves so much as to
think a good thought. It Is said Pelagius taught, that the Will of man needed
nothing of grace, but only to be enlightened by the Word of God to know his
Will, and the danger of not doing it, and the reward of performing it, and then
it was able by its own natural powers to perform it; grounding his opinion on
such Texts as these, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had
sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin. Now ye say we see, therefore
your sin remains. Some on the other side, think the Will is subject to the
special motion of God in the act of Conversion, or any other gracious act, so
that the grace of God is irresistably powerful, and what mixture men bring from
the virtue of the Will to grace is only the corruption of it; they ground their
opinion on such Texts as these; You has he quickened who were dead in
trespasses and sins. And again, We are created in Christ Jesus unto good works;
from whence they infer, That as a dead man does nothing to the raising of
himself, no more do we that are spiritually dead. As God put forth an Almighty
power at the Creation of the world, so an irresistible power at our Conversion,
which is called the new Creation. Now the truth is in the middle, we need Gods
grace as well to assist the Will in goodness, as at first to excite to
goodness, and it is very reasonable to think, that as the Devil is daily and
hourly suggesting evil motions to us, so God or his good Angel is daily and
hourly inspiring and assisting us to what is good; according to that of the
Apostle, Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has
begun a good work in you, will perform it; that is, will assist you to perform
it, unto the day of Jesus Christ. So that it is plain against Pelagius, that
God does not only assist to will, but also to do, what is good of his good
pleasure. Neither is it less plain against the other, that grace is not so
efficaciously inspired into the Soul, that is not in the power of the Will to
refuse it: for this would quite destroy the nature of the Will; for as he said
well, He that cannot choose but choose, does choose because he cannot choose, which
is a palpable and thick contradiction. Secondly, it appears from our Saviors
words, How often would I, and ye would not, that grace is not so irresistibly put
to the Will, that it is not in the power of the Will to refuse it, seeing he
blames them for so often forsaking their own mercy. So that they not only had a
power to resist his grace, but brought that power into act in judging
themselves unworthy of everlasting life.

The truth I told you was in the middle way, and it has been the ancient
opinion of the Church of God for above a thousand years ago, that the Will is
not destroyed by grace, but only repaired. A dislocated joint when it is well
set again, does not lose the nature of a joint, but rather is restored to its
former use and comeliness; so the grace of God healing the Will, does not take
away the nature of the Will, but only makes it able to obey Gods Will. So that
when Grace cooperates with the Will, man is left in the hand of his own Counsel
to turn, or not to turn to the Lord; God sets life and death before him, and
bids him reach out his hand to whether he will. This is apparent from Isa. 5.4.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it?
wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild Grapes? under the Parable of a Vineyard the whole House of Israel is
shadowed out: unto whom God was not wanting in the least measure of gracious
dispensations to make them good, yet they remained unreformed, and were wanting
to themselves. I shall briefly show you the meaning of those Scriptures which
these men mistaking, the one attributes too much, the other too little to the
Will in Conversion, and so proceed. Where it is said, Now they have no cloak
for their sin; because Christ came, and spoke to them; by coming and speaking
is not only meant, barely enlightening them, but, as appears by the Context, he
by Miracles so convinced them, that resisting those Convictions, our Savior
says, They hated both him and his Father, Joh. 15.24. And as for the other Text
urged by Pelagius, If ye were blind, etc. it does not from thence follow, that
the Will enlightened needs no other assistance, but only thus, sins against
knowledge are not so easily forgiven as sins of ignorance, but deserve more
stripes. And as for those Texts, which are urged on the other hand where it is
said, We are dead in trespasses and sins, and Created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, etc. These speeches are merely Metaphorical, and figurative, which they
so squeeze till they bring blood and not milk out of the breasts of the
Scripture. They are Similitudes only, and they would have them run on four
feet, as if all things that agree to a dead man, did agree to a man in the
state of nature: whereas the one is capable of preventing grace, the other is
not; the one may be raised by means, the other can be raised only by miracles.
Neither sin, nor grace take away the natural power of the Will; but only thus
it is: Sin hurts and weakens it, especially ill habits, grace heals and
strengthens it, and brings it near to its primitive goodness. An old heart, and
a new heart differ only as an Instrument in tune, and the same Instrument out
of tune; there are the same strings still, but not the same ordering of them.
So the same Understanding, Will, and Affections a man had before only now
placed on God, and delighting in goodness, which before delighted in sin; which
they not minding, make a man merely as a Tool in the hand of a Workman, or a
Pen in the hand of a Writer, merely passive to any good action. A man before
any Grace be offered, has a Free Will to natural acts, and a remote one to
supernatural; that is, a power to embrace Grace, and work in the strength of
it, in case it be offered. The man which lay at the Pool of Bethesda had not
lost his Limbs, only the use of them. When Christ strengthened those palsy
members, he arose, took up his Bed, and went unto his house. Thus the weak Will
is strengthened by the grace of Christ, but being strengthened is able to do
what is good. God does persuade the Will, by extrinsical helps as well as
intrinsical inspirations. Those providential acts of Abigail meeting David, or
of Saul's sleeping in the Trench, when David took away his Spear from his
Bolster, were of grace not only to David, but also to Saul, and turned his
heart from pursuing David. Efficacious Grace to use their own term, is nothing
but persuasion, which does not determine the Will, but only is so congruously
and seasonably put, that it is not rejected of the Will. Extraordinary gifts
are wrought immediately by Gods holy Spirit without man's cooperation, Saul's
Prophesying was without his assent to it; if every act of grace were thus
given, what difference would there be between his manner of giving ordinary and
extraordinary gifts? The Spirit of God is said to help our infirmities in our
Prayers in stirring up ardency of devotion in us; the original word for Help is
a double compound, and is Metaphorically put; for it has relation to one that
helps to bear part of another burden for him, taking it off in part from his
shoulders, and putting it on his own; or else helping him to lift it up. Now he
that is helped in bearing or lifting a burden, does something sure himself
toward the bearing or lifting of it; And so did St. Paul cooperate with the
grace of God, for he says, I labored more than they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God with me. The Scripture calls us, Workers in Gods Vineyard, not
Tools and Instruments. Call the Laborers, and give them their hire. And again,
We shall all receive a reward according to our works, Mark 16.20. They went
forth and preached every where, the Lord working with them, 2 Cor. 6.1. We then
as workers together with him beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God
in vain; But in vain they would receive it, if they would not cooperate with
it. If St. Paul, whom St. Chrysostom calls the best child of grace, thought it
no disparagement to the grace of God, to say he was a worker together with God
toward their Conversion: how can it be a disparagement to the grace of God to
say, we together with God work out our own Salvation. It were in vain to
persuade us to do, what God alone solely and wholly does in us. Now how many
persuasions in Scripture do we meet withal, To make you a new heart, to put off
the old man, and to put on the new. These plainly prove a liberty of Will; and
that we must work out our own Salvation, or else safety it self will not save
us. How pathetically does God wish the Conversion of sinners, Jer. 13.27. O
Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean! when shall it once be? Oh that my
people would have hearkened unto me, for if Israel had walked in my ways, etc.
Who reading such Texts can imagine, that God did not expect men's cooperation?
or that the cause of their ruin was only because Grace was so slenderly
offered by God, that it proved ineffectual unto them, when God says, Jer. 51.9.
We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed, forsake her. The judgment
inflicted plainly shows, God was not wanting to her, but she was wanting to her
self. All Comminations and threatenings were in vain, if the Will did not, or
could not cooperate with the grace of God: How could men fall from grace if God
leave us not to the mutability of the Will? It would be in vain to exhort such
to do their first works, and threaten them if they did not, if they were merely
passive, in every act of saving grace; nay, certainly if God withdraw his
grace, it is merely because we walk unworthy of it, for to him that has shall
be given, and he shall have more abundance, but from him that has not, that
is, has not well improved it, shall be taken away, even that which he has.
Some men think they can never exalt the grace of God enough, unless they debase
the powers and light of Nature far more than Adam debased them by his Fall. But
the Law of Nature written in the heart is no less the Law of God, than those
Laws of God, which are written in the Scripture, else Murder and Adultery in
the Heathen should not be sins, for where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, Romans 2.14. The Gentiles which have not the Law, and do by nature
the things contained in the Law, shall judge the Circumcised which transgress
the Law; which place does plainly show unto us, that the light of Nature is
good, as being the Candle of the Lord, and that it is not wholly extinguished
in us, but only darkened by Adams Transgression. I come now to answer those
Arguments which are brought against this truth. And first, it is objected, that
Christ is said to fill all in all, Ephesians. 1. ult. My answer is, These words are
not to be so taken, as if we were to do nothing at all toward our own
Salvation: for they are spoken figuratively, where by a Synecdoche, the chief
part is put for the whole. As suppose a man should say, Toward a man's
maintenance Money is all in all; not but that Food and Raiment do maintain him
more immediately, but because these cannot usually be procured without Money,
that answering all things, the saying is usual, and none except against it.
Their second Argument is taken from verse 19. of that Chapter, where the
Apostle says, We believe according to the working of his mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead. Whence they infer, the
grace of Faith is wrought by an infinite power in the heart: but we can
contribute nothing to an infinite power, therefore, nothing toward our own
Faith. My answer is, St. Paul's Faith, and so of the Primitive Christians, was
not wrought only by means, as ours now adays is, but also by Miracles; The
Apostles preached, and the Lord confirmed the Word with signs following. Mark
16.20. which signs and wonders when the people saw, they believed; according to
the working of this mighty power. But our Faith now is not so wrought; but only
by hearing, without seeing such an Almighty power to confirm the Doctrine: yet
are we never the less blessed, but rather the more. Thomas because thou have
seen thou have believed, blessed are they which have not seen, and yet have
believed. Thirdly, it is objected, If the Will of man have power to assent, or
not assent to grace offered, man shall do more toward his own Conversion than
God, for the act is more perfect than a mere power to act. I answer, although
in a Metaphysical sense, the act is more perfect than a mere power to act, as
the end of a thing is preferred before the means tending to it, yet in a Moral
sense it is not always so: neither does man by accepting do more than God by
offering his grace. God gives us power to get Wealth; say we get it, are we
more beholden now to our selves therefore than to God for our riches? I trow
not. The case is the same in the point of grace, when we have accepted of his
goodness, we ought to say, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give
the praise. If a Benefactor give an indigent person a considerable sum of
money, and he accept it, is he more beholden to himself for his acceptance,
than to the Donor for his kindness? If so: then their Argument is of force, but
not else. Fourthly, it is objected, If the Will of man has power to assent to
grace offered, and he do assent; another has the same grace offered, and he
does not assent, all the difference must needs come from man's Will; and so he
that believes and assents makes himself to differ from him that assents not,
contrary to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. I confess this Argument has
stumbled many learned men; as if the Apostle had spoken these words, concerning
the act of Conversion, or of receiving sanctifying grace: but it is spoken only
concerning receiving Ministerial Offices in the Church. See the first verse
else, Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards
of the Mysteries of God. (...) he taxes, as St. Ambrose well observes, the
pride and arrogance of some Teachers, who did insinuate into the people that
Baptism from their hands was more effectual, or any other Ordinance from their
hands was better than from the hands of another Minister; and so the People
thought more highly of one than of another, and were puffed up for one Minister
against another, as appears at verse 6. whereupon at verse 7. he subjoyns, Who
makes thee to differ? At verse 8. he taxes them for boasting, even over
himself, Ye have reigned as Kings without us, etc. to whom he thus speaks, You,
O boasting Teachers, that do so magnify your selves above me, or suffer the
people to do so, what have you ye have not received by my Ministry? For I was
your first spiritual Father, and if you did receive it, why do ye so boast over
me, as if ye had not received it from me? Who sees not that the Context stands
wholly affected to this Interpretation? To tax the pride of the seduced Party
both Pastors and People amongst them? And therefore to urge these words, Who
made thee to differ? as if the Apostle meant them concerning the act of
Conversion is to wrest the Scripture to a sense, which will nothing comport
with the matter in hand, nor fall in with the subject of that Chapter. If a
Prisoner at the Bar should find fault with the Judge on the Bench, as acting
contrary to Gods Word, because it is written, Judge not, that ye be not judged;
and again, Why do thou judge thy brother? Ought not the Context to clear the
scruple? Yes surely. Even so it ought in this point; for he that will not mind
what goes before and what follows after a saying in Scripture, may easily
pervert the sense of the Holy Ghost. From what has been said I hope it is
apparent, that the Apostle does not tax any man of pride, in this place, that
shall accept of Gods grace, and say he made himself to differ from him that
refuses the like grace in all respects; as is contended for. If when Eve was
fallen Adam had stood in innocence, who had made the difference between their
two estates? Had not Adams Will? You will say he might have boasted then; I
answer nay; for he had but done what was his duty to do, for to this end God
gave him a righteous Will to stand. If said, God is not bound to give us such a
Will since the Fall. I grant he is bound to nothing but what his good pleasure
binds him to; but St. Peter does assure us he has given us all things which
appertain to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. and therefore must needs give us
the principal thing, without which no man is godly, namely Grace sufficient to
heal the Will. God makes the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall on the field of
the slothful man, which is overgrown with briars and thorns, as well as on the
diligent, which stands so thick with corn, that it laughs and sings: Is it any
boasting against God for the good husband to say, my industry was the cause why
God blessed me more than the sluggard? I trow not. No more is it arrogance to
say, I have not forsaken my God as the wicked does: and therefore he has not
forsaken me; for he has revealed himself after this manner, 1 Samuel 2.30. I
said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father should walk before me
for ever but now, says the Lord, be it far from me, for them that honor me I
will honor, etc. Thus ye see the Lord will be no longer for us than we are for
him: and therefore David thus cautioneth his Son Solomon, not to bear himself
high upon any privilege of being Abraham's Seed, or David's Son; but says thus
unto him, And thou Solomon my Son, fear thou the Lord God of thy Fathers, and
serve him with a willing mind, if thou seek him he will be found of thee, but
if thou forsake him he will cast thee off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If these
words of David have any force in them, either as an Exhortation, or
Commination, it must needs be granted that he thought Solomon had power, either
to cooperate with the grace of God offered, or to refuse it as he pleased.
Fifthly, it is objected, if grace put us only in the equipoize, and man upon
deliberation turn the Scale to Virtue and not to Vice, all the difference
between a virtuous and vicious man should come from Nature, and not from Grace.
To that I answer, If Nature alone could turn the Scale without being put
gold-weight by Grace, it were true, but seeing it could not raise the Scale to
this equipoize without the assistance of Grace, it is false. Secondly, Gods
Grace did cooperate with man's Will in turning the Scale, and had the chiefest
stroke in it. Thirdly, man's nature at first was endowed with a power from God
to do good, and if he had done so, instead of doing evil, it had not a whit
derogated from the glory of God: but it had rather been to his praise, although
his obedience had come from the strength of Nature: even so if God by
adventitious Grace cure the Moral impotency of Nature that it be able to refuse
the evil and choose the good, the praise of that obedience is chiefly due to
that auxiliary grace, without which it could have done but little good, but
being thus relieved, although this new Nature put forth the act of obedience,
for Nature is not destroyed by Grace, yet it nothing derogates from the Grace
of God, but rather shows forth Gods glory in the cure of such a corrupted
nature. But if it be said, seeing God is a most merciful Creator, had it not
been a more merciful act to have created man determined to happiness, from
which he could not have fallen, rather than to leave him thus in the equipoize
to the mutability, or determination of his own Will? My answer is, This had
been to have unmann'd him; to have brought him down to the level of inseriour
Creatures which cannot alter, or suspend their actions; but are by Nature
determined to one constant course. Now God has set us a sphere above them, in
giving us reason for a Moderatrix, without which no actions could be virtuous,
and consequently not capable of that reward which he has laid up in heaven for
us. The noblest way of being happy is to have it for being holy. As God is not
mocked, so neither is he a mocker of men, which their opinion under debate
would make him; to offer a blind man Money on condition he will look on it, and
tell you whose Image and Superscription it bears, is certainly to mock him: but
if a man should proceed so far as to rail upon him for refusing an Alms upon
such easy terms, instead of relieving his misery he might justly be thought to
intend only to add to his affliction. So if God offer Grace to those whose
Wills can concur to the reception of it only subjectively, but nothing
causally, and then not only chide them for refusing it, but also lay it to
their charge that it was not efficacious as it might have been, if they had
actively concurred and cooperated with it, he should not only be a mocker of
men, but also under color of kindness, make a way to his wrath and
indignation, which is far from the candor and nature of God, who is always
merciful and serious in his offers of Grace. If it be said he does not mock us,
but justly challenge from us that lost power which he once gave us, as a
Creditor may justly challenge from a Prodigal that money he has spent, and
has not now to pay. Some are of opinion, that it is not the Prodigals fault
now, that he does not pay, if he be willing to pay, and has it not; but his
fault was only this; that he brought himself into that condition. And so it is
not a fault, that he which cannot receive grace does not receive it, but a sad
consequence only of his former sin which brought this impotency upon him; for
which he ought to be pitied, not upbraided, if he desire to receive it. Others
answer, it befits the goodness of God in the New Covenant of Grace made with
mankind to allow sufficient strength of grace to perform the conditions of that
Covenant in such a measure as he for Christ's sake would accept. Or else 1. The
Covenant of Works would be more gracious than the Covenant of Grace; for under
that, mankind had strength allowed him. Adam did not fall for want of power to
stand. Or else 2. The New Covenant should leave a man in a worse condition than
it found him, for the abounding of grace would make his sin abound, being sure
to be always refused: But Christ is the Mediator of a better Covenant, every
way considered a more gracious than that of Works, and Gods primary intent in
giving it was, not to make sin, but to make grace abound. I only ask a
question, if Zeleucus put out both the eyes of an Adulterer for Adultery, and
then offer him his Book to read, and hang him because he cannot read; was the
offer of the Psalm of mercy a mercy to him, or a mockery? So if God first
justly blind our understanding, and harden our hearts as a punishment of our
sin in Adam, and then make us a tender of grace in Christ, but never open our
understandings to see it, nor soften our hearts so far, that if we will we may
embrace it, but all his offers are upon impossible terms to be accepted,
whether the case be not alike and Parallel? 6. Lastly, it is objected, that it
is God that works in us both to will, and to do of his good pleasure, Phil.
2.13. Where you see, say they, St. Paul attributes both the will and the deed
to the grace of God. I answer, the meaning of the Apostle is, that God gives us
a power to will, and still assists us with his grace till we bring that power
into Act, and so a man works out his own Salvation, and he ought to do it with
fear and trembling, that is, he ought with reverence and godly fear stand in
aw: lest when God inables him to work, he be wanting to himself, and to the
grace of God; lest he grieve and quench the Spirit, and cause him to depart.
But if a man concur only subjectively and passively to pious works, as they
would have it, then it must be said, or may truly be said at least, that God in
us believes, repents of sin, and does all other gracious Acts, which how absurd
and blasphomous it would be, I leave the world to judge. It is said, our
Savior marvelled at their unbelief; but if it be as they say, I marvel why he
should marvel; for he knew beforehand they could do nothing; and he was
resolved, not to do all things alone, to bring them to the Faith. But
certainly, he had good cause to marvel; that when he afforded them such a
measure of Grace as would have converted Tire and Sidon, and would have made
Niniveh repent in Sackcloath and ashes, they should be so wilful and obdurate
that it made no kindly impression upon them. If any thing had been wanting on
his part, to have brought them to the Faith, he would not have upbraided them
with their unbelief; or have shamed them by the very Heathen; nor have
denounced a more intolerable measure of damnation against them, if there had
not been offered them superabundant advantages of Grace. I conclude therefore
with the Father, Sola voluntas ardet in gehenna, which I will English thus:
Wilful men will want no woe.

Vulgar Errors CONCERNING REDEMPTION Removed.
SAint Paul, comparing the First and Second Adam together, shows us the hurt we
received by the disobedience of the First, and the benefits we receive by the
obedience of the Second. For Adam and Christ are to be considered as two roots,
as we proceed from the one, we are of the wild Olive; but as we are engraffed
into the other, we contrary to our natures partake of the good Olive. Now look
what loss Mankind did receive by the one, it was the good pleasure of our good
God, that the same benefit Mankind should recover by the other. When the
Apostle says many dead by Adam, he says many made alive by Christ. When men
condemned by Adam, he says all justified by Christ; now what he thus makes
equal, for men to disequalize to such a degree, as not one of many to be
redeemed, though all in Adam were lost, is not to make a much more on Christ's
side, but a much less. Contrary to the Apostle, who all along puts the
redundancy on Christ's part, that where sin abounded grace superabounded, that
as sin reigned unto death, so grace did reign unto eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Now sin did reign over all men without exception unto death,
therefore grace must have a proportionable reign unto life. Christ must fulfill
on his part, what appertained to the procuring the Salvation of all; or else
the Salve is not so broad as the Sore; which yet the Apostle has been proving
at large in the fifth Chapter to the Romans. Our Church, rightly grounding her
Faith upon the Scriptures, teaches most truly that Christ died for all men; in
her Catechism she teaches the Child to answer, I believe in God the Son, who
redeemed me, and all mankind; and in her Collect for Good Friday, prays for all
Jews, Turks, and Insidels, that God would bring them home to his Flock, that
there may be one Fold under one Shepherd. Suppose God to hear the Prayers of
his Church, and to bring these to the knowledge of Christ; I demand, Has
Christ any salvation in him for these men or no? If he has, sure I am he
purchased it with his blood, and so died for them. If not: our Church is
mistaken in praying such may be brought to Christ for salvation who has no
salvation in him for such, or ever laid down his life a ransom for them. But
certainly, he is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him. For
as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation: So by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men to justification of life.
If Christ did not redeem all, it was, either because he was not able, or
because he was not willing to do it: If you say he was not able, you blaspheme
the power and virtue of his death, for St. John tells us, If any man sin we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
Propitiation not only for ours, but for the sins of the whole world. If you
say, not willing, you blaspheme his goodness, who would have all men saved, and
is not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3.9. If any part of Mankind left
unredeemed, Christ must needs be willing that part of mankind should perish,
else he would have redeemed them, without which he saw they must perish.
Nothing could hinder but his Will, for he might have redeemed all at the same
rate, but he was not willing any should perish, therefore it roundly follows he
left none unredeemed. When we urge those Scriptures which assert universal
Redemption; their answers are so weak, that it would make a man pity the
strength of a wrong biased education that will not let them see that their
answers are mere frivolous evasions. When we urge that of the Apostle, 2 Pet.
2.1. Some deny the Lord that bought them; they answer, he bought them for
Slaves, and not for Children. Now I would fain know what slavish work Christ
has to do for his redeemed ones, whose service is perfect freedom? When we
urge that place, Heb. 2.9. That by the grace of God Christ should taste death
for every man. They answer, Voluntate signi, non beneplaciti, that is, he
signifies so, but he means not so. If he means not so when he says so, how
shall we then know at any time by his words what he means? When we urge, God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son into the world, that
whosoever believes in him might not perish. They answer, by the world is meant
only the Elect chosen out of the world. That by the world in Scripture is often
meant that Party of men in the world which is contrary to the Saints, many
places may be brought, as the whole world stands in wickedness; these are not
of the world, even as I am not of the world, etc. but that in this place God so
loved the world, by the world should be meant only the Elect I have not says
enough to believe, and I am still to seek for that place of Scripture, where
the Holy Ghost by the world means only the Elect. In a word, what Scriptures
soever we bring to prove that Christ paid a price for all mankind; they reply
to us, that Christ paid a price for all sufficiently, but not intentionally.
Now I appeal to the universal reason of all Mankind, whether if Titius and
Sempronius be in slavery, he that paid nothing for Titius can be said to pay
for him what was sufficient to bring him out of Captivity, because he paid more
for Sempronius ransom than would have bought it; and which Sum, if he had
designed it so, might have redeemed Titius also? That such weak answers as they
bring should satisfy any rational men, must be imputed merely to the strength
of prejudice, and prepossession. If Christ died for all, says St. Paul, then
were all dead, 2 Cor. 5.14. By all, say they, were meant only all the Elect:
Then, say I, by virtue of the Antithesis, only the Elect were dead; but in Adam
Elect and Reprobate are alike dead; therefore the Apostles meaning cannot be,
that Christ died only for the Elect, for all were dead, both Elect and
Non-elect, and he died for all that were dead. Christ in no wise took upon him
the nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham; to show that he came not to
redeem the lost Angels, but Mankind that was lost. Now if any of Mankind were
left out of this Redemption, Christ should tender their Salvation no more than
the Salvation of the Devil and his Angels: but he does not leave the most of
men in as hopeless and helpless a condition as he left the Devil and his
Angels, whose nature he never took upon him. It shall never be laid to the
charge of a wicked Angel that he did not believe in Christ, but it shall be
laid to the charge of a wicked man that he did not believe in Christ; which
plainly shows he did more to redeem a wicked man than a wicked Angel. It should
not be a sin in a wicked man to refuse Christ as his Savior: if he be not his
Savior unless he thought him so to be, and yet refused him; but it must
necessarily be always a sin to refuse Christ; whether a wicked refuser of him
think him a Savior or no; because in deed and truth he is the Redeemer of all
mankind. He came to seek and to save that which was lost, but all mankind was
lost, therefore he came to seek and to save all Mankind, Mar. 16.15. Christ
bids his Disciples preach the Gospel to every Creature; that is, offer life and
salvation to all: in case Christ should offer it to all when he has purchased
it but for a few, there would be matter of disparagement in it. For what makes
us despise Mountebanks (as one says well) but that they promise more than they
are able to perform. Therefore seeing he bids us preach the Gospel to every
Creature, the glad tidings of the Gospel belongs to every Creature; and we are
to exhort every man to believe in Christ, and promise him life and salvation if
he do: which thing we could not truly do, if he laid down his life but for a
few, and paid no ransom for the most of mankind. This Doctrine of our Church,
that Christ redeemed all mankind, has no malignant influence in it at all;
which makes me admire why men are so bitter against it. If it were not true,
yet methinks even for humanity sake we should wish it were true, and not to be
so narrow hearted as to desire salvation only for our selves. That must needs
be the best good which is most diffusive, and wherein most may partake. If
Moses was so affectionate to the Souls of a provoking poople as to pray after
this manner for them, O Lord forgive their sin, and if not blot me out of the
book which thou have written; as if his own happiness could not please him,
unless it might be accompanied with the happiness of his people: how can we
choose but be enlarged with love and gratitude unto God that he has reconciled
the world unto himself; and how cheerfully should we publish that glad tidings.
If St. Paul was so diffusive of his charity as to wish himself accursed from
Christ, on condition it might do his brethren good to salvation; why should we
be such envious and churlish Creatures as to shut up the bowels of Christ
against the greatest part of mankind, which he was pleased to open to every man
in the world that would receive him? If this Doctrine did shut them out of
Christ, or from being partakers of the benefits of his Death and Passion, well
might their zeal be kindled against it: but seeing that it debars no man from
their right; declares Gods abundant love, sets forth Christ's diffusive charity
to the whole race of Mankind; what just cause of so much heat and passion
against it? Wherefore if any come unto you bringing this Doctrine, that Christ
died only for one of a City, or two of a Tribe, (of which two he is always one
in his own opinion you may be sure) pity his ignorance, and bid him not
Godspeed. Pray unto God to open his eyes to see the wonderful things of his
Law, to take away the spirit of pride from him, which makes him put himself
amongst the number of them Christ died for, and shut out his Brethren. I come
now to answer those Arguments which they bring to establish this uncomfortable
Doctrine; that Christ died for all men, is a comfortable Doctrine to every man;
and every man upon hearing and believing of it can infer, then certainly he
died for me. But if he died but for a few, there is just cause of doubting for
every man, whether he be amongst the number of the few; and unless God give a
particular assurance it cannot certainly be known. The Arguments which are
brought against this truth are these: The first is taken out of John 17.9. I
pray for them, I pray not for the world; whence they argue thus: Those that
Christ would not pray for, surely he would not die for: but he prayed only for
the Elect, therefore he died only for the Elect. I answer, This was a peculiar
Prayer, which Christ made in behalf only of the Apostles, as will appear by the
Contents of the Chapter; read the Contents and you will see it is so. Christ
prays to the Father that he will glorify him, that is the Contents to the
sixth verse; to preserve his Apostles in unity and truth, that is the Contents
to the twentieth verse; and therefore to apply it as it is applied in the
Argument is to wrest the Scripture to a sense it never intended. These words, I
pray for them, I pray not for the world, etc. are meant only of the Disciples;
and not of all the Elect, in opposition to the wicked of the world, as may
appear by the Context, verse the sixth, I have manifested thy name unto the men
which thou gave me out of the world, ver. 12. Those which thou gave me I
have kept, and none of them is lost but the son of perdition. It is impossible
that the former words should signify all the Elect in opposition to the
wicked; for all the Elect had not yet heard of Christ; or that the latter onght
to be so taken, seeing he says one of them is lost, which it is impossible that
any of the Elect should be. Verse 18. As thou have sent me into the world, viz.
to preach the Gospel, so have I sent them into the world; This cannot be meant
of all the Elect, for are all Apostles? all Preachers of the Gospel? And
lastly, if at the ninth verse he prayed for all the Elect of the world, in
opposition to the wicked of the world, as is contended for: how comes he to say
at the twentieth verse, Neither pray I for these alone? Nay, the following
words show apparently that at the ninth verse he meant the Apostles only; for
he adds, But for them also that shall believe through their word. A second
Scripture is this, I am the good shepherd, a good shepherd lays down his life
for his sheep. Mark, say they, he does not say he lays down his life for the
Goats, but for the Sheep. I answer, That Christ laid down his life for the
Elect this place does prove indeed, but it does not prove that he laid down his
life for none but the Elect; surely it does, may some say, because none else
are mentioned. I grant none else mentioned in that place, but they are in other
places of Scripture; but if that were a good way of arguing, I will prove he
died for none but for the wicked, Romans 5.6. In due time Christ died for the
ungodly. I pray who resemble the ungodly most, Sheep or Goats? Certainly the
Goats; why, he died for the ungodly, therefore for Goats, and not for the
Sheep, according to their way of arguing. Thirdly they object, the Apostle in
Romans 5.15. says, The gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ has
abounded unto many: he does not say to all. I answer, Many in that place
signifies all, as will appear by the Antithesis, or opposition, By the offense
of one many, he says, are dead, many there is the same with all, for it were
absurd to say; some as coming out of Adams Loins are not dead; and if it
signify all in one place, it must do so too in the other; or the Antithesis
would be defective, and you would spoil the Grammar of the place. If in any
other place, many signify not all, but part only, as it may where it is said,
My righteous servant shall justify many, it is not because he did not die for
them, but because they would not believe in him; He came to his own, but his
own received him not; but as many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the Sons of God. Fourthly, it is objected, Christ fore-knew they would
not be saved by him: now what wise man will pay a price for a Captive, when he
knows beforehand the Captive will not accept of it, or will come out of
slavery; but will be bored because he loves his Master? To that I answer, My
thoughts are not your thoughts, nor my ways your ways, says the Lord. They may
as well question Gods wisdom, why he would be at such pains to send his
Prophets of old rising up early and sending them, to those he knew beforehand
would not hear them, Ezekiel. 3.4, God told Ezekiel beforehand they would not
hear, yet says God, they shall know that a Prophet has been amongst them. So
God will one day make the wicked know that he sent his Son to redeem them, both
from wrath, and their vain Conversation; and they judged themselves unworthy of
everlasting life. God in his wisdom saw it good to send light into the world,
even to the wicked of the world, although he foresaw they would love darkness
more than light, because their deeds were evil. And so have I done with their
Arguments, grounded merely upon mistakes. To conclude, By the Parable of the
King making a great Supper, and inviting Guests that would not come, it appears
God provides all things requisite to save men, but they will not be saved. So
the year of Jubilee was a true Type of our deliverance by Christ, whosoever was
in bondage might then go out free; wherefore I conclude, as sure as we are lost
by the first Adam, so sure we are redeemed by the second Adam. So sure as we
are created by God the Father, so sure we are redeemed by God the Son; and
Whoever will believe in him shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life.

Vulgar Errors CONCERNING Praying by the SPIRIT Removed.
THere has nothing of late years been more mistaken, than those Scriptures
which speak of praying by the Spirit, or the Spirit helping our Infirmities,
and God's pouring out the Spirit of Prayer and Supplications upon his People.
Which places have been wrested against a set Form of Prayer, as if it were
nothing but cold breathings, and Lip labor, (to use their own words) and a man
in praying such a Prayer could not be assisted by the Spirit of God. Their
first mistake lies in this, that they do not distinguish between the gift of
Prayer, and the Spirit of Prayer. Many men have a very good gift of Prayer, and
a very fluent Tongue, who yet may be very formal as to their hearts: not every
one that has the best gift of Eloquence prays most by the Spirit, nor he that
has the meanest gift of Elocution prays least with the Spirit. We may instance
in Moses and Aaron: the one of a stammering tongue, the other God gives him
this testimony that he could speak well. Yet in the famous fight between Israel
and Ameleck, God makes not choice of Eloquent Aaron, but of slowspoken Moses to
get the victory by Prayer. Though Aaron speak better than Moses, yet certainly
he could not pray better than he. Prayer is a great part of Gods Service and
Worship; and our blessed Savior tells us, God is a Spirit, and must be
worshipped in Spirit. Yet when the Apostles desired him to teach them to pray,
he did not teach them to pray by the Spirit in their sense: who think speaking
extempore without premeditation whatever comes into their mind on a sudden is
the only praying by the Spirit: but he prescribes them a set Form, saying, When
ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. So that a set Form certainly
may be prayed by the Spirit, else it had never been commanded to be used, by
our Savior Christ. If it be said, the Lords Prayer is a pattern to frame our
Prayers by, rather than a Prayer it self. My answer is, As some Weights and
Measures, which are so exact in their kind, being kept as Standards to make
other Weights and Measures by, do not lose the nature of Weights and Measures
upon that account, but rather are warranted in their kind. So the Lords Prayer
by being made a pattern for our Prayers does not lose the nature of a Prayer,
but rather is thereby commended to us to be the most absolute Form of Prayer in
the world. In Numb. 6.23. God bids Moses speak unto Aaron and his Sons, saying
on this wise, ye shall bless the people, the Lord bless thee, and keep thee,
the Lord make his face shine favorably upon thee, etc. If any able of
themselves to conceive a Prayer; we may well suppose it should be the Priest
whose Lips should preserve knowledge, yet they are prescribed a set Form of
blessing the People. If it had been prescribed for the simple and ignorant sort
it might have been objected, They that have not gifts of their own are
permitted to make use of other men's gifts; but seeing it is prescribed the
Priest himself, nay, even for Aaron the Eloquent High Priest, it strongly
concludes for a set Form of Prayer and Benediction to be used in public by the
most able and eloquent Divine. Moses a great Prophet, who prayed so earnestly
that God said, Let me alone, as if he tied Gods hands, yet did he use one set
Form of Prayer when the Ark set forward, and when it rested, Numb. 10.35. When
it set forward, he said, Arise, O God, let thine enemies be scattered, let them
also that hate thee flee before thee; and when it rested he said constantly,
Return O Lord to the many thousands of Israel. Let us not seek to seem better
than he, in new Forms every day, whose gifts without question were unspeakably
greater than ours. The 92. Psalm was usually sung in the Church of the Jews
every Sabbath day; it was penned for that purpose as appears by the Title of
it. Seeing therefore a set Form of Prayer and Praise have been the practice of
the ancient Church of God, among the Jews, and of Christian Churches to this
very day, let us give them the right hand of fellowship, to have a Unity and
Uniformity in Public Worship. Our blessed Savior, of whom it was said truly,
never man spoke as he spoke, yet he uses three times together the same words,
in his Agony. Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. He wanted no
variety of words, yet he confines himself to the same words the Prophet Joel
prescribes the Prayer for the Priest, and bids them say, Spare thy people good
Lord, etc. St. Paul, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, used the same Salutation
in the beginning of most of his Epistles, Grace, mercy, and peace from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ; and the same Prayer at the end of them; The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the
Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. These examples plainly refute the error of
those that are against the Liturgy, or set Form of Prayer in the Church, it is
a ridiculous thing to think, that as a nice and squeamish stomach is delighted
with change of Dishes, so God is delighted with variety of words, and novelty
of matter and method, and that unless we have a new style, or a new trope, or a
new figure, or a new flourish every time more than other, we have not the
Spirit of Prayer, nor shall be excepted. Every good Christian is not able to
conceive a Prayer, many have weak Capacities to conceive them, want Order and
Method to compose them, yet even these, if they meet with a Prayer framed to
their hand, can pray fervently, and heartily. A set Form must needs be a great
help to those that are weak, and yet willing to pray; nay, even they that are
strong ought not to despise them, for Prayers in public are bounded by
authority. To pass over those bounds then, must needs be offensive to that
Authority that prescribed those bounds. If any do, they foment, as it were, a
Worship distinct, and apart from what is authorized by the Church, but more
reason that the spirit of a Minister should be regulated by the spirit of the
Church representative, than the spirits of the whole Congregation by the spirit
of the Minister. If he that was sick of the Palsy that was born of four could
have walked to Christ on his own feet, what could he have more desired than to
be healed? So if we come with our own invention or expression in Prayer, we can
expect nothing more than to be heard, which God the searcher of the heart will
as soon do when we draw nigh to him with words of the Churches composing, as if
they were of our own framing, if the Heart be not wanting. Yea, but methinks I
hear some say, the Heart must needs be wanting, for praying is one thing, and
reading is another. I grant they are two several things, but yet they are
compatible, and may well stand together. When we read the Lords Prayer in the
sixth Chapter of St. Matthew, and our intention is only to inform our selves of
the Will of God set down in his Word, we acknowledge we do not pray; but when
we read the Lords Prayer in the Liturgy, and we lift up our hearts to God in
every of the Petitions, then we affirm that we do pray. So then, when we read,
and our intention is only to receive knowledge into the soul, we do not pray in
reading; but when in reading we also pour out the requests of our hearts, then
such reading may truly be called praying. Secondly, it is objected, reading set
Prayers out of a Book is a stinting of the Spirit, but we ought not to stint or
quench the Spirit, therefore we ought not to read Prayers out of a Book. I
answer, 1. If he that prays a set Form stints the Spirit, then he that prays an
extempore Prayer out of the Pulpit stints the spirits of all those that join
with him, for they that hear him and join with him, are limited by his words,
and his sense, and so it is as bad as a set Form to them; for if their minds go
along with him, they pray the same Prayer that he does, and neither more nor
less. Now why should the People be tied to the Prayers of the Minister, and not
the Minister to the Prayers of the Church? If it be sinful in one to stint the
Spirit, it is sinful also in the other, and so no public Prayer, where many
join together, could be offered up to God without sin in this respect, because
the Spirit must be bound up and stinted in all but in him that speaks it. But
if the meaning of the Objection be, that extempore Prayers stint not the
Spirit, because then a man speaks as the Spirit gives utterance, which cannot
be in set Forms, then this absurdity would follow. If to those men which pray
extempore the Spirit of God does dictate those words unto them, then those
Prayers would be as good Canonical Scripture, if written by the Pen of a ready
Writer, as any of the Psalms of David, or Asaph, or any of the holy men of old
recorded in Scripture; which because it would be blasphemy to affirm it roundly
follows, such Prayers are not spoken as the Spirit gives utterance, but are the
effects of their own Art and Industry; and therefore the turning of that
practice into a set Form, does not stint, nor quench the Spirit of God in
Prayer. That those sudden Conceptions are not dictated by the Spirit of God
appears plainly by this, men of diverse opinions pray quite contrary things; as
for instance, a Presbyterian Minister takes a Text, sounding as he thinks
toward the establishing of Presbytery, such as that in 1 Pet. 5.1. The Elders
that are among you I exhort, who also am an Elder. From whence he delivers the
Presbyterian Government is the Government Christ established in the Church.
After his Sermon, he prays over again the chief Heads of what he delivered, and
says, Good Lord settle those truths which to day thou have shown us concerning
Church Government, upon our hearts. An Independent he comes and he takes a
Text, which he wrests likewise, but it is to Independency, and he bids them
stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, and be not
entangled with the yoke of bondage; from which words he delivers for Doctrine
that Independency is the only way that Christ has left for his Church. And
after Sermon he prays likewise, that the People may not receive his Doctrine as
the word of a man, but as the Will and Word of God. Call ye this praying by the
Spirit? To say so is in deed and truth a blaspheming of the Spirit; for the
Spirit of God cannot speak contradictions, as these men do in their Pulpit
Conceptions; And yet they would father all upon the incomes of the Spirit,
which assisted them in carrying on the work of the day. Their Sermons being
contradictory one to the other, and their Prayers suitable to their Sermons,
their Prayers must needs include contradictions also. One prays God to
establish Presbytery, the other Independency in the Church; now how can both
these be dictated by one and the same Spirit? To pray with the Spirit signifies
in Scripture three things, 1. To pray by immediate inspiration, so as to make
no use of our own judgment, or reason, either in devising the matter, or
choosing the words: but to speak only what the Spirit does suggest. Thus those
that penned the Scriptures were inspired, and spoke not their own private mind
or meaning, but as they were carried forth out of themselves, and moved by the
Holy Ghost. And so St. Paul is to be understood when he says, I will pray with
the Spirit, and with the understanding also; that is, I will use any language
which the Spirit shall dictate unto me, but I will interpret it, that the
People may understand it, and say Amen unto it, for while the Apostles lived
there was in the Church an extraordinary gift of Prayer, which supplied the
place of set Forms, but it was as miraculous as the gift of Tongues. When this
gift and the gift of Miracles ceased, they used stated Forms in Public, and
the Council of Carthage ordered that no other Prayers should be put up in their
Assemblies but what were approved of by wise and prudent men in the Synod; lest
something through ignorance or inadvertency might be uttered contrary to the
Faith and Doctrine of Christ. Secondly, By praying with the Spirit is meant to
pray by the direction of Gods holy Spirit, Jude 20. But ye beloved, building up
your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost. The Spirit
helps in directing us what is fit for us to ask of God, and what God sees fit
to bestow upon man: And this direction is given us in his holy Word, where we
are taught what to pray for, so as not to ask amiss, else we should not know
what to pray for as we ought, Romans 8.26. He that prescribes the model of an
house, and provides materirials, and sets men on work, may be truly said to
build that house, although it be builded by other men's hands; So the Holy Ghost
prescribing us Forms in the Word, and inciting us to pray by promise of reward,
and the like, may be entitled to our Prayers. Thirdly, He assisting us with
inward motions, carrying forth our affections with zeal and fervency, further
than naturally they would tend: may in this sense be styled the Author of our
Prayers. As wicked men, giving place to the Devil, Satan carries forth their
malice into murder, and raises storms of passions in their Souls, even as the
Wind raises the Waves of the Sea, even so on the contrary, a man applying his
heart to seek the Lord, and call upon his Name, the Holy Ghost aids him by his
grace to make powerful Supplications with sighs and groans which cannot be
uttered. Now every adopted child of God the Apostle witnesses, Gal. 4.6. has
these aids and assistances of the Holy Ghost in their Prayers, stirring up
their hearts to cry Abba Father, thus, and thus only they that are the Sons of
God pray by the Spirit of God. Now seeing the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication
consists chiefly in a fervent application of the mind, to the thing that is
desired, and to Almighty God of whom it is desired. It necessarily follows,
that words that are known and fitted to men's understandings are soonest
received into their hearts, and aptest to carry along with them judicious and
fervent affections. But it is objected, That a set Form of Prayer makes an
ignorant Ministry, a Schoolboy may read a Prayer out of a Book. To that I
answer, experience proves it has not done so: for the gravest and learnedest
Scholars are for it. There are other Offices for the Minister which require his
diligence and his study; First, his diligence to Catechize the Children, visit
the Sick. Secondly, His study to divice the Word of truth aright, comfort the
weak, stop the mouths of gainsayers, so that he has matter enough to exercise
his parts about, although he strive not to attain to that extempore way of
uttering any thing before God, which wise Solomon never admired. And as for
what you say concerning the Schoolboy, the same objection might have been
brought against Gods Priests in the Old Law: that a Burcher might have killed a
Lamb or a Sheep for Sacrifice as well as they: But was that any disparagement
to the Priest? No more is this to Gods Minister that another can read Prayers
as well as he, seeing it is his Office and not theirs to do it. But it is
objected, A set Form is superfluous, for Nature will teach any man to show his
grief, and a Lazer need not read out of a Book, pray heal my Arm, or my Log, no
more needs a man that is sensible of the plague of his own heart a set Form of
Prayer in a Book. To that my answer is twofold; First, Even poor lazer people
to move others to pity and compassion will study pathetical Expressions, and
use humble deportment, and great importunity, and yet find all little enough to
move compassion. Will they do this for their Bodies, and shall not we be more
earnest for our Souls? Secondly, There is a vast difference betwixt a Private
Prayer and a Public Prayer; a Private Prayer points to the sore of a man's own
heart in this or that particular, whereof perhaps, all circumstances
considered, not one of many is guilty: but a Public Prayer ought to be so
composed that it may concern all the Congregation, and all the People may say
Amen to it. Now for a man to pray out of the sense of his own wants only, may
be a good Prayer for his private devotion: but it cannot be so proper or so
profitable for the Public as a set Form, wherein the Composers consider the
usual wants of all Mankind. If a man were to prefer a Petition to his Prince,
would he speak extempore? Why, what thou would not offer to him, thou
ought not to offer to God, Mal. 1.8. the reason is full of moral equity, God
is a greater King than he. If you would be ashamed or afraid to bring
indigested stuff to the one, much more should you be so affected to bring
abortive Conceptions before the other. We may as well pray a set Prayer by the
Spirit as sing a set Psalm by the Spirit. Now even their own practice bearing
witness these men can sing a set Psalm by the Spirit. I mean after a gracious
manner; so that nothing but inadvertency to their own custom makes them grant
the one, and deny the other. Indeed they do well in singing David's Psalms, and
they follow the example of Hezekiah therein, who commanded to sing praises with
the words of David and Asaph. I could wish for the future that their Prayers
were of the same nature with their Praises, for these few Reasons, with which I
will conclude this discourse. First, A man may as well know beforehand with
what words to pray as to what sense. Secondly, They that pray not the same
words do use mostly to pray for the same things in other words: As that God
would forgive their sins, avert his judgments, strengthen their weak graces,
weaken their strong corruptions, and the like. Thirdly, Because these are most
for the edification of the People, who by often hearing of the same Prayer can
commit it to memory, and used to the same Liturgy, can join and answer in many
pathetical Responsals. Now all things in Public ought to be done to
Edification. Fourthly, An extempore Prayer may likewise hinder the devotion of
the Minister, as well as of the People: for his understanding may be so taken
up in thinking what to say next, that he may be very formal as to his heart,
and many times will be forced to be so for fear he should be out. Fifthly, Our
experience has showed us, that their Method has been confused, their
Tautologies many, their Traulisms absurd, their Sense none of the best, their
Passions vented, and the Dreadful Name of God so lightly, so frequently, and so
unnecessarily used in them, that many understanding men because of them, have
been ready to abhor the Sacrifice of the Lord, and could seldom or never say
Amen to them. Whereas in a set Form we are sure beforehand there is nothing
put up in Petition but what is fit for Man to ask, or God to give, and
therefore we can heartily without any hesitancy say Amen to it.

FINIS.

