Francis Cardinal Ximenes great Minister of State in Spain. Cross sculpsit


THE HISTORY OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF CARDINAL XIMENES, Great Minister of State
IN SPAIN.

Written Originally in FRENCH, BY The Sieur Michael Baudier of Languedoc,
Councellor and Historiographer to His Most Christian Majesty; and Translated
into English, by W. Vaughan.

LONDON, Printed for John Wilkins at the Sign of the Maidenhead in New
Cheap Side in Moor-fields. 1671.

To the Honorable Sr. Henry Herbert Knight, Master of the REVELLS.
SIR,
TRUE Gratitude abhors the prostitute forms of Verbal thanks, as a Virtuous
Lady the dress of a Curtezan; And since men practice the Art to make false
Glosses on the Text of their thoughts, to personate Gratitude, and render these
words mere Colors of ordinary Civility and Complements to fill up the vacuity
of discourse; which in the first use, were faithful interpreters of the
affections they represented: since false tongues are as modeable as false
Locks, and Grateful language (like excellent fruit grafted on a Crabstock)
usurped by those who take not any impression from the favors their speech
pretends engraven in their hearts, which remain unaltered from their innate
ingratitude, as the Crab-root retains his sour nature, though his boughs are
adorned with Golden Apples. Since men have learnt to give thanks by Rote, as
Parrots do Goodmorrows; To reduce the expression of Gratitude to lip-labor, is
to offer Sacrifice on a polluted Altar; to profane that which is holy, and to
pay a debt in brass money, which may have the stamp, but not the value of
current Coin. Large professions of thankfulness having by general abuse
degenerated into pure impostures and vizzards of hypocrisy, or (at best) empty
sounds, which naturally infer the hollowness of the Vessel they proceed from.

My obligations to you are many and great; Justice returns quid pro quo,
something equivolent to what is received; but Gratitude obliges reddere cum
foenore; a Duty I am so far from being Capable to satisfy, that I confess my
self Bankrupt by your favors: and for laying out kindnesses where they were
not deserved, nor can be requited, you might have repented your self of ill
husbandry, equal to his, who sowed Wheat on the sands; But that bounty to an
undeserving person, resembles so nearly that Archetype of Goodness, whereby
Providence obliges the Universe without its merit; that my want of desert, and
disability of retribution, will entitle your beneficence the more Divine; and
be Arguments of your Prudence, in doing good for Ends whereof you cannot be
disappointed: that is, like Solomon's Good Man, of being satisfied from your
self; a design not to be frustrated: and carries in it the Comfort of being
Conformable to his Precept, who Commands to give without hope to receive again.
-- Licet exemplis, in parvis, Grandibus uti. It was the saying of a great man
Roan Iesuis, Roy Ie ne puis, Prince Ie desdayne: To apply it to the present
purpose. Your Favors, Sir, I am heartily thankful for; actually to requite
them is beyond my power; And (though I do not scorn verbal acknowledgements,
yet, I ever thought words (which are but wind) as unfit representatives of the
deep Characters of Grateful thoughts, as ordinary Table-Books, or Chartae
deletiles, to hold matters of record. And conceived it proper to transcribe the
impressions my heart has taken from your favors, into Monuments that may
remain to perpetuity; and not only proclaim to the present Age, but transmit to
posterity a public testimony of your Goodness in my Gratitude. And though
herein I do no more than the insolvent person, who by the writing he owns
himself a debtor, publishes only his obligation and disability to pay: Yet the
freeness of those favors whereby you have engaged me, makes me confident of
your acceptance of this address, as my declaration in Print of the duties I owe
you; and particularly my obligations for the opportunities had for this
Translation of the Life of Ximenes: wherein if any Crudity appears, you will
wink at it as a thing incident to the first fruits of men's Labors. This being
such, and humbly presented to you, by him who is heartily as actually,

Your Servant, Walt. Vaughan.

TO THE READER.
THIS Book contains Virtue in Effigy drawn to the life, beyond the Artifice of
Picture or Sculpture; for (what Appelles and Lysippus could not shadow) the
life of Ximenes presents conspicuous as the light, the progress and Ascent of
virtue, from the obscurity of a private condition, to the illustrious Dignity
of a Governor of Kingdoms: And in one piece has expressed its infancy, growth
and maturity. It Is exposed to view in a Friars Frock, and the Pomp of a
Cardinal; in the solitary retirements of an Ermitage, and attended with legions
of armed men: Praying in a Cloister, and Judging on a Throne; Begging Alms, but
withal bestowing Provinces, and relieving Princes in distress: Dead to the
world, to live in it with Content; and buried in a Monastery, to obtain a
glorious resurrection into the Theater of Action, and the prime dignities of
Church and State. Fortune the Mistress of other men's virtues, waited on Ximenes,
as a Page Errant through the desert solitudes of Covents and Cloisters, into
the glorious splendor of Palaces and Sovereign Courts: like a wanton Lover,
she pursued him who fled from her, and Courted him, who slighted her. His merit
had preference to the prerogative of Royal Birth, when Queen Isabell unasked,
promoted him to the Archiepiscopal Chair of Toledo, which the Charms of
Conjugal affection, assisted with the powerful influence of Majesty in the
intercessions of Ferdinand her King and Husband, labored in vain to persuade
her to grant to Don Alonzo his Son, then Suitor for that Great dignity of prime
Prelate and first Grandee of Spain, who mist his mark, though he was born a
Prince, and had a King for his Advocate to plead in his behalf: the success
justified the wisdom of Queen Isabels choice. For the virtue of Ximenes, was
proof against the Charms of Romish Greatness: and continued humble and pious in
pontificalibus; not Fortunes slave, but Mistress: gained vast revenews, to
appear prodigiously liberal; and Sovereign Honors to Grace his Magnificence;
filled his soul with zeal for Conversion of Infidels, and his Heart with
Courage to conquer Oran. Managed the Generals Staff, and swayed the Scepter
with the same dexterity he handled the Breviary: the Head of an Army in a
Cardinals Cap, and Governor of Spain in the Purple of the Church; a Courtier
and Patriot in one person; the darling of his Prince, for fidelity and zeal to
promote the interest of the Crown; the favorite of the people, for easing
their grievances, procuring immunities, erecting and endowing Colleges,
Hospitals and Granaries; wherein he expended the vast profits of his Benefices,
like the Ocean returning the Tribute of the lesser Waters, he receives in
showers of beneficence on those who paid it. When he retired from the
Presidents Chair in the Council Royal, he went to Assist at Conferences of
Divinity, to demonstrate the Consistence of Piety (to Canonize him a Saint)
with Policy, which gained him the title of Great Minister of Spain. And that
the distractions of Government, could not disorder the harmony of his soul into
an incapacity to perform exercises of Devotion, when tossed with the Tempests of
a turbulent State.

He was humble in his personal carriage and private concerns, but haughty in
his Conduct, and heroically magnanimous in his public capacity. His Gratitude
to his Benefactors was Generous and exemplary; but usque ad Aras, confined
within the limits of Justice, from which he was inflexible, though tempted by
the highest obligations, which occasioned his contest with his Good Master
Ferdinand, and the Pope; when the former denied him what in Justice was due;
and the other would have usurped a power to unlock at pleasure the Treasuries
of the Church of Spain, with the Keys of St. Peter. But blind obedience was
not an Article of the Cardinals Creed, who reverenced the Pope as Pastor of the
flock; but would not admit him Lord of the heritage. He slighted mean exercises
of Virtue, as born only for arduous attempts: annulled Contracts made by the
High Treasurer Don Manuel in deceit of the King, and tore in pieces the
fraudulent Lease drawn by Collusion with the Farmers of Granada. Made Judges
examples of his Justice, and feel the severity of the Laws they had corruptly
abused, to color their sale of the right of the poor to the purse of the rich.
Reformed the Exchequer and Counsel Royal, as well as the Retinue of the Court:
laid prostrate three of the greatest Grandees of Spain, who had vilified his
Person, and contemned his Authority: forced the Council Royal to pay him the
respects they had neglected: obliged Prince Ferdinand Brother to Charles the
fifth then King of Spain, to obey the Orders he threatened to break: reduced the
Rebel Cities of Spain to obedience by Arms, and Mutineers by the sole Majesty
of his looks, and the silent Authority of his Great Conduct; opened (as
General) a passage to the Catholic King; and (as Archbishop and Cardinal) to
the Catholic Faith into Africa. Was a president of Piety, to Friars; of
Charity, Magnificence and Zeal, to Prelates: of Courage and Conduct to
Commanders of Armies: of Royal Justice, Prudence and Magnanimity to Princes:
and shines a Constellation of public and private, Moral and Politic, Civil
and Theological Virtues, that moved successively in the several Orbs of
Religious, Military and Politic Government: was a glorious Luminary in each,
and made it appear, that neither Religion, Military Discipline, nor Civil
Government, but a transcendent Eminency in every of them, was his proper Sphere.

These are the Lineaments of that virtue, the following Story presents in
lively colors; and renders as lovely, as that in Plato's fancy, whose Idea of
virtue was more amiable than Venus. But Plato's Idea's were held Paradox in
former days, and Platonic Love is a Chimaera in ours. Sense is the Ascendant
of the Age, the sole in let of modern affection and Knowledge; and Virtue so
great a stranger, that she will scarce be known by her Effigies: her Natural
form will be a Disguise when she appears amongst them, who adore the Pourtrait
of a Mistress, but scorn Idolatry to the image of Virtue, and prefer the
Pictures of Aretine, before the Tables of Cebes. Yet to please the Reader,
whose wit lies in his fingers ends; who knows no pleasure, but what is
palpable, and will rather deny the being, than admit the Love of invisible
things; Cujus Migravit ab aure voluptas omnis ad incertes oculos and Gaudia
vana. The Book invites him not to a dull Entertainment of dry precepts of
Morality; but a fine show of the Virtue of Ximenes, a new and strange sight
come from Spain, seen in France, newly shifted into an English habit, and more
worthy admiration than Pusionelle and the Butterfly. A Proteus in the several
shapes of Lawyer, Friar, Archbishop, Cardinal, General, Minister of State, and
Governor of Spain; retaining a Divinity in all forms. If you slight it as
virtue, it may deserve your sight as a Monster: a strange form whereof, you
cannot discover the least resemblance in your self. And though virtue be a
contemptible thing in your Judgment, the dress and Pomp it appears in, may
satisfy your fancy: as you visit the Theaters for the Scenes, not the Plays;
the Painters Pencill, not the Pen of the Poets. But these are reflections on a
French vanity and lightness of Spirit which the English Reader may think
himself unconcerned in. For Ximenes appears among us, in confidence the sole
Greatness of his virtues, will effectually recommend him to a kind
entertainment, from the Gravity of the English; who though they have excluded
Cardinals from their Country, retain respect for Cardinal Virtues. The Book
(like the pack of Ulysses, made up of toys for Women, and Arms for a Hero,)
though checkered with a pleasing variety of accidents to tickle the fancy of
the lightest wits, consists chiefly of Generous Examples of solid virtue, to
kindle emulation in the bravest Spirits: and doubts not of a Candid reception,
the Genius of the English (though the humor of the times may countenance the
contrary assertion) being really more inclined to imitate the heroic actions
and sound Discourses, than the trifling vanities and fantastic Capricchio's of
foreigners: as Achilles in Petty-coats, was better at handling a sword, than a
Distaff; and though dressed like a Lady, thought the Spear and the Target, fitter
for him, than Ear-knots and Patches.

ERRATA.
Page 14. l. 10. Dele too: p. 20. l. 30. r. Master: p. 34. l. 30. r. nocturnal:
p. 35. l. 5. r. San: p. 42. l. ult. r. Cady, or: p. 54 l. 11. r. for Defraying:
p. 58. l. 26, 27. r. formidable by: p. 62. l. 11. r. Calumniate: p. 73. l. 15.
r. thanked them: p. 74. l. 21. r. Rights: p. 80. l. 31. r. Purple: p. 93. l.
30. r. to: p. 95. l. 7. r. Velasco: p. 104. l. 11. r. Stranger: p. 106. l. 4.
r. Rid: p. 114. l. 26. r. Triumvirat: p. 128. l. 25. r. Di^^o his: p. 132. l.
8. r. Attaque: p. 148. l. 28. r. I Will. Besides mis-pointings and other less
material Faults, which the Reader may easily discover, and is desired to
Correct.

THE Contents.
CHAP. I. THE Birth and Education of Ximenes. His Journey to Rome. He is Robbed
by the way. His return to Spain, and Imprisonment by Order of the Archbishop of
Toledo. His Enlargement and Retirement into the Diocese of Siguenza. He is made
Vicar General thereof, and Administrator-General to the Earl of Cifuentes, and
takes on him the Order of St. Francis, page 1. CHAP. II. Ximenes interrupted in
his Devotions by Crowds of Visitants, retires into the Monastery of Castanet;
is made Warden of the Convent of Salceda; and in 1492. Confessor to Isabel
Queen of Spain. He is chosen Provincial of his Order for three years; leaves
the Court, and visits the Religious Houses under his Charge: His Design for
passing into Africa, to propagate the Faith there, diverted by Rouys, his
Companion: He travels on foot, and Beggs. page 7. CHAP. III. Upon the Death of
Cardinal Mendoza, King Ferdinand endeavors the promotion of his Natural Son,
the Archbishop of Saragosa, to the Chair of Toledo: But Queen Isabel prefers
Ximenes to the Dignity. He withdraws from Court, to avoid the Investiture; but
upon the Popes Mandate Returns and Accepts it. His Declaration not to admit of
any Pension to be charged on the Revenue of the Archbishopric. He continues
the plainness of a Religious life: Mends with his own hands the Frock of his
Order, with other Evidences of Humility: is complained of to the Pope, who
commands him to live more splendidly: Ximenes obeyes; is envied by the Monks of
his order: Their Generals extravagant address to the Queen. His Brother
Bernardin endeavors to stifle him in his Bed, and leaves him for dead. Ximenes
recovers, and persuades the King, to ease his people of a heavy Tax called
Alcabala, and erects a College at Arcala. page 9. CHAP. IV. The Zeal of
Ximenes for propagating the Faith. He Converts three thousand Moors in one
day: The Manner of their Baptism. The new Converts present him with five
thousand Volumes of the Alcoran, and Glosses thereon; he burns most of them.
The Revolt of Granada charged on Ximenes by his Enemies: the miscarriage of the
Courrier he employed. The King expresses great Displeasure against Ximenes; but
he retrives all, and obtains thanks from the King. page 17 CHAP. V. Ximenes
falls sick, and is Cured by a Morisco Woman. Bestows four thousand Crowns on
seven Hebrew Copies of the Bible. His great Care and Charge, for a Correct
Impression of the Scriptures. He obtains great Immunities for his College of
Arcala, and pardons a Malefactor led to execution: He builds another College.
page 21 CHAP. VI. The Death of Queen Isabel. Ximenes Executor of her last Will
and Testament. The extraordinary Honors done him by the King. The Dexterity of
his Conduct, in preserving Castille under the obedience of his Master
Ferdinand. The Arrival of Philip, Ferdinand's Son-in-Law, in Spain. The
Enterview of Ferdinand and Philip. Ximenes's Advice to Philip. He attends them
in their Conference; and shuts out Don Manuel Philip's Favorite. Ferdinand's
Speech to Philip: His Commendation of Ximenes. His haughty Conduct, in the
Affairs of the Farm of the Revenews of the Silks of Granada. Philip's Death.
Ximenes, the Constable of Castille, and Duke of Najar, undertakes the
Government in Ferdinand's absence. Upon Ferdinand's Letter, Ximenes resolves to
Govern alone: Is Chosen sole Guardian of the State. The Distracted Vagaries of
Queen Joan. The Troubles in Medina and Granada appeased by Ximenes. Ferdinand's
Return. Ximenes made Cardinal, and Inquisitor-General of Castile: The Honor
done his College of Arcala, by Francis the first of France; and Charles the
Fifth, Emperor of Germany, page 24 CHAP. VI. The Cardinal's Design to invade
Africa, proposed to Ferdinand, who excuses the enterprise for want of money.
The Cardinal furnishes money. Mersalcaber is taken by Surrender. The punishment
of a Spanish Soldier, for breach of the Articles. Diego Ferdinando is made
Governor of Mersalcaber, and Deiasio his Lieutenant: his extraordinary value,
page 37. CHAP. VII. Ximenes resolves to pass in person into Africa in the head
of an Army: The raillery of the Court thereupon. The Earl D' Olivarez by advice
of the Great Captain, made Lieutenant General. The Officers of the Army retard
and obstruct the Expedition. The Cardinal complains to the King; and if the
Army should disband, desires leave to retire into his Diocese. The King gives
new Orders, for the Army to attend the Cardinal. They mutiny: the Cardinal
employes Villaroel to advise Virnelli from his rigor against the Mutineers.
Viaanell's proud Answer: Villaroel wounds him. The Campmaster Salazars device
to appease the Mutineers. The Army lands: They engage the Moors and after a
stout resistance, prevail* Oran is taken: the Cardinal enters Oran in triumph;
Divides the spoil amongst the Officers and Soldiers: founds and endows an
Hospital. De Veras neglect in carrying the King News. The Earl of Olivarez
insolent carriage against the Cardinal; his submission. The Cardinal's return
into Spain, and the occasion. Captain Arias's exemplary familiarity with death,
page 44. CHAP. VIII. The Cardinal demands payment of the moneys he advanced for
the War; the Grandees and Officers strong opposition, and Arguments against
payment. The Cardinal's Defense. He prevails* Lewys William made Bishop of Oran
by the Pope, is opposed by the Cardinal; who makes fair offers of
Accommodation; which are refused by William in hopes of Sentence against the
Cardinal: his designs frustrated, and he slighted. The Cardinal prefers his
friend Rouys to the Bishopric of Avilas. The Cardinal's advice to his friend
before the promotion. He disposes of his Nephew in Marriage. His advice
hereupon. His Niece is married to a Nephew of the Duke D' Infantado. The
Cardinal breaks the Marriage. The reason. The Cardinal's respect to the Great
Captain. Extraordinary Honor done the Cardinal by Ferdinand. The Cardidinal's
Generous offer, to assist Pope Julius the Second. page 62. CHAP. IX. A Peace
with Africa. New Honors done the Cardinal. A War with France. The Cardinal's
Advice for the management. His Discovery of the secret League between France
and Navarr. The Cardinal's Liberality, in order to the King's health. He builds
several public Granaries, and a Magnificent Church and Monastery. His famous
Aqueduct, which cost a Million of Gold. The Pope demands Contribution from
Spain toward building of St. Peter's in Rome: The King consents, but the
Cardinal opposes and hinders it. King Ferdinand's sickness and frowardness. He
alters his Testament made at Burgos; and why: Rejects the proposal of Ximenes
for Governor of the Kingdom after his decease: the reason. He declares Ximenes
Governor, and dies. The Cardinal enters on the Government: his excellent
Conduct. page 72. CHAP. X. The Dean of Lovain by Patent from Charles King of
Spain, claims the Government. The Cardinal opposes him. Reduces Porto Carrero,
and his rebellious Forces in Portugal to obedience. Charles declares the
Cardinal Governor: is opposed in the new Title he assumed of King of Spain,
till address to the Cardinal: who in spite of the Grandees Opposition, caused
Charles to be proclaimed King of Spain in Madrid and Toledo. Peter Giroim takes
up Arms, but defeated by the Cardinal. The Duke D' Infantadoes extravagant
Speeches and Manifests against the Cardinal: his submission. The Cardinal's
Forces. The Grandees stir up the people to Rebellion. Valladolid, Leon,
Burgos, etc. revolt: Complaints to Charles against the Cardinal; but frustrated
by his prudence. page 81. CHAP. XI. The Cardinal's settlement of the Maritine
affairs of the Kingdom. He relieves the Islanders against the tyranny of the
Spaniards. His advice to Charles thereupon rejected, but to the damage of the
Crown. He stops the French: and reduces Navarr to an entire obedience to Spain.
Malaga in Arms, but reduced by the Cardinal's Forces. Velasio High Treasurer of
Spain seizes Arevale and fortifies it; but upon the Cardinal's Summons, opens
the Gates, and is pardoned, page 91 CHAP. XII. The exemplary Justice of the
Cardinal, in punishing Corrupt Judges and their Officers. He regulates the
Exchequer, and Orders of Knighthood: reforms the Council Royal, and the retinue
of the Court. His taking away the Pensions of Peter Martyr, and Gonsales D'
Oviedo, censured. He annulls a Gift of three Millions, made by Ferdinand to
three Grandees. The King of Tunis expelled his Dominion, is royally entertained
by the Cardinal, page 97. CHAP. XIII. The Cardinal by Edict commands all the
Genoese to depart Spain within 15 days: the reason of the Edict. Charles
accepts of the Genoese submission by their Ambassadors, and revokes the Edict.
The Cardinal refuses to publish the Revocation, till further satisfied. His
Advice to Charles in the affairs of Italy. The Jews offer Charles eight hundred
thousand Crowns for Liberty to Judaize or turn Christians at their pleasure:
the Council of Flanders advises Charles to accept the offer: the Cardinal
disswades him: His prudent Disposal of the Government of Provinces. He promotes
Dean Adrian, and others. His Constancy: page 106. CHAP. XIV. The Grandees
procure Laxaus to be sent Joint-Commissioner for the Government with the
Cardinal and Dean Adrian. The Cardinal slights him. He tears the Patents signed
by Adrian and Laxaus in the more Honorable place: and signs new Patents to the
same effect alone, and executes them. The Great Chancellor Savage sent into
Spain: His Corrupt proceedings: The Cardinals Generous and Discreet Complaint
against him. An Ordinance past at Rome, to levy the Tenths of the Clergy of
Spain: They are in discontent. The Cardinal defends and pacifies them. page
114. CHAP. XV. The Duke D' Infantado's Contempt of Justice: The Cardinal
threatens him: The Dukes extravagant Message to the Cardinal: He repents, and
is reconciled: the manner of it. The Cardinal's severity against Peter Gironne
for not obeying the Decree of the Court of Valladolid: The Grandees procure a
prohibition from Charles to stay the Cardinal's proceedings: The Cardinal and
Council inform Charles of the truth of the fact: have liberty to proceed. The
Judgment of the Court is executed: Giron submits. The Duke D' Alva fortifies
Casabrona against the Cardinal: the Cardinal besieges it: the resolution of the
besieged: the Duke submits and surrenders: the Cardinal's great affection for
the Monastery of Castanet: his inclination to Religious solitude. Charles
embarkes for Spain: the Cardinal advances to meet him: is poisoned: Advises the
remove of two principal Domestiques of Prince Ferdinands: his haughty Conduct
in their remove, though threatened by Ferdinand: his resolute Answer to
Ferdinands Threats: and the Grandees demand of his Commission. His Advice to
Charles upon his arrival in Spain. Charles by an Express thanks the Cardinal:
the Council of Spain advance to meet Charles without the Cardinal's Leave, and
were commanded to return: the Cardinal's Harbingers mark a Lodging for him: the
Marshalls of the Kings Lodgings mark the same for the Queen: the Cardinal
carries it: Charles his Letter of Dismission to the Cardinal: the Cardinal's
pious Death: his Epitaph and Character. page 122.
TO HIS EMINENCE THE Cardinal Duke OF RICHLIEU.
My Lord,
AMONG the gifts of Nature God has not imparted to Man a more admirable, than
that of Reason; which is that to the soul, that the soul is to the body. And
amongst those of Fortune, he has not given him a greater, than the Crosses of
life; which render his virtues Eminent and Conspicuous, in procuring him Palms
of Victory, and Crowns of immortal Glory. The Present I make your Eminence, of
the crosses and oppositions Cardinal Ximenes encountered and surmounted, in the
Government of a Kingdom, I dare affirm, the greatest and most considerable, the
Treasures of past Ages can afford. But I fear, my Lord, I may appear as
ridiculous in offering it, as he that carries water to the Sea. Since the
Esteem and Repute you have this day, of the prime Person of our Age, is no less
grounded upon your incomparable Constancy, in ore coming all obstacles that
oppose your virtue; then your admirable Conduct in Affairs of State. The
Painter certainly commits no Crime, who figuring out the Battles of other men,
delineates the Combats of some Great Captain, which were not designed the
subject of his Pencill. And if my Pen innocently mention any Action, that may
correspond, and run parallel with yours; I conceive it merits neither blame,
nor contempt on that account. For, my Lord, what Minister of State is there,
who has not resembled others in some Traverses of Fortune, and cross
occurrences in his Administration, it being impossible to govern men, without
opposition from men? The Platonic Philosophers held it an undoubted truth,
That the World is a Temple built by God, who has impressed his visible Image
in the body of the Sun, to act in his stead. What the Sun is in the Universe,
that a Minister of State is in the Government under his care; the great
Representative of the Sovereign Authority. The Sun is the Eye of the World; and
the Minister of State, in the Persian phrase, the Eye of the King. Yet this
glorious Luminary has its Eclipses, and aspiring mists and Clouds interposing
between us and him, to the obscuring of his Light. The Ancient Fiction of the
Suns rising out of the Sea, and setting there, without diminution of his
Luster; presents to us in him, the lively Picture of a Minister of State in the
Government of the world; and intimates those troublesome and disastrous
occurrences, that frequently infests the beginning and end of his
Administration; but cannot impair the Rays of his Glory. Cardinal Ximenes who
by his good Conduct, rendered Spain happy; had notwithstanding a whole Order of
Religion to decry his Politic Actions. And besides them, the Grandees, the
People, Cities and entire Provinces, banded against him; and at last all that
was powerful and considerable, in the Court and Country he had so worthily
served, abandoned and forsook him. But he who had a breast prepared, amidst the
Courtly smiles of prosperous fortunes, to resist the Storms and Tempests of
Adversity, has left us a grand Example and famous Instance, to confirm the
truth of that Assertion, which holds Constancy one of the principal qualities
requisite in a Minister of State; that a stout Resistance against the ills that
encounter him, is the Buckler that secures his virtues; And to turn his back to
the Assaults of Fortune, an Act misbecoming and altogether unworthy that Man,
who has the Conduct of others. Behold him (...) (having surmounted all
obstacles (...) in his way, to stop or disturb the ^^urse of his virtue)
arrived in France; where he may see practiced the Rules of excellent
Government; and hopes to acquire a second Glory, if, my Lord, you permit and
allow his name to live with yours. The Age wherein he Governed Spain, and that
which your Actions have filled with wonder and astonishment, immediately
succeed one the other; and may dispute with the Ages past and to come, the
honor and esteem, of being the happiest of Ages, as having produced two men,
who have been the Oracles of good Conduct, and Politic administration.

If you grant him this favor, my Lord, I hope for my part, that in recompense
of my Studies, and in consideration of my Joint Travel with him, in this
Commentary of his Administration, I may with your consent, obtain and carry the
Title I desire, of

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Baudier.

THE PREFACE.
IT is a Custom received in all Ages, and approved by the practice of the
whole world, to expose to public view the Effigies and Statues of men who have
surpassed others by the greatness of their Virtues, lived the Glory of their
times, and rendered themselves Recommendable to the imitation of Posterity. To
these figures of their Corporal Lineaments and Resemblances of the external
forms of their persons, some have added Tables and Memorials, as Monuments of
their Heroic and Magnamimous Actions in presiding over Councills, and public
Assemblies, appeasing popular Seditions, and restoring quiet and tranquillity to
a disordered City, Country, or State, or the like. I have proposed to my
imitation, this latter way of representing illustrious Personages, and here
present to the public, the pourtraict of the greatest Minister of his time,
that Europe could then boast in all the States she contains: I have drawn him
Active in War, a Counselor in Peace; extending the borders of Spain beyond the
Seas; advertising his Master of the disorders of the Court; and giving him his
Counsels and sage Advice. I have described him appeasing the Tumults and
factious disorders of Cities, of Provinces, of a whole Realm; advancing Virtue,
rewarding Merit, punishing Vice, and establishing a general felicity in the
whole body politic. The work is composed with that Candor, that Liberty, and
Truth, (which ought to Animate, and are the principal Ornament of History) that
the end and design of it, will easily appear to have been not the pleasing of
any particular person, but the profit of the public, and the good of the
Commonwealth. Which I have observed in that of the Administration of the
Cardinal D' Amboyse, already published; and some others that may follow this,
wherein my only design is truth, which always tends to the public good. But
the Actions of this great Minister, being far above those of other men, who
have managed the Affais of Monarchs, I thought it my Duty to consider some of
them apart, and to make particular reflections thereon, for the delight of
those that shall take the pains to read them.

The Crosses he met with in the Government of Spain, were almost infinite; and
the power of the Enemies that attacqued him, very remarkable; but his
constancy, in the resistance admirable. As a courageous Pilot forsakes not the
helm in tempestuous weather, but perishes gloriously with his hand upon it: so
has he left us this instruction, that a Minister should never endure disorders
tending to the vilifying and contempt of the Supreme Authority, (which his
represents) or to the oppression of Justice; but choose rather to lie buried in
the Ruins of the one and the other.

His Actions in the Armies when seventy years old, demonstrate that men who
wear a Robe, as well as those who wear a Sword, have their Vigor and Activity
to encounter Enemies, perils and difficulties. And though their condition
exempt them from corporal labors, yet they remain subject to those of the
mind; whose cares are more weighty, and pains more considerable and important.
All that fight have their share in the Victory, but the General who conquers by
his good conduct and prudence, merits all the glory. Therefore the Spartans for
a Victory gained by force of Arms, sacrificed only a Bird; but a whole Ox fell
Victim for a Victory obtained by the prudence of their General.

Cardinal Ximenes in attacquing Oran in the face of the Sun, contrary to the
design of his Captains, who would have expected the advantage of the night, to
carry on the Assault; seems to have revived the Generosity of Alexander, who
refused to set upon Darius by night, as scorning to steal a Victory; but
desiring the Sun might testify he owed it to his valor. Moreover his good
Conduct in all the War of Africa, where his Age and Quality forbad him the
bearing of Arms, justifies the opinion of the Great Roman Captain, J. Caesar.
That Conquest by Counsel, is not less honorable, than that by the Sword.

It Is a great instance of the excellency of his Conduct, that he brought
Learning and Military Valor, to esteem and reputation in Spain; that the State
received thereby the means, not only to defend, but render it self illustrious.
Nor was he ever subject to the reproach of extinguishing the sparks of Virtue
in the breasts of youth, by depriving Gallant Actions of their due Recompense
of just Rewards; but exercising with courage and integrity, both commutative
and distributive Justice, dispensing Rewards to the good, and inflicting
punishment on the bad; He raised his condition to that pitch of highest
perfection; which induced the Sage Politician to affirm, Plato.
that nothing in the World is so like God, as a just man.

The Government of Provinces, and principal Charges of State, were not given to
those who were most in favor, but to those who had most merit. It Is true, he
preferred Persons of Quality, but such as were also men of Fortune and Estate;
least their necessities might incline them to peel and oppress the people: Nor
had he less regard to their integrity. And in preferring Gentlemen of integrity
and worth, before other persons of equal virtues; he seems to have imitated
the order of the Heavens, which are guided by intelligences, whose Nature is
more excellent and pure, than those forms which derive their Grosser Essence
from the Elements. And as by the Ordinances of Nature, we do not only receive
Light immediately from the Sun the fountain of it, but from the lesser Stars,
whose bodies nature has disposed and adapted to a Capacity of receiving Light
from the Sun, and reverberating the same to us by Reflection: So the Governors
of Provinces, and places of importance should keep up and maintain the Splendour
of Majesty in the absence of their Prince; as the Stars by night (which is the
absence of the Sun) show us part of the brightness of that glorious Luminary.
And, besides that the people honor and reverence men of eminent quality, and
are more propense and ready to yield them obedience, than to men raised from a
Mean Condition; Gentlemen together with their blood, derive from their Parents
the seeds of Generosity; and have commonly the advantage of better Education,
and the memory of the Illustrious Acts of their Ancestors, is ordinarily a
spurr to virtue, a strong motive and powerful incitement to good Actions. But
Cardinal Ximenes, though where he found equal virtue in two persons of
unequal birth, he did, (as Reason would) prefer the Noble; yet was he far from
abandoning or slighting virtue, from which Nobility is derived, and by which it
is maintained.

The Gifts and Largesses he bestowed out of his proper stock on particular
persons and the public, are worthy remarque: His advancement of an infinite
number of persons of integrity and merit to the Offices of Magistrature, the
Dignities of the Chureh, and Charges of War, preserve to this day in Spain, the
memory of the Grandeur of his Spirit, and will remain an everlasting monument
of Glory and Benediction to his name. The Hospitals built at his Charge in
Spain, and endowed by him with Revenues; the Religious Houses remaining there
for durable works of his piety and bounty; the public Granaries stored with
Corn for relif of the poor, filled out of the Rents settled by him to that
purpose; the Seminaries and public Nurseries of virtue for the Commonwealth,
where he provided for the education of youth of both Sexes, left destitute of
necessaries in that behalf declare and will record to perpetuity, that the
Grandeur of Ximenes consisted not so much in his Eminent and Great Employments,
as in his transcendent Liberality and extraordinary bounty.

The Temples of the Graces in the Cities of the Levant, were by the Ancients
built in public places, as in their Markets, or near their Cirques and
Amphitheaters, to signify that the Benefits and good Actions of great men,
ought to be not only open to private persons, but communicated to the public.
A Minister of State is a public person constituted in the most eminent Dignity
of a Kingdom, next the Royal: And if it be true, that a good King is the Father
of his people; the Minister of State who is his Assistant, ought to be a
faithful Steward to dispense his favors, and afford ready helps to the wants
and necessities of the public. When Cinon the Athenian was grown Rich, he
caused the fences and enclosures of his Gardens to be laid open, that the poor
might have free ingress to gather the fruits; he kept an open house and table
for all that were in want; and sent his servants loaded with Garments through
the Streets of Athens, to be distributed amongst them that were in want;
holding himself unworthy to possess a great Estate, without imparting of it to
others. In like manner, had Cardinal Ximenes, when seized of that great
Benefice, (whereby was vested in him the largest Revenue of that Kingdom,)
filled his Coffers with Treasure, and locked up there the Gold destined for
other uses, he had condemned himself as guilty of embezling and converting to
his private benefit, what ought to have been laid out in the Redemption of
Slaves, enlargement of Prisoners, Cures of the sick, comfort of the afflicted,
and sustenance of the poor. But he made liberal destribution thereof suitable
to the necessities of the several objects of his Bounty. Certainly some good
Kings are public Springs, whence the people have right to draw; that is, to
have recourse to their Beneficence; and good Ministers of State ought to be the
pipes to those Royal Fountain, to convey to the people the water of Relief.

The greatness of his virtues, could not so exempt Ximines from Envy, but that
in his life time it attacqued both his Name and his Conduct, though his death
put a period to detraction, and procured Reverence to his name, honor to his
memory, and Elogies for his Government. And it is observable, men never behold
the Sun so earnestly, as when he is Ecclipsed. Innocence, of all places of the
world, makes least Residence at Court, where Ambition always wars against
eminent virtues. This concludes it necessary for a Minister of State, to
fortify himself with Constancy and Resolution, to resist their malignity, who
would call him to account; and charge him as answerable for all the sinister
Accidents that fall out: as if the Events of Affairs, depended only on him.
Cardinal Ximenes had this virtue in the superlative; always like himself,
always aquanimous, always firm, stout and resolute, in the beginning,
progress and end of his administration, that he might have said of himself,
what the Roman Camillus once of himself in another sense; That neither the
Dictatorship had elevated, nor Exile abated the height of his Spirit. That
neither the Archbishopric of Toledo, the Primacy of Spain, the Cardinals Cap,
nor the Authority of Governor of a Kingdom, had given him courage, nor the
crosses and misfortunes of Court taken it from him.

These great and heroic virtues have rendered him the complete original and
Architype of a perfect Minister of State: which I propose to their view, who
Govern the world under the Authority of Sovereign Princes; that they may
imitate his Zeal for the public good, his fidelity to his Prince, his
affection to persons of worth and wel-deserving, his strong inclinations and
vigorous actions for the good of the people, and increasing the Glory and
Grandeur of the State; being the ends and principal marks aimed at in all
Governments, managed with wisdom, and crowned with Success.

THE HISTORY OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF Cardinal Ximenes, Prime Minister of STATE
IN SPAIN.
KINGS, who are Masters of the Goods of this world, advantage men in their
fortunes, and improvement of their estates; but it is the Sun, that King of
Stars, and first of all second Causes, that enriches them with the Gifts of
Nature; so that those Regions which are blessed with the more favorable aspect
of this Eye of Heaven, produce things of greater excellency than other
Countries, and give birth to men of more eminent parts, and endowed with the
rarest qualities in Natures gift. Spain, by the happy advantage of her
situation, lies so full and open in the Eye of that great Luminary, that, as
enamoured of her beauty, he vouchsafes her the light of his countenance, and by
the large measure of his irradiation, afforded her, contributes to her
production of eminent persons. In her was born Francis, Cardinal Ximenes, of
the Noble Family of the Cisneres, who deduce their original from the Suburbs of
Villaizar, in the Diocese of Toledo. His Father was Alphonso, Receiver of the
Tenths of the Clergy granted by the Pope to the King of Spain; who, taken with
the beauty of a young Maid of an honest family and the same place, married her,
and had by her several Children, whereof Ximenes was the eldest. At the Font he
received, with the Graces of Heaven, the name of his Father Alphonso, which he
after changed, in the Cloister, into that of Francis. In his Infancy, he had
his Education in the Town of Areula D' Henares, where he learnt the principles
of the Latin Tongue, and of good manners: from thence he was removed to
Salamanca, to study those Laws which regulate the Estates and possessions of
men: where, by the advantage of his pregnant Wit, he became so great a
Proficient, that in a short time he was capable to instruct others.

His Family was reduced to so low an Ebb of Fortune, that his Father was put to
his shifts to furnish him with necessaries requisite for his study; and could
not well spare him sufficient to bear his charges. This obliged Ximenes to
bestir himself, as having no means of livelihood, but what he could get by his
wit and industry: therefore he read the Laws in his Chamber to several
Students, who contributed to defray his Charges. But his Genius aspired higher;
and the honest gains he made in his Chamber, he employed in the study of
Divinity. And having finished the course of that Study, returned to his
Country, where his Father practiced as an Attorney in the Court of Justice of
that place. Some Months he spent at home, but finding no employment there,
worthy his Abilities, he obtained his Fathers leave, to go to Rome to seek a
better fortune; But was unfortunately robbed by the way, and reduced to extreme
necessity. This disaster occasioned his stay at Aix in Provence, till Brunet, a
young Gentleman of Spain bound for Rome, (who had been his School-fellow at
Salamanca) passing that way, happily relieved him by taking him into his
company, and bearing his Charges to Rome. Being arrived at Rome, he became
Advocate for such of his Country, as had Suits depending in the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; till the news of his Fathers death; and his good nature carried
him back into Spain, to succor his Mother now a Widow, and afford his helping
hand to the Orphan state of his younger Brothers. But before his departure from
Rome, he obtained from the Pope (those they call) Spectative Bulls; whereby he
was provided of the first Prebend should be void in his Native Country; which
happened to be that of the Archpriest of the Borough of Vceda. The Revenue of
it was mean, but the convenience of having it at his door, invited him to take
possession. The granting of such Bulls, gives great offense to the Bishops of
Spain, as retrenching their power in collating Benefices. Alphonso Carilla,
Archbishop of Toledo, bestowed the same Prebend on his Almoner. Ximenes opposes
it; the Archbishop resents the resistance, as a high contempt, and presumptuous
obstruction of his Authority; resolves to suppress it by force, and claps up
Ximenes in the Tower of Vceda, where he kept him close Prisoner under hard and
rigorous usage, in a place which Ximenes after his promotion to the
Archbishopric of Toledo, made the Repository of his Riches; teaching us, that
great Souls make the Disgraces of the world a Treasury of Virtue. The miserable
entertainment and rude usage of this place afflicted his Spirit to so extreme a
degree, that it clearly appeared; There is nothing in the world more
insupportable, than trouble and slavery to men of Letters, whose Genius
requires Liberty and Repose. The loss of both drew sighs and groans from the
heart, and loud complaints from the tongue of Ximenes, which an old Priest his
fellow prisoner, and companion in misery, endeavoring to allay, bespake him
thus: A wise man, Ximenes, is always free; and virtue which believes no other
slavery but that of vice, loses not her Liberty in Chains and Irons. Cease then
to complain, and put an end to your Lamentations; endure with patience the lot
befallen you: Suffering is often the way to preferment. In the very place you
are in, was heretofore locked up John Zerervella, Brother to that Great
Constable of Castile Alvarez de Luna, with no other advantage than that of
closer imprisonment and heavier irons than yours; yet he was afterward
Archbishop of Toledo. Great miseries usher in those persons into great
prosperities, who by patience triumph over their calamities. Zerervella in the
course of his felicities, drew the comfort of his life from the memory of his
imprisonment. The innocence of your visage and majesty of your countenance,
are, in my judgment, presages of the like fortune to you.

He was removed from the Tower to St. Jorquats, a Prison for Priests lying
under Accusations of crime. His innocence was so apparent and conspicuous, that
his deteinure there, was so long only, as might serve for the execise of his
virtue. The Countess of Bondiano, Sister to the Archbishop, obtained his
liberty. Ximenes, fearing a second loss of it, resolves to enjoy it at distance
from the violences of a Prelate, who so ill understood the virtues and merits
of men. And therefore quitting the Diocese of Toledo, he retires into that of
Siguenza, where he changed his Prebend for a Chappelleny with a small pension.

Here that noble Affection of the best Spirits and most excellent temper, the
love of Learning, made him withdraw from the conversation of the world, to
follow his Studies; where he learnt the Hebrew and Chaldee Languages. But
though his life was retired, his reputation increased. The rays of virtue
discover the owner at distance, though he seem to lie hid in obscurity. Peter
Gonsalve, Cardinal Mendoza, Bishop of Siguenza named Ximenes his Vicar General,
and in a manner forced him to take the Office, and with it, the care of his
Diocese: the same time Alphonso De Sylva Earl of Cifuentes, taken prisoner by
the Moors in the Wars of Granada, was induced, by the repute of his honesty and
abilities, to constitute Ximenes Administrator General of all his Demeans,
during his imprisonment. Thus Fortune began to follow him, when he fled from
her, and sought an employment more agreeable to the tranquillity of his spirit,
than was to be found in the troubles of secular affairs. He held the world a
Sea, where some are wrecked, but all without exception are tossed with winds,
and subject to the agitation of the waves: the object of his desires and end of
his designs, being a Port to secure him from the one and the other; he made
choice of a Cloister, as most suitable to his purpose; and took on him the
Order of St. Francis, in order to the enjoyment of God and himself in prayer
and contemplation.

Here he changed the name of Alphonso into that of Francis, and resigned his
Benefices to Bernardin his youngest Brother; lest necessity that obstructs the
virtues of the bravest spirits, and often proves an ill Counselor to them,
should engage him in ill courses for gaining a livelihood.

CAP. II.
WHen Ximenes had thus quitted the World for a Cloister, the world went in
search of him into the Cloister; the gravity of his manners, and holiness of
his life, invited those of best quality in Toledo to visit him, for receiving
his directions for guidance of their souls in the way to Heaven. Even the
Ladies resorted to him for instructions to order their devotion; some with
Resolution to practice them, others to satisfy their Curiosity, in seeing a
man to famed for sanctity. The crowds of people that flocked daily to him,
interrupting him in the performance of his Religious Exercises, and wearying
him by importunity, obliged him to quit Toledo, and seck out a more retired
solitude in the Monastery of Castanet; so called, from a Grove of
Chestnut-trees which in a large circumference encompassed it round, the
Monastery being the Center. A year was scarce elapsed, but he was drawn out
thence, to take on him the charge of Warden of the Covent of Salceda, where he
kept the Friars within the Rules of their Order, more by the example of his
good life, than the commands of a Superior. But it is the Privilege of Courts
to enter into Cloisters, and take thence such men, whom Fortune has designed
to partake of their Grandieurs. Isabel Queen of Spain calls him to Court in
the year 1492. and by the advice of Cardinal Mendoza, Archbishop of Toledo,
makes him her Confessor. In this eminent place, he gave proofs of great
virtues, without any exception, but that of intermedling with Matters of State,
wherein he exceeded his Call, and strained beyond his Charge and his Frock.

This perhaps, gave those of his Order occasion to draw him back from Court to
a Religious employment, by choosing him their Provincial for three years. And
here he gave a most pregnant proof of the indifferency of his spirit for the
affairs of Court, and of the great love he bore his Order, by going from Court
more willingly, than he had come into it, and employing his time in visiting
the Religious Houses under his charge. Coming to Gibraltar, moved with a
charitable zeal for the salvation of the Infidels, he designed a Voyage into
Africa, at the peril of his life to instruct the Moors there in the Christian
faith: but a Friar of his Order, and in great esteem for Piety, dissuaded him;
assuring him, God had prepared him a great employment in Spain. He traveled on
foot, and begged, but was such a bungler at the Trade, and begged so
untowardly, that he seldom carried any but an empty bagg; which made Franeis
Rouys his companion tell him, he must give over begging; for that no man was
more certainly born to give to all, and beg of none, than he. And had not the
care of Rouys stood him in more stead than his begging Alms, he had made more
Fast-dayes, than the Rules of his Order required. So unfit to beg are Great
Spirits, being naturally disposed to Give, not to Ask.

CAP. III.
FOrtune, which had designed him for the prime Prelate of Spain, took care soon
after, to furnish his strong inclinations for the Good of mankind; with means
competent to express his Good nature in acts of benificence, answerable to the
Greatness of his Soul. Cardinal Mendoza, Archbishop of Toledo, labored under
two maladies, the one incurable, the other dangerous, Age and a Feavour; which
induced him to go to Guadalfayre, to take the benefit of that Air, he drew at
his birth. Ferdinand and Isabel, King and Queen of Spain, went thither to visit
him; This honor had saved the Cardinals life, if death had regarded the
presence of Kings, who are themselves his Homagers. Mendoza now drawing near to
his end, gave his Master these three sage Counsels. 1. To make peace with the
King of France, and keep it inviolable when made. 2. To marry the Infant John,
Designed Successor of their Crowns to Joan, since the wise of Alphonso King of
Portugal, pretendant to the Kingdom of Castile. 3. To conferr the
Archbishopric of Toledo, on a person of mean Condition, but of great
integrity, and extraordinary Capacity: That these qualities were apparently
eminent in the person of Ximenes; That the Grandees of Spain, proud enough of
the Titles they are born to, become intolerably insolent, by the addition of
those of great Dignities.

These Princes slighted the first Advice, to the prejudice and notorious damage
of Christendom, which smarted for their contempt of it, as the Spanish
histories ingenuously Confess. The third they embraced, which Coming to the
Knowledge of Ximenes, he remonstrates to them, that the Dignity of the
Archbishopric of Toledo being the prime of the State, as well spiritual as
temporal; which gave the person invested in it, the privilege of speaking next
the King, in the Council-Royal; ought to be given to the most illustrious, and
Ancient Gentry of the Kingdom.

Cardinal Mendoza quitted his life, and the Archbishopric together, in the
year 1496. Ferdinand would have preferred his natural son Don Alphonso,
Archbishop of Saragosa, to this great Benefice: But Isabel, who had right of
Presentation to it, as Queen of Castile, preferred the virtue of Ximenes,
before the birth of Don Alphonso, and the entreaties of the King her husband:
The year ensuing, they presented Ximenes to succeed in this Grand Prelature, no
less in dignity than Revenue; which amounts to two hundred thousand Ducats a
year. Ximenes forced by express Mandat from the Pope, accepts it: At his first
nomination he left the Court, and fled on foot to a Covent of his Order a great
way from Madrid, to avoid investiture in the Archbishopric: But returning in
obedience to the Pope, he declared to Ferdinand and Isabel, that he would never
consent that this Rich Benefice should be charged with one farthing pension, as
prejudicial to the dignity and liberty, of the prime pastor of Spain.

Now has he just cause to meddle in Affairs of the State, as being one of the
most considerable members thereof: This sudden change of fortune, shook not his
Constancy, nor altered his settled Resolutions of adhering to virtue; Yet was he
as free from mean, and base Actions, as from the Corruptions that usually
attend great fortunes; he made it appear that no dignity could be so great, as
to exceed his capacity, no Grandeur in the gift of fortune, to which his soul
was not commensurate; though in his plenty of Fortune, and Eminence of place,
he continued the plainness of a Religious life: Piety has brought plenty, and
abundance of Riches into the Church; And by the disorders of the world, the
Daughter has devoured the Mother; so that there are more Ecclesiastics Rich,
than Pious: Ximenes was not of their number; for amidst the Treasure of that
Great Revenue, he kept inviolable that poverty that exalts Great Personages
above the height of fortune, and consists in the contempt, and sober use of
these perishing enjoyments; And, as if he had been afraid to lose the least
part of it, he continued the practices of that Poverty, which the Rules of
Religion exact from its strictest votaries. The Pomp of a Cardinal, and
Attendance of the Prime Prelate of Spain, could not keep him from retyring into
a private place, from the eyes of his domestiques, to mend with his own hands,
the frock he had wore among those of his Order; so that after his death, in a
Box, whereof in his Lifetime, he constantly kept the Key; there were found
needles, thread, and pieces of Gray Cloth, of the Color of his Frock, which he
laid up for that use. He slept on a Friars pallet, which he had hid in his
Chamber, where stood his Bed of state; And that his family might not perceive
it, he made it his custom to go to bed, and rise alone, without attendants, and
his door shut. When he was first made Archbishop, he rid into the Country upon
an Ass attended by a troop of Monks of his Order; his house, his family and
his table were so ordered, as not to be inconsistent with his Vow of poverty;
The Great Revenue of the Primate of Spain, was employed in works of Piety, the
poor receiving a moity of it for their sustenance, whom he called, the Lords
and Proprietors of his Revenues.

The Bishops of Spain, instead of imitating the good Example of his simplicity,
were offended at it, and complained of him to Pope Alexander the sixth, who
sent him a Brieve, advising him to change that mean fashion of life, into a
more splendid, and becoming his dignity; telling him, it was not only
convenient, but necessary to maintain with some external pomp and luster, the
dignities founded in a holy simplicity: Ximenes obeys the Pope, his table is
better covered, his Beds more sumptuous, his utensils of Earth are changed into
Plate, and all the ornaments of Prelature more splendid and magnificent: But
his Golden Cross made him not a wooden Bishop; he continued his conferences in
Divinity with the Priests, and his sermons to the people: and it is remarkable,
he admitted no man into his family, but upon the commendations of honesty and
virtue.

But can it be expected, Ximenes should quietly enjoy a Dignity so Eminent, a
Benefice of so vast revenue? since it is the course of the world, that, as Roses
have their prickles growing up with them; so crosses are inseparable Companions
of great fortunes. The first that attacqued him, were the Monks of his Order,
who were at Court with him, and offended that he kept them in his house to the
Austere Rules of their Order, and forbad them to intermeddle with any thing but
their Beads, And that being lately made President of the Kings Council, he
procured not for them the Prelatures of Spain; spread ill reports of his
person, and made their Sermons invectives against his conduct; Turning the
pulpit, which ought to be the Oracle of truth, into a Theater of Envy; They
rested not there, but sent for their General from Rome, and armed him with
Calumnies against Ximenes. The General, arrived in Spain, and hurried with
faction and insolence predominant in him; goes to the Queen, and addressing
himself with little respect, accused Ximenes of Ignorance, of Pride, and of
Hypocrisy: Blaming the Queen for permitting such a man, to fit in her Council,
and in the prime Chair of Prelature in the Kingdom. Isabel well assured of the
integrity, and merits of Ximenes, and moved at the palpable rudeness, and
irregular passion of this General; asked him if he were in his wits, and knew
whom he spoke to. Yes Madam (says he) I am so well in my wits, as to know I
speak to Queen Isabel, who is but a heap of Dust as I am; and suddenly withdrew
from the presence of the Queen, more like a Fury than a Rational Creature. But
the accusations of these Monks, having no other foundation, but Envy, hatred
and untruths, were easily dissipated by the patience of Ximemes, to their
shame, but his Glory.

Thus these Ambitious men, who went out of the world upon design, to return
with greater advantage, attacqued his reputation: But Bernardine his brother,
attempted his life. Ximenes when he took the habit of St. Francis, resigned to
him his Benefices, and was soon after followed by this young man; who too,
became of the same Orders; and afterward tracing the steps of his Brothers
fortune, went to Court, in hope of a Bishopric: but the success not answering
his designs, he imputed the cause to Ximenes, and resolved to be revenged of
him, for the refusal or delay of his preferment. Ximenes lay sick at Arcula
D'Henares, in Latin Complutum; Bernardine was in his house, and finding his
Brother one day in his chamber, without any attendant, threw himself on the bed
where he lay, and pressing the bolster hard on his neck, endeavored to choke
him, and thinking it done, went out of the Chamber: Ximenes not quite dead, was
helped by his servants who came in, and having acquainted them with Bernardines
villainy, commanded them to apprehend him; They search, and having found him hid
in a Cave, drag him out, and bring him to Ximenes, who took no other revenge,
than that he sent him bound to the Monastery of Torrice to learn more wi^t.

Having recovered his health, he spent some time in reforming the Conventuals
of the Order of St. Francis, called Cordeliers; whom he reduced under the Rules
of the Observantins, to live without Revenews, as Children of Providence, and
upon the Alms they receive. His pains, and the Cordeliers oppositions and
complaints in this Affair, almost exceed expression. But by the end of the year
1499. his Constancy surmounted all difficulties raised by them, and afforded
him opportunity to employ his thoughts, toward redress of the peoples
grievances. It troubled him to see the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon oppressed
by a heavy Tax called Alcabala, which forced them to pay the King the tenth
part of all they sold or exchanged. This Imposition was first laid, toward
defraying the Charge of the Wars of Granada, against the Moors; but continued
to the grievance of the people, after the War; though ended to the great
advantage of Ferdinand and Isabel. Ximenes remonstrates to them, that God had
made them Pastors, not Tyrants over the people; that by the favor of Heaven,
they had obtained Victory over the Moors; that it was an ill Acknowledgement of
the mercy, to continue in time of Peace and Triumph, that Subsidy which was
intended only for the maintenance of the War. His advice was taken, and the
people discharged of the Tax. This gained him great reputation all over Spain;
so that he never entered the Palace Royal, but the people attended him with
joyful Acclamations, saying publicly, He never went to Council, but for the
good of the Commonalty. A wise Minister of State designs no less the good of
the public, than the Honor of his Prince.

The disorders of War had banished good Literature from the Territories of
Spain; Ximenes desires ardently to see it brought back and replanted: causes a
College to be built at Arcala, and the seventh of March 1498. (...) stone
himself, endowed i^ with Revenu^^ (...) furnished it with Regents; which
render^ it one of the best Academies of Spain. Certainly, the happiness of a
Kingdom, consists in the observance of the Laws, which is better effected
through careful education, than fear of punishment. Virtuous actions are
derived from good habits, acquired by practice and exercise of the wholesome
Rules of good Education: where this is wanting, the severities of Magistracy
are too weak, to contain men within the limits of obedience to Law; there being
nothing so difficult, as to subdue our passions, when by long Custom and
Continuance in Vice, they have got such head, as to master our Reason. Hence
that Maxim of the Wise man, that Prudent Education added to the Gifts of
Nature, renders men virtuous and obedient to the Laws; and that nothing is more
necessary for the Commonweal, than good institution and virtuous education of
Youth.

CAP. IV.
XImenes had not only a real Affection for Learning, but a high esteem for its
faithful Attendants, Honesty and Integrity; though his affection to the one,
and esteem for the other, terminated in Religion, as the ultimate object of his
best affections; the Ascendant of his soul, and Lady paramount of his passions.
To which he was so entirely devoted, as to take the measure of his affection
and esteem for Learning and Honesty, from their usefulness to the advancement
of Religion. The zeal he had to propagate Christianity, made him labor
willingly, and much for the Conversion of Infidels. About the end of this year
he attended the King and Queen in their Kingdom of Granada, newly recovered
from the Moors; to give advice, how this new Conquest might be best maintained:
and found time to preach so fervently to the Moors, that in one day, he
converted three thousand of them to the faith of Christ. And the multitude of
the Converts, making it impossible to baptize them all in the usual form,
within the compass of a day, using aspersion instead immersion, he sprinkled
them all with baptismal water, and so initiated them all the same day in the
Christian Religion. In memory whereof, that day being the 16th of December, was
long kept Festival in Spain. The Archbishop of Granada in his harangue to the
Cardinal, upon the Triumphs of that Kingdom, amongst others has this
expression; Sir, I may say without incurring suspicion of flattery, that your
Victories surpass the King's; for he gained Stones, but you have gained Souls
to God. The greatest part of the unconverted Moors followed the example of a
Prince of their Sect, of the Royal Family of the Kings of Granada, who became
Christian; and drew them with him, to the knowledge of the true Religion. These
new Converts, by the light of truth began to discover and detest their former
errors; and of their own accord, laid at Ximenes feet five thousand Volumes of
the Alcoran, or Glosses and Explications of it; all curiously bound, neatly
trimmed, and exquisitely adorned with Claspes and Knots of Silver, Gold, and
precious Stones, which made out the Esteem that people had, for the lying
impostures of their Prophet.

Many Grandees of Spain became Suitors to Ximenes, for one of those Books to
adorn their Libraries: but he refused, and causing a great fire to be made,
exposed them all to the fury of the devouring flames, except few that treated
of Physic, and had been found among the Alcorans. Taking from these new
Converts those objects which might renew the memory of the Errors in which they
had lived most part of their time. So frail, and so fickle is our nature in
good actions, that our progress in the way of virtue, is like that of Boats
against the stream of a rapid Torrent, which fall back in one hour more than
they advance in a whole day: This was not enough to contain them within the
bounds of their duty, some sighed for their lost liberty, others relapsed into
their old superstitions, and taking up Arms, resolved to force their way to
both, by fire and sword. Ximenes who was yet in Granada, stood the shock, and
bearing up bravely in a Sea of troubles that surrounded him, sends an Express
to the King: And for better dispatch, a Gentleman of Quality of the same City
offered him an Ethiopian Slave, so nimble and swift of foot, that he would
travel fifty Leagues a day. But the brutish Sot having received the Packet,
instead of making haste, overcharged himself so with Wine and Victuals at the
second Inn he met with by the way, that he slept there till the morrow after:
and he, who should have been in two days at Sevil, where the Court then was,
made it five ere he arrived there. In the mean time, the King had intelligence
of the Revolt of the Moors of Granada from them, who envying the greatness of
Ximenes, took care to send better Courriers than the Ethiopian: and informed
the King, that Ximenes, who through a rash and undiscreet zeal, would have
converted to Christianity in a moment, men who were not only born and had
lived, but were for the most part grown old in the Profession of Mahometism,
had lost the Realm of Granada: That he was utterly incapable to manage matters
of State, who proposed and made use of no other allurements, to win over his
Converts to submit their necks to the yoke of a new Government, than the
headstrong Capricchio's of his violent fancy, and the rigorous Austerities he
had practiced in a Cloister.

Ferdinand believes them, and remembering Ximenes had been introduced into
Court, and his Conduct extolled by the Queen his Wife; goes to her Lodgings,
and all in a flame. See now, Madam, (says he)! the Triumphs of our Ancestors,
and our own, purchased with the blood of the Nobles of Spain, ruined in a
moment, by the humoursome follies of your Ximenes! Ximenes by this time, had
intelligence from his friends of the negligence of the Ethiopian, and the sense
of the Court; he acknowledges his fault to entrust the sottishness of such a
Brute, with an Affair of so great Importance: And resolved for the future,
never to send Courriers on the like Occurrences, but such as were persons of
integrity and honest Repute; which he observed, making it his custom, to honor
and load with Presents, such whom he employed in dispatches of Consequence.

To retrive this miscarriage, and remedy the present disorder of his Affairs,
he dispatched Roiiys his Companion of the Order, to inform their Majesty's of
the Causes of the Revolt, and the Remedies he had applied. The good estate of
Granada, quenched the fire of Ferdinands anger and displeasure against Ximenes,
and drew from him Letters of thanks to Ximenes, for his great expense for the
good of the public, in restoring peace to Granada; and the dangers he exposed
himself to, to save his Cities from ruin, and the Kingdom from destruction. A
Minister of State who labors with integrity to serve his Majesty, ought by
good Actions and patience, to overcome the Envy and Calumnies of his Enemies,
which like thin mists are easily dissipated; and being built on the sandy
foundations of falseshood, and lies, are soon shaken and moulder to nothing.

CAP. V.
THE watchings and labors Ximenes underwent, to suppress the Tumults of
Granada, had impaired his health into a Hectic Feavour; so malignant, that the
Physicians could find no remedy for it. A Moriseo-woman converted by him, hears
of this, and sends him another woman of the same Nation, to desire permission
to cure his Feavour; which being granted her, within eight days by the use of
Ointments, and some words she recited, she restored him to perfect health. This
enabled him to go to Toledo, to salute the Princess Joan, Daughter and Heiress
of Ferdinand and Isabel, together with Philip of Austrich her Husband, and Son
to the Emperor Maximilian, who were lately come to Spain. And thence to visit
that glorious Temple of the Muses, his College of Arcala, the love of Learning
being inseparable from his soul: insomuch that in the year 1502. in order to
the Explication and Imprinting of the Holy Scriptures in Latin, Greek, Hebrew
and Chaldee, by persons of knowledge and skill in those Tongues at his charge
in that City; he bought up all the Manuscript Bibles he could hear of; and
caused most exact and correct Impressions to be made thereof in those
Languages. Seven Hebrew Copies cost him four thousand Crowns; the Latin and
Greek Manuscripts, being eight hundred years old, amounted to a greater sum:
besides a vast expense for maintenance and Salaries of Professors of those
Languages, and Correctors and Printers for fifteen years. His design was to
instruct the Priests in the Truths of the two Testaments, and to leave the
Church these Lights of the Holy Scriptures in their original purity. As if he
had foreseen, that a few years after the perfection of this work, Heresy would
arise, by false interpretation of Scripture; to attacque the purity of
Christian Doctrine. And therefore he provided this Impression, as a well
furnished Armoury, to defend the Church against the malice of her Enemies. This
great and painful work being finished; and the Printer presenting him with the
first Copy of it; with eyes and hands lift up for joy to Heaven, My God, said
he, I return thee immortal thanks, for granting my desires of good success to
this work. Then turning to his Domestiques who were most familiar with him;
It Is true, said he, my friends, that God has been pleased to crown my Labors
with success, in many important Affairs for the good of the State; but there is
not any thing, in which ye ought to rejoice with me more, than for the happy
accomplishment of this Impression and Explication of the Bible in the four
Languages.

He had designed also a Translation of Aristotle's works, and to adorn them,
suitable to the dignity of the subject. And certainly, since he thus revived
good Literature; it is but just, Learning should raise him to life again; and
that the Muses give immortality to his Name: for he who labors for them, ought
in recompense of his Travels, to receive from them the Auguste privilege of
never dying.

Much about this time, Joan Heiress of Spain was delivered of her second Son at
Arcala. Ximenes lays hold of the opportunity, for the glory of his College:
and by the favor of this birth, obtained for that City (which he had made an
habitation of the Muses) exemption from Taxes and all manner of Impositions.
The inhabitants of Arcala in memory of the favor, keep to this day, the Cradle
of that Prince; and bless the name of Ximenes, who procured it. As he went out
of his Lodgings the same day, he met the Officers of Justice leading a
Malefactor to the Gibbet; he stops them, and grants the wretched Criminal,
Pardon. Telling them, that though it was an Action beyond his Authority, yet so
much ought to be allowed his Dignity, to hinder that day of general Joy to all
Spain, from being Capital to an Inhabitant of Arcala.

After this, he built a College for Maids of honest Families, whom Poverty
kept in ignorance: and adjoined to it a Nunnery for the entertainment of such,
who were inclined to bid farewell to the world; with Provision, that none
should be taken into it, but such as came voluntarily; and as for those who
desired to continue secular, besides the virtuous breeding of the College, he
gave them honorable portions, and disposed of them in Marriage according to
their conditions. These works of Piety, and the War against the Moors, were the
Treasury, where he laid up those Riches Fortune cannot destroy.

CAP. VI.
BEing at Medina, Jerome Vianelli a Venetian, ^ffered him a Jewel at 5000.
Crowns, and pressed him much to buy it; though the price put upon it, exceeded
far the value of the Stone. Ximenes liked well the neat glittering and
sparkling brightness of the Jewel; but I know, says he, to bestow the money
better: for in an urgent necessity I can relieve 5000. Soldiers with Crowns
apiece; his Levies for the Wars of Africa being then afoot.

The year 1505 Spain had great loss by the death of Queen Isabel, the Most
Illustious Princess of her Age; no less Eminent for acquired habits of
Goodness, than Royal Extraction; being as worthily adorned with the Crowns of
Virtue, as legally Crowned with the Diadem of Spain; a Princess of Knowledge,
Piety and Generosity above the usual Capacity of her Sex. She who had observed
in Ximenes the Eminence of Rare Conduct, attended with singular integrity, made
him Executor of her Last Will and Testament: which was but a drop of that Ocean
of honor those qualities procured him, which rendered him so venerable in the
State, that never Minister was so much honored in his life, so much desired
and missed after his death. Every time he came to wait on his Master Ferdinand,
the King went out of his Chamber to meet him, and at parting, brought him to
the Chamber Door: nor would he si^, till a Seat were given Ximenes. So powerful
are great Virtues, as to obliege even the Scepters of the World to reverence
them. That Minister who is prudent and Generous, whose designs tend only to
the glory of his Master, and good of the public, deserves the Surname of
Guardian-Angel of the State, and ought to be honored as such by every one.

The death of Isabel gave Ximenes occasion to do Ferdinand good Service in
Spain, and to give new proofs of the greatness of his Conduct: Isabel who was
Queen of Castile, had by her Testament made Ferdinand her Husband, (who was
only King of Arragon) Administrator general of the Kingdom of Castile: Philip
his Son in Law, husband, as was said, of the sole Heiress of that Kingdom, had
other designs; and by the instigation of some Grandees of Spain, and presuming
upon the amity of France, intended to dethrone his Father in Law, and take
possession of Castile as the inheritance of his Wife. He was at that time in
Flanders with Joan, about whom Ximenes had placed some persons of trust, by
whom she informed him of the designs of her Husband to trouble Spain: and the
ill usage she had from him; for his Love to the Flemmish Ladies had divided the
Husband and Wife, and filled their Breasts with Jealousy and hatred of each
other: Joan writes to her Father the threats of Philip, to drive him out of
Castile, contrary to the Testament of the Queen her Mother; Philip surprises
Lopez Couitrilla, Fernand's Ambassador, with several Letters about him; and
without respect to his person, caused him to be imprisoned. Ximenes advertised
of these threats and violences, advises the Remedy, for Ferdinand's service; he
knew Philip had Negotiations afoot in France to solicit the Aid of that Court
against his Father in Law. Ximenes steps in, and prevents it, advises Ferdinand
to a strict Alliance on that side, and to take to Wife Germain de Foix, Niece
to Lewis the twelfth.

The Marriage was accomplished, and Philip surprised to see himself abandoned
by them from whom he promised himself the greatest succor, was forced to a
Treaty of Accommodation with Ferdinand, and agree to him the Administration of
the Kingdom of Castile, reserving to himself the honor only of being named
jointly with Ferdinand in all Letters Patents. This Agreement quieted the
Affairs of Spain, though not long. Philip comes thither with Joan his Wife,
visits the Cities of the Kingdom, and acts as sole Master of it without seeing
Ferdinand, or permitting his Wife to see him: Ferdinand though his Father in
Law longs to see Philip, and follows him from place to place, but Philip flees
from him, till Ximenes by his prudence procured an Interview. Philip instigated
by the great ones, desirous of novelties, and envying the Authority of Ximenes,
appeared at the enterview in the Equippage of Conquest and Triumph, not like a
Son to meet his Father, but marching with six thousand Warriers at his heels;
Ferdinand had only two hundred men of his household and retinue, and mounted on
Mules. But this Flemish Bravado lasted not long; the sage Advice of Ximenes
made it vanish; he goes to Philip at Burges, shows him the injury he did
himself to sow division in a State belonging to him; that to raise War in
Spain, was to Assault his own House; that Ferdinand had only the Administration
of Castile, and served only to keep it, and improve it for him; that the
Counsels given him, tended to his ruin; that Don John Manuel his great
Confident and Prime man of his Council, was a person interessed, and for his
own advantage fomented divisions between him and his Father in Law; that it
concerned him in point of interest, and for his own good to remove Manuel by
some honorable Employment; that an Embassy to Rome would be very fit for the
purpose. To remove from a Prince a pernicious favorite, is to rid a Sick man
of his Disease.

And because this Enterview is a principal piece of our Story, I thought fit to
give you the most remarkable particulars. Philip going to meet Ferdinand, had
on his right hand Ximenes (who went to him at Burges) and on his left Don
Manuel his High Treasurer; those of his Court were in Armor, and marched in a
posture of War; Ferdinands followers ridd on Mules, as men of peace, with
Cloaks and Swords only; the Principal Courtiers having forsaken him to attend
Philip, verified the old observation, that Courtiers adore the rising Sun.
Ferdinand meeting the Troops of his Son in Law, made a halt on a little rising
Ground to give them way: this place he chose as fittest in his judgment, (one
of the sagest of his time) to view and contemplate the disloyalty of the Court,
having of purpose taken up his standing in a narrow place, where all those who
had abandoned him to go to Philip, must of necessity pass close by him: And of
them the Duke of Najar first presented himself, mounted in Armor on a Spanish
Jennet, as for a day of Battle; his Page carried his Lance, and one of his
Captains led a Troop of men at Arms behind him: Duke, says Ferdinand, you are
ready for a Combat, you always carry a spice of the Captain. It is, Answered
the Duke, to serve the King our Sovereign Lord, and your Majesty.

The next that came up, was Garcia de la Vega Lord of Cnerva, who had been
Ambassador from Ferdinand at Rome, and graced with his favors in a large
measure; Ferdinand, a perfect Master of the Art of Dissimulation (commonly
called the Art of Reigning) perceived by the Bunching of his Clothes that he
wore close Armor underneath, and Embracing him said, Garcia, you were not so
Gross a few days ago, you are grown fat on the sudden.

These Embraces and Courtesies, were smart Reproofs, and cutting Exprobrations
of their ingratitude; and Ferdinand experimented in them, that if the good
fortune of the Court has few sure Friends, the ^ll fortune of it has much
fewer. Philip upon the fight of Ferdinand, would have alighted, but Ferdinand
spurting his Male, prayed him not to Dismount; Philip with Hat in Hand, desired
Ferdinands Hand to Kiss; Ferdinand spreads his Arms and Embraces him. Spain is
so stored with Castles and fair Countrey-houses, that in all that Road there
was not one fit for the Conference of the two Kings which forced them to
entertain one another in an Ermitage; Ximenes followed them in, and so did Don
Manuel, Philips Favorite. Ximenes seeing him enter, says to him; Don John,
their Majesty's would be private, Let Us withdraw, I will be Porter, and keep
the door for this time. Manuel goes out somewhat displeased; Ximenes reenters,
and having shut the Door, sits down with the Kings: Ferdinands Counsels to
Philip were the only entertainment of the Princes, which were to this effect.

My Son, the weight of a Crown is so great, that a good King cannot bear it
without help; and the Government of people requires such continual care and
incessant travels, that a Prince has need of ease by persons of fidelity, and
capable to manage public affairs; and herein the unhappiness of Princes is
remarkable, that they find few who mind more the honor of the State than their
own profit, or study the interest of their Master, more than their own private
advantages. Take heed therefore, my Son, that you grant not to them you honor
with your good will, (commonly called Favorites) any thing to the prejudice of
the people over whom God has invested you with Soverain Authority, whereof you
must make good use, and render him one day an account, and undergo the sentence
of an exact impartial Justice, and abide the severity of its Judgment. Think
not that such men are called without cause, the Leeches of the Court, who
hanging still at the Ears of their Prince, yet ungrateful to their
Benefactour, have by their insatiable avarice, base flattery, and monstrous
ingratitude merited those names of infamy and reproach of the vices they are
infected with. I had designed to have assisted you in the discharge of your
Office, knowing your Youth unexperienced in the Government of Kingdoms; but
since the great ones of Castile have persuaded you to the contrary, I will
retire, and confine my cares to the Governmens of the States, subject to the
Crowns God has given me: but shall make it my Prayer to God to give you the
Graces, and Forces necessary for great Kings; and during my absence from you I
leave you another Father, who will be of no less use to you, than if I were
with you in person, I mean my Lord Archbishop of Toledo here present; the many
proofs, and evident testimonies I have had of his fidelity and experience give
me cause to Assure you that a King cannot be wrecked in the Government of his
State, where he sits at the helm. May you believe his sage advice, and gather
the same fruits from his conduct as have given my name and that of Queen Isabel
the reputation and glory of having happily governed Spain; and to the
inhabitants of these Kingdoms the felicity they enjoy.

After this Enterview, the Kings parted. Philip went to dinner at Bimo,
Ferdinand at Remefid, and Simenes at Requete, three little villages within half
a league of the Ermitage; but the advantage of accommodation, was on Philip's
part, as feasted before dinner with the Royal Collation of Ferdinands
entertainment: For the Sage advice, for the Government of a Kingdom, is a true
aliment of Prince's spirit.

The affairs of Castile, were at this time carried according to the passion of
the high Treasurer Don John Manuel, Philips favorite; and the Revenue of the
Kingdom which is the blood of the people squandered away by him; which highly
displeased Ximenes: It happened one day that Bertrand de Salto one of the Kings
Treasurers, who had formerly treated with Ximenes about several affairs, in
respect to him came to let him know, that the King by advice of Don Mannel had
farmed out the Revenue of the Silks of Granada for ten years at a price; and
that he had the Charters in his hand ready drawn, to be delivered to the Seal;
Ximenes reads them, and observing that they were much to the damage of the
King, tore them in pieces; and gave the pieces to a page of his Chamber, who
stood behind him, which are kept to this day among the records of Arcala, for a
monument of the courageous liberty of this Minister: then turning to the
Treasurer, Salto, said he, were you not one of my friends, the King should
cause your head to be taken off: Dare you make Grants so prejudicial to the
State? Then going to the Palace, he informed Philip of this disorder, and
forced him to confess, they had surprised him.

This Prince began to relish the excellency of Ximenes counsels and fully
resolved to live for the future in better correspondence with Ferdinand, but
was suddenly taken with a great sickness which with his life ended his troubles.

Ferdinand was then in his voyage for Naples his new Conquest; the Grandees of
Spain assembled in Ximenes Chamber to consult about the Government of Castile:
diverse opinions were hotly proposed. The Constable, the Admiral, and the Duke
of Alva, advised to send speedily after King Ferdinand then at Sea, and to
desire his return into Spain to take the Government upon him. The Earl of
Benevent, the Marquess of Villena, and the Dukes of Infantado, and Najar,
contradicted this advice with so much passion, that they came to high words
with those that proposed it. Ximenes who had been all this while silent the
better to discover the intention of both parties, to prevent danger to the
State by this Rupture, and Divorce of Opinions, and by Amusing the passion of
the four last to divert and frustrate their designs of trouble, spoke as
follows; My Lords, King Ferdinand has ruled these Kingdoms above forty
years, it is now high time he should govern his own; since God has given
Castile men capable to Govern it; and such as can give a good account of their
Actions. The Assembly by common consent chose Ximenes, the Constable of
Castile, and the Duke of Najar, as a Triumnivat to Govern the State, to be
Guardians to the Queen, and Tutors to Prince Charles, afterward Charles the
fifth. Ximenes informs the King of these passages; and believing him to be then
at Barcelona, beseeches him to return into Castile. But the Courrier sound him
at the Isle of Isbice; and that having given Italy Advice of his voyage he held
himself obliged to perform it. But in truth his vehement desires to see
Gonsalves outed from Naples, being the main occasion of the voyage, would not
permit him to return till he had seen it done. Therefore he writ to Ximenes to
govern Spain in the mean time with the fidelity and integrity he always found
in him.

Now Ximenes resolves to sit alone at the Helm; and notwithstanding the
resolutions of the aforesaid Assembly is by the Council-Royal chosen sole
Guardian of the State, the Queen and the Infant Charles: he puts himself
immediately into the Posture of Governor of the Kingdom, Raises and Arms
Regiments of Horse and Foot for the Guards of the Princes and his own: The
Grandees of Spain astonished to see a man bred in a Cloister use force, and
have recourse to Arms for Authorizing his Conduct, blamed him as a light
spirited person; But he who knew of what importance it was to Awe the factious,
and have forces in readiness to suppress innovations gave them leave to talk,
but prosecuted his design. Queen Joan by the Travails of Childbirth, or rather
(as it is said) by the Charms, and Enchantments with some poisonous druggs
given her by a Flemish Lady, King Philips Mistress had a great weakness in her
senses, and was much disordered in her rational faculty. This made her wander
up and down the Countries, quitting B -- Burgos; and great with Child taking a
Journey to the Borough of Benferriale where she was delivered of the
Posthumous Princess Catharine afterward married to the King of Portugal. While
she lay In, the Citizens of Medina took up Arms, and being divided into two
parties, had brought the City to the brink of destruction: the Province of
Granada was up in Arms at the same time, and the Guards of the Sea-coste, from
Guards to Defend were become Enemies to Assault the Country: Ximenes by his
prudence opposed the one, contented the other, and made all quiet again. Yet he
was not in quiet, for the Queen after Childbirth having recovered her
strength, but not her senses, made him follow her through the Country to his
great inconvenience by the incommodities he underwent, in an Age fitter for
repose, than the Fatigues of the Court. This Princess could not be persuaded to
Lodge any where but in the fields, with the whole Court in Tents or in the
Country Villages. Ximenes put her in mind how incommodious this was for her,
and and what disorder she put the whole Court in for want of Lodgings; She
answered, a Widow ought not to go into Towns, but wander in the Fields, and
live in Villages. Thus she past from one Village to another, carrying with her
the body of her dead Husband Philip embalmed, fancying she enjoyed his Person
by the sight of his Carcass, and causing it to be laid in the Parish Church of
every Village she Lodged in, with a Guard to keep constant Watch at the Coffin,
under a strict charge not to permit a Woman to approach it. So Jealous was she
of a body without life, and incapable then to raise these passions in the
beholders which he had caused in his life time, being possessed of those
natural beauties, and endued with goodness so excellent, which charmed Ladies
affections into a passionate Longing, and men into an entire Love for him. This
Princess fooled with the Love of a Lump of dead flesh, would by no means part
with it till Ferdinand her Father returned from Italy, caused it to be taken
from her, and buried privately. The journeys she made were Noctural, by
Torchlight; which occasioned many inconveniences by sickness amongst her
retinue; Loss of her Baggage and falls of those on Horseback. Ximenes threw
himself at her feet and begged on his Knees that since she was resolved to make
the Court Errant and Itinerary, she would at least Travel by day, but she
Wedded to her folly, answered, That a Woman having lost her Husband, which is
her Son, ought to avoid the light of the Sun in the Firmament, and make no
journeys, but by night. The art of a skilful Pilot is often of no use amidst
the fury of the Winds and Waves: And the prudence and conduct of a Minister of
State are thrown away upon such Soveraings as are incapable of good Advice.

During these extravagancies of Queen Joan, Ferdinand returned from Italy with
Germain de Foix his new Wife; and took a voyage by Sea, to Savona, to see his
Wives Uncle King Lewis the twelfth; while he staid in Italy he obtained of Pope
Julius the second a Cardinals Cap for Ximenes, with the Title of Cardinal of
Spain; formerly given to Peter, Cardinal Triasio, under Henry the third, and
then to Peter Gonsalve Cardinal Mendoza, under Ferdinand, in token of the Popes
especial favor. So that in the sequel of our Story we shall call Ximenes by
the name of Cardinal. Together with this dignity he received that of Inquisitor
General of Castile: for the Inquisition had of long time got firm footing in
Spain, having been introduced by Ferdinand and Isabel, in the year 1577. by
reason of the mixture of Moors with Christians, and the superstitions of the
former, deeply rooted in the heart of that Kingdom. The Rigor of this
Ecclesiastical Justice struck terror into ill Christians, but was so far from
making them better, that it rendered them only more subtle and refined
Hypocrites. Cardinal Mendoza was his immediate Predecessor in that Office, and
Thomas Torquemata superior of the Covent of St. Dominick at Segovia the first
that bore it. These new honors altered not the manners of Ximenes; the Love of
Learning and Advancement of virtue had still the same place in his soul, and
were Continued in their former Station. He finished his College of Arcala,
constituted Laws and made Statutes for the regulation of it, filled it with
able Professors drawn from the famous Universities of Paris, Salamanca,
Valadolid, Bologina, admitting none from meaner places; endowing it with great
Revenues, adorned it with a rich Library, and brought it to such perfection
that Francis the first of France passing that way (when the fortune of War
made him experimentally know good luck does not always attend the valorous)
and seeing this admirable College, said, that his University of Paris was the
work of many Kings; but Ximenes alone had Completed a Royal work: Charles the
fifth King of Spain, and Emperor being one day to hear Mass in the College at
Arcala, quitted the Chair, and Cloth of State provided for him at the high
Altar, and took his place in the Quire, in the ordinary Seats of the Priests of
the College being for the most part public Professors; and all of them
Learned men, telling them; he would not lose the glory of sitting that day
among men of so great Learning, and making one of the Quire with them. Such are
the fruits of great Ministers, Labors for virtue and the public good; future
Ages reverence their names; the Greatest Kings of the world admire their glory,
and think themselves honored to be sometimes of the number of those who
possess the Offices of Learning, they have founded. Such is the Liberal Return
of gratitude virtue makes to those who enlarge her Kingdom.

CAP. VI.
THE Spirit of Ximenes was not only great and high, but Comprehensive and
Capable of all Affairs, those of War as well as peace found it a proper
receptacle to entertain them both together: The same time that his thoughts
were busily taken up with impression of Books founding Monasteries building
Colleges, endowing them with Revenues, and furnishing them with Regents and
Students he had in prospect the War of Africa, formed designs and made
preparations for it. When the Kingdom enjoyed a Secure peace, and flourished in
a deep repose, and undisturbed tranquillity, he Levied Soldiers, issued
Commissions, and provided moneys for the better Assurance of the State. It was
his Maxim That the Spirits of men being naturally free, cannot endure
servitude and subjection; but of force, and compelled by necessity; and he
would often say, That never Prince was feared abroad, or honored at home that
had not levied an Army, and at least made all the preparatives requisite to
carry on a War.

The desire of extending Christianity into Africa, and to free Spain from the
incursions and Robberies of the Pirates of that Country who were grown so bold
as to Enter the Spanish Ports to Spoil and carry away the Vessels of Traffic
engaged him in the enterprise of a War of such Consequence. There was at that
time in the Court of Ferdinand a Venetian named Jerome Vianelli well versed in
the Voyages of Africa, having often Sailed those Seas, that he knew perfectly
all the Ports, and safe Landing places on the Coast; This man had intelligence
of Ximenes design, goes to him, informs him of all the Avenues of the Coast,
and particularly the great Port of Mersalcabir near Oran, capable to receive a
very great Fleet: Ximenes hearkens to him, and finding him serviceable for his
designs, prayed he would see him often, and commanded his Porters to admit him
at all times, and give him Entrance as often as he desired it. By the constant
mode of Courts, it has been always difficult to get entrance to great
Ministers of State; which Custom, as it preserves them from an infinite
trouble of importunate persons; so it deprives them of the knowledge of many
persons of merit and worth, whose generosity will not permit them to beg
admittance from Servants, and leave to enter from Grooms and Porters: And it is
seldom seen that the persons employed in these Services either keep out the
former, or admit the latter to their Masters presence. Vianelli having the
privilege of free access to Ximenes, visits him often, and acquaints him with
what he had seen in Africa: Ximenes the better to comprehend what he said,
commands him not only to make a draught in Paper, but to imprint in Wax the
figures of the places. By this representation he saw a Castle situate on a
Rock almost inaccessible, having a Lanthorn on one of the Towers, not unlike
the Grecian Phares to serve Mariners for a mark of direction how to steer
their Course in dark nights, to safe Harbor. This Castle had on one side the
Port of Mersalcabir, and on the other, the City Oran; called by the Moors
Guharran, which in their Languge signifies a high place, and exposed to the
Winds. The Etymology may be derived from the Greek Verb Oran, which in that
Language signifies to see: the height of the situation gives an excellent
prospect. It was in Ancient time a little Borough, but by frequency of
Commerce and Traffic of Merchants, was now grown to the greatness of a City,
enclosing within the Walls, six thousand Houses, several Mosques and Colleges,
some Hospitals, and a great number of public baths. The Sea washes it on one
side, the other side affords an excellent prospect over delicate Gardens, and
pleasant Fountains, so plentifully embellishing the Country thereabouts, that
it Courts the spectators to taste of its pleasures.

By the draught and representations of Vianelli, Ximenes found it necessary in
order to an Attempt on Africa to make himself master of Mersalcabir, as the
safest Port for entrance. Having thus projected a design for the good of
Religion, and Liberty of Spain, he proposed the Execution to Ferdinand,
advising him to undertake the War, as an enterprise he made appear no less
profitable then Glorious. Ferdinand answered, that the interest of Religion was
so inseparable from that of his Crown, that if there had been no Consideration
to incline him to engage in this War, but the sole advantage to accrue to
Religion, the piety of the design was Motive enough to prevail with him to
undertake it; but that the vast Charges he had been at, in the Wars of
Granada, and his great expenses in Italy, had emptyed his Coffers, and
exhausted his Treasures, which are the Sinnews of War; and without which it
cannot be maintained. Ximenes offers him money, and Promises to Pay the
Soldiers, and Victual the Army for six Months; so great a Mass of Treasure had
this generous Prelate by frugal parsimony heaped up together from the Revenues
of his Bishopric: Upon this Offer, the War against Africa was resolved on; a
Naval Army prepared, and Diego Fernand de Cordova, made Captain General, who
took with him several old, experienced Commanders; particularly Raymond Cordon
Vice Admiral of the Fleet, and Diego de Vera, Master of the Artillery; Vianelli
was a principal person amongst them, as a guide to the Rest. The Fleet set sail
from Malaga the fifth of September, and about the fifteenth arrived at
Mersalcabir; the Moors Advertised by their Spies, were upon their Guard,
attending the appearance of the Fleet: they discover it, and repair to the Port
to hinder their Landing; the Conflict was sharp, and disputed hotly on both
sides; but maugre all the Resistance the Africans could make, the Spaniards
Landed, and went to besiege the Castle, which a^^^nds the Port, (being that we
spoke of before in (...) draughts) with a little Town, well peopled, environed
with the Sea on all sides, except the South. The King of Tremesen sent them a
Succor of Moors and Numidians to raise the Siege, but they were defeated by
the valor of the Spaniards: Those of the Castle made stout defense, till an
unlucky accident quailed their Courage: The Captain of the Garrison, a man of
Valor and Repute among his Soldiers, going round the Works to give Orders
where necessary, was struck dead upon the place, with a Musket shot out of a
Spanish Ship. The Loss of this man astonished the Garrison, and brought them to
a Parley, and promise of Surrender, if they received not a more powerful
Succor from Tremesen in three days: three days passed, but no Succor came;
they desired three days more, which was granted, but no Succor appearing,
they yielded upon Terms of safety for the Lives of Men, Women and Children; and
liberty to enjoy what they could carry on their backs; which being agreed to by
the Spaniards, they opened their Gates.

Diego Fernand a Religious observer of his Word and Promises, to see the
Articles of the Capitulation performed, stands at the Gates where the Moors
passed out of the Castle. A Soldier casting his eye on an African Woman in the
Crowd laden with the Riches of Fortune and Nature being extremely handsome and
Carrying with her the most precious of her Goods, was violently hurryed by the
blind passions of Avarice and Love to Rob and Ravish her; Diego forthwith
seized him, and caused him immediately to be killed with push of Pike.

Thus the Spaniards became Masters of the Fort within fifty days after their
leaving Malaga, and sent a Gally to Spain, to carry Ferdinand and Ximenes the
joyful news of their Victory which was gladly received by the whole Court,
especially by Ximenes who caused public thanks giving to God to be continued
for the Victory eight days together. The designs of War and of Armies,
depends on Kings, but it is God alone who gives the Victory.

The taking of the Castle of Mersalcabir struck such terror into the
inhabitants of Oran, that many left the City and retired to Tremesen: But Oran
continuing for some time free from the Assaults of Spain they took the
resolution to return; and being on their way near the Town, they met a Moor of
the best quality and State in Oran, on his way from thence to Tremisen, with a
Camel laden with Gold upon sight whereof they were seized with such a panique
fear, that they turned again for Tremisen; So powerful are Riches to Attract
men to the place of their residence. The Spaniards wanting money to carry on
the War, had other designs; for Diego Fernando having picked out the best of
the Soldiers for the garrison of Mersalcabir sent the rest back into Spain,
holding it vain to attack Oran without greater forces. The Town being almost
impregnable by the strength of its situation, Arms and Men.

At the return of the Army into Spain, Peter Lopez H^rosio, a man of Valor,
and one of the Captains in the War, presented Ximenes with a staff of Ebony
accurately turned, and curiously Polished which the Cadyor, Judge of the
Fortress, used to carry as the mark of his Sovereignty. Ximenes for some time
carried it in his hand, but afterward dedicated it to his Academy of Arcala,
in memory of so important a Victory, and with good reason; for if Letters give
Life to the brave Actions of men, it is Just the Trophies and Monuments of those
Actions be Consecrated to them. Diego Fernando was recalled into Spain,
Received graciously by the King, and praised openly by Ximenes in his Masters
presence from whom he had a grant by Patent of the Government of Mersalcabir,
as Conquered by his Valor and good Conduct: The Lieutenancy was given to
Driasio a person of great Courage, whom the King sent into Africa, retaining
Diego at Court.

No sooner was this Lieutenant arrived at Mersalcabir, but he made the Moors
sensible of his Valor, making daily inrodes upon them, and carrying rich
booties of Horses, Cattle, and Corn from the Country thereabouts; so that
provoked by these incursions and the miseries he reduced them to; they resolved
to destroy him, or perish themselves in the Attempt; and to that purpose laid
an Ambuscade for him; Driasio seeing himself in the midst of his Enemies, and
over-powred, his passage to the Garrison stopped, resolves to dye as he had
Lived, a valiant man: exhorts his Soldiers to sell their Lives dearly to their
Enemies, and not Cowardly give them away. They obey and follow him; and
Roderich Driasio with his men hewes his way through the Moors, beats, defeats
and Routes them, Leaving a notable example of his Courage and strength
remaining fresh in memory with the Moors to this day, for pursuing with Javelin
in hand, a Moor on Horseback who fled from him, he violently darted the Javelin
with such force and vehemence, that at one blow it pierced through and through
the body of the Horseman, the Bow of the Saddle, and the Neck of the Horse;
which has begot a Proverb among the Moors, who when they Curse one another in
the Wars, to express their Cholar in a Phrase of superlative bitterness, pray
The Blow of the Captain of Mersalcabir light on them. All this was done before
Philips Arrival into Spain, and is transposed hither to preserve the past
pieces of this Story entire without mangling it by interruption by the recital
of this.

CAP. VII.
THE same Year that Ferdinand returned into Spain, and Ximenes received the
Cardinals Cap, the Moors not tamed by the Loss of Mersalcabir came a Cruising
on the Coasts of Spain, took a strong Town, put to the Sword men Women and
Children; and elevated with this Success at their return into Africa, threatened
to besiege Roderich, and hew him pieces in his Castle. Cardinal Ximenes fully
resolved to Continue the War, and to expedite the prosecution, designed to go
in person if Ferdinand refused it, and made overtures and proposals in Council
to that effect. This awakened the envy of his Enemies, and afforded all Spain
matter of Discourse as various the passions of men. The great ones in Council
were of Contrary Opinions; and said abroad that the Ambition of the Cardinal
was immense and extravagant; that his condition suited not with Arms, but
peace; that nothing could be more abominable then for a Priest, a Monk, an
Archbishop, a Cardinal, to breath nothing but War and Bloodshed, and desire
to embrew his hands in the blood of slaughtered men. That the Exchange would be
no less ridiculous than strange for him instead of lifting his Cross, to Trayle
a Pyke; and laying aside his Mitre to put on a Helmet; Gonsalve who had gained
the name of Great, in the Conquest of Naples, was then in Spain, brought
thither by Ferdinand, by reason of the Authority his Actions had acquired him,
which was so great that it Created Jealousies and Suspicions in the Breast of
the King against Gonsalve for his Valor and Victories. So Dangerous is the
nature of the Affairs of Fortune, and of Court; ill Service deserves
punishment, and good Service by the envy of the great Ones, and Jealousy of
the Master. Gonsalves was then at Valladolid, under an Ostracism in his ow^
Country. But the name of great men cannot dye, and his has gotten immortal
glory abroad, and a singular Reverence in the Territories of Spain. The
Histories of Spain afford frequent instances of respect to Gonsalve's from the
Spaniards in General, and the particular honors done him by the Cardinal. But
amongst others, it is remarkable that after the Wars of Granada, a Prince of
the Blood Royal of the Moors named Zegri, near Kinsman to the famous King
Abenamar having forsaken the Errors of Mahomet, and by the pains of the
Cardinal, embraced the faith of Christ; when he came to the Font, prayed his
Godfathers to give him the Name of Gonsalve Fernando Zegri, telling them he
desired with the Spiritual Grace of Baptism to receive that of the name of the
great Captain Gonsalve, whose valor he had so frequent experience of in the
Wars of Granada against this Nation.

To resume our Discourse of the Cardinals Enemies, they were very Comical in
the expressions of their Envy, saying at Court that the great Captain was busy
turning over his Beads at Valladolid, while the Cardinal was commanding Armies.
That Gonsalves did the Cardinals business, and the Cardinal Gonsalves. The more
moderate said, that in Wars for Religion the Arch bishops of Toledo had
always taken care of the Armies employed against the Enemies of the faith. And
that 'twas no new thing to see Priests on Horseback in the head of an Army:
Others who pretended to a clearer insight into the Affairs of Court, and used
to Comment upon the News of the time, said, it was the Cardinals design to send
away all the Nobles of Spain, into the Wars of Africa, that he might Govern at
home without Contradiction. That he could not be better fitted for punishment
than to grant him his desire of being General of the Army, and sending him over
into Africa, and so remove him from Court, For then out of sight out of mind.
The business of Government is very painful and difficult, that great Ministers
besides prudence in Conduct have need of a Generous patience to resist the Envy
and Calumnies of the Court.

Ferdinand who knew the integrity of the Cardinal (better than all the world
beside) judged more equitably, heard his Advice, weighed, received and embraced
it, gave him thanks that for the good of Religion, and Service of his Kingdoms,
he would expose himself to the toils and hazards of War in an Age that
required nothing more than the repose and quiet of peace; the Cardinal being
then seventy years old: Ferdinand commands the Captain of the Galleys, and the
Admiral, to fit up the Galleys and Vessels of the Kingdom, to be ready at
Malaga, or Nova Carthagena* as the Cardinal should direct. The Captains of the
Ships, the Officers of the Marine, the Commissaries of Victuals, and of the
Army betake themselves every man to the duty of his charge, with great
diligence and expedition to fit and make ready the Vessels, Men, Victuals and
Ammunition.

The great Gonsalve advised the Cardinal to employ in this War Peter of Navarr
Earl of Olivarez a person of quality, valor and experience, and to make him
his Lieutenant General of the Army: The Cardinal upon his Recommendation calls
Navarr to him; and makes him Lieutenant General. On the other side the
Commissaries for Victuals, and those of the Navy, the Treasurers and Paymasters
of the Soldiers, either guided by the Cardinals Enemies, or loving Spain more
than Voyages into Africa, slacken their former diligence, and to their utmost
power retard the fitting of the Fleet, by diverting the Soldiers pay to other
uses and consuming the Biscuit provided for the Ships: The Counselors of state
opposed the Cardinal in his Discourses of the War, and advice for setting out
the fleet, alleging the Winter season was too rigorous and not yet over; when
Winter was past, they said the heat of Summer drew on, and would be more
insupportable to the Soldiers, than the Assaults of the Moors: The Army this
while mouldred away, and was like in short time to come to nothing. The
Cardinal had beat his Drumms throughout Spain, and made Europe and Africa ring
of his design. The preparations he had made were great, and if not attended
with effects suitable, would have proved the travels of the Mountains that
brought forth a Mouse. All the World was against him, only the King had not
declared himself upon the advices given him. He Addressed himself to the King
by a Letter from Carthagene, entreated him by the many travels and great
Labors he had endured in the administration of the Affairs wherewith he had
honored him, for the interest of Religion and the Love of God, that he would
not suffer so complete an Army, and so great preparations for War to perish
unprofitably; that the designs of those who envyed him, tended to the
diminution of his Royal Glory, only to make him incurr the blame of Temerity;
he declared to him the facility of the enterprise, and the treasure he had
provided for it, that he had of his own sufficient to pay the Army three
months: And if it should be his ill fortune to see his designs shamefully
frustrated, and the Army disbanded, that his Majesty would be pleased to grant
him leave to retire to his house at Toledo, where he would endeavor by
Exhortations and Sermons to make War against Vice in his Diocese. The King who
had a value for his person, and Judged him necessary for Spain, gave him the
satisfaction he desired, slighted the Counsels of his Enemies, gave him order
to set Sail, and commanded the whole Army to attend him the next Spring, being
the year 1508. But though these obstacles were overcome by the Courage of the
Cardinal, and Authority of the King, there sprung up new to retard his designs
and stay him at Carthagene. For just as he was to put his men on Board, the
Soldiers mutinyed, fled from their Colors, and drew to the hills near the Sea:
The occasion was this: The Cardinal had ordered that the Muster of the Army
should be in Africa at their first Landing: And to prevent the Pilleries
practiced by the Captains on their Companies that every Soldier should receive
his pay immediately from the Treasurers. Peter of Navar accustomed to the
rapines of the Wars in Italy, liked not this order, and gave notice thereof
under hand to the Captains, who disguising the matter, and setting it out to
disadvantage before the Soldiers, caused them to disband. Vianelli who was of
Authority in the Army, instead of appeasing the sedition, inflamed it; holding
close intelligence with Navarr, and having resolved with him to drive on the
Mutiny to the last point of despair.

In order to this he caused all the Mutineers he he could Light on to be
presently hanged up; and by color of doing Justice put those on the hills in a
desperate fury: The Cardinal seeing the remedy worse than the Disease sends
Villaroel Governor of Castocle to command Vianelli to proceed with more
gentleness, and not destroy those men who were necessary for the War they were
to make. Vianelli's pride made him take this in ill part, and Answer, he knew
better than the Cardinal or him how the mutinies of Soldiers were to be
appeased. Villaroel lays his hand on his Sword, strikes, and wounds him in the
head; and retires into the Citadel of Carthagene, under the command of his
Kinsman. This delayed the setting out of the Fleet; for Vianelli being the
principal guide of the Voyage, it was necessary to attend his Cure, as to
appease the mutiny of the Soldiers. To effect this the Cardinal employes
Captain Salazar Campmaster of the Regiment of Toledo, a great Warrier, Eminent
in Soldierly Eloquence and powerful in Military persuasion. He goes to the
Soldiers, tells them the Muster was to be taken Aboard the Gally-Royal,
persuades them to come to it, shows them baggs of Money, crowned with green
Boughs carried in their fight on the Shore at some distance from the hill
toward the Gally: the Mutineers at sight of the money haste down as Hawks to
the Lure. By this Artifice they were imbarqued, and set Sail from Carthagene
the 15th. of May with 24 Ships, ten Gallyes, and a great number of smaller
Vessels. The Army was composed of ten thousand foot, and four thousand horse.
On Ascension Eve they came happily to Anchor on the Coast of Africa. At their
Landing the Cardinal was Clothed in a long Vest of the Habit of his Order,
with a Cross of Silver carried before him by a Cordelier of a monstrous
stature, mounted on a white beast, his Sword by his side, girt upon his Robe.
Others of the Older who accompanied the Cardinal, were habited alike with long
Robes and Swords. With this Retinue he retires into the Castle of Mersalcabir,
to Rest and Refresh himself. News was brought him that Navarr had Landed the
Foot, but left the Horse on Board as useless on this Coast being full of Hills
and Rocks. The Cardinal goes to the Port, and commands all the Cavalry ashore:
To this Act the whole Army owed their safety in several Engagements with the
Moors wherein the Cavalry sheltered the Foot from Ruin and Defeat. The Army
was drawn no in four Batallions, and the Soldiers commanded by the Cardinal to
fit themselves for fight, by taking their Repast before they Engaged: Their
provision of Victuals consisted most of Bread, Bacon and salt Meats, and the
Cardinal dispensing with the abstinence of the day, being Friday, gave them
liberty to eat thereof; and after their repast exhorted them to fight
Courageously for the service of God and their King. This done, the Principal
Officers entreated him to withdraw into the Fortress, the feebleness of his Age
inclined him to consent, and being Conducted into the Castle he retired into
St. Michaels Chapel to fight against the Moors by Prayers to God being
disabled by Age for manual Combats.

The Infidels discovering the Approach of the Army were ready for battle, and
for better advantage had possessed themselves of a little hill where the Army
must of necessity have passed to attaque Oran; Peter of Navarr seeing this Post
taken by the Enemy was in doubt what to do, and goes to the Cardinal for
Advice, who having heard him, answered in short, Fight, God will be your
Leader; with this Answer he returns, and sets upon the hill, where in effect he
made no progress but in the Loss of his men, and those, the flower of his
Troops, whom the Moors slew in great numbers; Cut of their heads, and sent them
to Oran to be carried in Triumph through the Streets; where Women, and
Children, who seldom fight but with the dead, expressed their joy over them by
Songs and Dances. Lewis Contreras Captain of the slain, had but one Eye, and
partaking the fate of his fellow Soldiers, had his head cut off, and dragged in
the streets of Oran; some of those many old Women that pretend to Divination,
among the Moors, saw it; and having attentively viewed its Physiogmony,
suddenly cried out, An ill Omen, our Town is near Destruction. The people
insolent and senseless in such occurrences, cease not to dragg it along the
Streets, saying it was the head of the Alfaqui of the Christians, meaning the
Cardinal whom they knew to be General of the Army, and dragged it on to the
Prison of the Christians, made slaves at the taking of Mersalcabir by Diego
Fernandez. The fight in the mean time continued at the Hill where at last the
Spaniards beat off the Moors, and having enclosed them in the midst between the
body of the Army, and some Troops Navarr had commanded to advance, they put
them almost every man to the Sword, as they fled toward the City. The
Christians advance to the Walls of Oran; Sosa Captain of the Cardinals Company,
first mounts the Wall; and having planted there his Masters Colors, cries out,
Victory; the rest followed his Example, and some of the Soldiers getting into
the Town open the Gates and give the Army entrance, who put all to the sword.
The Mosques were filled with the blood of the Moors, who retired thither in
great numbers, and the Streets paved with dead bodies, ran down with the blood
of the slain; the Victors killing all, without pity of Age or Sex, till the
miserable spectacle of a sucking Child, playing with the Breasts, and Laboring
with fingers and mouth, to get the Teat of his dead Mother to suck, staid their
fury, and melted their relenting hearts into Compassion to a Creature senseless
of his misery; the poor Infant smiling at the Massacre of his Mother. Two days
after he was sold among the Captives to George Baracald the Cardinals
Secretary, and happy in the ignorance of his misfortunes was carried into
Spain, where he continued without trouble for the Ruin of his Country, or
grief for the Massacre of his kindred. It Is some kind of happiness to the
miserable, that they have been so in their Cradles.

The Spaniards having made themselves Masters of Oran, Navarr sent the News to
the Cardinal, who passed that night without sleep in chanting Hymns of praise
to God for so important a Victory.

The day following he went aboard the Galleys, and came by Sea to Oran, to
avoid the Hill that lay in the way by Land. The greatest part of the Army then
Marched to meet him, Received him in Triumph, and with joyful acclamations
saluted him Conqueror of Barbary, the Keys of the Town were presented to him,
which he afterward sent to the College of Arcala, with some Standards and
Arms of the Turks. All the booty was laid at his feet; Navarr having caused it
to be carefully locked up by the Cardinals order; Part was disposed afterward
defraying the charge of the Army; some rare pieces of value sent to Ferdinand,
and the rest distributed among the Captains and Soldiers according to their
respective valor and merit: The Cardinal for his share taking that which is
most acceptable to generous spirits the pleasure of giving to others. After
this he caused the Town to be cleansed and what might prove infectious to be
carried out, and in memory of the taking of the Town sounded an Hospital, and
ordained in the Church he built there, an Annual Service for the 15 of May to
perpetuity with Prayers to be made for him, for which he gave thirty thousand
Crowns.

Alvarez Gomez who writ more of the Actions of the Cardinal, then any Author
come into my hands observes that he held intelligence in Oran before he left
Spain with two Jews, Acmat Alcanixe the prime man of the Town and Catorre.
These persuaded the Townsmen to deny entrance to the Succors from Tremisen,
sent by that King to maintain the Siege, suggesting he designed by those
Succors to take the Town for himself. And when the Spaniards entered the Town,
those two men broke the Keys of a Gate where the people might have fled and
escaped the Massacre. The houses of these Jews were exempted from pillage, and
their persons from Violence, they passed afterward into Spain, and had
pensions from the King, during their Lives: Yet the same Gomez, and most of the
Spanish Historians forbear not to say that the Arrival of the Army the Siege,
and taking of the Town were all miraculous, that a Cross appeared to them at
their Landing, that the Sun stopped his Course 4 hours, adding so much length
to the day, to give light to the Combat.

Those of Tremesen made the taking of Oran fatal to the Christians and Jews
trading there, putting them all to death upon the news; while Spain on the other
shore Celebrated the success with Joy. The Cardinal had sent Ferdinand the news
by Fernand de Vera, son to Diego Master of the Artillery in this expedition,
who had desired the employment for his Son, but Fernand being young and
careless, made slow haste, sleep and play took up the best part of his time:
This occasioned a Soldier desirous to make advantage of the voyage to follow
him privately, and knowing the softness of his temper he robbed him off his
Letters to the King in the first Journey he made by Land, and arriving at
Court, ere Fernand was half way thither, Received of the King, the gifts
usually bestowed on Courriers that bring such happy news.

This new instance of negligence in Vera, confirmed the Cardinal in his
resolution taken on the Ethiopians miscarriage mentioned above, never to send a
Courrier on Affairs of importance, but such as should be a person of Judgment
and Merit, whose good address may advance the honor of the Prince and
Reputation of his Ministers.

The Cardinal had many Crosses in the beginning, nor had he fewer in the end of
this War: For as Fortune labors to obstruct virtuous Actions, so Envy strives
to obscure their glory: Peter of Navarr was preferred by the Cardinal to be
Lieutenant General of the Army, and Received from his hand the Authority and
honor he stood possessed of; but made so ill acknowledgement of the favor
that he employed them against the person of his Benefactor. A Soldier had
killed a Domestic of the Cardinals, who commanded Justice to be done
thereupon: Navarr not only opposed it, but upheld the Criminal, and bespoke his
General and Benefactour in this arrogant Language: If there be disorder and
insolency among the Soldiers; the cause is from you alone: They never knew two
Masters in War: Had I the sole command of the Army, I durst undertake in few
months to subdue Africa. Return when you please into Spain to attend your
charge of Prelate, and know that from henceforth you shall be no otherwise
treated then as a private person: These are not yours, but the Kings Arms. I
know the King gave you the Charge of Generalissimo, but it was only for the
Siege of Oran: your power is determined with the Siege: I will instantly cause
the Kings name to be proclaimed throughout the Army without mention of yours,
which he did the same day: To (...) offer reasons to a madman, is to imitate
him. Nor was he daunted it this insolent Proclamation that destroyed his
Authority, and Annulled his command. But some days after, with the generosity
and gravity natural to him, he sent for Navarr, gave Orders, and commanded him
to do what was necessary and fit to be done. Navarr obeyed him, acknowledged
his fault, begged his pardon, and was reconciled to him. The Cardinal embraced
him, commended him in public, and told him he deserved worthily the name of
Captain: but after their arrival in Spain, he set forth his humors and
extravagancies to the King, and advised him not to give him the Government of
Oran, nor any Authority in the Affairs of Africa, that the haughtiness of his
Nature, rendered him unfit for such employments, and was proper only for the
command of Armies, wherein he behaved himself as a man of valor and great
undertaking.

The Cardinal had in the mean time commanded the guards of the Port of Africa
to send him all the Letters that came from Spain, without any respect to their
address to others; they send him a packet directed to Navarr, he opens it where
he finds the Kings command to Navarr, that if the Cardinals presence were
requisite in Africa, he should keep him there as long as he could, and dissuade
him from crossing the Sea. The Cardinal being of a temper (natural to all great
spirits) Melancholic and Suspicious, imagined the King had written this with
design to ruin him, and that supposing the strength of his Aged body, much
impaired by the toiles of the War, he gave this command in hopes he would soon
pine away, and end his life there. This hastened his return; so that about the
end of May, he went on Board, and soon after arrived at Carthagene.

The first Action he did after his Arrival in Spain, was to Execute an Article
of his Testament, whereby he appointed that in case the War of Africa brought
any Damage to the Villages of the Diocese of Toledo, by reason of the great
number of Peasants he had employed in the War; Reparation should be made out
of his Estate, which he did himself in all places where he held it necessary. A
virtuous man ought not to leave that good undone till his Death, which he can
perform in his life.

The Cardinal arrived at Court continued his good Counsels for the advancement
of the State: he proposed to Ferdinand to change the Residence of the Knights
of Saint James, from the Monastery of Volsan in Spain, into the City of Oran in
Africa; And that to merit the Commanderies they should serve twenty years,
without parting thence, that so many years elapsed, they should succeed in the
Commanderies by their Seniority and Services. This (said he) will strengthen
your Militia in Africa, and render it formidably a number of Gentlemen who
commonly exceed others in valor: This advice if embraced had been attended
with great advantages, but the King refused it, only to reserve in himself the
power to prefer whom he pleased to these Commanderies.

The year following in the beginning of January, the Army Led by the Cardinal
into Africa, continued their progress, and advanced farther into the Country:
Peter of Navarr took the Town of Bugia, and about the end of July following,
that of Tripoly, but relapsing into his Vice of ingratitude against the
Cardinal, he joined with Vianelli, who followed his passion in endeavoring to
rend in pieces the Cardinals name, and destroy the reputation of him who had
advanced him to the prime Offices of the War. But as great Men prosper by
their Generosity, so unthankful wretches perish by ingratitude: Vianelli having
abused an Ensign in Africa, was by him betrayed to the Moors, who stabbed him
in his sleep. Peter of Navarr soon after on change of Fortune changed his
party, and sideing with the French in the Wars of Italy, was taken and
imprisoned by the Spaniards, where the miserable incommodities of a prison,
brought him to that height of despair, that the Spaniards say he attempted his
own life, and in hope to end his miseries, ended his days by his own hand, so
tragical was the Catastrophe of these two men signal for their envy, and
remarkable for their enmity to the glory of the Cardinal their Benefactour.

Peter Arias a valiant Captain, famous for many gallant actions in the same
War of Africa, has merited eternal praises for his constant payment of the
respect and acknowledgements due to the Cardinal who employed him. This
recommended him to the favor of the Court where he obtained the charge of
General of the Fleet, to the West Indies, against the savage Cannibals feeding
on humane flesh. There he became famous for his remarkable familiarity with
death, for being taken with an incurable malady, that sensibly threatened to
bring him lingeringly by degrees to his Grave, and finding himself past hope of
remedy, he caused a Grave to be dug in a Church where he went every day to
hear Mass, which being ended, he went to his Grave, and lay along in it,
celebrating in his life his own Funeral. As he lay in this Posture the Priest
with his Laver sprinkled Holy Water over him, and Chanted a Libera where it
needed not. This done, he rose again before death, went out of his Grave, and
made to his Lodgings. His wife and friends imputing this Action to Melancholy
more than Virtue or Devotion, endeavored to divert him from it. But he
seriously answered, I Do this to Accustom my self by little and little to an
habitation where I must long abide. And though Dead men need no Accustomance to
their Long home, yet such was the Meditation of this gallant Captain Arias upon
death, which though a stranger to his mind in the Wars where he had it daily
in his Eye, he practiced in peace in all its parts and Circumstances. Man
better thinks of his end in repose and tranquillity of Spirit, than in the
troubles of Affairs, and passions that distract him.

The envy that attaqued the Cardinal in the beginning and progress of the War
of Africa, could not hinder him from obtaining (over and above the glory of
having planted the Cross there, and extended the limits of Spain, to the other
side of the Sea) the reputation of a Captain fit to command Armies, generous in
Enterprise, prudent in Conduct, and hardy in Execution. Order and Discipline
the soul of War, as well as other Affairs of the World was wisely established,
and carefully kept during his command, insomuch that the old Spanish Soldiers
long after his death, gave this testimony of his conduct in War, that Captains
and Soldiers were never in greater honor and esteem, nor the Musters better
paid than in his Time: It Is admirable that a Man bred in a Cloister, having
never made profession of Arms, employed to the Age of Seventy years in
Ecclesiastical Functions became capable in a Moment to command an Army like him
in former Ages of whom it is observed that he went from the Republic less than
a Soldier, Scipio.
became by the way an excellent Captain. Ministers of State endued with an
excellent vivacity of Spirit and solid Judgment, learn by little exercise the
business of a Captain. The Cardinal attained it so, quickly and happily that
had he lived in those great Republics that triumphed over the best parts of
the World, they had to his name Ximenes, added the Surname of African.

CAP. VIII.
UPon the first design of the War of Africa, the Cardinal furnished the King
with money toward the Charge thereof on Condition of re-imbursement, or case
Oran were taken, the King should grant it to the Arch bishop of Toledo, unless
he chose rather to pay the money; The Voyage of Africa being generously
accomplished, and the Spaniards masters of Oran, the Cardinal demands the money
he advanced. This gave his Enemies fresh occasion to attacque his reputation,
and calumniated his integrity; The grandees of Spain who had designed to
trouble the State after Isabels death, and to take from Ferdinand the
Administration of Castile saw their designs defeated by the Counsels of the
Cardinal, and themselves reduced to a private life in their houses with as
little Authority as the meanest Burgesses of Madrid. See here an opportunity of
Revenge, to out the Cardinal from Court, and soon after with ease to Remove
Ferdinand from the Administration: they lay hold on it, and Remonstrate to
Ferdinand, that the Cardinals avarice was insatiable; that there was no reason
he should demand the money advanced, having made vast gains by the richest part
of the booty of Oran which he had reserved for himself, in recompense of his
Loans, That the bravest warriers having lost their blood in battle, returned
with no greater felicity than that of being laden with glory and Booty; that
the more generous contented themselves with the glory, leaving the booty to the
Soldiers. But the Cardinal who had seen no Field but St. Michaels Chapel, nor
handled other Weapon than his Breviary, while others with their Swords in their
hands, lay weltred in blood in the midst of their Enemies, is not satisfied
with the glory of Conquest, and spoils of a City, but must empty the Kings
Coffers on pretense of a Lone, which the King was not obliged to pay. The King
unwilling to drain his Treasures (as what King is willing to do it?) approves
of these discourses. So easily do Monarks believe what they desire: The Kings
Officers spoke almost to the same effect: The Cardinal never daunted by the
Crosses and Troubles of Court, makes a generous defense; alleges the Services
he had done in the War, that besides the money furnished to Levy the Army, he
had Conducted them to the place, established order amongst them, prevented the
frauds and pilleries of the Captains at Musters, which often proves the
destruction of Armies (for where the Soldier is not paid, he must of necessity
starve or disband) That but for him Navarr had left the Cavalry useless in the
Ships, that the Combat had not been undertaken if not Counseled yea commanded
by him. As to the Booty of Oran he took only some Arabic Volumes for the
Library of Alcala, where they were bestowed. That even that small parcel of the
Booty was not for him alone, but for the benefit of the whole Kingdom of Spain,
for whom he had founded the College and Library; and therefore he prayed his
Majesty to pay him the money advanced, or grant the City of Oran to the Church
of Toledo, according to promise. Some of the Council held this proposal
reasonable and useful to the King in saving him the Charge of a Garrison at
Oran; Others had more generous sentiments, and said that fear of expense ought
not to Ravish the Crown of Spain, of so important a place, that the Cardinal in
offering to maintain a Garrison there, acted as a King; and the King by
refusing it to save his money should act as a private person, and in derogation
to his Royal Condition; That honor is the true patrimony of Kings, to which
money ought to be subservient to preserve and increase it. That by the Laws of
the State, no private person can hold a place of strength upon the Frontiers of
the Kingdom that Agrede had been, heretofore taken from the Earls of
Montacute, because it was situate on the Confines of Arragon, and the Village
of B^z^, on the Sea side, over against Africa, from the Archbishops of Toledo.
That in Affairs of this Nature, the History of Spain gives no encouragement to
trust Priests more than men of other quality: Oppo Archbishop of Toledo
assisted Count Julian Governor of Granada to introduce the Moors into Spain,
who for many Ages shed the blood of the people, pulled down the Altars,
destroyed the Temples. And in several places established the Abominations of
Mahomet.

The Cardinal patiently heard these several Opinions, and saw they tended all
to his Ruin, but had before his eyes the Example of the great Captain
Gonsalves who having Conquered the Kingdom of Naples, and made it Subject to
the Crown of Spain, had no other Recompense but that of banishment in his own
Country, as living there without Office, without employment, without any
acknowledgement turning over his Beads at Valladolid, or sometimes at Court
where he was as inconsiderable; For men, how great soever their Virtues be are
oftentimes in the hands of Fortune and of Kings, as Counters in the hand of a
Banker, where that which now stands for a thousand presently signifies no more
than one.

Yet Reason and Justice carried the day, the Cardinal had them on his side, and
the King caused payment to be made him of the moneys he advanced, his Virtue
which before defended his Authority against Envy, and Obloquy preserved it
still and triumphed over both: and the Cardinal gave his Majesty thanks for
altering those opinions which the envy of the Grandees his Enemies had once
infused into his Majesty against him.

But this was not the only Trouble that sprung from the taking of Oran to the
vexation of the Cardinal. For among the conditions agreed on before the War;
one was that the Church of Oran should depend on that of Toledo in the quality
of an Abbey to which the Archbishop of Toledo, and not the King of Spain should
present Lewis William a Cordelier obtains a grant thereof by Bull from the Pope
with the Title of a Bishopric, which he assumed, but was hindered by the
Cardinal from taking possession; This man who leaving his Cloister, proposed to
himself the glory of appearing in the World with the Mytre and Revenue of a
Bishop, frames a Process in the Council, exclaims in the Court, complains of
the Cardinal, protests against his Violence, and proclaims to all the World,
that by the force of his great Authority he had Ravished a Bishopric from him.
The Cardinal to stop the mouth of this impudent Monk, who cared not what he
said, thought it prudence to propose a fair Accommodation, makes him understand
the Right accrued to the Archbishopric of Toledo, over the Church of Oran,
that he was obliged to maintain and Consecrate it to the Dignity of the
Archbishopric in memory of the War of Africa, not out of any covetous
designs to draw profit thence to enhance his Revenues, nor Ambition to join it
to the Cross of the Archbishopric, Offers it to him with the Title of Abbot
of Oran, and a seat in the Quire of the great Church of Toledo, with the
dignity and Revenue of a Canon, besides the Dignity and Revenue of Abbot of
Oran; Nothing but a Bishopric could satisfy the Cordelier; he refuses the
offer, the Cardinals Enemies bear him in hand, he should overthrow the
Cardinal, and obtain sentence from the King against him, he believes them and
continues obstinate. Ferdinand dying soon after, the Cardinal receives the
entire Government of Spain, slights the Cordelier, who continued, as before, a
Monk; and it may be, an ill one.

Francis Rouys Bishop of Ciudad Roderigos, the Cardinals Companion in the Order
of St. Francis, followed his fortune, and had negotiated for him at Court in
several Affairs of importance: he not content with his Bishopric, his Cross
seemed too small, and his Revenue far short of his desires; he presses the
Cardinal to procure him the Bishopric of Avilas then vacant: The Cardinal
answers, If my advice might prevail with you, you would value your repose above
Dignity and Revenues. You live happily in the condition you are in: Let me
persuade you to keep you so, and not seek troubles, and inquietudes elsewhere.
The time of our acquaintance cannot but have furnished you with clear
experience by your knowledge of my affairs, how many cares and troubles are hid
under the fair appearances of great Offices, and Eminent Dignities.
Nevertheless to satisfy the desires of his person who was knowing and
Virtuous, he made him Bishop of Avila, though he was ever averse from bringing
his friends into Offices which might break their repose, or endanger their
Consciences, and very Loath to draw out of Monasteries to the great dignities
of the Church, those men who were consecrated to God in the tranquillity of holy
Solitude. To draw a good Friar from the Cloister, when he loves his profession,
is to take Fish out of water, which is his proper Element.

The Cardinal had Labored with great care and Vigilance in peace and War for
the State of Spain, and now pressed with Age, which sliding away like the
Current of a rapid stream, brings a man to his end sooner than he is aware of,
casts his thoughts toward the advancement of his house; Marries one of his
Brothers to great advantage into one of the noble families of Spain, where
Virtue the Mother of Nobility was as Eminent as the blood illustrious; he made
it a condition in the Marriage, his Brother should not come to Court, where
vanity and Luxury (whose Vassals are the basest of Slaves) bear a Sovereign
sway, introducing into their Dominions all sorts of Corruptions. He enjoined
him to reside in the place of his nativity to live nobly there in a virtuous
tranquillity. Some years after he married Joan Cisnere his Niece to Peter
Gonsales Mendoza Nephew of Diego Mendoza Duke of Infantado, a name and Family
of the first Rank of the Nobility of Spain, he gave him for portion the
Marquisat of Val Suilian: The married Couple were both in their Minority, which
soon after served the Cardinal for a pretense to annul the Marriage, though
really the true cause of the Rupture was the cheat and deceit of Mendoza's
Kindred, who thinking that having given the Cardinal a man of their name and
Family, they had sufficiently obliged him to provide him a fortune, performed
not the promises they had made in behalf of their Kinsman in point of Estate.
For his Mother in confidence the Cardinal would provide enough for Peter, left
by her Will, her whole Estate to Roderick Gonsales her younger Son, but the
Cardinal who loved solid honor, scorned to be baffled, and broke the Marriage,
maugre all the opposition of the Duke of Infantado: Yet afterward he married
her into the same Family to Alfonso Mendoza, son and heir to Bernardo Mendoza
Earl of Clung: Such was the care he had of his Kindred. Nor is it forbidden
that a Minister of State should impart to this Kindred the fortune he
possesses, if done with moderation, and that by his Alliance he cover not, nor
uphold the Violences of others. This natural affection is an evidence of his
goodness, and sets of the Glory of his Actions with greater advantage.

The Naval Army soon after sent for the Conquest of Africa, had not the good
success of that Led by the Cardinal. Don Garija son to the Duke of Alva,
Commanded it, and had the misfortune to see it defeated by the Turks and Moors
at Gerbes: Ferdinand designs to set out another Fleet, and the Rendezvous to
be at Cadiz, but would not resolve till advice with the Cardiin this as other
matters, a Courrier is dispatched to him at Toledo to command his attendance at
Sevil: The Cardinal set out, and drawing near to Guadalquana expresses a desire
to Lodge in the Inn of Saja Vedra and sends his harbingers to take it up, The
harbingers find it marked for Gonsalve the great Captain, and advise the
Cardinal accordingly, Take another (says the Cardinal and leave that to him
who deserves all manner of honor. So propense was the Cardinal on all
occasions to honor persons of Eminent Virtues: great men naturally love those
that resemble themselves when the Concurrence of Offices or Jealousy of
dignities do not intetpose.

When the Cardinal drew near to Sevil, the King with all the Court went four
Leagues to meet him; the Cardinals Enemies being part of the Retinue, and thus
forced to honor him, they envyed and hated. The King at their meeting alighted
and Reverenced that head whence issued those Counsels that gave happiness to
Spain. This honor wrought two different effects, of humility in the Cardinal
and Rage in his Enemies.

At Sevil a Vessel arrived from the Indies, brought the King and Cardinal
advice that the Spaniards in the West Indies abusing the advantages they had
received from God above the people of that Country, tyrannized over those new
subjects of God and the King, and Sacrificed the lives of the Indians to their
avarice, Murdering them first, and then Robbing them of the Gold amassed in
their Grounds, and laying all desolate, without pi^ty, without mercy, without
Justice. The Cardinal advised his Master to send thither some men under the
Rules of Religion, who dead to the World, and wholly dis-interessed from secular
concerns might oppose their Charity to the violence of the Governors. The
advice was embraced; many men of his Order, Embarked for the Voyage; and among
them three of the Cardinals companions, whereof Francis Rouys was one; but the
Air of India, not agreeing with his Constitution, forced him to return to
Madrid, six months after his departure: At his Arrival he presented King
Ferdinand with a Box full of Idols Worshipped by the Indians, and a wedge of
Gold weighed above a thousand Ducats which doubtless had been an Idol to which
they who tormen^ed the Indians paid their devotions. At Sevil proposal was made
for raising another Army to recover the honor lost by the defeat of the
former, some preparations were made, but the affairs of Pope Julius the second
put a stop to the proceedings. This Prelate who troubled all Europe sent his
Nuncio into Spain to desire Aid from Ferdinand against the Council of Pisa,
(where the Cardials had chosen another Pope) and to demand vengeance against
Bernardine Cardinal Caruajale a Spaniard whom he had struck out of the
Catalogue of Cardinals as Author of that Council, and prayed the King to divest
him of the Bishopric of Siguenza which he held in Spain: Ferdinand to please
the Pope, took the Bishopric from Bernardine, and gave it Frederick of
Portugal; But the storm being over, Bernardine was afterward restored to the
Bishopric, that he might end his life with some kind of Dignity: in the affair
of Julius the second the generosity of the Cardinal in acknowledging the
favors of those who had obliged him was remarkable: he writ to this Pope who
had sent him the Cardinals Cap, that he would return him to Rome four hundred
thousand Crowns when he pleased, that he would Levy an Army at his own Charge
if the Pope needed it, and would in person lead them into Italy against his
Enemies. The fruit of a good Office is never lost, where it is sown in a
generous spirit.

CAP. IX.
SOon after the affairs of Africa put on a better face, the Kings of Tremesen
and Tunis sent their Ambassadors with presents to Ferdinand to treat of peace,
which was concluded, and free Commerce established between the Moors and
Spaniards of Oran: This peace with Africa pleased the Cardinal exceedingly, who
having been the first Author of the War of Africa, rejoiced beyond measure, to
see the fruits of his Lab^urs in a happy peace. The Affairs of Europe rann a
course quite contrary; Julius the second increased the trouble, he makes a
League with Ferdinand and the Venetian against the French; And he who ought to
have been the father of Christians, labored nothing more than to set his
Children by the Ears: Ferdinand to prepare himself for this League, sent for
the Cardinal to Burgos to advise with him; the Cardinal came thither, and for
his Lodging they had marked the Count of Salines house, where Prince Ferdinand
brother of Charles afterward surnamed the fifth was Lodged: The King his Grand
father commanded him to Remove, but the Cardinal would not by any means accept
of that Lodging, And when the King would have forced him by absolute and
express commands to that purpose, be excused himself saying, the Countess of
Salines with her Ladies were Lodged there, and that by the institution of his
order, he was prohibited to Lodge with women, which he Religiously observed
both at Court, and in his journeys: The day following the Cardinal walked with
Prince Ferdinand into the Palace Gardens: the King spies them from his Window,
and Calling to the Prince, bespeaks him aloud in these words, Son, You are in
very good company, and if you take my advice, will never part from it. Knowing
he was with a man who could make Princes such as they ought to be Wise,
Religious, and Generous: from the Garden the Cardinal attended the young Prince
to the Palace where he took leave of him to retire to his Lodgings, the Prince
offered to bear him Company, the King coming upon them in the Complement
advised him to it, but the Cardinal thanked for the honor and obtained
permission to Go alone. The resolutions taken in the Assembly at Burgos by the
advice of the Cardinal were, that the King should not hasten the War, but
choose any way rather than that of Arms to bring affairs to a solid peace: but
this advice was soon changed: The Cardinal receives Advertisement of a secret
League between the Kings of France and Navarr, thereupon he prepares for War,
advises his Master to it: And presses him to hasten the raising of an Army:
The discovery of the League was thus: The King of Navarr was passionately in
Love with a Lady of the Court, whose beauties had charmed his reason; This Love
by the prerogatives of the Crown which few Women know how to deny, was come to
enjoyment. A Secretary of State, and prime confident of this Prince took part
in this affair of Love, as if it had been a matter of State, Visits the Lady,
declares his affection, beggs her savor; she who had as great need of this
man's pen as the Liberality of the King, grants his desire; the King surprises
them together, and stabbs the Secretary: For Kings can no more admit partakers
of their Loves, than of their Scepters: A Priest of Pampelune called to Confess
the dying Secretary, having cleared his Conscience, ransacked his pockets;
there among other things he finds this secret Treaty, which he gave or sold to
the Spanish Ambassador resident in the Court of Navarr: They sent it to the
Cardinal; The Tenor of the League was that the King of Navarr should refuse
Ferdinand passage through his Countries when he marched in the aid of Julius
the second. That he should enter Spain with an Army when required by France.
That for this, restitution should be made him by France of his Patrimony, than
in the possession of the Duke of Nemours, father of Germain then Queen of
Spain, and of all the Rites and Possessions of the house of Albret detained by
France. That he should receive from France an Annual pension suitable to his
Royal Dignity. That France should by negotiation or Arms procure restitution
to be made him of that part of the Estate of Queen Catherine his Wife about
Burgos then detained from him: The Cardinal having read those Conditions,
Levied an Army and carried things to that point, that the Spaniards attribute
to him the War of Navarr, as the Author of it, though in truth the Violence of
Julius the second, and Ferdinands Ambition caused that War memorable in
History for the blood shed therein, which has afforded us this observation,
That War is a bloody burying place or Caemitere of Mankind.

The year 1513. being the next after the trouble of Navarr, Carried Julius the
second, out of the world to prevent his spreading of further mischiefs: soon
after, Ferdinand fell sick of the malady whereof he dyed: this affected him
with extraordinary sadness. To make him merry the whole Court turned Revellers:
the Ladies endeavored to please him by their divertisements of Balls and
Dances; the Gentlemen by Justs and Tournaments. Alfonso Mendoza Husband of the
Cardinal Niece was of the party and expended seven thousand Crowns to fit
himself for the solemnity a great expense in those times; this was to be paid
out of the Cardinals purse who used to reject and disallow all vain expenses,
but paid this cheerfully, telling those who spoke to him of it, that these
Tournaments were the remedy for recovery of the Kings health which he should buy
very cheap since his Nephew had expended no more. So willing was he to part
with his estate for the good of his Prince or relief of the people. 'Twas at
this time he made provision against that public exigency to which Spain is
often reduced for want of Corn: At Toledo, Arcala and Torrelaguce, he built
public Granaries, and filled them with Corn. The Senate of Toledo, in
acknowledgement of the benefit, has Consecrated the memory thereof to
perpetuity, by an Inscription engraven in the midst of the Palace; and the
people preserves the memory of it by a Marble Table, which to this day shows
the Character of his Liberality in the great Market of the City; and yearly on
the fifth of October, they Celebrate their grateful acknowledgements in an
Harangue made of the Virtues and merits of this great man.

Soon after he erected a magnificent Monastery and Church at Torrelagave for
the perpetual Celebration of his praises, whose bounty raised him to the height
of his fortunes: he adorned the Church with Sacred Vessels, and Vestments, and
furnished it with all necessaries for the Service of God, and Ornament of
Religious Worship. For the convenience of this holy place and the public, he
clave Rocks, and boared through Mountains to make Aqueducts for conveyance of
water thither from a spring at great distance from the Church; the Aqueducts
were Arched and Wide, and cost him by the computation of the Spaniards, no less
than a Million of Gold, this place to this day testifies the Generosity of this
Cardinal in his affections to the public; for great edifices without flattery,
report to posterity the Grandeur of the Builders.

But though he built of his own for the public good, yet would he not permit
others to be Magnificent at the Spaniards charges. Pope Leo the Tenth, who
succeeded Julius the second, had a design at this time to build at Rome, a
Temple to St. Peter, suitable to the dignity of the first Church of
Christendom; and because the charge of such a building amounted to vast sums
of money, he sent his Bulls into Spain, to demand Contribution from the
Spaniards. King Ferdinand consented, but the Cardinal being a severe man, and
inclined to ease the people, though he commended the Popes design, approved not
his exacting Money by his Bulls, but with all his power hindered the Execution
thereof; and with a generous liberty writ his thoughts thereupon to Rome, and
told them his mind.

Ferdinand approached the end of his Reign, and his Life, by the malady before
mentioned, which handled him so rudely at Burgos, that he left that place,
imputing to the Air the cause of that distemper he carried within him. When he
came to Arand, he sent for the Cardinal, who set out to attend him, and drawing
near to the Court, the King went in his Litter to meet him, to the astonishment
of all that were about him, his disease having so weakened him that he could
hardly stand, and in a few days after was laid on his deathbed. The Cardinal
was very desirous to wait on his Master to the last moment of his days, but
thought fit to withdraw, to avoid the suspicion his attendance might occasion,
if he were appointed governor of the Kingdom, which would be attributed more
to the Ambition of the Cardinal, than the Judgment of the King or the advice
of his Council.

This was the reason of his retiring to Arcala D' Henares, while God disposed
of this Prince according to the Decree of his will. Ferdinand in the mean time
felt himself dying, yet could not believe he should dye of this sickness. The
holy women of Avila had deluded his reason by her pretended prediction, that he
should outlive the violence of his distemper: he was so possessed with conceit
of the truth of her assertions, that he rejected and put off Matreuse the
Cordelier his Confessor who came to dispose his Conscience to part with this
World, and appear before him who Judges Kings without respect to their Crowns,
and said, That Man came to see him, not out of zeal, of piety or devotion, but
ambition, and in hopes to obtain some gift. Prince Charles his young Son, sent
Dean Adrian of Vtretcht to Visit him in his Sickness, but he could not get
audience; and when the Secretaries of State, moved in his behalf, and were
urgent with the King to admit him to his presence, he refused answering them in
Spanish, What comes he for, it may be to see whether I am dead or not. However
he admitted him afterward, and received the complement of Charles: The great
ones of the world can hardly part with it, nor is there any place men are more
loath to leave, than a Throne: But Death is as inexorable as necessary; She
respects not Scepters, nor fears Crowns. The Physicians, and principal
Counselors of State advertise Ferdinand, he was arrived at the last hour of
his life, that he had but a short time left to think of the Affairs of his
Conscience and Kingdom this made him Resolved to admit his Confessor and
believe, the Saint of Avila had not received from Heaven the advice she gave in
the Affairs of his Kingdom: he told them that by his secret Testament made at
Burgos, he had ordered Ferdinand his younger son, Brother of Charles to be
Governor of Spain, and appropriated to him as a peculiar Legacy the grand
Master-shipps of the three principal orders of Spain, those of St. James,
Calatrave and Alcantara. The Counselors remonstrate to him the injury he did
the Crown in the Alienation of those three orders which himself had judged
necessary to be kept always annexed to it: That he gave them to a Prince who
might when he pleased make use of them against the Crown, that the best and
surest inheritance he could leave Ferdinand was the love and good will of his
brother Charles. That it was dangerous to leave the Government of Spain in the
hands of Ferdinand whose youth made him sussceptible of ill impressions from
the great ones to the ruin of the State: Upon these Remonstrances he altered
his Resolutions and appointed Charles Governor during the life of the Queen
his Mother, sole Heiress of that Kingdom. But in the absence of Charles, there
wanted an administrator to manage the public affairs, with prudence, integrity
and generosity: Laurence Galinda Caravegal, one of the Counselors proposed the
Cardinal as eminently endued with all these qualities. Ferdinand turns his
head, and answers, Know you not the severity of Ximenes his spirit, no ways
fit to treat with men? Thus did he Reject him whose conduct he admired, whose
person he honored going to meet him every time he came to do him service, such
was the inconstancy of this great King. But there was some (though a very
light) cause for this disdain of Ferdinand against the Cardinal. The King
wanted a great sum of money, and would have borrowed it of the Cardinal, but
he refused to lend it, telling him boldly, the moneys arising from his
Ecclesiastical Revenues, were neither his, nor his Majesty's, but belonged to
the poor of the Archbishopric of Toledo, whose necessities could not give way
to the Loan he proposed: Nevertheless the Cardinals merit prevailed more with
Ferdinand than the memory of this Refusal: having mused awhile; his mind
altered, and he tells the Counselors, Were it possible to frame a person of
purpose fitted with virtues proper for the Government of my Kingdoms, he could
not be more capable than the Cardinal to discharge it, if we could mitigate the
excessive severity of his nature, and temper it with some sweetness of
disposition: he has to this time acknowledged Queen Isabels favors and mine,
and will certainly retain a grateful memory of them for the future: with that,
he declared him administrator General of Spain, and presently after breathed
his last.

This change of the Testament at Burgos alarmed the Governors of Prince
Ferdinand, they persuaded him to take on him the Government of the Kingdom, and
dispatch Patents in his name to the Counselors of State, requiring their
attendance to advise him in the Government. One of them upon receipt of his
Letters made Answer, We will go to the Prince to pay him our respects but we
know no King but Caesar: which allusion to that piece of holy Scripture proved
Prophetical; Charles then King, being afterward Emperor. The Cardinal in the
mean time enters on the Government of Spain, where he was so absolute that
having long since the purpose of the Church, he wanted only that of a Monarch,
and the name of a King, he held the Government two years, which he managed with
prudence, integrity, and magnanimity inseparable from his actions: he bore up
courageously against the disturbers of the public peace, and wisely appeased
the Troubles of Spain, checked and suppressed the boldness of the great Ones;
and plucked out of their hands the estates of the meaner sort, ravished from
them by violence and injustice: insomuch that Spain did then acknowledge, and
confesses to this day, She never enjoyed so perfect repose, so secure a peace,
as under the conduct of the Cardinal; who made it appear that the happiness of
the people is so far from being inconsistent with the glory of Administration,
that the direct way for a Minister of State to acquire glory and honor is, by
employing his cares with prudence and generosity to procure and promote the
good of the People.

CAP. X.
THE first Action he did after opening King Ferdinand's Testament, which
declared him Regent of Spain, was, The taking of Prince Ferdinand into his
care. And having given him a Retinue befitting his birth, he kept him always
near him, to prevent the great Ones of Spain, from drawing him to their party,
and making him their head, to follow the motion of the members, and to be at
the discretion of his pretended Vassals. After this he took order for
performance of the honors due to Queen German, and the Maintenance of her
family, suitable to her dignity.

The Crosses that rendered his Conduct more illustrious, attacqued him early:
Adrian of Vtrecht, Dean of Lorain, was sent by Charles into Spain in
Ferdinand's sickness, with Patents for the Government of Spain, in case
Ferdinand dyed: After his death, Adrian declared his Charge, published his
Patents in full Council; and would have taken upon him the Sovereign
administration of affairs. The Cardinal opposed it, and Remonstrates, that by
the Testament of Queen Isabel, King Ferdinand was made Regent of the Kingdom,
until Charles should have attained the Age of twenty years, that, Ferdinand
being dead before that time, he was by his Testament to succeed in his room.
And therefore the Regency belonged to him alone. Moreover, that by the Laws of
the Kingdom it was prohibited that a Stranger should Govern the State; and that
Adrian, being a Fleming, his birth excluded him from what he pretended to. This
Contest had Abettors and maintainers on both parts: the Cardinal had the good
Patriots on his side; and Adrian was upheld by the ambitious Grandees, who
desired nothing more than trouble to gain by, Charles who was in Flanders must
determine the difference: but while his Judgment was expected, the Cardinal
and Adrian Governed jointly, and both signed all Orders and Commands; though
Adrian was but the shadow to follow the motions of the Cardinal as the
substance acting in the public Affairs.

The first that by Arms disturbed the public peace was Peter Porto Carrero,
Brother to the Duke of Ascalon, whose Successors, are, at this day, Marquesses
of Villa-nova. This man, of great power among the Portuguese beyond the River
Guadiana, stirred up the people on that side the River to take up Arms, and set
all in confusion throughout that Province: his design was to possess himself,
by force, of the great Mastership of St. James, which the great Gonsalve
pretended to; and attended so long, till death put an end to his pretensions,
his hopes, his life, and his displeasures: Porto Carrero had obtained the
Pope's Bulls to succeed Ferdinand, in case he survived him. On the other side,
Prince Charles who was in Flanders had the Pope's Bulls for the three great
Commanderies of Spain: The Cardinal upon the first news of Porto Carrero's
Arming, without more ado, sent toward him some Troops of his men at Arms,
under the Conduct of Ville Fanno who restored peace to the Province, and beat
the feeble Mutineer, into more wisdom for the future: The best remedy for
Troubles raised by particular persons, is the Public Force.

This first Cloud thus dissipated, the Cardinal brought the Court and Council
to Madrid, as a place where the Liberty of the Regency would be more absolute
against the Grandees of Spain. A Courrier arrives there from Charles with
Letters to Queen German, the Council, and Grandees; containing his promise of
coming into Spain the next Summer; with Order to all that owed him obedience,
to pay it in the mean time entirely to the Cardinal. These Letters came
attended with private instructions to Adrian to found their opinions of the new
Title of King of Spain, which he had assumed on the death of Ferdinand, Adrian
speaks of it to the Cardinal and Council; they wonder at the Novelty, and
Answer, That by Ferdinand's death, Charles had acquired nothing in Spain; That
the Queen his Mother lived there sole Heiress of the Kingdoms. In their Letters
to Charles, they remonstrate that his Assuming the quality of King, might cause
trouble in the State, by furnishing seditious Spirits with a pretense to take
up Arms; and declare, that it was not Just to suffer the usurpation of the
Royalty, during the life of their natural Queen. Charles answered, that having
taken upon him the quality of King at the request of the Pope, and by advice of
the Emperor; it would not become him to quit it, but would be of prejudice to
his Authority, and derogatory to his honor. He writes to the Cardinal to
employ his Credit to procure him the continuance of the name of King, and to
proclaim him King throughout Spain. The Cardinal sitts about it, and plyes it
closely; called an Assembly of the Notable persons of the Realm composed of
Prelates, Grandees of Spain, and Counselors of State, and causes overtures to
be made, and the Affair proposed to them by Laurence Galiud Counselor of
State, his Confident, a man of great Learning and Eloquence. Who declared to
the Assembly the pitiful condition, and miserable Estate of Queen Joan now
besides her self, and incapable to Govern; shows them the necessity of having a
Prince, who might, at least in name, fill up what she could not indeed possess:
That Authority was the soul of the Kingdom; and since it could not be found in
the person of Joan, they must seek it in that of Charles: That it was no new
thing for the Infantes of Spain to bear the Title of Kings in their Parents
lifetime. He cited Presidents in the Reign of the Goths and their Successors.
In the Close of his discourse, he drew out of his bosom the Prince's Letters,
not demanding advice, but commanding obedience; and concluded it better, By
unanimous consent to gratify him in his desires, with Congratulation to him
for the Title he had assumed, than to refuse him That he had already taken, and
was resolved to keep. The Bishops, and Councillors of State, were of his
Opinion: The Grandees, of the Contrary. Henry Almirante, and Frederick D' Alva,
swore before the Assembly, They would never endure such an Usurpation. The
Cardinal turns to them, and with a face and voice full of severity says, King
Charles has no need of your Votes for the quality he Assumes; nor did I
assemble you, to desire them: but of my free inclinations for your good to give
you this occasion by the freeness of your Suffrages and cheerful Consent, to
merit the good will and favor of our Prince. But since you conceive that to be
due to you of Right, which was done you of Courtesy; I Will make you know, you
are not so necessary in this business as you mistake your selves to be. And
going out of the Council he sent for the Governor of Madrid, and commanded him
to cause Charles of Austria, to be proclaimed King of Castile by sound of
Trumpet in every Street of the Town; which was solemnly done the same day.
Toledo followed the Example of Madrid, and joyfully made the like Proclamation:
Such was the fruit of the Cardinals Severity, that the Grandees durst not
attempt any thing to hinder it. Where a Minister of State sees, Discourse and
Persuasions too feeble to prevail, he must use severity and force to back his
Authority.

The Kingdom of Arragon, followed not the example of Castile. Alfonso of
Arragon, Bishop of Saragosa, was Governor there by the Testament of Ferdinand.
The Arragonois, wonderful Jealous of the Laws of their State, refused to give
Charles the Title of King, during his mothers life: And, to second the refusal
with violence, Peter Gironne, eldest Son of the Earl of Vrenne, takes up Arms,
attacques the Duchy of Medina, Sedonia pretending a right to it; and besieges
Luzerre on the Sea side. The Cardinal sends against him a light Army under the
Conduct of Anthony Fonseca, and with him a Minister of Justice to punish the
Rebels with the Axe and Rope; Fonseca goes directly to Luzerre, raises the
Siege, and puts the Rebels to flight; who not long after came from those parts
to increase the troubles raised by the Duke of Infantade on his side: Who
keeping in mind the offense given by the Cardinal, by breaking off (as he said)
the Marriage between his Niece, and the Duke's Nephew, exclaimed against him in
Words and Writing; publishing in his Manifestoes, that the Nobility of Spain
were oppressed by the Cardinal (whom he called an unfrock'd Monk); That the
grandees of Spain had ever defended the Crown; that it was more reasonable the
Cardinal should obey them as Protectors of the State, than that they should
submit to the Cardinal, who had nothing worthy the taking notice of, but the
quality he owed to the gift of blind Fortune; and knew no more than the
severities and humoursome Vagaries the Monks practice in their Cloisters, when
they persecute one another. The Cardinal who was excellently judicious slighted
these Rodomantadoes, knowing that Choler without Force, is a Wind that makes a
noise but cann^^ (...). That the Grandees of Spain, spend their Revenues on
their Vanity and Luxury, to the last Farthing; having nothing left but noise
and exclamations, the feeble support of their huffing and pride; when he could
pay an Army with the Revenue of his Benefices. And leaving them thus to Champ
on the bit, he gave them leisure to acknowledge their fault and feebleness, and
by the Experience of his powerful Authority to come to themselves, and return
to their duty; which most of them did, and among others the Duke of Infantade,
who, after so many sallies, and freaks, sent him Letters of Submission and
testimonials of his Affection and Obedience. For they saw this Man entirely
fixed and resolute in his designs; when just then he had rendered himself
capable to command Armies, learning daily the Theory and practick of the Art of
War, entertaining himself with Discourses of all points thereof, amongst the
sagest and most Ancient Captains. Besides, he had a standing Army of thirty
thousand men, raised out of the Cities and Buroughs of Spain, who had no other
pay than Franchises and Immunities; These Forces made him formidable to his
personal Enemies, and to the Disturbers of the public peace. As wings carry
the Eagle to the glory of Combat; so Armies, the wings of Royal Authority,
carry it against the Enemies of the State, to their ruin and confusion, but to
its own certain Victory and Triumph.

The next Year being 1516. the Cardinal sent to Charles in Flanders, Diego
Lopez Ajala, a person in whom he reposed much confidence, to procure Letters
Patents to confirm Ferdinands Testament, which gave him the Regency; to approve
his Conduct; and to give him full Authority over the Council, the Tribunals of
Justice, the Governors of Towns, and the Receivers and Treasurers of the
Finances. Diego had in his Instructions, To let the King know, that the Grant
of these things by Letters Missive to the Council, was not sufficient. This he
did to take away all pretense from the Grandees for stirring the people against
him, on color that his Actions were not approved of by the Prince. For upon
his setting a foot thirty thousand men of the Militia of the Towns and Cities
which received Immunities only, for pay; the great Ones of Spain gave out that
these violent Courses tended to the subversion of the State That he Armed the
people against them, and with design first to destroy them, and then to ruin
the People; That his irregular Ambition, and exorbitant Pride had transported
him into a fantastic extravagancy of Acting the Captain, who had never handled
any Arms but a Breviary; nor worn any Armor but a Frock. Insomuch that when he
sent Japie of Segonia to make Levies of the Militia at Valladolid, the
inhabitants, instigated by Henry Almirant and others, ran to their Arms,
imprisoned Japie, fortified the Town; and rolling the Cannons to the Ramparts,
cried openly in the Streets, This is against Ximenes the Tyrant of the people.
The like fury was practiced in the Towns near Valladolid; and passing forward,
like Fire in a Forest, drew the Cities of Leon, Burgos, and many more, into the
like Revolt. The Cardinal was of opinion that violent Remedies would heighten
the disease, and inflame the more; and inclined to reduce the Mutineers to
their duty by the ways of Sweetness and Gentleness. Hence it was, that he writ
to them of Valladolid that had begun the disorder, That he never intended to
infringe their privileges, or violate their immunities: But that, if they had
any to exempt them from the Levies of the Militia, they ought to make them
known to the Council; where he would protect them to the utmost of his power.

But Reason and Gentleness are sometimes encouragements to greater Insolences
in the people: They of Valladolid sent the Cardinal an arrogant Answer, that
they had nothing to do with him, nor the Council, for the preservation of their
privileges; but knew well enough how to maintain them by their Arms against
his manifest Tyranny; and yet doubtless this was the Language of the great Ones
in the mouth of the people. They send into Flanders a solemn Embassy to Charles
against the Cardinal, to represent the peril he put the State of Spain in. The
Cardinal, whose prudence and courage crowned all his enterprises with good
success, sent also into Flanders; and by the negotiation of his Diego Lopez, a
man of Judgment and Dexterity, prepossessed Charles and made it appear to him,
that the Revolts in Spain were effects of the envy and malice of the great
Ones. Moreover, he ordered him to press for the Confirmation he desired, and to
declare that if it were not sent him, he would quit the management of Affairs,
and go to Toledo to enjoy there that Repose which is not to be found at Court.

The business of the Militia was for some time interrupted and laid aside, till
these Seditious were banished Spain. But (as the institution thereof by the
Cardinal was upon grounds of prudence, and very necessary to the Kingdom)
Philip the second, a Judicious Prince, Re-established it in the year 1565. long
after the decease of Ximenes. The Training of the People to War, is the
fortifying of the State. And the prudent Counsels of a Minister of State, who
designs the good of the public, are durable; and Time, the Father of truth,
dissipating the Factions and Fictions of those that Envy him, give them the
glorious advantage to serve after his death, for the rule of good Conduct.

CAP. XI.
THe Affairs of the Marine, claimed no less share in the cares of the Cardinal,
than the other Affairs of Spain. The death of Ferdinand, the malady of Queen
Joan, the absence and immaturity of Charles had made way for disorders to creep
in, to their Ruin. The Cardinal re-establishes at Sevil the ancient Methods
for Regulating the Maritine Affairs, re-fitts the number of Men of War
necessary for defense of the Coast; and Chasing Pirates, Manns and furnishes
them with Cannon, Powder, Bullets, and Victuals. Diego Columbo the Admiral, son
of the great Christopher Columbo who filled the new World with the Reputation
of Spain, and Spain with the Treasures of the new World, addresses himself to
the Cardinal as Regent of the Kingdom; beseeching him to extend his Compassion
and Justice to the Isles of the Ocean depending on the Crown of Spain, where
the merciless Spaniards treated the Natives ill, committing inhuman Cruelties
and using them worse than Mules or Asses, forcing them to carry burdens, and to
undergo Labors and Toyler intolerable; That these poor Islanders were men, and
carried in their faces the image of God as well as the Spaniards; That if they
were duller and more ignorant than the Spaniards, they were also better and
more innocent than they. The Cardinal sent thither Judges of known integrity
and sufficiency to end the differences which avarice and fury had sown in the
Islands, and in order to the relief of the Islanders, of whom some were killed
daily by the Spaniards in their Sugar-works, sent dispatches to Charles on that
Subject, desiring him to do therein as he thought fit. Charles, by advice of
the Flemings, and without the privity of the Cardinal, commanded 400 Moors
brought from the Land of Negroes into Portugal, to be sent into the Islands to
labor in the Sugar-works, and ease the Islanders, who were naturally weak and
feeble. The Cardinal, advertised of this Order, dispatched a Courrier to
Charles to put him in mind of the inconveniences might ensue upon the
introduction of these Negroes who were a strong and Warlike people, and would
questionless teach the Islanders the use of Arms, and the Art of War, which
would one day cause a notable Revolt. Charles communicates to his Council the
Advices of the Cardinal; the Flemings divert him from following them; and
persuade him, This Advice proceeded from the Cardinals Ambition because he was
not consulted with in the Affair: But in 1522. (5 years after the Cardinals
death) Charles felt to his cost the peril the Islands were in, occasioned by
the flighting of that Counsel; for the Moors, taking up Arms at the Isle of St.
Domingo, Attacqued the Town of that name, and had put all to Fire and Sword, if
not prevented by the valor of Melchior Castre, and Francis D' Avila, who
forced them to retreat and flee to the Mountains; and being beaten thence by
the Admirals Army, they had the deserts of their Rebellion in the punishment of
the Axe and the Rope inflicted on them.

The War of Navarr which happened in the time that the Cardinal ordered the
Affairs of the Marine, was an Evidence of his Courage and the haughtiness of
his Conduct: He sent an Army which stopped the Progress of the French more by
the advantage of narrow and difficult ways, than their Valor and Arms: and,
to deprive the Navarrois of occasion to take up Arms again, and recalling home
their Ancient and Lawful Lords, he pulled down the Walls of all their places of
strength, except Pampelun, and demolished all their Castles and Forts: which
was afterward of great advantage to Spain, which possessing Navarr without
just Title, kept it by the force of the Garrisons placed there, and the
weakness of the inhabitants. Great States are subject to Revolts, as gross
bodies to Fevers. Malaga, a Martine Town of Spain takes up Arms, and cries
Liberty, on this occasion. Complaint was made, that no punishment was inflicted
on Robbers taken in the City, though Justice had been demanded; for the
Criminal, by appeal from the sentence of the Judges of the City to the Admiral
of Castile, the Sovereign Judge in places near the Sea, often escaped the
punishments due to his misdeeds: the people in Arms ran into the places
subject to the Admiral's Jurisdiction, demolish the Tribunals of his Officers
of Justice, beat down the Racks and Gibbets set up for marks of their
Sovereignty, and, to maintain the sedition, roll the Cannons off the Ramparts,
shut the City Gates, and declare, that if the Cardinal would use his ordinary
Violences to the prejudice of their Liberties, they knew how to defend them by
Force. The Inhabitants brought into one place all their Utensils of Brass and
Copper, and having melted them down, Cast new Cannons, with the Arms of the
City, and these words atop, The Defenders of the Liberty of Malaga, caused
these Cannons to be Cast. The Flemmings in Charles's Court, thinking to draw
the Envy and Blame of the Rebellion of Malaga, on the Cardinal's Conduct, who,
they said, was too harsh, and Rigorous for the people of Spain; encouraged
those of Malaga by Letters, to defend themselves against his Violence,
promising them their Assistance with Charles. But the Cardinal, slighting the
threats of the Flemmings, carried on his Affairs with Courage and Prudence; and
like a sage Pilot, who scorns to forsake the Helm in a Tempest, continued his
Conduct; and applied the Remedies he thought proper for these Popular
Commotions, by sending 6000 Foot, and 400 Horse of the Militia of Spain, under
the Command of Anthony Cueva, directly to Malaga; with Order to use the
inhabitants as Enemies of the State. Cueva marches with these forces; and being
within two days March of the City, the Citizens, better advised, sent their
Deputies to tender him Obedience. He goes thither, and enters the City,
disarmed the Rebels, and Hanged five only, for an Example, and Terror to
others. Thus, without Expense, without spilling the blood of the Subject,
whereof a Minister of State ought to be always sparing; the Cardinal quenched
the fire of Rebellion, kindled in a place from whence it might have easily
dilated to the utter Consumption of the soundest parts of the State. Of so
great importance it is, that the Authority of a Minister be entire, and like
that of the Sovereign's it represents.

The flames of Rebellion were no sooner quenched in one part of Spain, but the
Grandees blew them up in another; and always with design to charge the
Cardinals Conduct with the blame of the Confl^gration. They set up Velasio
Cuellar, high Treasurer of Spain, and Superintendant of the Finances, against
the Cardinal; and, to engage him to Arm with more Ardour and Eagerness, they
make Mary, Velasio his Wife, of the party: who persuaded him to seize Arevale,
which he did, and Cantoned it with his Forces, whom he disposed into several
quarters, Fortified by him in that Country. The Admiral of Spain was the
principal Boutefeu, and main Incendiary, and Ringleader of this new Commotion;
he foments it, goes by Night to the Duches of the place, speaks to the
Inhabitants, encourages them to hold out stiffly; promising them Succors of
Men, and supplies of Money, in case they were Assaulted; And that he would come
in person to defend them from the Violences of the Regent, till the arrival of
Charles into Spain, for their deliverance. The Cardinal knew of these Troubles,
and the Abettors thereof; and fearing to lose Velasio, a person of quality, he
tried every way before that of force to reduce him: he writ, exhorted,
entreated, and threatened if he obeyed not, but all to no purpose: This obliged
him to send thither some Regiments of Horse, and Foot, with a train of
Artillery, under the Command of Cornelius. The Forces arrived at the place, and
the Captain summoned Velasio to render himself, declaring that in case of
disobedience, he would put all to Fire and Sword, and him to death by the hand
of a Hangman, and transmit to his posterity the infamy of his Crime. Velasio,
seeing himself deceived by the Admiral, and other Grandees, who had made him
promises of Forces and other Succors they could not perform, consulted his own
safety, obeyed, opened the Gates; and received Grace and Pardon, instead of the
Punishment he deserved.

The Cardinal having appeased this Sedition also, without Charge or Blood, gave
Charles Advice thereof, and entreated him to cause the Admiral to be punished,
as the Author of all those troubles that arose in Spain; whose proceedings
confirm, by a pregnant instance, That the Obedience due to Kings is a very
brittle and frail thing, if not upheld by fear, and the reverence of Majesty.
To preserve which, the Cardinal instituted the Militia in the Kingdom, that he
might have Arms ready at hand to resist the motions of Insurrections, and
suppress them in the birth, without giving them time of growth and increase.
And, to render the strength of the Militia more considerable he caused a great
quantity of Artillery to be made: and filled Arsenals with it in the four
Corners of Spain, for the Convenience of drawing them where it should be
necessary for defense of the Royal Authority, with these fulminous Engines. The
Cannon is the last reason of Kings, and, if not the best, yet certainly the
best able to defend them.

CAP. XII.
THhough the Cardinal, Regent of Spain after Ferdinands death, had in his hand
the Regal Authority, yet hitherto you have seen him exercise only the Office of
a Physician to cure the distempers of it; But now that he has restored it to
health and peace, he bends all his thoughts to the exercise of Justice, the
principal business of Kings. He began with the Governors of Towns and Cities,
sending Judges impartial and not subject to Corruption, to inquire into their
demeanor, and inform him of their deportment and behavior in their places;
and where he understood they were Tyrannical to the oppression of the poor, who
groaned under their violences, he deposed them from their dignities; and having
made their names infamous, left them more miserable than those they oppressed.
He of Toledo was the first example of his Justice. The Officers of Justice who
behaved themselves ill, had the punishments they deserved: some of them who had
been more covetous than Just, having sold the right of the Poor to the purse of
the rich, were whipped through the Streets of those Towns where they had been
in Commission; with a Hangman at their backs, and before them, a Trumpet who
proclaimed their shame in the Enormity of their Crime. The like usage had they
who in places of Judicature had exacted sees that were not due. The greater
Gentry who were Justices in the Countries whereof they were Lords: those Eagles
which break through the Spider-webb, could not escape the punishment due to
their violences, by being exempt from the Jurisdiction and power of the Judges:
for the Cardinal caused them to be handled with the Rigor they deserved.

Arrojou a Knight of the Order of Calatrava, acted in his Commandery of Zoritan
like a Tyrant in the Country he Usurpes. The Maids and Women whom Nature had
made most Beautiful, and Virtue most Amiable, he Sacrificed to his
extravagancies: And what Love could not obtain, Force ravished from them: Those
were taken from their Parents, and these from their Husbands, to serve the
pleasure of this Beast; The Cardinal sent a power Competent to Attaque him, but
by flight to Flanders he changed his place, but escaped not his punishment: The
Cardinal by Letters signifies to Charles the Exorbitances and Enormities of
this Ruffian, and the punishment due to his Crimes, and prayed him to make him
an Example of his Justice by severity answerable to the heinousness of his
Actions.

The Treasurers of the Finances who had embezelled the public Moneys (which
are the blood of the people) were strictly Examined and Narrowly sisted, nor
were these Spunges squeezed only, but punished for their Rapines.

These Actions of Justice drew an universal Love to the Cardinal from the
people of Spain, who reverenced his Name; and most of the Grandees sought his
Friendship, with Oaths and protestations to defend his Authority as their
Lives; and not without reason. For, Justice the Mother of other Virtues, being
the Daughter of Heaven and Queen of the Earth, gains them that Exercise it the
savor of God, and good will of men.

The happiness of the Kingdom was this great man's Aim; and in order to
attaining a complete felicity he continued the Exercise of his Justice in
Reducing every part of the State into their proper bounds. The military Orders
of Knights in Spain are diverse, and of great Latitude; the greatness of their
power made them usurp on others within their Jurisdiction, and abusively assume
Privileges not due to them: But the Cardinal forced them to make restitution
of what was not theirs, Regulated their Jurisdictions, and Abrogated the
Privileges they had arrogated to themselves. The favor of Court having
introduced more Members into the Council of State, than Merit or Virtue, had
filled it with Persons unworthy that place. But he who knew that the Ministers
who serve in this Sacred Temple of Policy ought to be persons of the greatest
experience and singular integrity, purged it of all those who were unfit for
that dignity, and filled their places with better men.

Having reformed the Council he turned to the Train, and Attendants of the
Court; where the importunity and impudence of the Mean, and the Recommendations
of the great Ones, had introduced a multitude of men who had no other Virtue to
boast of than a confident Miene, a proud Gate, and vain Discourse. He resolved
to Cashiere these dronish Lurdanes, and stop those unprofitable Mouths that ate
the Kings Bread, but did him no Service: which he did with one dash of his
Penn, Crossing out the Allowances made them, who were so leight in their
Vanities, that they were blown away with a Feather. That Monarch wants a
Guardian to order his Affairs, who by the Pensions he bestows, feeds with the
Bowels of his People, such men as are neither necessary for him, nor
serviceable to the public.

This Retrenchment was Just: but his taking from two famous Historians of that
time, the Pensions given them as due to their Labors, is marked as unjust in
the History of his Administration. Peter Martyr, and Gonsales D' Oviedo were
crossed out amongst the Retainers; but revenged, with their Penns, the Loss of
their Pensione; staining his name with spots of so black a dye, as the whole
series of the past Age has not been able to wash out. But it may be he was
forced to this; By their example, to take from others all cause of Complaint.
But what an example is this to robb them of their Reward who deserve it, and
take away the Pensions of two Learned men who served the public. Or if he
thought this necessary to be done, he should have made up their Pensions out of
his own fortunes, and paid them out of that estate which was sufficient to pay
an Army.

Peradventure 'twas Charles his pleasure it should be so. Had he so little
credit with Charles whose (...) he preserved for him, as not to prevail with
him to continue the Pensions of two Historians, who could have given Charles
and his name immortal Glory? This seems sufficient to condemn his Severity, and
call it Inconsiderate. But the greatness of his Conduct in other matters, his
excellent Justice, and singular favor and propensity to oblige men of Virtue,
make it hardly credible that so great a person, who had done so much for
Learning, should commit so gross a sault; but give cause to impute it to some
other Minister, whose enmity against these Historians, might have engaged him
in so foul a fact. Thus Alvarez Gomez in the History of his life excuses him;
and observes that he lamented several times, that occasion was often given him
to exercise just Severities in taking from men what they unjustly possessed;
and not to express his Liberality, in giving unto them those Largesses he
esteemed due from him to Virtue.

To do good to men of merit, is to pour Oil into Lamps, which proves no less
useful to others in the light they receive from them, than beneficial to them
in enabling them to impart it.

That the Exchequer be full, and the Treasury of the Prince abound in Cash, is
certainly one of the things most necessary for the State; this defends it, this
augments its Grandeur, and renders it formidable to its Enemies: The Cardinal
who harbored in his heart as one common Center, an extraordinary zeal for the
Service of his Master, and no less affection for the good of the people;
designed to fill the Treasuries of Spain, to serve the glory of his Master; but
without any intention to enrich his King by the impoverishment of his people;
saying, Thrift and Frugality, Parsimony and good Husbandry, were great Revenues
to a monyed King, as the King of Spain. And that Gifts made without reason and
against Justice, are the Moths that eat through his Baggs, and the Thieves that
empty his Coffers. Charles, in four months of his Reign, gave away to his
Courtiers (or rather Leeches of his Court) two Millions of Gold: This he said,
with grief, to see so prodigious an excess, of Profuseness and Lavishment: Not
but that he allowed Liberality place among the Virtues of a Prince, but that he
would have it exercised with Moderation and Justice.

Henry the Admiral, Pacieco D' Ascalone, and Henry Fortune, had obtained of
Ferdinand, a million a piece of Lievres of Gold, charged on the Revenue of
Peru; and should have received it at the return of the Plate-Fleet. The
Cardinal made void, and annulled these Gifts; And though Fortune was of Kin to
his good Master Ferdinand, he took from him his Million as well as from the
others. Kings, said he, ought to dispense the effects of their Justice,
indifferently to persons of all sorts; but those of their Liberality to them
only, who serve their Persons or the Public; advantage others by their
Labors, and excel them in the fidelity of their Services, and the Dignity of
their Virtues. The Revenue of Princes, though great in it self, is always too
little for the necessities of State, and passing through many hands, is much
diminished ere it arrive at their Coffers. The Cardinal to provide against this
inconvenience, gave the Offices of the Finances, to men fit for them; persons
under no necessity to tempt them to Rapine. And chose for Surintendant of the
Kings moneys, a Lord by Birth, one of the Noblest of Spain, and in Estate the
Richest in the Kingdom. Spunges full of water, take in no more, though steeped
in it.

Great Buildings, without good Foundations, swagg and come to Ruin. The
Cardinal laid three Foundations necessary for Royalty, whereon, as on firm
pillars, the Authority thereof relies: The first is Justice, when the King
dispenses it to his Subjects impartially, and without respect of persons; when
the Scepter affords relief to the poor and the weak, against the injuries of
the Rich, and the Powerful. The second, when the King has a respect, and good
value, for the Men of War, that give proofs of their Experience, and Valor,
in the Service of his Wars. The third, when the King does not squander away
his Revenue, but, by thrift and parsimony, keeps a good stock in Reserve for
Royal Enterprises, which ought to be his ordinary Exercises; who, that he may
be great, must do great things. Experience had taught the Cardinal the truth of
this sage Maxim; for in four months of his Regency under Charles, by help of
his Treasure, he had compassed his designs, ended a War of great importance,
calmed the Commotions of Spain, made sure of Navarr, reduced Malaga to
Obedience, maintained strong Garrisons on the Frontiers, assured the Seacoast,
made incursions into Africa, sent a Naval Army against Algiers, and delivered
Bugie, Pignon, and Melillo, from the Siege of Barbarosse, great Admiral of the
Turks. If I (said he) have done all these things, notwithstanding the
oppositions of my Enemies, what cannot a King do, by his absolute power, if he
leave in his Treasure a stock for Royal Undertakings. Money being the sinews of
War, and the object of men's Affections, the Monarch who is Rich, becomes
puissant in the one, and absolute Master of the other.

The glory the Cardinal had acquired by his prudent management of the State,
and his good Actions to private persons, was greatly augmented by the Violences
of the Turks, and misfortunes of Africa, which brought a stronger King at his
feet, to implore his Assistance. The King of Tunis, Son and Heir of Jabet
Albuzen, was guilty of the Crime of being Neighbor to a Monarch, more powerful
than he, and possessing a Crown convenient for the Ottoman. This brought a War
upon him; Barbarosse who had command from the Turk his Master to out him from
his Throne, was the more willing to attacque him, in that he had obtained from
the Ottoman Post, a promise to succeed in the Throne and Title of the King of
Tunis, in case he Conquered him; on Condition nevertheless to hold it of the
Crown Imperial of the Turks. The Corsayre undertakes it; and, overpowering
Tunis, enters the City, and drives out the King; who dispoiled of his Estate,
embarks for Spain, to seek relief in Christendom for his disasters: in his
passage he was set upon with Tempests and Storms; which, though less than those
he met with at Land, put his Vessel in danger; but he escaped a wreck at Sea,
being reserved for a greater at Land, which had already deprived him of his
Crown, his estate, his repose, and reputation, and had more miseries in store
for him during the rest of his life, which the Sea might have swallowed up, and
therein all his Losses and Calamities. He Arrived in Spain, and threw himself
into the Cardinals Arms, who received him, gave him Retinue befitting a King,
comforted his miseries with kind entertainment, and promises of
Re-establishment in his Throne. The Minister that represents a King, and holds
his Scepter in his absence, ought to do Royal Actions; and, to reach forth a
helping hand to distressed Princes, is one of the greatest of these; for if,
the Man that helps a Man, is a God to that Man, the King who is a God on Earth,
and his Minister in his stead, succouring a persecuted King, is a God to a God.

CAP. XIII.
THE same Year John Rio, a Spanish Pyrate, returned from his Course, having
taken many Genoa-Vessels, and Rich in Booty and Prizes, and at Anchor in the
Port of Carthagena Nueva, where he enjoyed other men's goods, by the Laws of
Pyracy: when some Ships of War, arrived from Genes, attacqued him in the
Harbor; and, being well Armed, and fighting for the interest of their
Republic, they took this Sea-robber, and carried away his person, and Vessels.
But this Action done within a Port of Spain, was an offense against the Majesty
of the King: the Cardinal resents it as such, and publishes an Edict,
commanding all the Genoese in Spain, to depart the Kingdom within fifteen
days, upon pain of Confiscation of their goods, and of their Lives; and in the
mean time caused seizure to be made of their Goods, wherever they could be
found; This Alarmed the Republike, seeing their Commerce, to which they owe
their Maintenance and Grandeur, broken on that side, and their Alliance much
altered: They betake themselves to their remedy, and send Ambassadors to
Charles in Flanders, to disavow the boldness of those Ships which in the Port
of Carthagene, had violated the respect due to his Crown, which had met by the
way the punishment they should have received from the Republic, had they
arrived at Genes, which the Tempest prevented, in taking from them both their
Ships and their Lives: Therefore, they implored his Majesty not to impute that
to their State, which was the Act of two or three private persons; Charles was
satisfied with this submission, and revoked the Edict published by the
Cardinal. But he being Jealous for the honor of his Master, which had a
greater share in his thoughts, than the care of his own life, holding the
Genoese to be very Cautelous people, and desirous to penetrate the depth of
their intentions; upon information received, that they held intelligence with
the French about the Kingdom of Naples, deferred the publishing of the
Revocation, and Restitution of the Genoese goods, till he had sent Ambassadors
to Genes to clear the doubt; but the Ambassadors finding the Genoese sincerely
inclined to keep good Correspondence with Spain, he made restitution to the
Genoese of their Goods, and their liberty of Commerce. The Honor of Kings is
their true Patrimony, preferrable to their estates. Their Ministers ought
carefully to preserve, and courageously defend it; for as bodies without souls,
which give them life, are easily corrupted, so Monarchies without Honor and
Reputation decline and come to Ruin.

Spain had long since laid the Foundations of Dominion over Italy; and the
house of Austria, now entered into Spain, carried on the building. Maximilian,
Grandfather of Charles passed the Mountains on that design. Charles dispatched
a Courrier to the Cardinal to demand his Advice in the Affairs of Italy: the
Cardinal sent it him, and advised to divert Maximilian from the Siege of
Breseia then in design, and to turn his Forces against Milan; for that City
being once taken, the other would be easily Conquered; that, to render himself
yet more considerable in Italy, he must gain the Popes affection, and make use
of him upon occasion; to quiet the troubles of the Country, and to serve
himself of his Authority, as a new Peru to furnish moneys for the War, by
obtaining Crusadaes for Spain, which (as usual) would bring a Cross on Gold and
Silver, and raise him a Considerable Revenue: He advised Maximilian to threaten
the Pope into fear, to force his Condescension to what he would not willingly
grant; and counseled Charles to make choice of a person Generous, Vigilant,
and of great Authority, to be Ambassador at Rome, and to gain from the Pope a
person of innocent Manners, and of a gentle and tractable disposition to be
Nuncio in Spain; For on this depends the good of all great Affairs, and the
peace of the Nation. These Counsels the Princes of the house of Austria did
then make use of to their great advantage, and pursue the same to this day: For
the sage Answers of a great Minister consulted with in affairs, whose like do
often fall out in a State, are the voice of an Oracle, which foresees things to
come, and guides the designs of Posterity.

The Kingdom of Spain, had been long infected with the falsity of Religions,
contrary to the Christian; The Moors Preached there the Errors of the Alcoran;
and the Jews the sopperies of their Talmud; and though they had won the one
and the other to the faith of Christ, yet the Jews whose Religion is Obstinacy,
relapsed often to their former Worship, Apostatizing from the faith they came
to profess. This exposed them to the rigours of the Inquisition, being daily
dragged before that severe Tribunal. To deliver themselves from the pains they
deserved, they Deputed the principal amongst them, to attend Charles in
Flanders, and beseech him to permit them to enjoy that which God gave man when
he sent him into the World, the Liberty of Choice in a Free will; That Religion
could not be imposed by force, but instilled by Discourse; And that he would
grant them who were born in Judaism, liberty to Judaise as their Fathers had
done, or become Christians at their pleasure: In acknowledgement of this
favor, they offered him eight hundred thousand Crowns of Gold: Charles
assembles his Council to advise on this proposal, they give their opinions in
favor of the Jews, and that in the necessity he was reduced to, he should
accept the eight hundred thousand Crowns: The Cardinal, Advertised by his Agent
in his Masters Court of the Counsels of the Flemmings, sent a Courrier to
Charles, advising him not to meddle with Gods right, that Religion was above
Crowns, that Heaven knew to maintain its interest against his encroachments,
that he ought rather to imitate the Piety of King Ferdinand, his Grandfather,
who in the necessities of the Wars of Navarr, had refused six hundred thousand
Crowns of Gold offered by the Jews for the like indulgence: Charles followed
the Cardinals Advice: That King is unworthy the Assistance of Heaven, for
preserving his estate, who despises the Estate of God, which is Religion; and
God who expelled out of the Temple, the Tradesmen, who made it a place of
Merchandise, outes those Monarchs from the Throne who sell for money the
respect due to Divine Worship. The interest whereof a good King and his
Ministers, prefer before the reason and interest of State.

Ill Customs never dye, or grow old at Court, though good ones presently make
their Exit. The Government of Provinces and Towns in Spain, was heretofore
committed to the persons best qualified, and of greatest integrity in the
Kingdom; Time which carries away the best of things abolished this custom, and
made it absolete; Favor brought in such men whose faults and defects the
blindness of Court discovers not. The Cardinal resolved to re-estabish what he
found Just in the ancient Customs of Spain, bestowed the same Governments on
men whose nobleness of blood and integrity of life rendered them the most
Considerable in the Kingdom.

But that the puissance of their Families, and support of their Kindred, being
persons of quality, might not debauch their integrity, and encourage them to
violence, he Removed them to places distant; employing them in Governments of
Towns and Provinces, where they could expect no support but from their Virtue.
He who adds greatness of dignity, to that of birth and quality, tempts virtue,
and needs a Bridle to retain it within the bounds of Justice.

These ears of the Cardinal tended to the Glory of Virtue; the aim and mark
of his designs, being the advancement of virtuous persons, whose fortunes he
raised in his Administration by his own beneficence, or the Kings, by his
procurement. He gave Adrian Florent, of Vtricht, Dean of Lovayn, and his
companion in the Government of Spain, the Bishopric of Tortosa, with the
Office of Inquisitor General of Spain, which was an advantageous step for him
to a Cardinalship; and to mount him thence to the Papal Chair. He preferred
Alfonso Manriquez to the Bishopric of Cordova. And the Sieur Motta of Burgos,
a person well verst in Theology, and Secretary to Charles, to that of Badacos;
The advancement of Motta was great in appearance, but in effect mean; his
Virtue and Learning had rendered him considerable in the Court of Charles, and
that of Rome; After the death of Ximenes, the King gave him the Archbishopric
of Toledo; and the Pope, a Cardinals Cap. But these Gifts were made him, when
he could not enjoy them; and Fortune gave him only a View, but no Livery and
Seizen of the Grandeurs of the World. The Letters of the King, and those of the
Pope, which conveyed to him those eminent dignities, sound him on his
deathbed; So that seeing himself on the brink of the Grave, he took the
Letters out of a Box, and gave them one of his principal Domestics to Read.
Having heard them, he discoursed of the vain pretensions of Court, and the
cheating hopes of the World, that the sutest course for a virtuous man to
steer, is to conform to the will of God, and condoled their misfortune to see
their expectations fall with him into the Dust. But this care of the Cardinal
to advance persons of merit, evinces he was not guilty of retrenching the
Pensions of the two Historians before mentioned; But rather that of Learned men,
the most knowing and Laborious for the public, are not the greatest favorites
of Fortune, whether it be for want of importunity in pursuing it, or of Friends
to introduce them into the Theater of Preferment; so that their Virtue
continues indigent, like the Sick man on the brink of the Pool, which makes
Poverty often the Sister of Wit.

These things happened in 1516. The following year will be the last of the
Administration, and Life of the Cardinal: In the month October this Year, he
entertained himself one Evening with some Divines of Repute; and their
Discourses being of matters of holiness advanced far in the night. One of the
Domestics tells the Cardinal, A Courrier from Africa, then at the door,
desired to speak with him; he Commanded them to admit him, the Courrier
delivered his Letters, the Cardinal read them to himself; and then turning to
them that stood by, with a Composed and Serene Countenance told them, The News
is, that the Moors and Turks have beaten us at Algiers, and our Army Defeated.
But the Loss is not great, for Spain is delivered of a multitude of
Malefactors. Vagabonds, and Assasines, whereof our Army was Composed. It was
my Master Ferdinands Maxim, that it is necessary to send (...) abroad to purge
the Realm, of murderers, thieves, robbers, and other-ill Livers. Having said
this, he continued his Theological discourse with admirable vigor of spirit,
and force of wit: The prudence of a Governor ought to be attended with
constancy in public misfortune, that the serenity of his countenance, and
alacrity of Discourse, may extenuate and lessen the ills that befall; And that
Minister deserves well of the public, who bears up in good hopes of the State,
notwithstanding the Losses and Calamities that seem to discourage him.

CAP. XIV.
IT IS natural to the Spaniards, to pursue their Resolutions with a settled and
unmovable constancy; so that it is equally difficult to divert them from
pursuing their designs as to extort from them what they are possessed of by
their Achievements. The Grandees of Spain envying the Cardinal's Authority had
resolved his ruin, as appears before; and what demonstration soever they made
of Amity, yet the Leaven of Jealousy remaining in their hearts, set them on
afresh to carry on their design, and endeavor the destruction of his, by
establishing of another's Authority! They prevail with Adrian his associate in
the Government, to write to Charles in Flanders, that the Cardinal was a proud
man, impatient of a companion, and did all after his own humor and fancy,
without consulting him; that he wanted strength to resist the sallies of his
daring and hardy spirit: And therefore became his humble Suppliant for a second
to Assist him in the Government; and, by their joynt-Authority, to balance the
Excessive power of the Cardinal, which might otherwise prove in time
prejudicial to his Majesty's. Charles sent Laxaus a Flemming, and of His
Council, to make up the Triumviral in the Government of Spain. The Grandees who
knew that what is divided, is of less force, rejoiced to see the Cardinal's
Authority in that predicament; and went all to meet Laxaus with great
Demonstations of honor: The Cardinal staid in his Lodgings to attend his
coming; and as Laxaus was conducted to him, he came no farther to meet him,
than to his Ante-chamber, where he received him with a gravity befitting his
Person, and Dignity. And as it is a principal part of the dexterity of a
Minister of State, To know men, he studied the temper and humor of Laxaus; and
finding him a downright Flemming, more inclined to Pleasures and Jollity, than
serious Affairs; he thought his Enemies made choice of a weak Rival to confront
his Authority: and, to let them know he slighted him, showed greater respect to
Adrian, than him. Yet Adrian, led by the Nose by the Cardinal's Enemies, made
use of the occasions they offered him to attacque his Authority. Letters
Patents were to be dispatched and published in some Affairs of importance; The
Grandees advise Adrian and Laxaus to sign them first, and to take up the most
honorable place of signature: They did so, and then sent the Letters to the
Cardinal to be Signed. Who having Courage answerable to the Grandeur of his
Spirit, observed this Flemmish Bravado of Ambition, and slighted it; causing
the Letters to be torn in pieces by his Secretary in his presence, and ordered
others to be made ready, which he signed alone, and caused them to be executed
as effectually, as if signed by all three; and, during the course of his
Administation, continued it thence forward, though before he showed Adrian the
respect of sending them to him to be signed; which he forbore after this time,
that the Contempt he had designed for him, might fall on himself. The Flemmings
durst not resist his Authority, fearing his Anger; and that, by provoking him,
they might prejudice Charles, who would impute to them the disorders that might
follow; Ferdinand, brother to Charles, being then in Spain, under the Guard and
Conduct of the Cardinal.

Nevertheless, to destroy this great Authority, by more powerful means; they
proposed to Charles, to put the Scepter of Spain in his absence, into the hand
of a Prince of his House, and Advised him to entreat Maximilian the Emperor,
his Grandfather, or Lewis Count-Palatin, his Cousin, to come into Spain for
that purpose. Some were for making Ferdinand Governor, others for the high
Chancellor Savage, but all for outing the Cardinal. Maximilian was busy in
Italy: The Genius of Spain, is so far above that of Alemain, that the Count
Palatin was not likely to bear up to the height, requisite for the Government;
and, if the absolute power were committed to Ferdinand, it might be feared he
would not quit it when desired. So that of all the persons proposed in Council,
the Chancellor only stood. The Cardinal had intelligence of all transactions
in Charles his Councils, and desired him by Letter, to grant him leave to quit
the Government, and retire to his Diocese, rather than send him a new
Companion, with whom he must renew the contests with the former. That the
nature of Government is such, that, to carry it on with Authority, it must be
given to one alone. Notwithstanding this, Savage came into Spain, with the
Title of Governor, as well as the Cardinal: But made no other progress in the
State, than to establish there, venality of Offices in Judicature, Council, and
Court; to banish virtue; and fill his purse. For it is observed, that in his
four months stay in Spain, he drew away five hundred thousand Crowns, which he
carried into Flanders: The Cardinal vexed to see those excellent Orders his
care and pains had established in the State, ruined in a moment; and that
Offices formerly the Rewards of Virtue and merit, were now put to sale by the
Avarice of this Flemming; and possessed by them who had more money to buy, than
capacity to manage them; complained to Charles, and with a liberty full of
respect writ him his mind; Remonstrating to him, That great Kings obtain from
God the enjoyment of their Crowns, and from men the Reverence due to them, so
long as they govern the people with Justice and Integrity; That in respect of
the great weight of the Government, God allowed them to call Assistants for
their ease and support in the Management of great Estates; That their Justice
and Vigilance ought to be as Conspicuous in the choice of their Assistants, as
in the Government of their Subjects: That a Prince is Responsible for his
Ministers, and Chargeable with the Crimes they commit in the State, if he knows
and suffers them. He prayed him in all humility, that he would come into Spain,
to establish there by his presence, that order which the Strangers he had sent
thither, had destroyed; and to keep the people within the bounds of their duty,
who were now apparently raised to a boldness that tended to the subversion of
the State; being so licentious that every one not only said, but Printed what
he pleased; and attacqued his Authority by publishing and Justifying their
complaints against him.

This courageous Liberty of Advertising Charles of the disorders and
misdemeanors of the Flemmings in Spain, drew on the Cardinal the hatred of
many to such a degree as obliged him to provide for the safety of his life; his
guard was more strictly and constantly kept, his meat watched to prevent
poison, and this care extended to his bed, and trial made of the water that was
sprinkled in his Chamber. But all this caution could not save him from that
Lingering Poison, which, the Spaniards write, destroyed his health, and at last
his life: whereof you shall hear in due time.

The Court of Spain was at this time full of infamous Libells, against the
Flemmish-Ministers; and against Xeures, of the House of Croy, favorite to
Charles, whom Lewis the 12. of France having the Gard-noble of his person, gave
Charles for his conduct; The Libellers spared not the Cardinal; nor his
Confident, Francis Rouys; the Flemmings were highly incensed at the Libels and
Obloquy of the people; This obliged the Cardinal to make search for the
Authors; but so lightly, that neither Author nor Seller was punished for
writing or publishing. For as for him, though he writ of this matter to
Flanders, yet he was (says Gomez) of opinion, that, Inferiors should have the
Liberty to avenge their grievances by words and writings, which endure no
longer than while you are offended at them; that to slight them was the only
way to suppress them, and, to be angry at them, was to acknowledge them true.
Alphonso Castilla, Governor of Madrid, brought Adrian, and Laxaus, some Copies
he had recovered of the Libells against them. They, not used to such Satyrs, as
things not accustomed in Flanders, resented them highly, and specially Adrian,
to whom injuries of this kind were like Fleas in his Ears, or Snuff in the
Nose, to discompose and inflame the Levity of his Temper; insomuch that being
afterward advanced to St. Peter's Chair, under the name of Adrian the 6. the
Satirical reflections, and tart Animadversions published by the Roman Wits on
the Statues of Pasquin, and Morphorio, were so offensive to him, that he
commanded the Statues which had stood there many Ages, to be dug up, and
thrown into Tyber. The Count De Sessa, being present when this Order was given,
told him, Holy Father, if you cause these Libel-Carryers to be cast into Tyber,
the Froggs will Croke out their Verses; and what two Stones whispered to men,
many mouths will proclaim to the River: It Is a hard matter to take from men
that liberty of their spirit which God has allowed them, which they will find
means to make known to the World: Adrian followed his Advice, and left Pasquin,
and Morphorio standing in the place they possess at Rome to this day. Certainly
they are much deceived, who think by power to bury in Oblivion the ill actions
they are guilty of, or to keep from Posterity the knowledge of their vices: The
severities they exercise against the writers thereof, give Credit and Authority
to the relation; and procure as much glory to the Historian, as shame to the
Criminal: It Is a good Rule for great Ones, to live so as they would be
represented to posterity in the stories of their Lives, that, by their good
actions, they may obtain the glory of an immortal name.

The Troubles which before had disquieted the Court, and raised the people to
Arms, were now entered the Churches, and got up to the very Altars: The Priests
of Spain had taken the Alarm, and published grievous Complaints, and loud
Threats in defense of their Revenues, and the liberty of their Dignities; For
Selim, Emperor of the Turks, having carried his Arms into Egypt, taken from
Tomombey his Crown and his Life, and Triumphed over the whole Nation; resolved,
after this notable Conquest, to turn his victorious Arms against Italy, to add
that Country to the rest of his Triumphs, to enter Rome by a breach, and feed
his Horse on the Altar of St. Peter. These barbarous Threats obliged the
Princes of Italy, to provide for the security of their Estates. Pope Leo the
tenth, then in the Chair, employed his care to preserve the Patrimony of the
Church; and for the Guard of the Seacoast, an Ordinance was past in the
Lateran-Council to Levy the tenths upon the Clergy of Spain. This put them in
an uproar: the Cardinal used his best endeavors to appease them, and to
restore peace to the Church, the house of God, as he had done to Cities the
habitations of men: he dispatched a Courrier to Rome, and ordered Arteagua his
Agent in that Court, in his name, to make the Pope an offer, not only of the
tenths of the Archbishopric of Toledo, but of all its Revenues, his money,
his movables, all that he had of rich or precious in the Treasure of his
Church; if the necessity of a holy War required it for the defense of the
Altars of God in Italy. But, to declare, that, without such a necessity he
would never be the Author of those new Impositions, nor consent that the
Priests of Spain should be made Tributary to Strangers; with a strict charge to
send him the Resolutions of the Lateran Council hereupon. Arteagua understood
by the Pope's Nephew, the Cardinal De Medicis, that the Council had not
ordained the Levying of these Dismes, but in case of extreme necessity, and
that the Enemies were within the State of the Church, or upon the Borders of
Italy; and it appeared, the Source of this trouble about the Benefices of Spain
arose from the Pope's Nuncio in that Kingdom, engaged therein by his desires to
finger the moneys, or his imprudence in management of Affairs. Thus the
Cardinal protected the interest of the Church, and calmed the Commotion.
Priests have in their persons a kind of Spiritual Royalty, whereof their Miters
are marks. To protect and defend them is to pass to Glory, by the way of Piety.

CAP. XV.
THough the Cardinal had surmounted the opposition of the Flemmings against his
Authority, triumphed over the Envy of the Court, and the Threats of the
greatest part of the Grandees of Spain; there remained an important victory to
be gained over three potent Enemies, who like a triple-headed Monster stood up
against him, with a boldness he was obliged to humble, and bring to the ground:
The first was Mendoza Duke of Infantado, his Capital Enemy for the Rupture of
the Marriage between his Nephew and the Cardinal's Niece: This hatred was
inflamed by the loss of a Cause at Law, whereby a Borough of the Duke's
demeans, was rejoyned to the Church of Toledo, from which it had been
dismembered. And as the Syndic of the Church went to take possession of it, the
Duke himself gave him the Bastonado. This Outrage offended the Cardinal at
Madrid, who told many. He would teach the Duke more Reverence to Justice, make
him loose his Dukedom, and undergo the punishment he deserved. The Duke was
netled to the quick at these Threats, and, to declare his resentment, sent to
the Cardinal one of his Attendants to tell him, That he was a dissembling Monk,
meanly born, and raised to the fortune he possessed by the subtlety and
hypocrisies natural to his Frock. This Envoy arrives at Madrid, goes to the
Cardinal, and shows him that he was a Domestic of the Dukes, received wages
from him, and ate of his bread, and therefore subject to his Commands; that he
had given him one to tell him such words which peradventure would Anger him,
and therefore before he spoke them, he desired his leave to do it; and that he
would not impute the offenee to him: The Cardinal gave him leave to deliver his
message, which he did word by word as the Duke had commanded: The Cardinal
nothing moved, made Answer; My Friend, you are employed in a very foolish
Embassy: Return to your Master, and I am persuaded you will find him wiser
than when you left him, and repenting his follies. Which was true; for the Duke
much troubled that passion had so far blinded his reason, sharply rebuked his
principal Domestics, that they had not withstood his Choler, and prevented the
sending of that message to the Cardinal. Velasco Constable of Castile, who knew
the inconsiderate rashness of the Duke, advised him to a Reconciliation with
the Cardinal; returned to Madrid; and entreated the Cardinal to pardon the
Duke, and impute these words to the blindness of passion, and not esteem them
the sense of his mind. The Cardinal Answered, that when Mendoza would in person
beg pardon, and confess with his own mouth he deserved punishment, he should
not find him inexorable. Velasco disposed the Duke to do it: A day and place
were appointed for the enterview. Fountain Caralla, within two Leagues of
Madrid, was chosen for that purpose; where the Cardinal came attended with some
of his Domestics: The Constable and the Duke came also. But being upon the
place, the Duke forgot the Conditions of the Enterview; and, instead of
performing them, with a bold Countenance, and haughty expression, having
saluted the Cardinal, told him, Provided I violate not the Laws of Religion,
and pay the King the obedience I owe him, I little value the displeasures of
others, slight their Checks, and scorn their Affronts. These words of pride,
sounded strange in the Cardinal's Ears, who expected a better temper, according
to the Constable's Promise; and, made this Answer: Mendoza when you fail in the
one or other, you shall know me to be the grand Inquisitor of Spain, and the
King's Lieutenant General in all his Estates; and in these qualities, I will
cause you to be punished according to your demerits. The Constable, seeing
their hatred inflamed, not reconciled; and troubled at the huffing of the Duke,
reproved him sharply for it; and having brought him by discourse to an
acknowledgement of his fault, inclined him to expiate it in the instant he had
committed it, making him cast himself at the Cardinals feet, and beg his
pardon, whereupon the Cardinal embraced him, and took him up.

The very instant this was doing, they heard a noise of Soldiers, and a Volley
of Muskets, shot at the door of the house. Horror seized the Constable, and
the Dukes pride was turned into fear. Both apprehended a train laid for their
Liberty or Lives: but 'twas a Pannick fear, and the cause appeared to come from
John Spinosa Campina of the Regiment of Guards, who having understood that the
Cardinal was with two Grandees of Spain, without any Guard to attend him, rann
thither with the Guards under his Command. The Cardinal reproved him for
coming without order, and having taken leave of the Constable and Duke, with a
countenance full of respect and friendship, returned for Madrid.

The second of the three powerful Grandees, whose boldness and envy the
Cardinal was to grapple with, and overcome; was Giron, Lord of Vienna, who was
always of the contrary party, and Ringleader to those that opposed his
Authority: Giron was of a lively spirit, bigg words, bold in his raillery,
smart and cutting in his Reparties: Coming one day to the Cardinal's
Chamber Door, he asked the Usher, Friend, what is King- Ximenes a doing? Spain
had been governed by a King of that name, who was so dull and sottish of
spirit, and so grossly vicious, that no day passed without some instances of his
extravagancies; which gave his Subjects cause to ask one another often, What is
King Ximenes a doing? Another time, this Lord having been in Treaty with the
Cardinal, about some affairs of importance, and taking his leave, the Cardinal
scarce moved his Cap at parting, Giron turned about and asked the Servants,
Whether their Master had a scalded head: These flights added to many attempts
against his Authority, provoked the Cardinal to Resentment upon occasion, which
fell out patly: For Giron was in suit against Gutterio Quixada for the Borough
of Villas Hermanos, which Giron had usurped; In the suit the weakest went to
the Wall, and suffered under the oppression of the greater; Giron having drawn
it at such length that Quixada's purse being too shallow, could not have
Justice: he complains to the Cardinal, telling him, that, as the King ought to
do Justice to his people, so ought the King's Lieutenant: the Cardinal did it,
and, by Judgment of the Court of Valladolid, Giron was enjoined to restore to
Quixada, the Borough of Villas Hermanos: A Senator of Valladolid went upon the
place to execute the Judgment, and put Quixada in possession: Giron makes up a
party, sends his Son and Servants to the place; where they received the
Commissioner, and gave him the Bastonado. An information was drawn up of this
insolent Rebellion, and sent to the Cardinal and Council, who decreed the
offenders to be Arrested; cited them by sound of Trumpet to appear, and
proceeded against them as Traitors: The Grandees of Spain, who saw Giron in the
high way to destruction, sent two Gentlemen of note to the Cardinal, to entreat
him, not to ruin a person of Giron's quality: That it was his interest to
preserve the Grandees; and, to destroy them, as he did was to destroy himself,
as being by his dignity of Archbishop of Telodo, as Primate of the Prelates,
so first of the Grandees of Spain, and having precedence of all; The Cardinal's
answer was, He would protect honest men, and punish the wicked contemners of
Justice, and disturbers of the public peace.

When they saw the Cardinal inflexible, they sent to Charles in Flanders,
misrepresented the matter, and obtained a prohibition to stay execution of the
Judgment, till he came into Spain: Upon receipt of the prohibition, the
Cardinal and Council, sent to Charles, informed him of the truth of the Crime,
sent him the Process, and remonstrated to him, that having been appointed by
God the Guardian and preserver of the Laws, he ought to give Justice liberty in
her functions and freedom, and to do her duty; entreated him to consider the
Consequence of this Affair, that if such Enormities were tolerated, there
should not be one King only in Spain, but as many Kings, as there are puissant
great Ones: Charles, in Answer to the Cardinal and Council, writ, He had been
misinformed, and that it was his intention, Justice should be done: The
Judgment against the Offenders was Executed. The Cardinal sending Regiments of
Horse and Foot, against Villas Hermanos, where Giron's Son, and several Young
Lords of his quality, Sons of the Grandees of Spain, were assembled with some
Forces, and had added new insolences to the former Rebellion, having caused the
Effigies of the Cardinal to be drawn through the Streets in his pontifical
habit, with a Trumpet before it, to publish the Ignominy: But when they saw the
Assailants, they left their sport, and betook them to their heels: The Walls of
the Town were beaten down to the foundations, and they plowed up, the houses
fired, and the places they stood on, sowed with salt, in token of malediction.
Seven men of the place, who had said they knew no Lord but Giron, were whipped
by the hangman; and with them some of Giron's Domestics on a holy day, that so
important an execution might not be retarded: To make Quixada amends, and
repair his damage in the loss of the Town, they adjudged him Giron's Estate,
and proceeded further against his family and person. To take from the Rebels
all hopes of mercy, this execution was confirmed by Letters Patents from
Charles in Flanders. This brought Giron to reason: he humbles himself to the
Cardinal and desires mercy; and to make his prayers more effectual, all the
Grandees of Spain joined with him: The Cardinal by Letter interceded to Charles
for a pardon; that in bringing him to an exemplary humiliation, and forcing him
to beg pardon in person, he had sufficiently punished him; that the Grandees
acknowledging their faults, and truly humbled, were not to be treated with the
severities usual in other men's Cases.

The third puissant Enemy of the Cardinal, among the Grandees of Spain, was the
Duke of Alva, of great Authority, of a great Family, Illustrious in blood,
abounding in Riches, powerful in Friendship and Alliance: the Cardinal had his
opportunity to bring him to reason, as well as the others. The Duke of Alva, in
King Ferdinand's life time, in whose favors he had a great share, obtained for
Diegolus third son, the Priory of St. John in Spain, of the Order of Knights
then at Rhodes, now at Malta; a Dignity of great revenue, and equal Authority
in the Kingdom: Antony Alstuniga of an illustrious family, was at that time in
Legal possession; but the Duke of Alva, upheld by the Authority of the King,
and the great master of Rhodes, took it from him by force, contrary to Right,
and the Laws of Spain, and settled his Son there; who enjoyed it peaceably for
six years, till Ferdinand's death: Astuniga seeing the Duke's credit buried
with that Prince, had recourse to Justice, and summons the Usurper to a Legal
Trial: The Process was decided at Rome, and Diego enjoined to make restitution
of the Benefice. Astuniga returns into Spain with the Decree, implores the
Cardinal's protection, whom he knew to be the Defender of Justice, and obtains
it: Charles in the mean time, informed of this difference, looked upon it as of
importance to the State, writes to the Cardinal and Council, to put the
Benefice in a third hand till farther order. The Duke of Alva refuses to obey
his Command, believing it an invention to outt him from the Priory, calls the
other Grandees of Spain his Friends to his Assistance, and fortifies Consabrona
the principal place of the Priory: The Cardinal seeing him act the King in
Spain, resolved not to endure it; he commands forth a thousand Horse, and 500
Foot of his Guards, in the Suburbs of Madrid; but at the instant falls sick to
the danger of his life: Madrid, and all the Realm of Castile made public
Prayers for his Recovery, on which, as then, depended the peace of Spain. He
Recovers, and finding the Duke of Alva unwilling to obey, resolves to force
him, but, by the way, proposed him a fair accommodation: And it is remarkable,
this great Minister never took the way of Rigor, till he had first tried that
of Sweetness, and found it ineffectual to perform the duties of Justice, in his
Administration: He proposed to the Duke, That he should give the King a
Gentleman of his Family, to be answerable to his Majesty for the places of the
Priory that should be put into his hands, and to surrender them to the King if
there should be cause, when he had declared his Judgment; by which means the
Duke might have remained Master of the Priory, and the Revenue. The Duke
stormed at this proposal, and thinking that to accept it, would have been to
part with his own, rejected it. The Cardinal sends a leight Army to besiege
Casabrona; the Duke also sent thither a thousand Foot, and some Horse with
Victuals and Money: The Cardinal's Troops met them by the way, engaged, and
defeated them, took their money and Victuals, and marched to the place they
were to invest. The Duke of Alva's Son was within, with a great number of young
men of his Age, most of them Sons of the Grandees of Spain; All the Nobles of
Toledo, that had attained the age of 21 years, assisting in the Defense. The
Herald summoned them to open their Gates, and obey the King; their Answer was
high, though not a word spoken; for they set on the Walls of the place, Biers
covered with black, to signify tacitly their resolution, rather to dye than
yield. The Duke of Alva this while was anxiously distracted in his thoughts. On
the one side, he saw the shame that would attend his suffering a Piece of such
convenience and profit to his Family, to be wrested out of his hands, and that
his labors and great preparations would end in Affronts and greater Disgraces:
On the other side, he beheld the thunderbolt hanging over his head, ready to
fall upon him to the ruin of his person and his house. His Estate was already
Confiscated by Decree of the Council, which gave him fearful apprehensions of
the Cardinal's severity, as a man whom he knew entire and immovable in his
resolutions.

The example of Villas Hermanos, was fresh in memory, and the image of it in
his thoughts troubled him; representing him as miserable as his friend Giron.
He resolved to bow, rather than break; goes to Madrid, humbles himself, makes
means of Reconcilement to the Cardinal, causes his Son to obey, renders the
place, and obtains of Charles the moiety of the Priory for his Son, the other
moiety being left for Astuniga, and enough for both. Another difficulty arises
in the enjoyment of the Benefice: The great Master of Rhodes who had unjustly
outed Astuniga, to invest Diego in the place, would not acknowledge any Prior
but Diego, gave him all the Authority of Grand Prior, and sent him Orders for a
general Assembly of all the Knights of the Order in Spain; Diego summons them,
and would have had them assembled without other Authority than his; the
Cardinal hinders it, sends for him, and tells him, If you were in the Isle of
Rhodes, you might do your pleasure; but in Spain where I command, know, you
must come to me and have my permission.

Thus he reduced to reason the three Grandees of Spain, who had most opposed
his Authority; who having made a great noise, had experience to their shame of
the greatness of his Judgment, the height of his Courage, and his mavelous
Address, being compelled to throw themselves at his feet, whose head they
slighted, and had in contempt. The Fable of the Giants destroyed by
Thunderbolts, and buried under the Mountains they had accumulated, instructs a
Minister of State, sometimes to use force and severity against potent men, who,
to trouble the public peace, would by destroying his Authority attain the
King's.

These Crosses, and the unwillingness of the great Ones, to acknowledge the
honor he had acquired in Spain, with the ingratitude of the people, whose ease
he affected, and procured the happiness they enjoyed; gave him sensible
displeasures, and made him call to mind the tranquillity and sweetness of his
Religious life in the Monastery of Castanet. Near which, there was in view a
little hill covered with Trees, where he often went to search, under their
shadows, the light of truth in Holy-Writt, and after some hours reading,
kneeled, and with hands and heart lift up to Heaven, conversed with God in
Prayer and Meditation; then retiring immediately into a little Cabin, made
with his own hands, in imitation of, those Angels of the Desert, the ancient
Hermits, he fed his body with Bread and Water, but his Soul with plentiful
repasts of spiritual delicacies: The holy pleasures of this solitude he panted
after, amidst the Crosses and oppositions he encountered in the State; saying
often to his greatest Confidents, If I might obtain leave, how willingly would
I change this Palace for my Cabin at Castanet; the Authority of Governor of
Spain, for the silence of that solitude; and my Mitre of Toledo, and Cardinals
Cap, for the habit of that poor place. A Minister of State, has not in the
troubles of Affairs, a more solid comfort than that of Piety, which is the
Policy of Heaven (if any be exercised there) as well as part of the Politics
of this World.

Charles, often advised by the Cardinal to come into Spain to enjoy his Crown,
and dissipate by his presence the Troubles that daily grew up, at last leaves
Flanders, and by an Express to the Cardinal, gives him notice he was Embarked;
The Cardinal goes from Madrid, and advances with the whole Court to meet his
Master, making choice of the Borough of Alcande, situate on the Banks of the
River Guadalayer to attend his coming; and taking with him Prince Ferdinand
under a strong Guard, on which depended the peace and safety of Spain; in his
journey he passed through B^zeguillas, a Village on a Hill, and Dined there;
but the worst Dinner he ever made: (for there the Spaniards generally believe)
he had that venomous Dose of Lingering Poison which destroyed his life; which
is the more probable, for that the Provincial of the Observantines of St.
Francis, being on his way with some of his Order, to go to the Cardinal, a man
on Hors-back came to them with his face muffled up in a Hand-kerchief to
prevent their discovery, and said; Fathers, if your business be to the
Cardinal, make haste to him before he Dines, and advise him, not to eat of a
Pigeon that shall be served in to him, for it is poisoned; Marquine the
Provincial arrives at Bozeguillas, and recounts to the Cardinal, what the
strange Gentleman told him. The Cardinal having thanked him for his Care of
him, made him this Answer; Father, if I have been poisoned it was not this day,
but a while ago reading at Madrid, a Letter from Flanders, when me-thought I
drew in poison by my Eyes; since which, I protest, I feel my self dye every
day: Nevertheless I am not so well assured of this, as to exclude all doubt of
the truth thereof; We are all under the Conduct of Gods Providence, which takes
away, and restores our health, as he judges most necessary for our Salvation.
Let Us obey then those holy Decrees that are irreversible.

But when his malady came on him, he returned to his former opinion, telling
his Physicians, that he should perish by the Treason of those Wretches, that
attempted his life. The Spaniards write, that after Dinner at Bozeguillas, his
malady heightened so apparently, that putrified matter broke out under his
Nails; yet this could not hinder him from employing the small portion of life
that remained, in the service of the State. He had written to Charles, that it
concerned him to command from his brother Ferdinand, Alvarez Osorio, the
Dominican, Bishop of Astozia, the Prince's Tutor; and Peter Gusman, Grand Prior
of the Order of Calatrave his Governor, who apprehending the Arrival of
Charles in Spain, might give the young Prince Counsel to the disservice of the
King, it being long reported that these men would never brook the Flemings whom
they hated, and to avoid a meeting would retire to Arragon with Ferdinand, and
cause him to be Crowned King of that Kingdom: But he was designed by Heaven for
greater Fortunes, and was Emperor after his Brother Charles the fifth, and had
the Royal Crowns of Hungary and Bohemia, in right of Queen Anne his Wife,
Heiress to Ladislaus, and Lewis, her Father and Brother, Kings of those
Kingdoms; he had four Sons, and eleven Daughters, of whom Joan d' Austria was
married to Francis de Medicis, great Duke of Tuscany; of which Marriage was
born, Mary de Medicis, Queen of France and Navarr, Wife of Henry the Great, and
Mother of Lewis the thirteenth late Regnant; a Princess of eminent Virtue,
singular goodness, and incomparable magnanimity, maternally descended from the
Houses of France and Austria, as well as those of Hungary, and Bohemia: for,
the Emperor Ferdinand her Grandfather, was younger Son to Mary of Burgundy,
only Daughter of Duke Charles, and Isabel of B^urbon.

Charles judging the Remove of Osorio and Guzman, necessary for his Service,
Commanded it, and writ to the Cardinal to that purpose; The Master of the
Courriers, who received the dispatch, instead of delivering it (as addressed)
to the Cardinal, carried the Packet to Dean Adrian, who opened it, though not
directed to him, and gives to Ferdinand his Brother's Letter, where the young
Prince saw the King his Brother's Command for Removing Osorio and Guzman; He
went to the Cardinal, and with tears in his eyes entreated him not to make any
change in his Family, till his Brother's Arrival in Spain; that Guzman and
Osorio were very faithful to him, and had great affections for him, that they
were given him by the hands of King Ferdinand his Grandfather, and his
Grandmother Queen Isabel; That to take them from him, were to condemn the
Judgment, and vilify the Memory of two Princes whom the whole world had
honored: The Cardinal though surprised, as not knowing of the Affair (which
Adrian had discovered) to remove the Odium from himself, exhorted the young
Prince to obey the King his Brother, on whom depended his Fortune and Grandeur,
that he ought to prefer the interest of Charles, before that of his
Domestics, and to conform to his will. Ferdinand seeing that he gained nothing
on the Cardinal's spirit, gave him in choler this reparty; Since you are
resolved to destroy me and mine, when you might have pleasured me in forbearing
a little while to execute what is writ to you from Flanders, I will take order,
my Servants shall not be Ruined, as you have designed. The Cardinal was moved
at his threats, but being Resolute and Courageous to maintain the interest of
his Master, told him, Sir, You may do what you please; but before the Sun set
to Morrow, though all Spain stood against me, the King shall be obeyed, and you
shall obey him the first of any. Ferdinand ne^^ed at these words, retired
toward Aranda; The Cardinal sent after him, and gave the charge of his Person,
and of the Town to Cabanilla and Spinosa Captains of the Guards, commanding
them to be up all night with their Troops, and not permit a person of the
Princes Family to go out of the Town: They obeyed him, and on the morrow Osorio
and Guzman were dismissed, and the will of Charles was executed with Fidelity
and Courage; the principal qualities of a Minister of State, in Affairs which
concern the interest of the King with the Princes of his blood.

Some Grandees of Spain seeing the Cardinal proceed with absolute Authority
against the Infant Ferdinand and themselves, demanded of him a fight of his
Commission; The Cardinal pointed to the Soldiers of his Guards, and told them,
Those Folks there with the will of the King, are the power I have to command
Castile: then twisting on his finger the Cord of his Order wherewith he was
girt, This, said he, is sufficient to chastise proud Vassals, and bring them to
Reason. A little after, he caused some Cannons to be discharged, and a Volley
of Musket Shot, which was the last Answer, but more terrible than the first:
This stopped their mouths, and struck fear into these men who had been more
curious than wise. Scarce had the Cardinal ended this important Affair of
Ferdinand's Family, when a Courrier brought him news, Medina Sedonia was taken
by Peter Giron, Son of Giron, Lord of Vienna, who took up Arms, made himself
Master of the Field, and Siezed that place into his hands in Revenge of the
injury of Villas Hermanos: the Cardinal sent against him some Troops of the
Militia then afoot under the command of Count Quignonio de Luna, with order to
take the Rebel and bring him alive or dead. Another Courrier at the same time
arrived from Charles, to inform him of a design of the Turks against Oran; For
having set Sail from Flanders, the ninth of September, 1517. he met with some
Corsayres by the way, who informed him that an Army of Turks were upon their
March to Oran: this obliged him to advertise the Cardinal, praying him to
provide for the safety of that place with all Diligence possible, as a Piece of
great convenience for the Rendevouz of the Forces he designed to send to
Africa, for extending Christianity unto those Pagan Countries. The Cardinal by
the same Courrier assured him of his best care for preservation of Oran,
commended his design, and advised him to pursue it; that of so many Monarks who
in past Ages had worn the Crown of Spain, they only added a constant felicity
to a long Reign who had labored most in the propagation of Religion: But Oran
for this time had only an apprehension of the Turkish Arms: for the Moors of
Africa, fearing the violences of the Turks, obstructed their Passage, and
defeated their Army.

In the mean time Charles after a happy Voyage came to Villadichosa in Spain,
with the Princess Elenor his Sister, afterward Queen of Portugal, and since
that Queen of France by Marriage with Francis the first: He gave the Cardinal
notice of his Arrival, and demanded his advice about his Entry into the
Kingdom, that he might make it like a King, and be received of his people
according to his desires and dignity. The Cardinal advised him to Receive
courteously such as came to meet him, to compose his Countenance, and order his
Discourse and Habit, suitable to the mode of Spain; to send his Brother
Ferdinand into Germany, for that his presence in Spain was useless to his
person, and might prove prejudicial to his Authority; that it concerned him to
use his utmost dexterity in executing this Resolution; to impute the cause to
Maximilian his Grandfather, and to appear much displeased at the separation;
the people of Spain having a passionate love for Ferdinand, as bred amongst
them, and a perfect Spaniard in Language, behavior and inclinations: That he
would not come to any resolution against the Sicilians, who had Massacred their
Senators, till he had first weighed the Condition of his Exchequer, and the
forces of his Kingdom. That he would advance further into Spain, and make haste
to Madrid.

As to this last point, the Flemmings relished it not, but resolved to retain
Charles in the remote parts of the Kingdom, till the Cardinal's death, which
they were advised must shortly follow: they desired nothing less than that this
man should come to speech with the King, apprehending a discovery of their
rapines by his generous liberty and integrity to the King. But Charles received
those Counsels, as lights for his Conduct, and sent an Express to convey his
thanks, confessing himself much obliged by his cares, his prudence, and
fidelity. The Cardinal by the same Envoy Returns Answer, That the services he
had done him, were of duty; That he esteemed it his glory to have sustained the
Envy of almost all the world in serving him; That the predominant passion of
his soul was his desire to see his Majesty, and to put into his hands the
Kingdom more sound and entire, than he had received it, at the beginning of his
Administration.

All Spain went to meet their new King: the Constable Velasio was attended with
seven hundred horse; the Council made haste to tender him their duty, and
thinking they had no more to do with the Cardinal, now Charles was arrived in
Spain, they took their journey without advertising the Cardinal. But he out
went them by his Courriers, whom he sent to the King, desiring his Majesty not
to suffer a disorder of so ill example in the State; that the Council the
principal body of it should thus separate from their head, and entreating him
to command them back to Aranda: Charles did so, commanding the Council to
return the way they came, and go to the Cardinal; that it would be more
acceptable to him to see them together with him. This put them in great
disorder; for, having with them their Wives and Children, they could not return
without much inconvenience: They sent to the Cardinal, entreated him he would
be pleased to permit them to attend his Majesty in the place the Courrier found
them. The Cardinal impatient of Contempt, and highly offended at the slight
offered him, made no show of Resentment, but resolved not to bate them a step
of their return to Aranda; answers them, That he was glad they were all in
health, that they all knew how punctual he had always been in causing the
obedience due to the King to be exactly performed. And since his Majesty had
advised them to return to Aranda; it was his advice, They should obey him with
all the diligence in their power. They, as they parted rashly, returned
shamefully:

The respect due to a Minister of State is to be preserved even to Jealousy,
as that that maintains his Authority which Slights and neglects destroy.

At this arrival of the King in Spain, the people were much moved, and hotly
demanded an Assembly of the States of the Realm. The Cardinal was of opinion it
ought not to be granted so soon, but that the King must be first Received, and
Affairs settled in a quiet Posture, saying, It was of great concernment that
Kings at their coming to the Crown should be received of their people with
extraordinary reverence as a matter of great importance to their Authority:
This advice was slighted, but the neglect cost Spain dear. All the Kingdom was
in trouble and the State in danger by the contests that arose about the place
where the Estates should convene; at last it was agreed, the King should come
to Valladolid for holding the Assembly.

There the envy of the Cardinal's enemies mustered all its force to affront his
Person, and attacque his Authority. The harbingers of this great Minister
having taken up a house for him, the Marshals of the Kings Lodgings, being
Flemmings, set on by the Grandees, took it from them, and for reason told them,
This Lodging must be marked for Queen Germain; The Cardinal Jealous of his
Authority, and impatient of Affronts, having discovered the practices of the
Flemmings, disputed it with them, and carried the Lodgings.

But he must shortly dislodge from the Court, and the world, though with the
same honor he had lived there: the Flemmings enter into a Cabbal, to outt him
the Court. Mota Bishop of Badaos, a dignity he owed wholly to the Cardinal's
favor, to please Xeures, the Kings favorite, (as the Spaniards say) and his
own interest, advised Charles to remove the Cardinal from Court into his
Diocese of Toledo. Charles who was no less obliged to the Cardinal than to him
who gave him the Crown of Spain, forgot the services of this Grand Minister,
followed Mota's advice, and by his inconstancy confirmed the Proverb, that
Services of great ones are no inheritance; having sent a letter to the Cardinal
the tenor whereof was this.

My Lord Cardinal, I hold on my journey by Jurdefillas; whereof I thought fit
to advertise you, that you may come to M^jados the Bishop of Segorges House,
where I desire to see you, and to receive your good Counsels, not only for the
conduct of my Estate, but the ordering of my Family, which I will regulate
according to your sage Advice. This is the last help I can receive of you in my
Affairs; for, your long Services deserve repose, and your Age requires it; and
I grant it willingly, and advise you to retire to your house, to enjoy it with
more pleasure. God alone can give you a just recompense for your long travels
in the conduct of this Kingdom; as for me I shall never forget them, and will
ever pay you the respects due from a good natured Child to a careful and
bounteous Father.

This Letter of dismission by the trouble it gave the Cardinal cast him into a
Fever which brought him to his Grave, though some Spanish Historians say, that
the Courrier who carried it, finding the Cardinal desperately sick delivered it
not, but that (the Fever holding him eighteen hours after, whereas the
Physicians advertised him, he could not live above six hours) he brought back
the Letter to the Council, and delivered it to Adrian. Others write, that he
received it on his deathbed, and called for pen, ink, and paper to answer it;
but that, having written three or four Lines, his strength failed him, the pen
dropped out of his hand, and he soon after breathed his last. These Lines, or
piece of a Letter were never published, as if fate had been unwilling to
discover to the world any thing imperfect to which this man had put his hand.
Certain it is, the Cardinal perceiving he must shortly dye, made an End worthy
his good life, Mustering up the force of his Spirit, in the weakness of his
body, and discoursing piously and learnedly of the mercy of God, the
inconstancy of the World, and the Vanity of the Court; embracing the Crucifix,
bedewing his face with tears, he begged pardon from God for his sins, and
having protested he had not laid out one Rial of the Revenues of his Benefices
for the advancement of his Kindred, he received the Christian- Viaticum, the
Holy Eucharist, repeating often those words of David, My God, in thee have I
put my Trust, and went to enjoy in Heaven those Crowns which God gives them,
who govern people with prudence, integrity, and piety. This happened on Sunday
the ninth of November, 1517. in the 80th. year of his Age, having worn the
Mytre of Toledo 22. years, and governed Spain, as many, under Ferdinand,
Isabel, Joan, Philip and Charles: His body was interred in the College of St.
Idelphons in Alcala D' Henares, which he had built; his Tomb of white Marble,
and his Effigies of the same are to be seen at this day, with this Epitaph
worthy his illustrious Actions, which comprehends in short, both what he did
before his Glorious Administration, and his Acts in the State, Condideram Musis
Franciscus Grande Lycaeum,
Condor in exiguo nunc ego Sarcophago.
Praetextam junxi Sacco, Galeamque Galero,
Frater, Dux, Praesul, Cardineusque Pater.
Quin virtute Mea junctum est Diadema Cucullo,
Cum Mihi regnanti paruit Hesperia.


He was tall, and straight of Stature, of a serious Look, carrying in his face
natural Gravity, his voice was Masculine and firm, his Visage Long and Meagre,
his forehead Large and without Wrinkles, midling eyes somewhat deep set in his
head, but very lively; his Nose long and aquiline; his Teeth jutting out a
little toward his Lips, which gave the Courtiers occasion in Raillery to call
him, The Elephant: a piece of Buffonnery wherein they spoke more truth than
they were ware of; for an Elephant must he needs have been in strength, who
carried the weight of so many Affairs, and so great Crosses. Twenty eight years
after his death, as they were digging the Grave his body lay in, they drew out
his Bones, and his Head, once the Palace of the greatest Judgment that ever
appeared in Spain, the Scull whereof was all of a piece, without Suture, the
mark of a strong Brain; but withal the cause of the continual Headaches he was
subject to, by the vapors wanting vent.

This is the Pourtrait of his body: that of his mind is already drawn in those
many illustrious Actions, and sage Counsels it produced: yet like the Painters
finishing Touches, we'll add some observations to the body of our past Story.
He expressed himself in few words, but handsome and very significant, his
Answers were clear and very intelligible; and when he discoursed of any
business, he never went from the point; his Entertainments were serious, saying
often with the Roman Orator, We were not born to trifle away time, in sports
and plays, but to employ our selves in serious Matters and Affairs of Weight.
His Study was his Pleasure; and Discourses of Divinity his Recreations after
Meat.

True it is Melancholy was his, as most great men's predominant humor: but when
it troubled him, he retired from business, and appeared not to any but his most
intimate Familiars. This discovered it self in some notable passages of his
life, as the Baptizing the Moors of Granada, with the Laver, and his design to
Conquer Africa. What he had once resolved on, he executed with incredible
promptitude: Salust had taught him that lesson which he would often repeat,
That nimble Execution ought to tread on the heels of deliberate Resolutions. No
man more impatient of contempt and slights offered against his Authority, none
more apt to endure Liberty of Speech.

A Priest of Osma desired of him a Judge extraordinary to determine a suit he
had depending, and pressed him earnestly, as the chief of the Council, to grant
it; the Cardinal answered, The ordinary Judges should do him right, that he
must content himself with them, and abide satisfied with their Decree, that he
knew not where to find better in all the Cities of Spain. Is it possible (said
the Priest) that the pitiful Borough of Torrelagine should give a Primate to
all Spain, and so many Cities not afford a competent Judge for a small suit?
The Cardinal finding him so free in his expression, thought he had belonged to
some Grandee, who had set him on to speak these words, and asked him, Who was
his Master? My self, said the Priest, and I be, no other: You say well, replied
the Cardinal, you cannot have a better; and having given a Judge as desired,
dismissed him. Contrera a Spanish Priest Preached one day before the Cardinal,
and, with more Zeal than Discretion, inveighed against Rich Habits, not
considering how necessary they are to procure Reverence from the people to
persons in Authority and Eminent Dignity; and turning to the Cardinal, he
reproved him in the face of the Congregation for wearing a Robe lined with rich
Furrs. The Cardinal took this Reprimande very patiently, and after Sermon
invited the Preacher to Dinner, and commended his Sermon. Some write that after
Sermon he took the Preacher aside into the Vestry, and having opened his
Bosom, showed him a hair Cloth under his Robe; but I dare not affirm it, lest
I seem to condemn the most solid Judgment of that Age, of Levity. Time was one
of the things most in his Esteem, and knowing that the Loss of it was
irreparable, he was a very niggard of it, and loath to lose a moment: he was
always Trimmed by Night, for fear of spending any part of the day on the
necessities of his person, which might be dispatched another time. And as he
was Trimmed, it was his course to have some serious Book Read to him. He took
an ineffable delight to bestow Benefices in his Gift, on persons Capable, who
sought them not, nor knew of the Vacancies; and severely rejected such as
begged them of him, as failing in the respects due to his person. The way to
miss a promotion from him, was to beg it of him. One of his Almoners had
advice of a Vacancy very convenient for him; and, knowing that if he moved not
the Cardinal for it, he might bestow it on one he never thought of; and that to
beg it, was to lose it; he presented himself to his Master, and bespoke him
thus: My Lord, such a Benefice is void, To desire it of you, were to violate
your Laws, and the prohibitions you have made in that behalf, which I will
never do, nor came I to that purpose, but humbly to crave your Directions how
to obtain it. The Cardinal liked his address, and answered, You shall have it
with a good will, get the Writings dispatched, and the Benefice will be yours;
and instantly commanded his Secretary to provide them.

But as he was severe in rejecting the importunate requests of his Domestics,
he was no less ready to acknowledge their Services, but would have his favors
prevent their demands, to engage them with more grace, and stronger obligation.
It Is observed of this great Minister, that never Man served him in or out of
his Family, who was not largely Rewarded. God made man Freeborn: Fortune has
Robbed him of that Liberty, by reduceing him under Servitude of great Ones, who
are guilty of Ravishing from him, what is most precious, his Liberty, and his
Time; unless they restore them the fruits of the one, and the other by way of
recompense in ample rewards, which alone can repair the loss of this letter,
being otherwise irrecoverable.

The Cardinal was apt to resent Injuries, and Affronts, but no man more
thankful for Pleasures done him, which he never forgot. Brunet the Spaniard,
mentioned in the beginning of this Story who assisted him in his Voyage to Rome
when the Robbers had left him only his Tongue to beg, is a pregnant Instance:
this man came to see him in the time of his greatness. The Honors, the
familiarity, and intimate privacy the Cardinal afforded him, put the Court into
Admiration. No person in Spain, the King only excepted, having received so much
respect from him: He labored to retain him near himself, he sent him presents,
promised him what entertainment, offered him what preferment he pleased,
courted his acceptance of Bishoprics, and great Offices; ^or raising his
Fortune: But Brunet, who pre^erred the repose of a mean Condition, before ^he
troubles of the great dignities of the World, ^aving thanked the Cardinal for
the honors he ^id him, the offers and promises made him, ^etyred home to enjoy
there that tranquillity he ^esired, in those conveniences whereof he had
^^fficient to satisfy him.

Monsieur Xeures, who envyed the Reputation ^f this great Minister, and feared
his liberty of ^peech to King Charles against him; and after him, ^^e Cardinal
Granvel, on consideration of the ^randeur of his Actions, averr the Cardinal
^^^ued of Royal-blood, though Time, which no ^^ss Conceals, than Discovers the
best of things ^^th hid his Extraction, it being in their Opini^^ impossible a
Private man should be capable of (...) great things, unless he had in him the
Seeds of ^^ose virtues which are proper to Monarks, ^^d were descended of
mighty Potentates. But such was the life, and such were the Actions of Francis
Ximenes, surnamed, for the effects of his prudence, The Cardinal of Spain,
whose Counsels are to this day observed in that Kingdom, and his Virtues serve
the World for Directions in the Conduct of State. For if the Pourtraicts of
great Persons have the property to make the spectators to imitate their
qualities, their Virtues are excellent guides to lead us aright by their
illustrious splendor in the ways of this World.

THE END.

