Baxters Apology. Directions for the Binder.
The General Title. The Answer 1. To Blake. 2. To Kendall. 3. To Colvinus. The
Epistle to Col. Tailor next to the Title of it. 4. To Air. 5. To Crandon.



RICH. BAXTERS APOLOGY Against the Modest EXCEPTIONS OF Mr T. BLAKE.

AND THE DIGRESSION OF Mr G. KENDALL.

Whereunto is added ANIMADVERSIONS on a late DISSERTATION OF Ludiomaeus
Colvinus, alias, Ludovicus Molinaeus, M. Dr OXON.

AND AN Admonition of Mr W. Air of Salisbury.

WITH Mr Crandon's Anatomy for satisfaction of Mr Caryl.

Phil. 1.15.16, 17, 18, 19. Some preach Christ even of Envy and Strife, and
some also of Good Will: The one preach Christ of Contention, not sincerely,
supposing to add Affliction to my bonds: But the other of Love, knowing that I
am set for the Defense of the Gospel. What then? Notwithstanding every way,
whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is preached, and I therein do Rejoice,
yea, and will Rejoice. For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through
your Prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

London, Printed by A.M. for Thomas Underhill, at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's
Churchyard, and Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet. 1654.

TO THE Honorable Commissary General EDWARD WHALLEY.
SIR,
THough weakness and distance have prohibited me that converse with you which
sometime I did enjoy, yet have they not excussed your former Kindeness out of
my Remembrance. Received Benefits should not Die before us: If the Donor kill
them not by Retraction, the Receiver must not suffocate them by Oblivion; nor
prove their Grave, who was intended for a Storehouse, if not a Garden where
they may be Rooted and be fruitful. In those hearts where Benefits Live, the
Benefactor Lives. And those that Live in our Estimation and Affection, we
desire their Names may be inscribed on our Monuments, and survive with ours,
when we are Dead. While we live also we more regard their Judgments of us,
then other men's; and are more ambitious of standing right in their esteem; and
therefore are willing that our just Apologies may be in their hands, to hinder
misapprehensions, and resist unjust Accusers. May these Reasons excuse my
prefixing your Name to these Papers, and directing them first to your Hand:
(Custom having led me into that Road, wherein I do not unwillingly follow.) It
is not for Protection or Patronage of my Opinions: For that I refer them
wholly to the Father of Lights, the Illuminating Spirit, and the Light of that
Truth which they contain and Vindicate. Nor do I desire that you should make
these things your Studies; they being more fitted to the use of those Students,
that can lay out much of their time on such things. I confess I had rather see
in your Hands, the Holy Scriptures, and Books of Practical Divinity, then these
Controversies: and had rather hear such Practical Discourses from your Mouth.
So far am I from soliciting you to any singular Opinion of mine, that I
solicit you not once to read these Books; save only when any Opinion in them
shall be Accused, to turn to the Words, and see what is said. It is the
Practical Christian that holds fast the Truth, which many eager Disputers soon
lose. Doting about Questions that engender strife, is not the Religiousness
that God approves; What ever the Professors of this Age may imagine. It is the
most Practical Teachers and People in England commonly that are the most
Orthodox. I have often noted many men's Prayers to be much freer from Libertinism,
then their Sermons; and their Sermons then their Writings and Disputes. That Is
a man's Judgment indeed, which he dare reduce to Practice, and own before God.

The Work of these Papers have been to my mind somewhat like those sad
Employments wherein I attended you: of themselves, grievous and ungrateful;
exasperating others, and not pleasing my self (besides the ruinating of my
bodily health) And as the Remembrance of those years is so little delightful
to me, that I look back upon them as the saddest part of my life; so the Review
of this Apology, is but the renewing of my trouble: to think of our Common
frailty and darkness, and what Reverend and much valued Brethren I contradict;
but especially for fear lest men should make this Collision an occasion of
Division, and by receiving the sparks into Combustible Affections, should turn
that to a Conflagration which I intended but for Illumination. If you say, I
should then have let it alone: The same answer must serve, as in the former
Cause we were wont to use. Some say, that I who pretend so much for Peace,
should not write of Controversies. For my self it is not much Matter: but must
Gods Truth (for such I take it) stand as a Butt for every man to shoot at? Must
there be such Liberty of opposing it, and none of Defending? One party cannot
have Peace without the others Consent. To be Buffeted and Assaulted, and
Commanded to Deliver up the Truth of God, and called Unpeaceable if I defend it
and resist, this is such Equity as we were wont to find. In a word, both works
were ungrateful to me, and are so in the Review; but in both, as Providence
and men's onset imposed a Necessity, and drove me to that strait, that I must
Defend or do worse; so did the same Providence so clear my way, and draw me on,
and sweeten unusual Troubles with unusual Mercies, and Issue all in Testimonies
of Grace, that as I had great mixtures of Comfort with Sorrow in the
Performance, so have I in the Review: And as I had more eminent Deliverances
and other Mercies in those years and ways of Blood and Dolor, then in most of
my Life beside; so have I had more encouraging Light since I was engaged in
these Controversies. (For I speak not of these few Papers only, but of many
more of the like Nature that have taken up my time.) And as I still retained a
Hope, that the End of all our Calamities and strange Disposings of Providence,
would be somewhat Better then was Threatened of late: so Experience has taught
me to think, that the Issue of my most ungrateful Labors shall not be vain;
but that Providence which extracted them has some use to make of them, better
then I am yet aware of; if not in this Age, yet in times to come. The best is,
we now draw no blood: and honest hearts will not take themselves wounded, with
that blow which is given only to their Errors. However, God must be served
when he calls for it, though by the harshest and most unpleasing work. Only the
Lord teach us to watch carefully over our Deceitful Hearts, least we should
serve our selves while we think and say, we are serving him; and lest we should
Militate for our own Honor and Interest, when we pretend to do it for his
Truth and Glory!

I hope, Sir, the Diversity of Opinions in these days, will not diminish your
Estimation of Christianity, nor make you suspect that all is Doubtful, because
so much is Doubted of. Though the Tempter seems to be playing such a Game in
the world, God will go beyond him, and turn that to Illustration and
Confirmation, which he intended for Confusion and Extirpation of the Truth. You
know its no news to hear of some Ignorant, Proud and Licentious, of what
Religion soever they be. And this Trinity is the Creator of Heresies. And as
for the sober and Godly, it is but in lesser things that they disagree: and
mostly about words and Methods more then Matter (though the smallest things of
God are not Contemptible.) He that wonders to see wise men differ, does but
wonder that they are yet Imperfect, and know but in part; that is, that they
are yet Mortal sinners, and not Glorified on Earth! And such wonderers know not
what man is, and it seems are too great strangers to themselves. And if they
turn these differences to the prejudice of Gods Truth, or dishonor of
Godliness, they show themselves yet more unreasonable; to blame the Sun that
men are purblinde. And indeed were Pride and Passion laid aside in our
Disputes, and men could gently suffer contradiction, and heartily love and
correspond with those that in lower matters do gainsay them, I see not but such
friendly debates might edify.

For your self, Sir, as you were a friend to sound Doctrine, to Unity and to
Piety, and to the Preachers, Defenders and Practisers thereof, while I converst
with you, and as fame informs us, have continued such; so I hope that God who
has so long preserved you, will preserve you to the end; and he that has been
your Shield in corporal dangers, will be so in spiritual.

Your great Warfare is not yet accomplished: The Worms of Corruption that breed
in our bowels, will live in some measure till we die our selves. Your Conquest
of your self is yet Imperfect. To fight with your self, you will find the
hardest, but most necessary Conflict that ever yet you were engaged in; and to
overcome your self the most honorable and gainful Victory. And think not that
your greatest trials are all over. Prosperity has its peculiar Temptations, by
which it has foiled many that stood unshaken in the storms of adversity. The
Tempter who has had you on the waves, will now assault you in the calm; and
has his last game to play on the Mountain, till nature cause you to descend.
Stand this Charge and you win the day. To which, as one that is faithful to
you, I shall acquaint you in a few words, what his temptations are like to be,
and how you should resist them: If you are already provided, a Remembrancer
will do you no harm.

1. The first and great Assault will be, to entice you to Overvalue your
present Prosperity, and to Judge the Creature to be better then it is, and to
grasp after a fullness of Honor and Wealth, and then to say, Soul, take thy
Rest. As you love your Peace, your Life, your Soul, your God, take heed of
this. Judge of Prosperity as one that must go Naked out of the world: Esteem of
earthly Greatness and Glory as that which will shortly leave you in the dust.
Why should it be proper to Dying men to be Wise, and to Judge truly of this
world, when all the living undoubtedly know that they must Die?

2. At least the Tempter will persuade with you to enjoy your Prosperity to the
satisfying of your flesh; and tell you that the free use of the Creatures is
your Christian Liberty, and therefore you need not deny your selves those
Delights that God affords you. But remember that it is the seeming sweetness
of the Creature that draws men from God: The Pleasantest Condition is the most
dangerous. If ever you would have your soul Prosper, make no provision for the
flesh to satisfy its lusts: A better man then any of us, was fain to tame his
body and bring it into subjection. Mortification is a necessary, but much
neglected part of the Christian Religion.

3. Should the Tempter prevail in these, it would follow, that God would be
much forgotten, former Engagements violated, and the Invisible things of the
Life to come would be seldom thought on, and less esteemed. O think on him that
remembered you in your greatest straits! Its a provoking sin to break those
Engagements which depth of Extremity, or Greatness of Deliverance, did formerly
constrain us to make with our God! Ingratitude makes a forfeiture of all we
have. And think not well of your own heart, when you cannot think more sweetly
of another world then of this. Its unhappy prosperity that makes God to be more
slighted, and the Glory to come more unsavory to our thoughts, and makes us
say, It is best to be here.

4. Another dangerous Temptation that will attend these, will be, to disregard
Christ's Interest through an over-minding of their own: To play your own game,
and lay out your chiefest care for your self, and make Gods business to stoop
unto your own. Where this prevails, the hearts of such are false to Christ:
While they pretend to serve him, they do but serve themselves upon him. They
will honor Christ no longer then he will honor them. And when they are once
false to Christ, they can be true to no one else. Their friends are esteemed
but as stepping stones to their Ends. When they can serve them no longer they
reject them as unprofitable. Ever Remember, that man stands safest that
espouseth no Interest contradictory to Christ's; I had almost said, None but
Christ's: For even Christ's must be made his own, and then his own will be
Christ's. God is more engaged to secure his own Interest then ours. There is no
Policy therefore comparable to this, to Engage most deeply where Christ's
chiefest Interest lies, and to Unite our own to his, in a just subordination.
He that will needs have a standing divided from Christ, Independent on him, or
Equal with him, much more in Opposition to him, is sure to fall. It will break
the greatest Prince on Earth to espouse an Interest inconsistent with Christ's,
when he does but arise to plead his Cause. Study therefore where Christ's
Interest most lies, and then devote all your own to the promoting of it: and
hold none that lives not as the Vine on the Wall, or rather as the branch in
the Vine, in Dependence upon his. And upon Enquiry you will find, that Christ's
Interest lies much in these two things, the Piety and the Peace of his People.
The Reformation of his Churches, and the Uniting of them (at home and abroad)
are the greatest works that any can be Employed in. To which ends Gods chiefest
means, is an Able, Godly, Diligent Ministry, to Teach and Rule his flocks
according to his Word. All the Interest that God has Given you, he expects
should be speedily, diligently and undeservedly employed to these Ends. Delay
not, you have but your time. Think it not enough to do no harm, or no more good
then those below you. Your standing is unsafe when you do little or nothing for
God. He is not bound to hold you the Candle to do nothing, or to work for your
self. Work therefore while it is day: the night comes when none can work.

5. Another Temptation that you must expect, will be, to have your mind swell
with your Condition: and to disrespect the inferior sort of your Brethren. But
I hope the Lord will keep you small in your own eyes; as remembering that you
are the same in the eyes of your Judge, and your shadow is not lengthened by
your successes, and that you must lie down with the Vulgar in the common dust.

Sir, Because the matter of this Book may be less useful to you, I could not
direct it to your hand, without some words that might be more useful. I do not
fear least you should take my faithful dealing for an injury, or interpret my
Monition to be an Accusation; as long as you so well know the Affections of
your Monitor. The Lord be your Teacher and Defense, and Direct, Excite,
Encourage and Succeed you, and all that have Opportunity to do any thing to the
Repairing of our Breaches, by furthering The Reformation and Unity of the
Churches: Which is the earnest Desire, and daily Prayer of

Your Servant in the work of Christ. RICHARD BAXTER.
Kederminster, Marc. 8th 1653.
RICH. BAXTERS ACCOUNT Given to his Reverend Brother Mr T. BLAKE OF THE Reasons
of his Dissent FROM The Doctrine of his Exceptions in his late TREATISE of the
COVENANTS.

JOHN 3.7. Little Children, let no man Deceive you: He that does Righteousness,
is Righteous, even as he is Righteous.

1 TIMOTHY 4.8. Godliness is Profitable unto All things, having Promise of the
Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's
Churchyard, and Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, 1654.

The Preface Apologetical.
SO sweet a thing is Christian Love and Concord, and so precious are the
thoughts of Peace to my Soul, that I think it unmeet in this contentious Age,
to publish such a Controversy as this, without an Apology: which, its likely,
may be needful, both as to the Matter and the Manner. Not that I dare rather
choose to Excuse a fault, then to forbear the committing of it: But that I
would have the Reader judge of things as they are. Just Apologies are not a
cover to our faults, but for removal of mis-representations, and healing of
misapprehensions, that those may not be taken for faults which are none, or
those to be of the greater size, which are but ordinary infirmities. Whether my
Apology be Just, the Reader must judge.

I do so heartily Love Peace, that I have hard thoughts of Controversy: yet do
I so Love the Truth, that I refuse not to contend for it. Though the strait be
great, yet its no other then we are usually put to, even in lower things. The
most noble and excellent ends, may have some distastful means: which as none
that is in his right senses will choose for themselves, so none but a slave to
his senses will refuse when they are necessary. It is no Contradiction in such
a case, but true Discretion, to Choose the thing which at the same time we do
Abhor: To choose it as a necessary Means, and yet to abhor it for its
Ungrateful Nature. We are contented to seek, and buy, and take that Physic
which we so abhor* that we have much ado to get it down or to retain it. The
Lord knows, that contending is distastful to my soul: though my corrupt nature
is too prone to it. Much studying of Controversies has often discomposed my
mind, and interrupted my more sweet and heavenly thoughts, and unfitted me for
public and private duties; so that I as sensibly find my self a loser by it,
as by some other avocations of a more aliene nature. Yet dare I not be so
selfish as to cast it off. That must be endured, which may not be desired. We
may not pretend the disadvantages to our souls (much less any lower) against
apparent duty, and service to the truth of God. Many ways has our Master to
make us a full reparation for our losses. What then shall I resolve on? Neither
to Delight in Controversy; nor totally to Refuse it. Not to rush upon it
unadvisedly, nor to be carried into it by blind Passion and partiality, nor
yet to cast away my Captains Colors, nor to draw back when I am pressed. Not to
militate for any Faction, but for the Faith; nor for vainglory and credit, but
for Christ: And this with such a differencing the Person from the Cause, that
as it respects the error, it shall be bitter and contentious; but as to my
Brother, it shall be a Conference of Love. I abhor almost nothing more in
Divines, then laying too much upon the smaller controvertible Doctrinals, and
making too much of our Religion to consist in curious and unnecessary
speculations, if not unsearchable, unrevealed things; contradicting one of
their first Maxims, that [ Theology is a Practical Science.] An honest
Philosopher saw the evil of this Seneca Epist. ad Luc. 102. Non debuit hoc
nobis esse propositum, argutias serere, and Philosophiam in ^as angustias, ex
sua Majestate detra^ere.

Quanto s^tius est ire aperta via, and recta, quam sibi ipsi flexus disponere,
quos cum magna molestia debeas relegere? Neque enim quicquam aliud istae
Disputationes sunt, quam inter se perite captantium lusus.


. Yet must Gods commands be obeyed, and the Truth defended, and the Church
confirmed and edified, and the soul of an erring Brother be relieved, though at
a dearer rate then a verbal Disputation.

It is about five years since I wrote a small book about Justification, and
being in great weakness and expectation of death, I was forced to deliberate,
Whether to publish it with its many Imperfections, or not at all? I chose the
former, supposing the Defects and Crudities would be charged only on the
Author, and that some Light might notwithstanding appear to the Reader, which
might further him in the understanding of several truths. I durst not so far
value reputation, as to be injurious to Verity, for fear of discovering my own
infirmity: Its no time to be solicitous about the esteem of men, when we are
drawing near to the Judgment Seat of God. When this Book came abroad, it fell
under very different Censures, as most things use to do that seem to go out of
the ordinary road. Too many overvalued it: Some were offended at it. Hereupon
being afraid lest by Ignorance or Rashness I should wrong the Church and Truth,
I did in the end of my Book of Baptism, desire my Brethrens animadversions and
advice: which accordingly many of the most pious and Learned men that I know in
the Land, were pleased to afford me; and that with so much Ingenuity, Love and
Gentleness, as I must needs confess my self their Debtor, as having no way
deserved so great a favor: and I do hereby return them my most hearty thanks.
After this my Reverend and Dear Brother Mr Blake in a Treatise of the
Covenants, did publish a Confutation of some things in my Book (among many
others whom he deals with, Mr Powell, Mr. Tombs, Mr. Owen, Mr. Firmin, etc.)
wherein I found nothing but tenderness and brotherly Love, as to my person; and
no such inclination to extremes in his Doctrine, as I found in some others; but
much Moderation and Sobriety, as indeed the Gravity, Piety and Integrity of the
man, would promise to any that know him. Only I thought it might have been more
convenient to him, to me, and to others, if I had seen his exceptions before
they had been published, that so having known what I would reply, he might have
published only so much as he remained unsatisfied in. But as it seems, his
Judgment was otherwise, so is it no whit to me offensive. Yet when I had read
his Book, it was my Resolution, to send him privately my Reply, that so we
might consider how far we were agreed, and how far the difference was only
seeming and about words, and might publish only the remainder to the world, by
joint Consent. The Reasons of this Resolution were these: First, Because I was
loath by tedious altercations, to hinder the Reader from discerning the Truth:
It is the course of most voluminous Disputers, to tire their Readers with
Contendings about words, that they can hardly find out the true state of the
Controversy; much less discern on which side is the Truth. Which might be much
remedied if men would but lovingly first debate the matter in private, and cut
off all the superfluities and verbal Quarrels; and then put out only the
material differences by joint Consent, having Corrected even in the language
and manner of debating, whatsoever was displeasing or seemed injurious to
either party. Secondly, Because I unfeignedly abhor contending, and never
wrote any thing that way, but when I was unavoidably necessitated. Thirdly,
Because I so well know my own frailty, and proneness to be over-eager and keen,
and unmannerly in my style, and the frailty of most Brethren in being Impatient
hereof; yea of many in judging themselves wronged when they are not, and making
some plain speeches which were but necessary or innocent, to seem proud,
contemptuous, and sleighting as to men's persons, racking them to a sense that
was never intended, I therefore thought it safest to avoid all occasions of
such mistakes, which may be injurious to themselves, as well as to me.
Fourthly, Because the Lord has of late years by a strange, unresistible work
of his power, fastened in my soul so deep an Apprehension of the Evil of
Dissentions, and of the Excellency and Necessity of the Unity of Brethren, and
the Peace of the Church; and in order hereto, of the healing of our Divisions,
that it sticks in my thoughts night and day, and the Zeal of such a
Reconciliation does eat me up; so that I make it the main study and business of
my Meditations, which way I might do any thing toward its accomplishment. And
I was much afraid, lest if I wrote by way of Controversy, I might, by
exasperating my Brethren, hinder this happy work. He that knows my heart,
knows that these were my thoughts. Hereupon I did in the first Page signify
to M. Blake, this my Resolution, which when I was forced to alter, I would not
alter the words of my writing, but having given this account of the reason of
them, I shall let them go as I wrote them.

Before I had finished my Reply to Mr. Blake, comes out Mr. Kendal's Book
against M. Goodwin, with his Digression against me: After-this, I was informed
of diverse others that were ready to write against my Doctrine, and some that
had written, and were ready to publish it, and diverse others that were desirous
to send me their Animadversions. I did therefore apprehend (and so did many
learned Friends) an unavoidable Necessity of appearing more publicly, both to
spare my Friends the labor of writing the same things to me over and over,
which so many others had written before; and to spare my self the time and
pains of endless private Replies (which have this three years taken me up, and
hindered me from more profitable work:) and also to prevent men's publication of
more such writings as have already been published; seeing when none know what I
can say against them, the rest may go on in the way as these have done, and
trouble themselves and the world in vain. Besides, I understood that some were
offended at my silence, as mis-interpreting it to be from contempt. Being
therefore necessitated to do something of this kind, I could not (according to
the Laws of Justice or Friendship) deal publicly with any, but those that had
begun to deal publicly with me. Its true, there has been long unanswered, a
Book of Mr. Owens against some things which I had wrote which concerned him.
But I never thought fit (nor yet do) to Reply to that: 1. Partly because it
contains so little matter of real difference between him and me (and most of
that is answered by Mr. Blake, and in my Reply to Mr. Kendall:) The main Points
being, Whether Christ suffered the same which the Law threatened, or the Value,
or that which was equivalent? (wherein he yields as much as I need) and,
Whether the Covenant be Conditional? and, Whether the Obligation to Punishment
be dissolved before we Believed, sinned, or were born? And to vindicate the
Truth in these two or three Points, I conceive it not so meet a way, to do it
in Answer to that Book, wherein ten times more words would be bestowed in
altercations, and upon the by. 2. Besides, I was never never necessitated to a
Reply to that Book, nor once desired, and I will do nothing of that kind,
which I know how to avoid. 3. But indeed my greatest reason, was the
consciousness of my temerity in being so foolishly drawn to begin with him; and
the consciousness of my fault in one or two unmannerly words of him, and
consequently the consciousness of my duty to be first silent. It is not fit
that I should both begin and end. But these Brethren that I here Reply to, did
begin with me.

Upon these Reasons, I sent not my papers to Mr. Blake, but resolved to publish
them, with my Reply to Mr. K.

As for Mr. K. himself, I know not the man; but by his writings he appears to
be a Learned man: And I will hope his humility may be answerable to his
Learning, though he here express it not: We are all poor frail sinners; and
above all do hardly Master our Pride; the fire whereof in an unmortified soul,
does make fuel to it self of Gods excellent Gifts, till it have turned them
all into salt and ashes. That which this Learned man has troubled himself to
write concerning my self, I will not insist on: It is not for my self that I am
disputing, but for the Truth, so far as I know it: I can truly say as
Augustine to Hierom, Obsecro te per mansuetudinem Christi, ut si te laesi,
dimittas mihi; nec me vicissim laedendo malum pro malo reddas* Laedes enim si
mihi tacueris errorem meum, quem forte inveneris in Scriptis, vel in dictis
meis. Nam si ea in me reprehenderis, quae reprehendenda non sunt, te potius
laedis quam me; quod absit a m^ribus, and sancto proposito tuo, ut hoc facias
voluntate laedendi culpans in me aliquid dente malevolo, quod mente veridica
scis non esse culpandum, etc. Fieri potest ut tibi videatur aliud quam veritas
habet, dum tamen aliud abs te non fiat quam charitas habet. Nam and ego
amicissimam reprehensionem tuam gratissime accipiam, etiamsi reprehendi non
meruit, quod recte defendi potest: Aut agnoscam simul and benevolentiam tuam
and culpam meam; and quantum Dominus donat, in alio gratus, in alio emendatus
inveniar. Quid ergo? fortasse dura, sed certe salubria verba tua tanquam cestus
Entelli pertimescam. Caedebatur ille: non curabatur: Et ideo vincebatur, non
sanabatur. Ego autem si medicinalem correptionem tuam, tranquillus accepero,
non dolebo. Si vero infirmitas vel humana, vel mea, etiam cum veraciter
arguitur, non potest non aliquantulum contristari; Melius tumor Capitis dolet
cum curatur, quam dum ei parcitur, and non sanatur. Hoc est enim quod acute
vidit, qui dixit, Vtiliores esse plerumque inimicos objurgantes, quam amicos
objurgare metuentes. Illi enim dum rixantur dicunt aliquando vera, quae
corrigamus: isti autem minorem quam oportet exhibent Justitiae libertatem, dum
amicitiae timent exasperare dulcedinem. Non mihi esse debet molestum pondus
aetatis tuae, dummodo conteratur palea culpae meae. I do not feel my self hurt
by the words of Mr. K* against my self, much less by any free disclosure of my
faults. But I confess I desired more Clemency to his Adversary, and more humble
sense of his own frailty, when I read some passages in him against Mr. Goodwin.
For example, part. 3. page 112, 113. much of two pages are taken up in [ Yet
(if you be able to believe him) he tells his Reade^ he is sure there is no
Pepper sprinkled throughout his Discourse, nor is he Couscious to himself of
the least bitterness, etc.
A solemn Profession of his discerning the Just hand of heaven, and the spirit
of slumber on Mr. Goodwin, and the pompous display of his folly, to appear most
ridiculous, etc.] even daring to [adore the hand of God in infatuating his
parts, that Balaams Ass may see the hand of the Angel against the Prophet] with
more of the like. And what is the matter? Why Mr. Goodwin overseeingly wrote
the word [ Antecedent] for [ Consequent] and [ Consequent] for [ Antecedent.] A
heinous crime! When I read such passages as these in him, I began to think, how
well I had sped, and tantum non, did owe him thanks for handling me so gently,
even in those passages that others most blamed. But I saw it was no wonder, if
all my words were sifted to the bran Indeed I more desired in Mr. K. a
conscience so tender as would have strained at some of all those palpable
untruths in matter of fact, then a milder language to my self. But he tells us
in his Epistle, that Aliquando innocentius delinquendum erat, ne deessent in
quibus condonandis, etc. Et quidni mihig ratuler faelicia quadam erratula, etc.
Whether he think also that he should innocentius delinquere, and faeliciter
errare, that there may be matter for the honor of Gods Grace, as well as man's,
I cannot tell.
.

2. As for the Manner of my handling these Controversies (which is the next
thing that (more) needs an Apology,) I expect to be blamed for these three
things: 1. For unprofitable Altercations and Repetitions. 2. For too much
curiosity and obscurity in some distinctions. 3. For too course and sharp a
style.

1. For the first, I knew not how to avoid it, without inconvenience. I must
follow the leading of them that I reply to. I must not digress too far, to
fetch in more useful matter then they put into my hands. Yet I think I have
done somewhat in that kind, as far as I saw fit. And when the same words of
theirs, require the same answers, I am forced sometime to repeat them, where
the occasion is repeated. Yet I can promise the Reader that I will not go near
so far in this way of repetition, as more learned disputants do, and in
particular Dr. Twiss.

2. For the second Exception, I must say, that many are mistaken in my way, in
that they discern not the difference, 1. Between Necessary distinguishing and
unnecessary. 2. Between Curiosity in the main Cause, and in the Means of
discussing it. 3. Between curious Notions that are thrust on the Church and
poor ignorant people, as Necessary and Certain; and such as we are forced to
use with Learned men to discover their mistakes, and to expugne curiosity of
Error or Uncertainty, by exactness of indagation, and as curious an
explication of the Truth. I am somewhat confident that my curious
distinguishing (as some call it) is but of the later sort, in all these
respects. For example, In the present Controversy about the Instrumentality of
faith to Justification, that which offends me is, that Divines should be so
dangerously curious, as to make a Logical Notion of such Necessity, which Gods
Word never used, nor for ought I know, the Church for many a hundred year; and
which poor people cannot comprehend: Yea and that they may lay so much of the
difference between us and the Papists on this point, thereby most dangerously
hardening them, when they shall discover our Error; and occasion them to
triumph over us, and to think, that the rest of our Doctrine is like this? And
that this Instrumentality is still so contradistinguished from Merit, as if
there were no third way of Faiths Interest in our Justification, but it must
needs be the one or the other. Yea and the most Learned in the upshot fly to
this, that Credere is not Agere, but Pati, and is but Actio Grammatica, or the
name of Action, but Physically or hyperphysically a suffering. Is not here a
curious Doctrine of Faith and Justification? If Aristotle had been a Christian
he could not have comprehended it: Much more is it too fine for vulgar wits (as
well as too false for lovers of the Truth.) In opposition to this, and in
compassion of plain Christians, I only say, that faith is the Condition of our
Justification; or that the reason why we are Justified by it (supposing its
Object, and its Aptitude) is, because the Free Donor, Lawgiver and Justifier
will have it so, and has designed it to this Office in his Promise or
Testament. I think this is plain Doctrine, and fit for plain men. There Is
scarce the simplest man in the Town, if one offer him the Sovereigns pardon for
Rebellion, on Condition he will thankfully Accept it, and promise to Rebel no
more, but he knows this to be the reason why his Acceptance has an Interest in
his pardoning ( viz. as the fittest Condition freely determined on by the
Sovereign) without any more ado. And I think to read him a Logic Lecture
about Active or Passive Instrumentality, would more abuse then enlighten his
understanding. Yet the subtilties of those whom I oppose, does force me often to
distinguish, to expugne their Sophistry: and I am forced to use more accurate
means to defend a plain Truth. And indeed, he that Defines and Distinguishes
well teaches well. Confusion is the Mother and Nurse of Error. Truth loves
the Light. It is not sound Distinction that I blame in any, but fancies and
vain curiosities, and carrying us from Matter to Words, and making an
appearance of difference, where there is none, and calling Confusion by the
name of distinction or explication. I am sure a few obvious Distinctions, have
been a Key to let many a truth into my understanding.

Moreover I must desire the Reader to consider, when things seem too curious to
him, and hard to be understood, whether it be not from the Nature of the
subject matter, rather then from any unnecessary Curiosity in me: If the matter
be such as will bear no more familiar and plain enodations and explications, I
cannot help that. As Seneca says, Epist. 58. Platoni imputes, non mihi hane
^erum difficultatem. Nulla est autem sine difficultate subtilitas. I cannot
better speak my mind then in the words of Austin, li. 5. de Trinit. c. 1. Ab
his etiam qui ista lecturi sunt, ut ignoscant peto ubi me magis voluisse quam
potuisse dicere animadverterint, quod vel ipsi me^ius Intelligunt, vel propter
mei eloquii difficultatem non intelligunt: Sicut ego eis ignos^o, ubi propter
suam tarditatem intelligere non possunt. Pardon my obscure difficult
expressions, and I will pardon your dullness of apprehension.

3. For the third Exception, viz. the sharpness of my style, I have these
things to say, 1. I dare not, nor will not wholly excuse it. I am too conscious
of my frailty, to think my self innocent in this. I confessed my fault as to
one even now; and I confess as to another (Mr Walker) I committed the same
fault, by too unmannerly provoking expressions (Though I will take none for a
competent Judge of the degree of my fault, that has not read his Answer to J.
Goodwin, and Mr Gatakers Vindication of Mr Wottons Defense.) The other passages
that some accuse me of, are, I think, upon a forced mistaken sense of my words.
The most real sharpness that ever I was guilty of, was against Mr Tombs in my
Book of Baptism: and its too probable that in this against Mr K. I have
transgressed: which if I have done, I heartily desire him, as I do all other
Brethren whom I have offended, in compassion of humane frailty, to remit it; as
I heartily do all those passages of his, which his Readers do generally judge
so unsavory. However I do adjure every Reader, that would not break the ninth
Commandment, and wrong God and themselves and me by false censures, that they
impute not my sharp expressions to a disesteem of Christian Unity and Peace, or
a hatred to my Brother: and that by too impatient reception, they make it not
an occasion of disaffection, or breach of peace in themselves. For the Lord
knows, that, though my words may be too rough and earnest, yet my soul longs
after the Unity and Peace of the Church. And I never yet wrote against any
Brother so sharply, but I could heartily live with him in dear Love and
Communion; as I am confident I should do with these, if they were near me: For
sure I am, I disagree not with those with whom I do converse; nor ever fell out
with any Brother, to my remembrance, since I was a child. Charge me with
unmeet expressions if you please; but with no further Unpeaceableness,
Disaffection, or Contempt of my Brethren, then you can prove. 2. I must entreat
the Reader to distinguish carefully, between my speeches against the Person,
and against the Error or Cause which I oppose. I confess, when I am confident
that it is Error that I speak against, especially if it appear to be foul or
dangerous, I am apt to shame it, and load it with Absurdities, and show the
nakedness of it to the Reader: In this case, I find many take it as if I spoke
all this of the Person, and censured him as absurd, as I do his Opinion: which
is an injurious charge; seeing a wise man may hold an absurd Opinion. And I
think, as I must not speak contemptuously of my Brother for a lesser Error, so
neither must I for his sake, speak lightly and favorably of his faults. Error
is not like confessed sins, which none dare own, or encourage others in: but it
is a Vice that disposes men to Infect all they can; and emboldneth them to
defend it, and fearlesly to draw all others into the guilt. And therefore it
needs the most potent opposition, and the souls of our Brethren need the most
effectual preservative: And that must not be only by a naked, dull Confutation;
but also by a discovery of the foulness, the sinfulnes and dangerousness of the
Error. The Affections have need to be awaked, as well as the Understanding
informed, in the present case, as well as against common moral Vices. I am sure
Seducers make no small advantage, by moving the Affections, and why they that
speak Truth should not do so, I cannot tell. If we must do so in Preaching, so
must we in some Disputings, still supposing that Information go first, and
exciting application be but subservient, and be not the leading, or the
principal part. ^^ose that take intellectual Error to be no sin, must deny
the understanding to be under a Law, and its acts to be participative
voluntary, and being commanded by the Will. And if Error be sin, we may have
leave to disgrace it and deal with it as sin; provided that we maintain our
Charity to the erring Brother. I am bound not to hate my Brother in my heart,
but plainly to Rebuke him, and not suffer sin to rest upon him. If he take it
ill, that makes not me the offender, nor will discharge me from my duty. 3. I
confess I think we are commonly too tender eared in such cases: of which I have
spoken my mind already in the end of the Preface to my Book of Baptism. I have
often wondered to think what patience we expect (and justly) yea and find, in
many of the worst of our hearers, when we speak to them as cuttingly as
possibly we can (and all too little:) and how little we exercise or can allow
to one another! and what silken ears the Preachers of humility have themselves?
And I cannot but observe the strange partiality of the best: how zealous they
are against a Toleration of Errors; and yet how impatient of being told of
their own. Other men's should be cut down with the Sword, and theirs may not be
plainly confuted by the Word: nor can we so skilf^^ry butter and oil our words,
but that we shall be taken for contemners of our Brethren. Not that I am free
from the same disease: but (though proud hearers judge him a proud speaker that
deals plainly with them, yet) I can truly say of that sin, to the praise of my
Physician, as Seneca Epist. 8. Salutares admonitiones velut medicamentorum
utilium compositiones litteris mando, esse illas efficaces in meis ulceribus
expertus: quae etiamsi persanata non sunt, serpere desierunt. Rectum iter quod
sero cognovi, and lassus errando, aliis monstro. And for my own style in
writing, it is but such as I would use in free speaking, if any Brethren were
present: and I think they would then bear it. I would not be furious, nor yet
would I be blockish; nor speak as without life about the matters of life. I say
of earnestness as Seneca of wit, Epist. 75. Qualis sermo meus esset si una
sederemus, aut ambularemus, tales esse Epistolas meas volo, quae nihil habeant
accersitum, aut fictum. Si fieri posset quid sentiam ostendere, quam loqui,
mallem. Etiamsi disputarem, nec supploderem pedem, etc. hoc unum plane tibi
approbare vellem, omnia me illa sentire quae dicerem, nec tantum sentire sed
amare. Non jejuna esse and arida volo, quae de rebus tam magnis dicentur. Neque
enim Philosophia ingenio renuntiat. Haec sit propositi nostri summa: quod
sentimus, loquamur; quod loquimur sentiamus.

4. One thing more I desire: that if my words be any where offensive, the
Reader will do me that right, as to consider diligently the words that I Reply
to: for without that, you cannot equally judge of mine. Though I do not feel my
self smart by any words of Mr K's, yet I knew not well how sufficiently to
Reply to them, without manifesting them to be as they are. I remember Hierom,
speaking of one Evagrius that pleaded for the Stoical impassionateness, says
he was, Aut Deus, aut Saxum: I am neither: and therefore must speak as I am.
Yet this I will promise my most offended Brethren, that in the harshest of my
Writings, I will not give my adversaries half so hard language, as did either
Hierom the most Learned of the Fathers, or Calvin the most Judicious and Happy
of the Reformers, no nor as Dr Twisse the most Learned opposer of the
Arminians. And I remember what it was that Hierom complained of (advers.
Ruffinum) Canino dente me rodunt, in publico detrahentes, legentes in angulis:
Iidem Accusatores and Defensores; eum in aliis probent, quod in me reprobant:
quasi Virtus and Vitium non in Rebus sit, sed cum Authone mutetur.

I cannot blame the Reader if he be weary of this long Apolo^^^* and ask, To
what purpose are all these words? To whom I truly answer; More for thy sake
then mine own: because some angry Divines that dissent, do raise such an odium
against my Writings, upon the pretenses before intimated, that they may thereby
hinder thee from receiving any benefit, and entertaining the Truth. For my own
sake, I confess it little troubles me; for I know it has been the case of my
betters, and I have greater matters to be troubled for. I can say as Vict.
Strigelius Epist. ad Wesenbech. a little before his death, Ego editione talium
pagellarum nec nominis mei vanam gloriolam quaero, nec aucupium pecuniae
exerceo: Sed cupio Deo declarare meam gratitudinem pro maximis beneficiis; and
Ecclesiae ostendere meam confessionem, denique mediocribus ingeniis aliqua ex
part prodesse. Horum finium cum mihi optime sim Conscius, non met^o quorundam
insulsas aut venenatas reprehensiones, sed me and meos labores Filio Dei
commendo. Scio meum Vitae curriculum and breve and exiguum esse: Quare in hac
brevitate peregrinationis ea dicam, scribam and faciam, quae migrationem in
vitam aeternam non impediunt. This Learned Divine ( Strigelius) himself, and
before him Melancthon, as peaceable as Learned (and many another besides them
also) have been so tired with the censures and reproaches of Divines, that it
made them, if not weary of living, yet more willing to die: So that Melancthon
thus wrote down before his death, the motives of his willingness to leave this
world.

A sinistris.
Discedes a Peccatis:
Liberaberis ab aerumnis and
a Rabie Theologorum.
A dextris.
Venies in Lucem:
Videbis Deum:
Intueberis Filium Dei:
Disces illa mira arcana quae in hac vita intelligere non potuisti: Cur sic
simus conditi: Qualis sit copulati^ duarum naturarum in Christo.
Nay it is not only Dissenters, that do terrify people from reading what I
have written, by telling them of I know not what latent dangerous Errors; but
even they that are of the same opinion with me: For example, I lately wrote,
that [the Doctrine of Infallible perseverance of all the sanctified, was my
strong opinion, and I was persuaded of its truth,] and I argued for it from
Scripture; yet because I so far acknowledged my own weakness, as to say, that I
was not so fully certain of it, as of the Articles of the Creed, and because I
say, I think it unsafe for a backsliding scandalous Christian, to venture his
salvation merely on this controverted Point,] what offense is taken? what
reports spread abroad? some proclaiming that I wrote against Perseverance (even
when I wrote for it;) Others that I am turned Arminian: Others that I am
dangerously warping! In so much that some of my nearest friends, for whose good
I published that Book, were ready to throw it by for fear of being infected
with my doctrine against Perseverance! The enemies Instruments be not all
unlearned nor ungodly.

For my part, I commend their zeal against Error, so it be Error indeed, and
so they will moderate it with Charity and Humility. I am as strongly persuaded
that its the Dissenters that err, as they are that its I. And were they as
zealous against Error indeed, I think I might have spared the labor of such
Writings as these. But I remember how they reprehended Beatus Rhenanus for his
supposed coveteousness, Beatus est Beatus: attamen sibi. So are such Brethren
charitable, sibi and suis. And all this comes a studio partium, and because the
Doctrine of the Unity of Christ's Body, and the Communion of Saints (as Saints)
is not reduced to practice; and we love not men so much for being of the same
Body, as for being of the same Side or Party with us; nor for being in the same
Christ, as for being of the same Opinion. If he that knows Christ knows all
things; and if Interest in Christ alone be enough to make us Happy; then is it
enough to make our Brother Amiable; though still we may be allowed the dislike
of his faults.

Which side the Truth lies on, in the Points here debated, I willingly leave
the Reader to judge according to the evidence that shall appear to him in the
perusal. I desire no more of him, but Diligence, Impartiality, and Patience in
his studying it: And I again entreat my Brethren to believe that I write this
in an unfeigned Love of Peace and them: and that accordingly they will receive
it: and where they meet with any of the effects of my infirmity, which may seem
provoking and injurious to them, they will compassionately remit them;
remembering that Heaven will shortly Reconcile our differences.

Kederminster, Aug. 1. 1653.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Prologue to Mr. Blake, page 1 Certain Distinctions and Propositions
explaining my sense, How Christ as King is the Object of Justifying Faith,. 1.
page 3 Ten Arguments proving that Christ as King and Head is the object of the
Justifying Act of Faith,. 1. page 3, 4 The common Distinction between Fides
Quae, and Fides Qua Justificat, examined,. 1. page 7 The danger of the contrary
Doctrine,. 1. page 8 The former Doctrine defended against Mr. Blakes
Exceptions,. 1. page 9 The same defended against more of his Exceptions: and
the faith Heb. 11, explained,. 2. page 10 James 2. about Justification by
works, explained and vindicated,. 3. page 12 How far works Justify,. 3, and 4.
page 14, 15 Why I wrote against the Instrumentality of Faith in Justifying,. 5.
ibid Ethical Active improper Receiving, distinguished from Physical Passive
proper Receiving,. 5. page 17 How Christ dwells in us by Faith,. 5. ibid Mr.
Bl's Exceptions against my opposition of Faiths Instrumentality in Receiving
Christ, considered,. 6. page 18 Mr. Bl's dangerous Doctrine, That God is not
the sole efficient, nor any Act of God the sole Instrument of Justification,.
7, and 8. page 19 Mr. Bl's contradiction, that faith is the Instrument of man,
and yet man does not Justify himself,. 9. page 20 Whether Faith be both Gods
Instrument and man's in Justification,. 10. page 21 Further, how Christ is said
to Dwell in us by Faith,. 10. page 22 The common opinion of Faiths
Instrumentality opened: and the Truth further explained,. 11. page 23 More of
Mr, Bl's reasoning on this, confuted,. 12. page 27 Whether God make use of our
Faith as his Instrument to Justify us,. 13 page 28 Whether the Covenant of God
be his Instrument of Justification,. 14. page 28 Mr. Bl's arguing against the
Instrumentality of the Promise confuted, 15, and 16. page 29 Mr. Bl's dangerous
Doctrine confuted, that [the Efficacy that is in the Gospel to Justification it
receives by their Faith to whom it is tendered,. 17, and 18. page 30 Whether Mr.
Bl, say truly, that the word has much less an Influx to the producing of the
Effect by a proper Causality, then faith,. 19. page 31 In what way of Causality
the word works,. 20. page 32 Whether the word be a Passive Instrument,. 21,
page 33 Mr. Bl's strange Doctrine examined, that [the word is a Passive
Instrument of Justification,. 22, and 23. page 34 More against Mr. Bl's
Doctrine, that [Faith through the Spirit gives efficacy and power of working,
to the Gospel, in forgiving sins]. 24. page 35 Fuller proof of the most proper
Instrumentality of the Gospel in Justification,. 25. page 36 Mr. Bl.
Contradiction, in making Faith and the Gospel two Instruments, both making up
one complete Instrument,. 25. page 37 More against Mr. Bl. strange doctrine,
that [Faith gives efficacy as an Instrument to the word,. 25. page 37 A
Condition, what; and how differing from mere Duty,. 27. page 38 The difference
between us compromized or narrowed,. 27, page 40 Of Evangelical personal
Righteousness,. 28. page 41 What Righteousness is,. 28. page 43 In what sense
our personal Righteousness is Imperfect and perfect,. 28 page 44 Isa. 64.6.
explained, Our Righteousness is as filthy rags, 29. page 46 How Holiness is
perfect or Imperfect,. 30. page 47 Whether Holiness or Righteousness be capable
neither of perfection nor Imperfection, but in relation to a Rule,. 31, and 32.
page 48 Concerning my charging learned Divines with Ignorance and other harsh
speeches,. 33. page 49 We are not denominated personally righteous for our
conformity to the Law of works only, or properly, proved,. 33. page 50 Whether
as Mr. Bl. says, the old Rule, the Moral Law be a perfect Rule, and the only
Rule,. 33. page 51 A Vindication of the Author from the imputation of
Arrogance, for charging some Divines with Ignorance,. 33. page 49 Whether
Imperfect Conformity to the Law be Righteousness, as an Image less like the
pattern is an Image,. 35. page 54 How fairly Mr. Bl. charge me to say
[Sincerity is the New Rule,. 36 page 55 An Answer to Davenants Testimony cited
by Mr. Bl.. 37. page 56 How far Unbelief and Impenitency in professed
Christians are violations of the New Covenant,. 38. page 57 How many sorts of
Promises or Covenants there are in Scripture mentioned,. 39. page 58 How far
Hypocrites and wicked men, are, or are not in Covenant with God; in several
Propositions,. 39. page 60 An enquiry into Mr. Bl's meaning, of Dogmatical
faith, and being in Covenant,. 39. page 64 Of the Outward Covenant (as they
call it) and how far the Unbelievers or Hypocrites may have right to Baptism
and other Ordinances,. 39. ibid Mr Bl's Absurdities supposed to follow the
restraint of the Covenant to the Elect, considered,. 41. page 80 Our own
Covenanting is the principal part of the Condition of Gods promise or Covenant
of Grace,. 41. page 81 Whether I make the Seal of Baptism, and of the Spirit,
to be of equal latitude,. 42. page 84 Mr. Bl's dangerous argument, answered
[The great Condition to which Baptism engages, is not a prerequisite in
Baptism: But Justifying Faith is such: Therefore]. 43. ibid More of Mr. Bl's
Arguments answered,. 44, and 45. page 86 My Arguments Vindicated from Mr. Bl's
Exception,. 46. to 52. page 88 26 Arguments to prove, that it is Justifying
faith which God requires of them that come to Baptism, and that Mr. Bl's
doctrine in this is unsound and unsafe,. 52. page 94 Of Mr. Bl's Controversy
with Mr. Firmin,. 53. page 107 My asserting of the Absolute promise of the
first Grace, vindicated,. 55 page 108 Whether our Faith and Repentance be Gods
works,. 55. page 109 What Life was promised to Adam in the first Covenant,. 56.
page 111 Of the Death threatened by the first Covenant,. 57. page 112 Whether
the Death of the body by separation of the soul were determinately threatened,.
58. page 113 Of the Law as made to Christ,. 59. page 115 Whether the Sacrament
seal the Conditional promise Absolutely? or the Conclusion [I am Justified and
shall be saved] Conditionally,. 60, 61, 62, 63. page 115 The Nature of sealing
opened,. 64. page 118 20 Propositions showing how God seals,. 64. page 119
That the minor being sealed, the Conclusion is not eo nomine sealed, as Mr. Bl.
affirms,. 65. page 123 How Sacraments seal with particular Application,. 67.
page 125 Mr. Bl's doctrine untrue, that [If the Conclusion be not sealed, then
no Proposition is sealed]. 68. page 126 Whether it be Virtually written in
Scripture that Mr. Bl. is Justified,. 69. page 126 More about Condi^ional
sealing,. 70, 71. page 128 Whether it is de fide that Mr. Bl. is Justified,.
72, 73, 74. page 129 In what sense we deny that Conclusion to be de fide,. 75.
page 133 That Divine Faith has Evidence, as well as Certainty. Rob. Baronius
and Rada's words to the contrary, examined,. 75. page 134 The difference
between Mr. Bl. and me contracted, and a plain ^ogent Argument added, to prove,
that the Conclusion forementioned is not sealed,. 76. page 139 The possibility
but vanity of Conditional sealing,. 77. page 140 More of Mr. Bl's Reasons
answered,. 78, to 81. page 141 The danger of teaching men, that they are bound
to believe that they are Justified, and shall be saved,. 81. page 142 In what
sense the Covenant commands perfect obedience,. 82. page 144 Mr. Bl's Reasons
examined, concerning the Covenants commanding perfection,. 82, to 91. page 144
How far true believers are Covenant-breakers,. 84. page 148 The Covenant is
Gods Law,. 91. page 152 The Conclusion Apologetical against the charge of
singularity,. 92. page 152
The Prologue.
MY Reverend and dearly beloved Brother, I remember that when I met you last at
Shrewsbury, you told me that you had sent to the Press a Treatise of the
Covenants, and desired me not to be offended, if you published in it some
things against my Judgment: Your Treatise is since come to my hands, and upon
a brief perusal of some part of it, I am bold to let you know this much of my
thoughts, 1. That I very much value and honor your Learned Labors, and had I
been Mr Vines or Mr Fisher, I might rather have given (in some respects) a
higher commendations of your Book: And especially I love it for its sound
discoveries of the Vanity of the Antinomians. 2. So far am I from being
offended at your Writing against my Writings, that (as I have often said
concerning Mr Owen, since I saw his Book against me, even so do I by you) I
never honored you so much (though much) nor loved you so dearly (though
dearly) before as since; for I see more of your worth then I saw before. For
where I err, why should I be offended with any brother for loving Gods Truth
and men's souls, above my Errors, or any seeming Reputation of mine that may be
engaged in them, and for seeking to cure the hurt that I have done? God forbid
that I should seek to maintain a Reputation obtained by, or held in an
opposition to the Truth. I take all my Errors in Theology (even in the highest
revealed points, participaliter) to be my sins; but especially my divulged
Errors: And I take him for my best friend, that is the greatest enemy to my
sins. And where I err not, I have little cause for my own sake to be offended
at your opposition. For as you are pleased to honor me too highly both in your
Epithetes and tender dealing, yea in being at so much pains with any thing of
mine, and in stooping to a public opposition of that which you might have
thought more worthy of your contempt, so I know you did it in a zeal for God
and Truth, and you thought all was Error that you opposed; so that in the
general we fight under one Master, and for one Cause, and against one Enemy:
You are for Christ, 1. For Truth and against Errors, so far as you know it,
and so am I. I know you wrote not against Me, but against my Errors, real or
supposed. And truly, though I would not be shameless or impenitent, nor go so
far as Seneca, to say we should not object a common fault to singular persons (
Vid. Cor. de Ira, l. 3. c. 26. p. (mihi) 452. no more then to reproach a
Blackmore with his color; yet I see so much by the most Learned and Judicious,
to assure me that humanum est errare, and that we know but in part, that I take
it for no more dishonor, to have the world know that I err, then for them to
know that I am one of their Brethren, a son of Adam, and not yet arrived at
that blessed state where that which is childish shall cease, and all that is
imperfect shall be done away. Only if my Errors be greater then ordinary, I
must be humbled more then ordinary, as knowing that my sin is the cause that I
have no greater illumination of the Spirit. I have truly published to the world
my indignation against the proud indignation of those men, that account him
their enemy that shall publicly contradict them.

2. Yet must I needs tell you, that in the points which you contradict, I find
no great alteration upon my understanding by your Writings; whether it be from
the want of evidence of truth in your Confutation, or through the dullness of
my Apprehension, I hope I shall better be able to judge, when I have heard from
you next. I think I may safely say, It is not from an unwillingness to know the
Truth. And one further difference there is in our Judgments: For my Judgment
is, that it is not so convenient nor safe a way to publish suddenly a reply to
your opposition, as to tell you my thoughts privately (seeing we live so near)
and to bring the Points in difference by friendly collations to as narrow a
compass as we can, and make as clear a discovery of each others meanings as may
be; and then by joint consent to tell the world our several Judgments, and our
Reasons, as lovers of the Truth and of each other; that so others may have the
benefit of our friendly Collations and Enquiries; and may be thereby advantaged
for the more facile discovery of the Truth. Truly I would have all such
Controversies so handled, that all the vain altercations might lie in the dust
in our studies, and that which is published might be in one Volume friendly
subscribed by both parties. In this I perceive by your practice, your Judgment
differs from mine; and that you rather judge it fittest to speak first by the
Press, that the world may hear us. I crave your acceptance of these Papers,
rather in this private way, and that you will signify to me in what way I
shall expect your return, wherein I think it fitter you please your self then
me. I shall faithfully give you an account of the effect of your Arguments on
my weak understanding; but not in the order as they lie in your Book, but I
will begin with those Points which I judge to be of greatest moment.

. 1. Mr Blake Treat. of Covenants, page 79.
IT is also true that faith accepts Christ as a Lord, as well as a Savior: But
it is the Acceptance of him as a Savior, not as a Lord, that Justifies:
Christ Rules his People as a King, Teaches them as a Prophet, but makes
Atonement for them only as a Priest, by giving himself in Sacrifice, his blood
for Remission of sins: These must be distinguished, but not divided: Faith has
an eye at all, the blood of Christ, the command of Christ, the doctrine of
Christ, but as it lies and fastens on his blood, so it Justifies. He is set out
a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.24. not through faith in his
command. It is the blood of Christ that cleanses all sin, and not the
Sovereignty of Christ. These confusions of the distinct parts of Christ's
Mediatorship, and the special offices of faith may not be suffered. Scripture
assigns each its particular place and work; Sovereignty does not cleanse us;
nor does blood command us: Faith in his blood, not faith yielding to his
Sovereignty does Justify us.

. 1.
R. B. THis is a Point of so great moment in my eyes, that I resolve to begin
with it. I doubt not but the difference between you and me is only about the
bare methodizing of our Notions, and not de Substantia rei: But I doubt lest
your doctrine being received by common heads, according to the true importance
of your expressions, may do more against their salvation then is yet well
thought on: And that not per accidens, but from its proper nature; supposing
the impression of the soul to be but answerable to the objective doctrinal
seal. I am no friend to the confusion that you here speak against; and I am
glad to find you so little in love with it, as to pass your judgment that it
is not to be suffered: For now I rest assured that you will not be offended,
when here or hereafter, I shall open your guiltiness of it; and that you will
not be unwilling of what may tend to your cure. These two or three necessary
distinctions I must first here premise, before I can give a clear answer to
your words.

1. I distinguish still between constitutive Justification or Remission by the
Gospel grant or Covenant, called by most Justificatio Juris, and Justification
per sententiam Judicis. 2. I distinguish between constitutive Legal
Justification as begun, and as continued or consummate. 3. Between the Physical
operation of Christ and his Benefits on the intellect of the Believer per modum
objecti apprehensi, as an intelligible species; and the moral conveyance of
Right to Christ and his Benefits, which is by an act of Law or
Covenant-donation. 4. Between these two questions, What justifies ex part
Christi? and What justifies, or is required to our Justification ex part
peccatoris? 5. Between the true efficient causes of our Justification, and the
mere condition, sine qua non, and cum qua. 6. Between Christ's Meriting man's
Justification, and his actual justifying him, by constitution or sentence.

Hereupon I will lay down what I maintain in these Propositions, which (some of
them) shall speak further then the present Point in Question, for a preparation
to what follows.

Prop. 1. Christ did Merit our Justification (or a power to justify) not as a
King, but by satisfying the justice of God in the form of a servant.

Prop. 2. Christ dotn justify Constitutive as King and Lord, viz. ut Dominus
Redemptor, i. e. quoad valorem rei, he conferreth it, ut Dominus gratis
benefaciens: but quoad modum conditionalem conferendi, ut Rector and
Benefactor. For it is Christ's enacting the new Law or Covenant, by which he
does legally pardon or confer Remission, and constitute us Righteous, supposing
the condition performed on our part. And this is not an act of Christ as a
Priest or Satisfier; but jointly, ut Benefactor and Rector.

Prop. 3. Christ does justify by sentence, as he is Judge and King, and not as
Priest.

Prop. 4. Sentential Justification, is the most full, complete and eminent
Justification; that in Law being quoad sententiam, but virtual Justification;
though quoad constitutionem debiti and relationis, it be actual Justification.

Prop. 5. Faith justifies not by receiving Christ as an object which is to
make a real impression and mutation on the intellect, according to the nature
of the species: I say, To justify, is not to make such a real change: Though
some joy^ with the Papists in this, and tell me, that as the Divine Attributes
make their several moral Impressions on the soul according to their several
natures, so do the satisfaction and merits of Christ, apprehended, procure
comfort and joy, and a justifying sentence to be pronounced in the soul it
self: and so the apprehension of Christ's Soverainty causes our subjection
(which last is true.)

Prop. 6 Faith therefore can have no Physical Causation or Efficiency in
justifying; seeing that the work to be done by us, is not nosmetipsos
Justificare, in whole or in part, but only Jus acquirere ad Beneficium gratis
sed conditionaliter collatum: It is a Relative change that is made by
Justification, and not a Real or Physical.

Prop. 7. The Legal, formal interest, or conducibility of Faith to our
Justification, cannot therefore be any other then that of a Condition, in the
proper Law-sense, as the word [Condition] is used, viz. that species of
conditions which they call Voluntariae vel Potestativae, and not Casuales vel
Mixtae.

Prop. 8. Scripture does not say (that I can find) that Faith justifies; but
that we are justified by Faith: I therefore use the later phrase rather then
the former, both because it is safest to speak with the Scripture, and because
the former speech seems to import an Efficiency; but the later frequently
imports no more then a mere condition. Yet I will not quarrel with any that
speaks otherwise, nor refuse to speak in their phrase while I dispute with
them, as long as I first tell them my meaning.

Prop. 9. Though, ex part Christi, our several changes proceed from his
several Benefits, and parts of his Office exercised for us; yet, ex part
nostri, i.e. fidei, it is one entire apprehension or receiving of Christ as he
is offered in the Gospel, which is the Condition of our interest in Christ and
his several Benefits; and the effect is not parcelled or diversified or
distinguished from the several distinct respects that faith has to its object.
Christ meriteth Remission for us as Satisfier of Justice; and he actually
justifies us as Benefactor King and Judge, and he teaches us as Prophet, and
rules us as King. The real mutations here on us, receive their diversification
partly from our faith, because there faith does efficere or causare; As we
learn of Christ because we Believe him, or Take him for our Teacher: We obey
him because we Take him for our King, etc. But it is not so with the Conveyance
of mere Right or Title to Christ and his Benefits. Faith does not obtain Right
to Remission and Justification distinctly as it receives his Righteousness, or
himself as Priest; and so Right to the Privileges of Christ's Government,
distinctly as it takes him as King; nor Right to Adoption, as it takes him as
a Father; nor Right to Glory, as it takes him as Glorifier: no more then all
inferior benefits (as Title to Magistracy, Ministry, Health, House, Lands,
etc.) proceed and are diversified by the diverse aspects of our faith on Christ.
The true Reason of which is this; That Right to a benefit is the mere effect of
the Gift (Donation) or Revealed Will of the Giver: And therefore no Act of the
Receiver has any more interest, or any other then it pleases the Donor to
assign or appoint it to have. So that (supposita actus natura) all the formal
Civil interest comes from Gods mere Will, as Donor: (for to the Absolute
Benefactor does it belong, as to confer all Right to his freely-given
Benefits, so to determine of the Time and Manner of Conveyance, and so of the
Conditions on the Receivers part.) The nature of the Act of Faith is caused by
(...), as Creator of the old and new Creature; I mean of our natural faculties,
and their supernatural endowments or dispositions: And therefore this is
presupposed in ordine naturae to faiths Legal interest: As God is first the
Maker of earth, before he is the Maker of Adams body: Faith is to be considered
as being Faith ( i. e. such acts exercised about such objects) in order of
nature, before it can be rightly considered as justifying or the condition of
Justification: Seeing therefore it receives all its formal Legal interest from
God, as Legislator and Donor of Christ and his benefits, which is after its
material aptitude ad hoc officium; its interest must not be gathered directly,
ex natura actus, but ex constitutione donantis and ordinantis: And therefore
you must first prove out of the Gospel, that It is the Ordination of God, that
as Christ's several actions have their several effects for us and on us, so our
faith shall be the proper condition of each of these various effects, qua
apprehendit, as it Believes or Accepts each distinct effect, or Christ
distinctly as the cause of that effect, and etiam consideratum in modo
causandi. But, alas, how invisible is the Proof of this in all your Writings?
(I will leave the rest of the Propositions, by which I intended here together
to have opened some more of my sense, till afterward, because I will not
interrupt the present business.) Here, either my Understanding is too shallow
to reach your sense, or else you are guilty, quoad literam, of very great
confusion; (which one would think should have befallen you at any time, rather
then when you are blaming others of unsufferable confusion:) and yet quoad
sensum involutum, of more dangerous, unscriptural, unproved Distinction.

1. Your expressions confound Christ and his Actions, with man's faith in our
Justification: Or, these two Questions [By what are we justified ex part
Christi?] and [By what are we justified ex part nostri?]

2. Your implied sense, even the heart of your reasoning, consists in this
assertion, that [As our Right, as to the several benefits received, is to be
ascribed distinctly to several distinct Causes on Christ's part, so also as
distinctly are the particular Benefits, quoad Debitum vel Titulum, to be
ascribed to the several distinct apprehensions of these Benefits (as most say)
or of Christ as diversely causing them (as some say.)] And here I cannot but
complain of a treble injustice that you seem to me guilty of (even in this
elaborate Treat, wherein you correct the Errors of so many others.)

1. Against the Truth and Word of God, in implying it to have done that, even
in the great Point, the Constitution of the Condition of Justification and
Salvation, which is nor to be found done in all the Scripture.

2. Against the souls of men: 1. In such nice mincing and cutting the Condition
of their salvation, to their great perplexity, if they receive your doctrine.
2. And also in not affording them one word of Scripture or Reason for the proof
of it, which is injustice, when you are Confuting others and Rectifying the
world in so great a Point. 3. Lastly (and leastly) it is evident injustice to
your Friend, to Accuse him (for it is no hard matter to know whom you mean)
with confounding the distinct parts of Christ's Mediatorship, which he still
distinguishes as exactly as he can: though he do nor distribute as many
offices to Faith, as there are objects for it, or as he does to Christ's several
Works. Why did you not name one line where I do confound the parts of Christ's
Offices? I pray you do it for me in your next.

I will not trouble you much with Arguments for my opinion in this Point,
seeing you meddle with none already laid down, and seeing I have done it over
and over to others, and because I am now but Answering to your Confutation.
Only let me tell you, that the Proof lies on your part. For when I have once
proved, that God gives Christ and his Benefits to man, on Condition he will
Believe in Christ or Accept him: If you will now distinguish, and say, It is
Accepting his satisfaction, which is the Condition of Justification, and
Accepting him as King, which is the Condition of Sanctification or
Glorification, etc. you must prove this to be true. For non est distinguendum
vel limitandum ubi Lex non distinguis vel limitat. If God say [Beleeve in the
Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved,] and you say, [Beleeving in him as Priest
is the only Condition of saving thee from guilt: and Believing in him as King,
is the only Condition of saving thee from the power of sin, etc.] you must
prove this which you say. Or if you will not say [It is the only Condition] but
[the only instrument] you give up the Cause. For the word [Condition] is it
that expresses its nearest Legal Interest in justifying or conveying any
Right: and that which you call its Instrumentality, is but the natural Aptitude
and Remote Interest.

1. It is the Receiving of Christ as Christ that justifies (as the Condition
of Justification) But he is not received as Christ, if not as Lord-Redeemer.

2. Justifying faith is (say the Assembly) the Receiving of Christ as he is
offered in the Gospel: But he is offered in the Gospel as Savior and Lord, and
not as Savior only: Therefore, etc.

3. Justifying faith is the Receiving of Christ as a full Savior: But that
cannot be except he be received as Lord. For to save from the power of sin, is
as true a part of the Saviors Office, as to save from the guilt.

4. Justifying faith receives Christ as he justifies us, or as he is to
justify us: But he does justify us as King and Judge and Benefactor; as he
satisfies and meriteth in the form of a servant under the Law.

5. If receiving Christ as a Satisfier and Meriter, be the only faith that
gives right to Justification, then on the same grounds you must say, It is the
only faith that gives right to further Sanctification and to Glorification: For
Christ Merited one as well as the other.

6. Rejecting Christ as King, is the condemning sin: Therefore receiving him as
King is the justifying faith, Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies that would not
that I should reign over them, bring, etc. The reason of the consequent is,
because unbelief condemns (at least partly) as it is the privation of the
justifying faith: I speak of that condemnation or peremptory sentence which is
proper to the new Law, and its peculiar condemning sin, eminently so called.

7. Psalm. 2. Kissing the Son and submitting to him as King, is made the
condition of escaping his wrath.

8. Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. The condition of Ease and Rest (from guilt, as well
as power of sin) is our coming to Christ as a Teacher and Example of meekness
and lowliness, and our Learning of him, and Taking on us his yoke and burden.

9. That faith which is the Condition of Salvation, is the Condition of
Justification or Remission: But it is the receiving of Christ as King, as well
as Satisfier, that is the Condition of Salvation: Therefore, etc. 1.
Justification at judgment, and Salvation (from hell, and adjudication to
Glory) are all on the same conditions, Mat. 25. and ubique. 2. Justification is
but the justifying of our Right to Salvation; i. e. sentencing us as Non reos
Paenae (quia Dissoluta est obligatio) and quibus debetur praemium; Therefore
Justification and Salvation must needs have the same conditions on our part. 3.
Scripture no where makes our faith, or act of faith, the Condition of
Justification, and another of Salvation. But contrarily ascribes both to one.
4. When Paul argues most zealously against Works and for Faith only, it is in
respect to Salvation generally, and not to Justification only. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By
grace ye are saved through faith, etc. Not of works, lest any man should boast.
Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his Mercy he saved us, etc. Never more was said against Justification by Works
(which Paul excludes) then against Salvation by them: Nor is it any more
dishonor to Christ that he should give Justification or Remission on Condition
of our Accepting him as King, then that he should give Salvation on that
Condition. 5. Pardon of sin and freedom from hell, must needs have the same
Condition: For pardon respects the punishment as truly as the sin. Pana and
Vaenia sunt adversa: Pardon dissolveth guilt; Guilt is the obligation to
punishment. Yet I speak here only of a plenary and continued pardon.

10. Lastly, If Accepting Christ as Lord-Redeemer, be the Fides quae
Justificat, i.e. quae est conditio Justificationis, then it is nearly, strictly
and properly the justifying act of faith, as the accepting of Christ's
Righteousness is: But the Antecedent is granted by all Divines that I have had
to do with: Therefore, etc. For the general cheat is by the distinction of
Fides quae Justificat (that is, say they, the Accepting of Christ as Savior
and Lord, by a faith disposed to fruitfulness in obedience) and Fides qua
Justificat (and that is the Accepting of Christ's Righteousness as our formal
Righteousness, say some: Or the Accepting of Christ's Righteousness as the
meritorious cause of our Righteousness, say others: Or the Accepting of Christ
himself as Priest, say others:) Now this Fides [Qua] either respects the mere
matter of faith, or it respects the formality of the effect, or it respects
the Formal Reason of faiths interest in the effect, ut medium, vel causa. 1. If
[ qua] respect only the matter of faith, then 1. it is an unfit phrase; for [
qua] and [ quatenus] are strictly used to express the formal Reason of things.
2. And then the Accepting of Christ as Lord must be the Fides Qua too: for that
is confessed to be materially an act of that faith which justifies. 2. If [
Qua] respect the formality of the effect, and so the respect of faith to that
effect rather then another; then faith is not [justifying] qua recipit
Christum, sed qua justificat: And so the distinction contains this truth,
That fides quae sanctificat etiam justificat, sed non qua sanctificat: and e
contra. But neither of these can be the sense of them that use this distinction
in our case. 3. It must therefore be the former reason of faiths interest in
justifying that is expressed by [ Qua:] and then it implies the begging of the
Question, or this false supposition [that Fides qua fides justificat] I mean
not qua fides in genere, but qua haec fides, viz quae est fiducia in Christum
satisfactorem, vel acceptatio Christi. Indeed the term [Accepting] implies the
gift and offer, and the constitution of that acceptance for the condition: But
the Act it self is but the Matter apt to be the condition: If Christ had been
given (or pardon) absolutely, or on some other condition; then believing in him
would not have justified. Therefore fides in Christum qua talis does not
justify; but qua conditio Testamenti praestita: though fides in Christum qua
talis had in its nature a singular aptitude to be chosen and appointed to this
Honor and Office. So much to show the vanity of that distinction (of much more
that might be said.) Further the consequence of the major Proposition of my
Argument, is made past all dispute, to them that will but well consider this:
To (be the condition of our Justification) speaks the nearest interest of faith
in our Justification, that is, as it is medium legale; or that kind of
causality which it has; which is to be causa sine qua non, and cum qua:
Therefore it is a mere impossibility that the Receiving Christ as Lord should
be the condition of our Justification (or the fides quae est conditio, as they
speak) and yet that we should not be justified by it as a condition, when
performed? It is no sounder speech, then to say, that is an efficient cause,
which does not effect. Some Conditions (and most among men) are Moral impulsive
causes: Faith is rather a removens prohibens, and ea^h nothing in it that so
well deserves the title of a Cause, as of a Condition: though unbelief may be
said to be the Cause of our Not-being justified, as such causes are said to
move God, when we speak according to the manner of men: Indeed if they will say
(according to their principles) that Fides in Christum Dominum quae est
conditio non justificat per modum instrumenti; I shall grant it: But then 1. I
shall say as much de fide in Christum satisfacientem. 2. Thus they grant it the
interest of a Condition in our Justification: and I intend no more. We are
justified by faith as the Condition of Justification: Therefore we are
justified by every act of faith which is the Condition: For, A quatenus ad omne
valet consequentia. Thus I have given you a few of those many reasons which
might be given, to prove that the Accepting of Christ for Lord-Redeemer, and
not only as Satisfier, or not only his Righteousness, is that Faith by which as
a Condition we are justified. And what sad effects it may produce to teach the
world that the only justifying act of faith is, The Accepting of Justification
as merited by Christ's blood, or the Accepting of Christ's Righteousness to
justify them; it is not hard for an unprejudiced man to discern. For my part,
in all my experience of the case of the ungodly that I have trial of, I can
find no commoner cause of their general delusion and perdition, then this very
doctrine; which they have generally received, though not in such exact terms a^
it is taught them. I never met with the most rebellious wretch (except now and
then one under terrors) but when they have sinned their worst, they still think
to be saved, because they believe: And what is their believing? why they
believe that Christ died for them, and therefore God will forgive them, and
they trust for pardon and salvation to Christ's death and Gods mercy: This were
good, if this were not all; but if Christ were also received as their Sovereign
and Sanctifier and Teacher: But if this were the only justifying act (as they
usually speak) then I should not know how to disprove him that should tell me
that all men in the world shall be saved that believe the Gospel to be true: or
at least, the far greatest part of the most wicked men: For I am certain that
they are willing not to be damned, and therefore Accept, or are Willing of
Christ to save them from damnation: and I am sure they are Willing to be
pardoned as fast as they sin, and that is, to be justified: and therefore must
needs be Willing of Christ to pardon them (supposing that they believe the
Gospel to be true) What therefore shall I say if a wicked wretch thus argue: He
that has the only justifying act of faith is justified: But that have I; for I
Accept of Christ to forgive and justify me by his blood: Therefore, etc? Shall
I tell him that he dissembleth, and is not Willing? Why 1. Long may I so tell
him before he will believe me, when he feels that I speak falsely and slander
him. 2. And I should know that I slander him my self: Supposing that he believe
that there is no pardon but by Christ's blood, (as the devils and many millions
of wicked men do believe:) For I know no man in his wits can be willing to be
unpardoned and to burn in hell. Shall I give him the common answer (the best
that ever was given to me,) that though the only justifying act be the
receiving Christ or his Righteousness to justify us, yet this must be ever
accompanied with the receiving him as Sovereign, and a resolution to obey him?
Perhaps I may so puzzle him for want of Logic or Reason; but else how easily
may he tell me, that this receiving Christ as Lord, has either the nature of a
medium ad finem, or not? If it be no medium, the want of it in this case cannot
hinder the Justification of that man that is sure he has the sole justifying
act it self: For as mere signs or idle concomitants do nothing to the effect,
so the want of them hinders not the effect where all causes and means are
present* But if I say, that this act of faith is a means to Justification; then
I must either make it a Cause, or a Condition, or invent some new medium not
yet known.

But you say [Soveraignty does not cleanse us, nor does blood command us.] Ans.
1. How ill is Sovereignty put in stead of the Sovereign? I say not that the
reception of Christ's Sovereignty does ^ustifie (those words may have an ill
sense) but we are justified by receiving Christ as our Sovereign (which much
differs from the former.) 2. Christ as Sovereign does cleanse us, both from the
guilt and power of sin, by actual Remission or Justification, and by
Sanctification. 3. Suppose you speak true, as you do, if you mean it only of
Meriting our cleansing: What is this to our Question? But you add [Faith in
his blood, not faith yielding to his Sovereignty does justify us.] Ans. This
is something to the purpose, if it had been proved. But will a nude and crude
Assertion change men's judgments? or should you have expected it? A text you
cite, and therefore it might seem that you thought it some proof of this, Romans
3.24. But all the force of your Argument is from your dangerous addition,
which, who will take for good Exposition? The text faith, He is set forth to be
a propitiation, through faith in his Blood. And you add [Not through faith in
his Command.] 1. Sed quo jure nescio. Your exclusion is either upon
supposition, that faith in his Blood is equipollent to faith in his Blood only;
or else it is on some mysterious ground, which you should the rather have
revealed, because it is not obvious to your ordinary Reader to discover it,
without your revelation. If the former; 1. By what authority do you add [only]
in your interpretation? 2. Will you exclude also his Obedience, Resurrection,
Intercession, etc? When by the obedience of one many are made righteous? and
Romans 8.33, 34. It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again; who is even at the right hand
of God, who also makes intercession for us. 2. But the thing that you had to
prove was not the exclusion of [faith in his Command] but of [faith in Christ
as Lord and Teacher] or either: Receiving Christ as Ruler, goes before the
receiving of his particular Commands. And for the text, Romans 3.24. It was
fittest for Paul to say [by faith in his blood] because he intends to connot^
both what we are justified by, ex part Christi, and what ex part nostri, but
the former p^incipally. I will explain my thoughts by a similitude or two.

Suppose a Rebel be Condemned, and lie in prison waiting for Execution; and
the Kings Son being to raise an Army, buyeth this Rebel, with all his fellow
prisoners, from the hand of Justice, and sends to them this message; If you
will thankfully acknowledge my favors, and take me hereafter for your Prince
or General, and list your selves under me, I will pardon you (or give you the
pardon which I have purchased) and moreover will give you places of Honor and
Profit in my Army:] Here now if the Question be, What it is on the Princes part
that does deliver the prisoner? It is his ransom, as to the Impetration or
Preparation: and it is his free-Grant, which does it, as to the actual
Deliverance. If it be asked What is it that Honors or Enricheth him? It is
the place of Honor and Riches that by the Prince is freely given him. But if
you ask on the offenders part, What it is that delivers him as the condition?
It is not his accepting Pardon and Deliverance (or the Prince as a Pardoner or
Ransomer) that is the sole Condition of his pardon and deliverance from death:
Nor is it the Accepting of the Honor (or of the Prince as one to honor him)
that is the sole condition of his Honor: Nor is it accepting of Riches, that
is the sole condition of enriching him. But it is entirely the accepting of the
Prince for his General, and thankful acknowledging his Ransom, that is the
Condition of all together, and has as near an interest in one part of the
Benefit, as another.

Or suppose the condemned prisoner be a woman, and the Prince having Ransomed
her, does send this offer to her, That if she will thankfully acknowledge his
favor, and take him for her Redeemer and Husband and Prince (to love, honor
and obey him) he will deliver her, and make her his Queen, and she shall
partake of all his Honor and Riches.] Here now if the Question be, What it is
on his part that Redeemed her? What that Delivered her? What that honored her?
What that enriched her? each effect must be ascribed to its proper cause, and
the causes not confounded: And she must distinctly apprehend, by what way and
cause each privilege comes. But if you ask only, What it is on her part that
is the condition of enjoying these Benefits? Why it is but one entire,
undivided Condition before mentioned: Will you here subtly distinguish and
say, that her taking him to deliver her, is the sole act which is the condition
of her Deliverance? and her taking him to Dignifie her, is the sole condition
of her Dignity? and her taking him as Rich, or to enrich her, is the sole
condition of her enriching? No, It is one undivided condition that equally
gives her interest in all. Much less is it the Accepting of his Riches, that is
the sole condition of enriching her. Yet if any should in one Question include
both, What on his part did save her from death? and what on her part? then it
must be expressed as Paul did in the forementioned text, in our case: It is her
Marrying or Accepting a Merciful Redeemer. I should wrong you, by seeming to
imply a doubt of your Apprehensiveness, if I should spend words in application
of this to our case. Having been so much too tedious already, I will only add;
That the common doctrine in this Point, requires that there be as many acts of
faith as there are Benefits from Christ to be received; and that each one is
the Instrument of receiving that particular benefit: and so one act of faith
Justifies, another Adopteth, etc. And that act which receives Justification,
which they call the Passive instrument thereof, in the upshot of all their
Disputes they so describe, that it is apparent they mean ipsam Justificationem
passivam: And so with them Credere and Justificari must be Synonimall terms:
For so to receive Justification, is nothing but to be Justified.

. 2.
Mr Bl. THere are several acts of Justifying faith, Heb. 11. but those are not
acts of Justification. It is not Abraham's obedience, Moses self-denial, Gideon
or Sampsons valor, that were their Justification: but his Blood who did enable
them in these duties by his spirit. Paul went in these duties as high as they,
living in more clear light and under more abundant grace. I doubt not but he
out-tapt them, and yet he was not thereby Justified; as 1 Cor. 4.4.

. 2.
R. B. 1. IT is a strange phrase to call any act of faith [An act of
Justification.] If you speak properly, you must mean it efficienter vel
constitutive: either that some act of faith is an act of Justification, as the
efficient (but that's far from truth, to believe and to justify differ) or
else that it is an act constituting Justification: But that is as far from
truth; for then Credere should be Justificari. If you speak improperly, you
must mean, either [An act effecting Justification] as it seems you do; which is
unsound, as well as improper: or else [An act which is the Condition of
Justification] which is sound, though improper.

2. Who knows whether you mean that [none of those acts, Heb. 11. are acts of
Justification] or [not all of them] The proper importance of your words is for
the former. But that is a dangerous untruth: for verse. 13. is judged by our
Divines to contain a proper description of justifying faith [they saw the
promises ( i. e. the good promised) a far off, and were persuaded of them,
and embraced them, etc.] But which soever you mean, you should have proved your
assertion. It will be easily acknowledged that many there mentioned, were not
the great and principal act which is the Condition of Justification, as begun:
But yet they may be lesser acts which are secondary parts of the condition of
continuing their Justification. I do not think but that act [by which Noah
became the heir of the righteousness which is by faith,] v. 7. had a hand in
continuing his Justification, though it were the preparing the Ark, being moved
with fear. I think that act by which Abel obtained witness that he was
righteous, and that by which Enoch pleased God, and without which it is
impossible to please him, had some hand in Justification: I think these four
great acts mentioned, v. 6. are part of the condition of Justification. 1. To
believe that God is ( viz. that he is God, the Chief Good, the first and last,
the principal efficient and Ultimate End, etc.) 2. The diligent seeking of him.
3. Believing that he is a rewarder of them that do so. 4. Coming to him. (If
this be distinct from the second.) When the holy Ghost does of purpose in the
whole Chapter set forth the glory and excellency of faith, I dare not be one
that shall imagine that he speaks all this of a lower sort of faith, and quite
left out the noblest part which justifies, from his praises.

3. Yet you should not (in my judgment) have called [ Abraham's obedience,
Moses self-denial, Gideons valour] acts of Justifying faith: Are these acts of
faith? If you mean that these acts are fruits of faith, its true: Or if you
mean that an act of faith did excite the soul to each of these acts, and so you
mean not the obedience, valor, etc. but the act of faith which excited it,
then you might call those acts of justifying faith: But if I had called valor
and obedience so, I should have been blamed.

4. What mean you to say Obedience and Valor was not their Justification? Do
you think that any act of faith is Justification? You mean (if I may conjecture
from your after-doctrine) the instrument of Justification.

5. But then how come you to say next, that it is Christ's blood? The blood of
Christ is the meritorious cause of our Justification, which improperly may be
called also, the Matter of it: But I think it is neither our Justification
formally, nor the instrument of it in proper speech.

6. But I thought the contest in your Dispute had been, Which is the justifying
act of faith, and which not? and therefore when you denied those in Heb. 11. to
be acts of Justification (which I am forced to interpret [justifying acts]) I
expected to find the true act asserted; but in stead of that I find the
opposite member, is [The blood of Christ.] Is this indeed the Controversy?
Whether it be [Accepting Christ as Lord] or [the blood of Christ] that
justifies? Never was such a Question debated by me, in the way here intimated.
I am wholly for you, if this be the doubt: It is Christ's blood that justifies
meritoriously. But yet we are justified by faith too, as the condition of our
interest in free Justification. And why should these two be put in opposition?
I looked when you had asserted and well proved that it is not taking Christ as
Lord, but only faith in his blood, that is the condition on our part, of our
attaining Justification.

7. It would prove a hard task to make good, that there are several acts of
justifying faith, by which we are not justified; without flying to great
impropriety of speech. By [justifying faith] you must mean, the Act, Habit, or
renewed Faculty: If the act, then I think you will say, it is but one, or not
many: Or at least every act, which is justifying faith, must needs be such as
we are justified by: Or else why should that act be called [justifying faith.]
2. But I doubt not but you mean the habit: And then 1. you confess that the
habit is [justifying faith] which is true; not only as it helps to produce
the act, but even as it is in it self; But that will overthrow the doctrine of
instrumentality. 2. It requires another kind of Disputing then I here meet
with, to prove that acts and habits of man's soul, are of so different a nature,
that where the acts are specifically distinct by the great distance and variety
of objects, yet the habit producing all these is one and the same, and not
distinct as the acts: and that obedience, self-denial and valor, are acts of
the same habit of faith, as is the accepting an offered Christ. 3. If you
should mean by [justifying faith] the faculty as sanctified, then all other
acts of that faculty as sanctified, or of the Spirit there residing, might as
well be called Acts of justifying faith. But I will not imagine that this is
your sense.

8. 1 Cor. 4.4. is nothing to our business. Paul was not his own justifier:
Though he knew not matter of condemnation ( sensu Evangelico, for no doubt he
knew himself to be a sinner) yet that did not justify him, because it is God
only that is his Judge. Can you hence prove, that accepting Christ as Lord, is
not the condition of our Justification? Then you may prove the same of the
accepting him as Savior. For Paul knew nothing by himself, as if he were
guilty of not performing the one or the other: yet was he not thereby justified.

. 3.
Mr Bl. ^Ames indeed says, that Abraham was justified by works, when he had
offered Isaac his son on the Altar, Jam. 2.21. but either there we must
understand a working faith, with Piscator, Paraeus, Pemble, and confess that
Paul and James handle two distinct questions, The one, Whether faith alone
Justifies without works? which he concludes in the Affirmative: The other, What
faith justifies? Whether a working faith only, and not a faith that is dead
and idle? Or else I know not how to make sense of the Apostle, who straight
inferres from Abraham's Justification by the offer of his son, And the Scripture
was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. How otherwise do these accord? He was justified by works: and
the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, he was justified by faith?

. 3.
R. B. 1. IF James must use the term [Works] twelve times in thirteen verses,
(a thing not usual) as if he had foreseen how men would question his meaning,
and yet for all that we must believe that by [Works] James does not mean
[Works] it will prove as hard a thing to understand the Scripture, as the
Papists would persuade us that it is: and that there is as great a necessity of
a living deciding Judge.

2. Do but read over all those verses, and put [working-faith] in stead of
[Works] and try what sense you will make.

3. No doubt but Paul and James handle two distinct Questions* but not the two
that you here express. Paul speaks of Meritorious Works, which make the Reward
of Debt, and not of Grace, if you will believe his own description of them,
Romans 4.4. But James speaks of no such Works, but of such as have a consistency
with Grace, and necessary subordination to it: I prove it: The Works that James
speaks of, we must endeavor for and perform, or perish (supposing time) But
the works that Paul speaks of, no man must endeavor, or once imagine that he
can perform, viz. such as make the reward to be of Debt and not of Grace. Paul
speaks indeed of faith collaterally, but of Christ's Merits and Free Grace,
directly and purposely: So that the chief part of Paul's controversy was,
Whether we are justified freely through Christ's Merits? or through our own
meritorious Works? But James's question is, Whether we are justified by faith
alone, or by faith with obedience accompanying it; and both as subordinate to
Christ's Merits? Paul's question is, Of the meritorious Cause of our
Justification: James's question is, Of the condition on our parts, of our
interest in a free Remission; supposing Paul's question determined, that Christ
only is the Meriter. Paul speaks of Justification in toto, both in the
beginning and progress, but especially the beginning: But James speaks only of
Justification as continued and consummate, and not as begun: For both Abraham's
and every man's was begun, before Works of Obedience: Though a disposition and
resolution, and engagement to obey do go before.

4. If with the named Expositors, you understand by [Works] a working-faith;
either you grant as much as I affirm, in sense; or else you must utterly null
all the Apostle's arguing, from verse. 13. to the end. For if by [Working-faith]
you suppose that James meant that God did not only make [Faith it self] to be
the p^incipall condition, but also [its Working] in obedience, when there is
opportunity, to be the secondary condition (or part of the condition) of
Justification as continued; as being the necessary modus, or effect (both which
it is in several respects) then you say the same in sense as I do, only
changing the Scripture terms without and against reason. It is ordinary to make
the modus or quality of that matter which is the substance of the condition, to
be as real a part of the condition as the matter it self. As when you oblige
your Debtor to pay you so much current English money; it is here as necessary
that it be [English] and [Currant] as that it be money. If you promise your
servant his wages, on condition he serve you faithfully: here [Faithfulness] is
as real a part of the Condition, as [Service.] If a man take a woman in
Marriage, and estate her in all his Lands, on condition that she will be to him
[a chaste, faithful Wife:] here her chaste fidelity is as true a part of the
condition, as to be his Wife. So if God say, [He that has a Working faith
shall be justified and saved, and he that has not, shall perish.] Here as
faith is the principal part of the condition, so that it be a [Working] is the
secondary, and as real a part of the condition, as that it be faith. And if
Satan accuse you for not-beleeving (at Judgment) you must be justified, by
producing your faith it self, so if he accuse you as having a faith that was
not Working; how will you be justified but by the Works or Working disposition
of that faith?

5. As for your single Argument here, I answer, 1. It is a weak ground to
maintain that James twelve times in thirteen verses, by [Works] means not
[Works;] and by faith alone (which he still opposes) does not mean faith
alone, and all this because you cannot see the connection of one verse to the
former, or the force of one cited Scripture. Others may see it, and be able to
show sense in the Apostles words, though you or I could not. If every time we
are at a loss in analyzing or discerning the reason of a cited Text, we shall
presume to make so great an alteration, merely to bring all to hang together in
our apprehensions, we shall find Analyzers the greatest corrupters of
Scripture. It is easy to imagine and fain a false Analysis with much
plausibleness.

I conceive that James cites these words expositorily: q. d. [And thus or in
this sense the Scripture was fulfilled, i e. historically, spoke truly of that
which was long before done, Abraham believed God, i. e. so as to second his
faith with actual obedience, and it (i. e. believing and so obeying, or
trusting Gods promise and power so far as to offer his son to death) was
imputed to him, etc. 2. Or why may not James by concession preoccupate an
objection? knowing that this would be objected he might say, q. d. I grant that
the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, etc. but yet though he were initially
justified by faith only, yet when he was called to works, he was justified also
by his obedience. 3. And is it not as hard to discern the reason of this
citation, according to your exposition as mine? For you may as well say, [How
do these accord, He was justified by a working faith: and The Scripture was
fulfilled which says, He was justified by faith?] For James is not proving
that Abraham was justified by faith, and yet this is it the Text speaks: but
that he was justified by works seconding faith, or, as you say, by a
Working-faith: Where, if you put any emphasis on the term [Working] and account
it to superadde any thing to mere believing, you say as much as I; and then
James must cite that Text expositorily; and then whether according to my
exposition or yours, varies not the case, seeing one says as much for Works as
the other.

But I suppose you will say, Faith which justifies must be working; but it
justifies not qua operans. Ans. 1. True: nor qua fides, i. e. qua apprehendit
objectum, if the qua speaks the formal reason of its interest in
Justification. 2. But why cannot faith justify unless it be working? If you
say [Because that God has made it the condition of Justification, that we
believe with a working faith] and so that it be working is part of the
Condition, you say the same in sense as I. If you say, either that working is
necessary as a sign, that faith is true; or that the nature of true faith will
work; both are truth: but to say this is the Apostle's sense, is to null all
his Argumentation: For he pleads not for a mere necessity of signification or
discovery, but for a necessity ut medij ad Justificationem; even that
Justification which he calls [Impu^ing of Righteousness] and that by God. And he
argues not only Physically, what the nature of faith will produce; but
morally, what men must do to such ends. And it is only as a condition that
faith or its working nature can be necessary ad finem ut media moralia; if you
speak of such an absolute necessity as the Text does.

. 4.
Mr Bl. ALL works before or after conversion, inherent in us, or wrought by us,
are excluded from Justification.

. 4.
R. B. 1. THe term [Works] signifies either such as a Workman does to deserve
his wages for the value of his Work; which make the reward to be of Debt and
not of Grace; and so its true: Or it signifies all good actions; and so this
saying is contrary to the scope of the Scripture. 1. Faith and Repentance are
such works and wrought by us. 2. James asserteth the inclusion of such works.
If you say, But faith and repentance justify not as Good works: I easily grant
it: That they be Good, flows from the Precept: That they Justify, flows
from the Promise, constituting them the Condition. If they should justify
because Good, their goodness must be such as may accrue to a Meritoriousness^
But yet they must be Good, before they can justify as Conditions of the free
Gift: yea and have a peculiar eminent goodness, consisting in their aptitude to
this work, and to Glorify the free Justifier. Mat. 25. Romans 2. James 2. with
the greatest part of Scripture, look not with such a face as your Proposition.
This may serve to your following words.

. 5.
Mr Bl. ANd these things considered, I am truly sorry that faith should now be
denied to have the office or place of an instrument in our Justification: nay
scarce allowed to be called the instrument of our receiving Christ that
justifies us; Whether faith be the Instrument of Justification.
because the act of faith (which is that which justifies us) is our actual
receiving Christ, and therefore cannot be the instrument of receiving. This is
too subtle a Notion: We use to speak otherwise of faith. Faith is the eye of
the soul whereby we see Christ, and the eye is not ^ight. Faith is the hand of
the soul, whereby it receives Christ, and the hand is not receiving. And
Scripture speaks otherwise: We receive remission of sins by faith, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified is received by faith, Act. 18.26.
Why else is this righteousness sometime called the righteousness of faith, and
sometime the righteousness of God which is by faith, but that it is a
righteousness which faith receives? Christ dwells in us by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. By
faith we take him in and give him entertainment: We receive the promise of the
Spirit through faith, Gal. 3.14. These Scriptures speak of faith as the souls
instrument to receive Christ Jesus, to receive the Spirit from Christ Jesus.

. 5.
R. B. 1. I Know not how to meddle with Controversies, but some body will be
sorry or angry, which side soever I take. I am sorry that I have made you
sorry, but not for that Doctrine which caused it; which yet I shall be, as soon
as I can see cause for it.

2. Why would you not here attempt to prove, that which you are so sorry should
be denied, viz. That faith is the instrument of Justification? Will all your
Readers take your complaint for a demonstration of the error of what you
complain of?

3. I was as sorry that men called, and so called faith the instrument of
Justification, as you are that I deny it: And as your sorrow urged you to
publish it, so did mine urge me. And my sorrow had these causes (which I am
content may be well compared with yours, that it may appear which were the
juster and greater.) 1. No Scripture does either in the letter or sense call
faith an instrument of Justification. 2. I knew I had much Scripture and reason
against it. 3. I thought it of dangerous consequence, to say, that man i^ the
efficient cause of justifying and pardoning himself, and so does forgive his
own sins.

4. Yet all this had never caused m^ to open my mouth against it (for I truly
abhor the making of new quarrels.) But for the next, viz. I found that many
Learned Divines did not only assert this instrumentality, but they laid so
great a stresse upon it, as if the main difference between us and the Papists
lay here. For in the doctrine of Justification, say they, it is that they
Fundamentally err, and we Principally differ: And that in these four Points.

1. About the formal cause of our Righteousness, which, say these Divines, is
the formal Righteousness of Jesus Christ, as suffering and perfectly obeying
for us (or as others add, In the habitual Righteousness of his humane nature;
and others, The natural Righteousness of the Divine nature.

2. About the way and manner of our participation herein, which as to Gods act,
they say is imputation (which is true) and that in this sense, that Legaliter
we are esteemed to have fulfilled the Law in Christ.

3. About the nature of that faith which Justifies, which, say most of our
foreign Reformers, is an assurance, or full persuasion of the pardon of my
sins by Christ's blood.

4. About the formal reason of faiths interest in Justification, which, say
they, is as the instrument thereof.

I doubt not but all these four are great Errors. Yet for these must we contend
as the Reformed Religion; and here must lie the difference between us and the
Papists. That which troubled me was this: To think how many thousand might be
confirmed in Popery by this course, and what a blow it gave to the Reformed
Religion. For who can imagine but that the young Popish Students will be
confirmed in the rest of their Religion, when they find that we err in these?
and will judge by these of the rest of our Doctrine? Especially when they find
us making this the main part of the Protestant Cause, what wonder* if they
judge our Cause naught? This is no fancy, nor any needless fears, but such a
real blow to the Protestant Cause, as will not easily be healed. Had Divines
only in a way of freedom used this phrase, and not made it so great a part of
our Religion, to the hazarding of the whole, I had never mentioned the
unsoundness or other inconvenience of it. Now to the thing it self, Your
Arguments for faiths instrumentality to Justification, I will consider when I
can find them: You begin with (and say more for) faiths instrumentality in
receiving Christ. You can say no more of me concerning this, but that [it will
be scarce allowed to be so called.] This intimates that I make it no matter of
contention: nor do I know how I could have said less, if any thing; when its
only the unfitness or impropriety of the phrase that I mention, and not the
sense: which I thought with so much tenderness I might do, upon reason given,
it being no Scripture phrase. If faith be the instrument of receiving Christ,
then it is either the Act or the Habit of Faith that is the instrument: They
that say, the Habit is the instrument, speak not properly, but far more
tolerably then the others do. If gracious Habits are properly called
instruments of the soul, then so may other Habits: And why is not this language
more in use among Logicians? if it be so unquestionably proper? But I perceive
it is the Act of faith that you call the instrument: for you answer only to
what I say against that. I drew up a Scheme of the several sorts of Giving and
Receiving, in Answer to another Learned Brother: which, for the necessity of
distinguishing here, I would have added, but that so operous a Reply would be
unsuitable to your brief Exceptions. Receiving strictly taken is ever Passive:
Receiving in a Civil, Ethical, less proper sense, is but the Act of accepting
what is offered: When it is only a Relation, or Jus ad rem that is offered,
Consent or Acceptance is an act so necessary ordinarily to the possession (or
proper Passive reception) that it is therefore called Receiving it self: yet is
indeed no efficient cause of the Passive reception or possession: but a
conditio fine qua non, and a subjective disposition; and so makes the subject
capable of the benefit: but being no efficient it can be no instrument. Yet
still I say, that if any will please to call it an instrument in this sense, I
will not quarrel with him, for the impropriety of a phrase; specially if some
men had the same ingenuity as others have, that say, it is but instrumentum
metaphoricum. But to say, that the act of faith is the instrument of Ethical
Active reception (which is it that I argued against,) is to say, Receiving
Christ is the instrument of it self. Now let us see what you say to this. 1. You
say, Its too subtle a Notion: That deserves no Reply. 2. You say [We use to
speak otherwise of faith.] That's no proof that you speak properly. You say
[Faith is the eye of the soul; and the eye is not sight. Faith is the hand,
etc.] Ans. 1. Strange proof! not only by Metaphors, but by metaphors of mere
humane use. 2. Is the act of faith the eye of the soul as distinct from sight?
and the hand as distinct from receiving? Tell us then what actual seeing and
receiving is? To speak metaphors and contradictions is no proving your
Assertion. Next you say [Scripture speaks otherwise.] That's to the purpose
indeed, if true. You cite, Act. 18.26. where is no such matter. If [By]
signify an isntrumental cause, It is either Always or Sometimes: You would
not sure have your Reader believe that it is Always. If but sometimes, Why do
you take it for granted that it so signifies here? Why did you not offer some
proof? This is easy Disputing. Next you say [Why else is this Righteousness
sometime called the Righteousness of faith? Sometimes the Righteousness of God
which is by faith; but that it is a Righteousness which faith receives?] Ans.
1. Its properer to say, Credens recipit credendo, The Believer by believing
receives it: Then to say, Faith (especially the act) receives it: But if you
will use that speech, it must express but formalem rationem credendi
expositorily, and not the efficiency of faith, and therefore no
instrumentality. It is the Righteousness of God by faith, because God gives it
freely (Christ having merited it) upon condition of man's faith. You add [ Ephesians.
3.17. Christ dwells in us by faith. By faith we take him in, etc.] Ans. You odly
change the question: We are speaking of faiths instrumentality in receiving
Right to Christ, or Christ in relation: and you go about to prove the reception
of his Spirit, or graces really, or himself objectively: For Christ is said to
dwell in us, 1. By his Spirit and Graces. 2. Objectively, as my friend dwells in
my heart when I love him. The text being meant of either of these, is nothing
to the purpose. 2. Yet here you do not prove that [by] signifies a proper
instrument: no more then your actual intellection is said to be the instrument
of Truths abode in you; when it is said that Truth dwells in you by
intellection. The same Answer serves to your following words about receiving
the Spirit. 1. Its nothing to our Question. 2. You give us but your bare word
that Scripture speaks of faith as the souls instrument, even in receiving the
Spirit of Christ, much less in receiving Right to Christ. But still remember
that from first to last, I profess not to contend with any about the use of
this phrase, of faiths instrumentality in receiving Christ. It is its being
really the proper isntrumental efficient cause of Justification, which I
denied, and resolvedly more then ever do deny. This you next come to, and say,

. 6.
Mr Bl. THe instrumentality of it in the work of Justification is denied,
because the nature of an Instrument (as considered in Physical operations) does
not exactly belong to it; which if it must be always rigidly followed, will
often put us to a stand in the assignation of causes of any kind in Moral
actions. The material and formal causes in Justification are scarce agreed
upon, and no marvel then in case men mind to contend about it, that some
question is raised about the Instrument. But in case we shall consider the
nature and kind of this work, about which faith is employed, and examine the
reason and ground, upon the which faith is disabled from the office of an
instrument in our Justification, and withal look into that which is brought in
as an instrument in this work in the stead of it, I do not doubt but it will
easily appear, that those Divines, that with a concurrent judgment (without
almost a dissenting voice, have made faith an instrument in this work) speak
most aptly, and most agreeably to the nature of an instrument.

. 6.
R. B. BUt is this certain? Do I therefore deny faith to be the instrument of
Justification, because the nature of an instrument [as considered in Physical
operations] does not exactly belong to it? I said 1. The action of the
principal Cause and of the instrument is one action. Is not this true of moral
operations as well as Physical? If it be not, you must make us a new Logic
before you can reasonably expect that we receive your Logical Theology. 2. I
said, the instrument must have Influx to the producing of the effect of the
principal cause, by a proper causality: that is, in suo genere. Is not this
true of Moral operations as well as Physical? Its true, Moral causes may be
said to have a less proper causation then Physical: But 1. The instrumental
must be as proper as that of the principal. 2. There is a wide difference
between, causam Moralem, and causam Moralitatis. Effecti naturalis potest esse
causa moralis, vel imputativa: Et effecti moralis scilicet Ethici, (ut Debiti,
Juris, Meriti,) potest esse causa remotior naturalis. It may well be called a
proper causation, when the effect is produced by as full a causation as the
nature of the thing will admit (as in relations that are by mere resultancy.)

2. You say [the material and formal causes of Justification are scarce agreed
on.] But does that give you a liberty to assert what you list, or what cannot
be proved true, because all men see not the truth? I should have thought you
should rather have thus concluded: [Seeing Divines themselves cannot agree
about the assignation of these Logical, unscriptural notions in the business of
Justification, therefore it is a mere Church-dividing course, to place so much
of the Protestant Cause in such notions, and insist upon them as matters of
such necessity and weight, as is done in asserting faiths instrumentality to
Justification.] Your argument (in the issue and tendency) is like that of
plundering soldiers in time of fight; that say, Now they are altogether by the
ears, we may take that we light on: why should they question us, till they
agree among themselves? 3. Whether this phrase be so apt as you affirm, we
shall better know when you have said something to prove it. If Divines have
been so concurrent in it as you say, that there is scarce a dissenting voice, I
hope I am the more excusable, if it prove an error, for opposing it: For it is
pity to let so many mistake themselves, mislead others, and make us part of a
new Religion.

But Sir, what is the cause of this sudden change? Through their great
condescension, I have received Animadversions from many of the most Learned,
Judicious Divines that I know in England: And of all these, there is but one
man that does own the Doctrine of faiths Instrumentality; but they disclaim it
all; some with distaste, others with a modest excuse of them that use it, and
the gentle interpretation of [a Metaphorical instrument] and that remote: for
so they would have me interpret our Divines. I told you this when I saw you,
and you asked me, Whether Mr C. were against it? To which I Answer, Not so much
as diverse others that write to me; but judge you by his own words, which are
these, [ Obj. But though faith be not the instrument of our Justification, may
it not be called the instrument of receiving Christ? Ans. I think they mean so
and no more, who call faith the instrument of our Justification, etc. I shall
not be unwilling to yield to you, that to speak exactly, faith may better be
called a Condition, then an Instrument of our Justification.] So far Mr C.

. 7.
Mr Bl. THe work about which faith is employed, is not an absolute, but a
relative work: a work of God toward man: not without the actual concurrence of
man: such in which neither God nor man are sole efficients; nor any act of God
or man can be sole instruments; but there must be a mutual concurrence of both.

. 7.
R. B. A Dangerous Doctrine, in my Judgment, to be so nakedly affirmed: No
doubt but Justification is a Relative change: and it is past Controversy, that
it is not without the actual concurrence of man: for he must perform the
Condition, on which God will justify him: But that God is not the sole
Efficient, nor any I suppose the word [Act] is used so largely, as to include
the Law it self.
Act of God, the sole Instrument, I durst not have affirmed without proof: and
much less have undertaken to prove.

. 8.
Mr Bl. THis must needs be granted, unless we will bring in D r Crispes passive
recipiency of Christ: Christ's abode in man without man, in spite of man, and
suppose him to be justified in unbelief.

. 8.
R. B. THis is very naked asserting. Why did you not show some reason of this
ill consequence? Its past my reach to see the least. 2. Why do you still
confound Christ's real abode in us by his Spirit, with the relation we have upon
Justification? when even now you affirmed, it was a relative work (as you call
it) I pray, by the next show us more clearly, how these absurdities follow that
doctrine which affirms, That God is the sole Efficient cause of our
Justification, but having made man's Belief and Consent the Condition (whose
nature is to suspend the effect, till performed) he will not justify us till
we first believe and consent. This is my Doctrine plainly.

. 9.
Mr Bl. ANd faith is disabled from this office in Justification, by this
Argument: If faith be an instrument, it is the instrument of God or man, etc. I
Ans. It is the instrument of man: and though man do not justify himself, yet
he concurres, as a willing ready Agent with God in it. God is a justifier of
those that believe in Jesus, Romans 3.26. God has set Christ forth a
propitiation through faith, Romans 3.25.

. 9.
R. B. IF this be not palpable contradiction, saying and unsaying, my Logic is
less then I thought it had been. If it be [Mans instrument] of Justification;
and yet [Man do not justify himself.] Then either Man is not Man, or an
Instrument is not an Instrument, or Justifying is not Justifying. Had you only
affirmed it to be man's act, and Gods instrument (how absurd soever otherwise
yet) you might have said, Man does not justify himself. But if it be man's
instrument, then man is the principal cause (in respect of the isntrumental.)
For omne instrumentum est causae principalis instrumentum. And can he be the
efficient cause, and yet not effect? Is not that to be a Cause and no Cause? In
my judgment this doctrine should not be made part of our Religion; nor much
stress laid on it if it were true; because its so obscure: That man concurres
as a ready Agent, who doubts? but does that prove him or his faith the
efficient cause of his own pardon and Justification? Is the performer of the
condition of [Gratefull consent] no willing Agent, unless an efficient Cause?
The text you cite does not speak of instruments, for ought I can find.

. 10.
Mr Bl. ANd because it is the instrument of man in a work of this nature, it is
also the instrument of God. As some have observed a communication of Titles
between Christ and his Church (the Church being called by his Name) so there is
a communication of actions in these relative works. Christ dwells in our hearts
by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. We believe and not Christ: and yet faith there is Christ's
instrument, whereby he takes up his abode. God purifies the hearts of the
Gentiles by faith, Act. 15.17. They believed and not God: yet faith is Gods
instrument in the work of their purification. So on the other side, the Spirit
is Gods work: yet we by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans
8.13.

. 10.
R. B. IF this be indeed true, That it is man's instrument of Justification and
Gods both; then both God and man are both Causae principales partiales, by
coordination making up one principal cause. This I hope you will not downright
affirm: I deny it on this reason: Every absolute Donor (I mean, who is
absolutely owner of what he gives) is the total cause-efficient-principal, of
his own Donation: But God in justifying is an absolute Donor (giving remission
and Righteousness) Therefore, etc. 2. Or else God and man must be principal
causes one subordinate to the other, and each total in his own kind. This must
be your meaning, by your first words: But then which of these is the most
principal cause, and which the subordinate? It is hard for a better wit then
mine to know your mind by your words: For when you say [Because it is man's
instrument, it is also Gods instrument.] It may seem that you take it to be
man's instrument first, or else how can it be therefore Gods instrument
[because] it is man's* But yet whether you speak de ordine consequentis vel
consequentiae, de ordine essendi and efficiendi, vel de ordine dicendi and
colligendi, I know not. However, I will not be so uncharitable as to imagine
that you take man for the most principal cause, and God for the subordinate;
but contrarily. But then you do not only make man the pardoner and justifier of
himself, but you make him the nearest total cause of it: and so it would be as
proper to say, Man forgives himself, as that God forgives him: And so faith
would be only man's instrument directly, as being the nearest cause-principal;
and Gods instrument remotely. As if I hold my pen, and you hold my hand, the
pen is proxime my instrument, and remotius yours. And so God should justify
and pardon man, by himself, as Gods instrument: As if a Judge had committed
Treason, and the King should give him authority to Judge, Pardon and Absolve
himself. But how much might be said against this? To justify efficienter is
actus Rectoris: Sed homo non est rector sui ipsius (in the sense in hand:)
Therefore he cannot justify himself. Indeed if you had spoke only of the
Justification in soro conscientiae you might well have ascribed it to man as
the efficient cause: but that you speak not of.

2. The communication of Titles that you speak of, is 1. very rare. 2.
Uncertain whether at all found in Scripture. That Text 1 Cor. 12.12. seems
rather to leave out [the Church] as understood, then to communicate Christ's
Name to it: q. d. [So is Christ and the Church.] I would advise all friends of
mine to take heed that they presume not on this slight ground to communicate
Christ's Name to the Church in their ordinary speech. 3. But who can tell what
you mean by a communication of actions? Your putting [Communication of actions]
in contradistinction from [Communication of Titles] makes the proper sense of
your words be, that Christ does as really communicate actions themselves, as he
does Titles themselves. But that is no better then a plain impossibility: For
the communication will make it another action. The accident perishes, when
separated from its subject: and therefore the same accident cannot be
communicated. But its like you intended to have said, That there is a common or
mutual attribution of each others actions, or one is entitled to the actions of
the other; and so mean only a communication of the Name quoad modum producendi,
and not of the actions themselves. But then, either this is an improper
figurative way of speech; or it is proper, and grounded in the nature of the
thing. If the former, then it is nothing to our Question, who are not enquiring
whether there may not be found some Figure in Rhetoric according to which
faith may be said to be man's instrument of Justification and Gods? but whether
it be so properly and indeed? And if you could find any Scripture that so
speaks figuratively, calling faith man's instrument and Gods in justifying; (as
you cannot) this would do nothing to the deciding of our Controversy. It is
therefore a grounded attribution that you must prove, where there is also a
real instrumentality, and so the Name fitted to the Thing. And how prove you
this? Why, as before, Ephesians. 3.17. you say, [We believe and not Christ; yet faith
is Christ's instrument, whereby he takes up his abode.] But this is too facil
disputing to satisfy. 1. Here is not a word to prove that it is a relative
In-dwelling that is here spoken of. I need not tell you how singular you are in
this Exposition (if you so expound: If not, you say nothing.) 2. If that had
been proved, yet here is no proof that [by] signifies instrumentality. 3. Much
less that it is Christ's instrument. How easily are all these affirmed? I think
Christ dwells in our hearts, as I said, 1. By his Spirit and Graces; and so he
is said to dwell in us [by faith.] 1. Formaliter, faith being the principal
part of that grace which dwells in us. 2. Conditionaliter, Faith being a
condition of our right to the Spirits abode. 3. Efficienter, as the act of
faith does directly cause the increase, and so the abode of the habit; and also
as it exciteth other graces. If you will call this efficiency an instrumental
efficiency, I think it is no proper speech: We do not use to call the act of
intellection, Man's instrument of knowing or increasing the habits of knowledge:
but I will not contend with you about this: Nor yet if you say, This act of
believing is Man's instrument (of exciting and increasing grace in himself)
directly, and Gods instrument remotely: As my pen is immediately my instrument,
and remotely his that holds my hand. Or rather I should say, as my action in
writing is improperly called my instrument, and his. And thus man may be said
(yea more properly then thus) to sanctify himself, and God to sanctify man by
himself: But in Justification the matter is far otherwise: Man does neither
Justify himself, nor God justifies man by himself. The second way of Christ's
dwelling in us, is Objectively. And here if you will speak so improperly, as to
say that man's act of believing is his instrument of receiving Christ as an
Object, or of the Objects abode in the soul, I will not con^end with you about
it: Only as I would desire you to make this phrase no great part of Religion,
nor lay too great a stress upon it, so also to remember, 1. That it is but the
species and not Christ himself that is objectively received, and thus dwells
in us. 2. That every other grace that has Christ for its object, is thus far
an instrument of receiving him, and of his abode in us, as well as faith* but
none so properly and fully as knowledge. And 3. That thus Christ dwells
objectively in every wicked man that thinks of him: Though doubtless not in
that deep and special manner as in his chosen.

3. And yet further, as a consequent of the first sort of indwelling, Christ
himself may be said to dwell in us C^viliter, vel Moraliter, that is,
Reputative, because his Spirit or Graces dwell in us Naturaliter: As a man that
keeps possession of a house by his son or servant, or by his goods: And here
also, if you have a mind to the term Instrument, you may, for me, say that
Christ keeps possession by faith or the Spirit as his instruments: But then you
must consider, 1. That this is by no communication of Actions and Titles: but
here is a real ground for this speech. 2. That it is not faith a man's act, but
faith as Gods grace wrought and maintained in us, by which he may in this sense
be said to dwell in us, or keep possession of us. 3. That thus every grace may
as truly be said to be Christ's instrument of possession or indwelling, as
faith: so he dwells in us by love, hope, trust, desire, joy, etc. but most
properly by the Spirit or new Creature, or whole body at Sanctification.

4 That all this is nothing to prove faith to be man's instrument and Gods (yea
or either alone) to effect our Justification.

The same answer serves to Act. 15.17. God purifieth man's heart by faith: 1.
From the power of sin, and that is by faith: 1. Formaliter. 2. Efficienter, as
is before expressed. 2. From the guilt of sin; and that is by faith as a
condition on man's part (and not as an instrument:) By or through which God is
said to purify or pardon us; 1. In that he conferreth remission only on this
condition; and so does constitute the formal office of faith in justifying. 2.
In that by his Spirit he causes or gives says it self, and effects the
matter. Though, whether this Text reach to Justification, I will not Dispute.
So that you do but nakedly affirm, and not prove that faith is Gods instrument
or man's in justifying.

Lastly to what you say from Romans 8.13. I reply, 1. An Ad^utor or Concause is
ill called an instrument. Must the Spirit needs be our instrument, because it
is [By] the Spirit? As if [Byj signified only an instrument?

2. All this is nothing to the business of Justification. Prove but this, that
man is as true an efficient of his own pardon or Justification, as he is of
mortifying the deeds of the body, or of Progressive Sanctification, and you
shall carry the Cause: I will not then contend whether the term [instrument] be
proper or improper.

. 11.
Mr Bl. MAn neither justifies nor sanctifies himself, yet by faith he is raised
to close with God in both: And so faith as an instrument receives Righteousness
to Justification: and therefore is called, The righteousness of faith, which is
our Justification, and works Sanctification; provided you understand not the
first work, which is properly Regeneration, and precedent to says; but the
further progress and increase of it, etc.

. 11.
R. B. 1. IF man justify not himself, and yet faith be his instrument of
justifying, then farewell old Logic.

2. If man sanctify not himself, under God, as to the progress and acts of
sanctification, then farewell old Theology. God bids men wash them, and purify
their hearts, and cleanse their hands, and make them new hearts, etc. and Peter
says, Ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit,
etc. 1 Pet. 1.22. And we must cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. with many the
like.

3. [To close with God] in pardoning me, signifies not that I pardon my self,
or that I or any act of mine is an efficient cause of pardon.

4. When you say, that [Faith as an instrument receives righteousness to
Justification] you speak exactly the conceptions of most Divines that I have
met with, or read, that go your way; and therefore these words deserve a little
further consideration. Their meaning, as far as I can understand of the whole
business is this: 1. They conceive of Christ's own righteousness, wherewith
himself was righteous, as given to us. 2. They conceive of the act of faith, as
the instrument of receiving this. 3. Upon the receiving of this, they conceive
we are justified, as a man that receives Riches is Rich, or that receives
Honor is Honorable. 4. Because faith is the instrument of receiving
righteousness, therefore say they, It is the instrument of Justification. For
Justification Constitutive, is but a relation resulting from righteousness
received. This is the sum of the common judgment of most that I have read.

But these things must be more accurately considered, I think. And 1. It must
be known, that the Righteousness given us, is not the Righteousness whereby
Christ's person was Righteous: (for accidents perish being removed from the
subject:) but it is a Righteousness merited by Christ's satisfaction and
obedience, for us.

2. It must needs be known that the faith which is the Justifying condition, is
terminated on Christ himself as the object, and not on his Righteousness which
he gives us in Remission: Remission or Righteousness may be the end of the
sinner in receiving Christ; but Righteousness or Remission is not the object
received by that act which is made the condition of Justification: or at least
but a secondary remote object; even as a woman does not marry a man's Riches,
but the Man; though it may be her end in marrying the man, to be enriched by
him: nor is her receiving his riches the condition of her first Legal right to
them; but her taking the man for her husband. And as a Patient being promised
to be cured, if he will take such a man for his Physician, and wholly trust
him, renouncing all other: Here it is not receiving Health, or a Cure that is
the proper Condition of the Cure: Health and Cure is the end for which the
Physician is Accepted and Trusted: but it is himself as a sufficient faithful
Physician which is the object of that receiving, which is the condition of the
Cure. The like may be showed in other Relations, of a Master and Scholar,
Prince and Subjects, Master and Servants, etc. Receiving the persons into
relation, from whom we expect the benefit, goes before receiving the benefit it
self by them; which is usually the remote end, and not the object of that first
reception which is the condition. Our Divines therefore of the Assembly do
perfectly define justifying faith to be, A receiving and resting on Christ
alone for salvation, as he is offered in the Gospel. It is of dangerous
consequence to define justifying Faith to be the Receiving of Justification or
Righteousness.

3. In my judgment, it is a mere fancy and delusion, to speak of the receiving
a righteousness that we may be justified Constitutive thereby, in such a sense,
as if the righteousness were first to be made ours, in order of nature before
our Justification, and then Justification follow because we are righteous; and
so these were two things: For to receive Righteousness, and to receive
Justification is one thing. Gods justifying us, and pardoning our sin, and his
constituting us righteous, and his giving us righteousness, is all one thing
under several notions. Yet as God gives, 1. Conditionally. 2. Actually: so
man receives, 1. Receptione Ethica activa, figuratively called receiving. 2.
Receptione Physica, propria, passiva: The former goes before Justification: but
only as a small, and secondary part of the condition, if properly any (it being
the accepting of Christ himself that is the main condition:) The later is
nothing at all but Justificari, commonly called, Passive Justification.

4. Christ's Satisfaction or Redemption ( solvend^ pretium) and merit, cannot be
properly received by us: For they are not in themselves given to us (but as
Tropically they may be said to be given to us, because the fruit of them is
given us.) It was not to us, but to God, that Christ gave satisfaction, and the
price of our Redemption. And yet justifying faith does as necessarily respect
Christ's satisfaction and merit, as it does our Justification thereby procured.
It is therefore the acknowledging of this Redemption, Satisfaction or Merit,
and the receiving of Christ as one that has redeemed us by satisfaction and
merit, and not the receiving that Redemption or Satisfaction our selves. To say
therefore, that the justifying act of faith, is only the receiving of Christ's
Righteousness or of Justification, is to exclude the receiving of Christ
himself any way; even to exclude him as satisfier from the justifying act: and
to exclude from that act, his Redemption, by bloodshed, satisfaction and merit:
For if it be only the receiving of righteousness, that is the justifying act,
then it is neither the receiving of Christ himself, nor yet the acknowledgement
of his Satisfaction and Redemption by his blood; and so they must say of these
as they do of the reception of Christ as Lord, that it is the fides quae
justificat, sed non qua justificans.

5. If faith shall be said to be the instrument of Justification eo nomine,
because it is the receiving of that Righteousness whereby we are justified,
then it will follow that faith must also be called the instrument of our
enjoying Christ, eo nomine, because it receives him, and the instrument of our
Adoption, eo nomine, because it receives Adoption; and so the same act of
faith which entitles us to Justification, does not entitle us to any other
blessing; nor that act that entitles us to Christ, does entitle us to
Justification (unless there be several justifying acts:) but every particular
mercy has a particular act of faith as the instrument of receiving it: which
is no Scripture doctrine.

6. It must be remembered that the thing that faith receives naturally and
properly, is not Christ himself, or his righteousness; but the species of what
is represented as its object. And that faiths reception of Christ himself and
his righteousness, or of right to Christ, is but Receptio metaphorica; vel
actio ad receptionem propriam necessaria: and that the true reception, which is
pati, non agere, does follow faith, and therefore Christ himself is received
only Receptione fidei ethica, activa, metaphorica: Species Christi predicati
recipiatur receptione naturali, intelligendo: J^^ ad Christum recipitur
receptione naturali passiva, propria: That which is conditionally given (on
condition of acceptance or the like) and offered to be accepted; this is
received, Receptione fidei ethica: whereupon follows the actual efficacious
giving of that thing, (the condition being performed, which suspended it:) and
this the believer receives, Receptione passiva, propria; but it is not his
Faith that receives it.

7. The great thing therefore that I would desire to be observed is this; that
though faith were an instrument of the foresaid objective, or of the Ethical,
Metaphorical recption of Christ (which yet is not properly, being ipsa
Receptio,) yet it is not therefore the instrumental cause of the passive,
proper reception of Right to Christ or Righteousness. Of this it is only the
condition and not the proper instrument. (For I shall show hereafter that it is
impossible it should be both:) It does morally qualify the subject to be a fit
patient to be justified, as M. Benjam. Woodbridge says truly, in his excellent
Sermon of Justification. The reason of this is, That it is only Donation or the
will of the Donor signified, that can efficiently convey a right to his own
Benefits. The Receiver is not the Giver, and therefore not the conveyer of
Right. Every instrument is an efficient cause, and therefore must effect: and
it is only giving that effects this right. Now if the giving (the donation)
had been absolute, it had absolutely conveyed right; and faith would have had
no hand in it, as being no condition: Or if the gift had constituted another
condition, that other would have had the causing interest that faith now has (
ut causa sieve qua non.) So that the the nearest and formal interest of faith
is, Its being the condition; and its apprehension of its object, is but the
remote aptitudinal reason, being ipsa fides. The great thing therefore that I
affirm is this, That if you will needs call faith the instrument of
apprehending Christ, or righteousness, yet does it not justify proxime and
formaliter, As such; but As the condition of the gift performed.

8. And if you will speak improperly, and call faith as it is the
performed-condition [ instrumentum Receptionis] it is not therefore
instrumentum Justificationis: In a few words, thi^ is the sum: 1. Faith is an
Ethical, Metaphorical reception of Christ. 2. If any will speak so improperly
as to call this, The instrument of this Ethical reception; I will not contend
with him. 3. This Ethical reception Active, is constituted by Christ's
Testament, the condition of Passive proper reception of Right to Christ, and
with him to his Benefits. Faith must first be faith, i. e. apprehensio Christi,
in order of nature before it can be the condition of Right. 4. It justifies
therefore qua conditio, and not qua fides in Christum: or as they improperly
speak, qua instrumentum Christum apprehendens. 5. If any will take the word
Instrument so improperly and largely, as to comprehend the condition, then you
may so further say, [Faith is not only the instrument of Active reception, but
of true Passive reception of Right to Christ, and so of receiving
Justification.] 6. But this is qua conditio pr^stita, and not qua apprehensio
Christi. 7. And therefore every act that is part of this condition, may so be
called, instrumentum recipiendi. 8. And if it were, as they would have it, that
faith is the instrument eo nomine quia Christum apprehendit, then every grace
that apprehends Christ must be the instrument too: And doubtless Knowledge,
Love, Hope, Delight, etc. do apprehend, or receive Christ in some sort* and
have him for their object. 9. Though I will not contend with him that will say,
[ Fides non qua fides, sed qua c^nditio praestita, est instrumentum morale
recipiendi jus ad Christum and justi^iam ab ipso promeritam.] Yet (as I think
he lays a snare for himself and others, in turning the plain and proper term
[Condition] into an improper term [ instrumentum Recipiendi,] so) I think it
not to be endured that therefore faith or any act of man, should be called the
instrument of Justification. For though you may in a strained speech say, that
Receptio moralis activa being made the medium or condition Receptionis physicae
passivae, may therefore ^e called instrumentum recipiendi, and Credere vel
acceptare said to be moraliter vel reputative pati; (and so every condition qua
condition be termed a Receptive instrument) I say, though I will not quarrel
with this speech for mere unfitness; yet it is a higher and more dangerous
error to say That faith or any condition is therefore instrumentum
Justificationis. It is not an instrumental efficient cause of the effect,
because it is medium fine quo non recipitur: As Realis vel naturalis receptio
Justificationis, is not Justificare, sed Justificari; so much more evident is
it that Moralis and imputativa Receptio Justificationis, non est Justificare,
sed medium necessarium ad [Justificari.] 10. Lastly, I say again what I said in
my Aphorisms; These two Questions must be distinguished: What is the nearest
reason of faiths interest in Justification? And, what is the remote reason? or
why did God assign faith to this office? To the first, this is the only true
Answer: Faith Justifies rather then any thing else, because God in framing his
deed of gift, was pleased to make faith the condition: The mere constitution of
the Donor is the cause. To the second, this is my Answer: God chose faith to
this office of being the justifying condition, rather then other duties,
because it was fittest: as being in its own nature, An acceptance of a freely
given Christ, and Life with him (which men call the instrumentality.) I have
the more fully opened my meaning here together about this point (though with
some repetitions) that I might leave no room for doubting of it, and
misunderstanding me.

. 12.
Mr Bl. THe Spirit will do nothing without our faith, and our faith can do
nothing without the Spirit. Man cannot justify himself by believing without
God, and God will not justify an unbeleeving man. Faith then is the act of
man; man believes, yet the instrument of God, that justifies only believers.

. 12.
R. B. 1. THe Spirits working in Sanctification, is nothing to our question of
Justification. 2. The Spirit works our first faith without faiths co-working;
and that is more then nothing. 3. The Spirit moves faith to action, before
faith move it self: and that is more then nothing. 4. It is not so easily
proved as said, that the Spirit never exciteth any good act in the soul, nor
yet restrains from any evil, without the co-working or instrumentality of
faith. But these are beside the point. 5. When you have laid down one
Proposition [Man cannot justify himself by believing, without God,] how fairly
do you lay down this as the disjunct Proposition? [and God will not justify an
unbeleeving man.] Concedo totum. Is that your Conclusion? Would you have no
more? Who would have thought but you would rather have said [Nor will God
justify man, unless his faith be the instrument of it?] And do you not seem to
imply that man with God does justify himself, when you say [Man cannot
justify himself by believing without God?] No, nor with him neither? For none
can forgive sins but God only, even to another: but who can forgive himself?
Indeed I have thought what a sad case the Pope is in, that is the only man on
earth that has no visible pardoner of his sin: he can forgive others; but who
shall forgive him? But I forgot that every believer forgiveth himself; for I
did not believe it. 6. How nakedly is it again affirmed, without the least
proof, that our faith is Gods instrument in justifying? Does God effect our
Justification by the isntrumental, efficient causation of our faith? Let him
believe it that is so happy as to see it proved, and not barely affirmed.

. 13.
Mr Bl. SO that which is here spoken, by way of exception, against faith as an
instrument, holds of efficients and instruments, sole and absolute in their
work and causality. But where there is a concurrence of Agents, and one makes
use of the act of another to produce the effect that in such causality is
wrought, it will not hold.

. 13.
R. B. HE that will or can make him a Religion of words and syllables, that
either signify nothing, or are never like to be understood by the learner, let
him make this an Article of his faith. 1. What you mean by [absolute] I cannot
certainly ariolate, unless that which is never a principal. 2. Nor know I
whether by [sole] you mean Materialiter, Formaliter, vel Respective quoad
causam principalem. 1. Two materials may concur to make one formal
instrument: Here the instrument is but one, though the matter of it may be of
diverse parts. Sure this is not your sense, that faith and something else
materially concur to make one instrument. 2. An instrument may be called
[sole] formally, when it it is the only instrument, and there is no other
concurreth to the effect. If you mean that my exceptions hold against none but
such sole instruments, then it is more nakedly, then truly asserted: nor do
they hold ever the more or less, whether the instrument be sole or not: else
they would hold against few instruments in the world. For it is not usual to
have an effect produced by a sole instrument: especially of subordinate
instruments, though it may be usual as to coordinate. 3. An instrument may be
called [sole] Respective, as to the principal cause: viz. It is not the
instrument of many principals, but of one only. Is this your meaning, that my
exceptions would hold, if faith were only man's instrument, or only Gods; but
not when it is both? If so 1. This is affirmed without the least show of proof,
or reason; why my exceptions hold not as much against that instrument of a
double principal, as of a single? surely the nature of an instrument is not
varied by that. 2. If God and man be both principals (as they must be, if faith
be the instrument of both) then either coordinate or subordinate; but neither
of these, as I have argued before. Man neither forgives himself under God, or
with God, if you speak of one and the same forgiveness. Though I know there is
another kind of forgiveness, whereby a man may forgive himself: whereof Seneca
speaks, de Ira, when he says, [Why should I fear any of my Errors, when I can
say, See thou do so no more, I now forgive thee.] lib. 3. cap. 36. O for one
proof among all these affirmations, that [here is such a concurrence of Agents,
that God makes use of the act of man, to produce the effect of Remission] and
that as an instrument, and not only as a mere condition, fine qua non.

. 14.
Mr Bl. THe Promise or Grant of the New Covenant in the Gospel, is (instead of
faith) made the instrument in the work of Justification. This is indeed Gods,
and not man's. It is the Covenant of God, the promise of God, Of the
instrumentality of the Covenant.
the Gospel of God: but of it self unable to raise man up to Justification.

. 14.
R. B. YOu have been far from satisfying me in asserting the instrumentality
of faith in Justification. You here come more short of satisfying me, against
the sufficiency of the Gospel-grant as Gods instrument. You say, This indeed is
Gods, not man's. I say, There is none but Gods: for non datur instrumentum, quod
non est causae principalis instrumentum. You say, It is of it self unable to
raise man up to Justification. I answer, 1. It is not of it self able to do all
other works antecedent to Justification, as to humble, to give faith, to
Regenerate, etc. But that's nothing to our business. 2. But as to the act of
Justification, or conveying right to Christ, pardon, and righteousness, I say,
It is able of it self as the signum voluntatis divinae to do it. And you will
never be able to make good your accusation of its disability. 3. If you should
mean that [of it self] i. e. without the concomitancy of faith as a condition,
it is not able: I answer, that's not fitly called disability: Or if you will so
call it; the reason of that disability, is not because there is a necessity of
faiths isntrumental co^fficiency; but of its presence as the performed
condition: It being the will of the donor that his grant should not efficere
actualiter, till the condition were performed.

. 15.
Mr Bl. IT is often tendered and Justification not always wrought, and so
disabled from the office of an instrument, by Keckerman in his Comment on his
first Canon concerning an instrument. As soon as the instrument serves not the
principal agent, so soon it loses the nature of an instrument. He instanceth
in an horse which obeys not the reins of his rider, but grows refractory:
then he cease to be an instrument for travel. A sword is not an instrument
of slaughter, where it slayes not: nor an ax an instrument to h^w, when it cuts
not. Neither is the Gospel an instrument of Justification, where it justifies
not.

. 15.
R. B. J Am too shallow to reach the reason of these words. I know you had not
leisure to write them in vain, and merely to fill paper. And I will not be so
uncharitable as to think you willing to intimate to the world, that I had wrote
or thought that the Gospel was the instrument of justifying a man that was
never justified. Do you think I know not a Cause and Effect are so related,
that formaliter it is not an efficient before it does effect? Though it may
still be the same Thing, and have the same Aptitude to produce the Effect, even
when it is not applied: and therefore by many Logicians is laxly termed a Cause
still. 3. Nor can I perceive you make this a medium of any argument: except you
would argu^ thus: The grant of the Covenant is not an Instrument of justifying
unbelievers that never were justified: Therefore it is not a full or proper
instrument of justifying believers that are justified.] Or else, therefore
faith is an instrument as well as the Gospel. To your Reader that is no wiser
then I, these words therefore, are at the best but lost labor. For I suppose
this Argumentation you will not own.

. 16.
Mr Bl. WHen the Minister is a Minister of condemnation, the savor of death to
death, there the Gospel becomes an instrument of condemnation and death.

. 16.
R. B. 1. SO it is, if there be no Minister where it is known any way. 2. I
speak of Gods grant or promise in the Gospel: you speak of his commination. 3.
If the threat be the proper instrument of condemnation, a pari, the promise or
gift is the proper instrument of Justification. Saw you not this when you wrote
it?

. 17.
Mr Bl. THe efficacy that is in the Gospel for Justification, it receives by
their faith to whom it is tendered.

. 17.
R. B. DArkly, but dangerouslly spoken. Darkly, for its possible you may mean,
that it receives it by faith as by a condition sine qua homo non est subjectum
proxime capax: and so I grant the sense: dangerously, For the words will seem
to any impartial Reader to import more; specially finding what you say for
faiths instrumentality before: viz. That the Gospel receives its efficacy from
faith, or by faith as the instrument which conveyeth that efficacy to the
Gospel: which if you mean, I would for the Truth's sake, and your own, that
these words had never been seen. For if faith give the Gospel its efficacy; 1.
It cannot be as a concause-instrumentall, coordinate; but as a superior, more
principal cause to the subordinate. 2. If it were the former that is meant, yet
were it intolerable.

1. Nothing but a superior cause does convey efficaciam causandi to another.
And this must be either, 1. Influendo in potentiam inferioris. 2. Vel in actum.
To say that man's faith does either of these to the Gospel-grant, is such a
doctrine as I will not dare to argue against, left you take me thereby to
accuse you of being guilty of it.

2. Faith cannot as a concause, convey any efficacy into the Gospel: For a
coordinate concause does influere immediate in ipsum effectum, at non in
concausae potentiam vel actum.

3. If you had only said that faith does concur in efficiency with the
Gospel, to Justification; you had said more then you bring any proof for: But
let us see what you bring in stead of proof.

. 18.
Mr Bl. HEb. 4.2. Unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them: but the
Word preached, did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it. 1 These. 2.12, 13. You received not the Word of God, as the word of
men, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God, which effectually works in you
that believe.

. 18.
R. B. BUt where is your conclusion? or any show of advantage to your Cause? 1.
In the first Text, the Apostle speaks of the words profiting in the real change
of the soul; and our question is of the Relative. The Scripture means, The
word had not that further work on the heart, as it has in them that mix it
with faith: will you interpret it thus: [The Word did not justify them.] 2.
Its true, that the Word did not justify them: but that's consequential only of
the former unprofitableness. Once prove that man is but as much efficient in
justifying himself, as he is in the obedience and change of his mind or
actions; and then you do something. 3. Is here ever a word for the Gospels
receiving its efficacy to Justification by faith? no nor of its so receiving
that real profit of sanctification, which is here meant, neither. Its weak
arguing to say, The Word profited not, because it was not mixed with faith:
therefore faith conveys to it its efficacy of sanctifying, yea of justifying.
You cannot but know the sequel would be denied. In progressive sanctification,
and obedience, and exercise of graces, the word and faith are concauses, and
one will not effect without the other: But it follows not that therefore
faith gives efficacy to the Word in this (much less to Justification where
faith is no efficient.) For concauses have not influence on each other, but
both on the effect. The want of faith may hinder the Word from that further
work one the soul, which presupposes faith (for faith is not wrought with
faith's cooperation.) and that's all that the Text says: But may not the
absence of faith hinder, unless when present it does effect? I am sure in
Justification, where it is but a condition, it may. The nature of a condition,
when the gift is free and full, is not to effect the thing, but to suspend the
efficacy of the instrument, till it be performed. As (if I may use so gross a
similitude) the clicket of a Cross-bow does hinder the ^ow from shooting, till
you stir it; but does not add any force to it, when you do stir it.

The second Text I know not how you mean to make use of; unless you argue thus:
The Word works effectually only in Believers: therefore faith conveyeth
efficacy to the Word. I think I need not tell you, that I deny the sequel (not
to speak of the antecedent:) nor yet to tell you that this speaks not of
working the relative change of Justification.

. 19.
Mr Bl. SO that the Gospel, in it self considered, is wanting in that honor
assigned to an instrument, to have influx to the producing of the effect of the
principal cause, by a proper causality. If none dare say, that faith has such
an influx, they may much less say that the Word has such an influx.

. 19.
R. B. THe Gospel in it self considered, without the coordinate or subordinate,
or superior causality of faith, has this honor so fully, clearly, beyond all
doubt, that no man that is a preacher of this Gospel should question it: Much
less should prefer the causality of faith, in saying, that [we may much less
give this honor to the Word,] or say this of the Word, then of our own faith.
Yet the Gospel without the concomitancy of faith, does not actually justify:
else faith were no condition or causa sine qua non: But that is no dishonor to
the Gospel; nor defect of power which faith must supply. But the force of the
instrument being merely from the Donors will, he wills that it shall then
(and not till then) efficere, when the condition is performed. I appeal to all
the Divines, Lawyers and Logicians in the world; when the thing to be conveyed
is but Debitum vel jus ad rem, and the effect is but a Transcendental relation
(as debitum is,) Is not the Voluntas constituentis vel Donantis the only
principal proper efficient? And is not the sig^um voluntatis constituens, the
properest instrument that the wit of man can imagine. Is not the Testament of a
man the most strict and proper instrument of conveying right of the Legacy to
the Legatary? Is not a Covenant, Contract, Deed of gift, the most proper
instrumental efficient cause of the duness of the thing given or conveyed? It
is not only a Law term, but a term of the strictest Logic, to call these a
man's instrument for conveyance. Is not a praemiant or priviledging law, in the
most strict and proper sense the Legislators instrument, effecting the debitum
praemii vel privelegii? It is evident that the fullest definition of an
instrumental efficient cause does agree to these: as far as the nature of the
effect ( Relatio debiti vel juris) will admit of full or proper efficiency. For
these instruments are the very fundamenta proxima of these relations. Can you
prove the like, (yea and more) of faith, and will not? But I pray once more
^emember that it is not the effecting of a Physical change, but a relative, the
conveying of Right that we are speaking of: so full an instrument is each of
th^se that the very name of the effect is often given to them. So a pardoning
instrument is called A pardon: the instrument of donation is called A deed of
gift. The Law is said, praemiare and punire, quia constituit debitum premii and
paenae.

. 20.
Mr Bl. PEmble therefore affirming the Word to be an instrument of Gods Spirit,
presently adds, Now instruments are either cooperative or passive, and the
Word must be one of these two: Cooperative, he says it is not, and gives his
reason: It is therefore, says he, a passive instrument, working only per modum
ob^ecti, as it contains a declaration of the Divine Will, and it proposes to
the understanding and will the things to be known, believed and practiced.

. 20.
R. B. Mr Pemble speaks of the Word effecting, or as the instrument of
sanctification. We speak of it as conveying right to Christ, and as justifying.
What Is that to this? 2. When did Mr Pemble prove that the Word or other objects
are passive instruments? You know he goes against the stream of Philosophers:
and then his reasons must sway more then his authority: And his reason, which
you say he gives, is but this, It cannot be declared what operative force there
should be in the bare declaration of Gods will, etc.] But I will undertake to
declare that an operation there is by the agency of this declaration; though
not punctually how it operates: I have read many that say that objectum
operatur in genere causae finalis: and others that say it works in genere
causae efficientis, some saying it effects Physically, others that it
effects morally, others that objectum operatur naturaliter, at pr^ponens
objectum est tantum causa moralis; others that it is causa efficiens objectiva
protatarcti^a respectu earum operationum qua ab illa immediate exercentur; sed
causa finalis respectu aliorum operationum quae ab illa sunt priorum
interventu, as Burgers^is speaks: But I remember none that call it Instrumentum
passivum: yea not only the object, but declaration and all, Instrumentum
passivum. For my part I am of Scotu^ mind, that Objectum operatur efficienter
and per m^dum naturae in intellectum; sed moraliter tantum in voluntatem;
irresistibly and necessitatingly on the intellect (considering it as an
intellect, and not so far as it is sub imperio voluntatis and ita ejus
operationes sunt participative voluntariae;) but on the will not so. And I am
sure this passive instrumentality of the Word in sanctifying, does very ill
agree with the language of Scripture; which makes the Word to be mighty,
powerful, pulling down strong holds, sharp, dividing, etc. The seed of God by
which we are begotten, lively, the Word of life, saving men's souls, quickening,
sanctifying, cleansing, etc. But what is all this to Justification?

. 21.
Mr Bl. SO that if Burgersdicius his gladius and culter be active instruments,
and Keckerman 's Incus instrumentum fabricationis, and his scamnum and mensa
accubitus, and terra ambulationis; yet it follows not, as is thence inferred,
that there is no passive instrument. Here is an instrument that is passive.

. 21.
R. B. THese words import an intimation that I said all these were active
instruments, which should not have been done, when I manifested that I took
some of them for no instruments. 2. These words intimate, as if I concluded
hence (if not only hence) that there are no passive instruments; which should
not be, when I only brought in these as Objections to be answered, and argued
with Schibl^r against passive instruments thus: Every instrument is an
efficient cause: All efficiency is by action. Therefore every instrument is
active. If you chose rather (as ordinarily you do) to silence my reasons then
answer them, yet you should not have intimated, as if I had given you none, or
but such as I gave not. 3. I look for your proof of a passive instrument; and
not to say [Here is an instrument that is passive] as if you were demonstrating
it to my eyes, when you bring nothing but singular Mr. Pembles singular word.
And I doubt whether you believe him or your self thoroughly; for if you did, I
think you would preach but coldly. I am persuaded you look your preaching
should operate actively: And indeed so it must or not at all; for pati non est
operari; and therefore Pemble denies it to cooperate, and to operate. Be not
offended if I doubt whether you believe this your self, in your Studies,
Preaching, Writing and Exhortations. 4. I doubt not but that which does only
realiter pati, may be called an instrument moraliter vel reputative: but then
its reputative instrumentality, consists in a reputative activity. 5. And I
doubt not but the dispositio materiae may, by a borrowed speech be called
instrumentum recipiendi; and so instrumentum passivum, i. e. Passionis, i. e.
Receptionis* but all this is nothing to the business. 6. If it were proved that
there were a hundred passive instruments, it would never be proved that faith
is one (as an instrument signifies an efficient cause) of Gods work of
justifying us: neither Really nor Reputatively is it such.

. 22.
Mr Bl. THat which is produced by an efficient or principal agent to the
producing of an effect, and receives activity and power from some other, is a
passive instrument and not active.

. 22.
R. B. STranger yet! 1. Its nothing to the nature of an instrument active or
passive, whether [it be produced by the principal agent] or not, so it do but
subserve that agent. 2. If this proposition be true, there is never an active
instrument in rerum natura: For Angels and men, calor, frigus, and all
creatures are produced by God as the principal cause to the producing of some
effects (except there be any ultimi effectus found out which are not causes of
other effects) and they all receive activity and power from God. Those that are
most for passive instruments say, calor is an active instrument. But if I use
fire to warm my beer, or burn any thing, this receives its activity and power
from another, and therefore must be no active instrument, with you. If there be
no active instrument, when I thought there had been no passive instrument, I
was f^r wide. 3. But what mean these strange words of [Activity and power
received] if the instrument be not active? Is not the Potentia here meant,
Potentia efficiendi? and is not all effection by action? And is not the
activity here mentioned, an activity in causing? What? and yet no active
instrument? 1 Be not offended with me, Dear brother, if I confess, that you and
I differ in more points than one, and in our Philosophy as well as Theology.

. 23.
Mr Bl. But the Word is produced and held forth of God for the work of
Justification, and has its power of working elsewhere.

. 23.
R. B. YEt more strange! 1. Is it not enough that you take the Word to be a
passive instrument of Confirmation and Conversion? and all the work that it
does on the souls of your hearers really? (...) you must feign the Word to be
the passive instrument of Justification too? Is there any thing in the whole
world that can m^r^ unfi^ly be called a passive instrument, then the Covenant
of Justification? Why, it is Gods only instrument of active Constitution of the
dueness of the benefi^? Though it be but action morali, ut ^ignum ^^l^ntatis
donatoris. The Debitum results from the Grant, Deed of Gift, Testament, or
Instrument of Donation or Conveyance, as from its fundamentum proximum: And is
the fundamentum proximum Relatio^is a passive Instrument*

2. The Word has its power of working elsewhere, that is, from God; but not
from man's faith: Far be such a thought from my soul.

3. I suspect by your words, when you say [the Word is produced and held sorth
of God] and by your discourse all along, that you all this while understand not
what I mean by the Covenants justifying: (yet I had hoped you had understood
the thing it self.) You seem to think that the Covenant justifies by some real
operation on the ^oul, as the Papists say; and our Divines say, It sanctifies;
or as it justifies in for^ conscientiae, by giving assurance and comfort. But
Sir, I opened my thoughts of this fully in Aphor. page 173, 174, 175, 176, 177,
178, 179. I scarce bestowed so many words of any one particular point. I speak
not of the effect of Gods Word, as preached to men's hearts: but as it is Lex
promulgata, and Faedus, and Testamentum, and so does convey Right, or
Constitute the dueness of the benefit? This is the Record that God has given
us, eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son, etc. 1 John 5.11, 12. This
Gospel-donation does constitute the duness of the thing given; to us; and thus
the Covenant justifies, as a written pardon under the Kings hand, or an act of
grace or oblivion, does pardon. Do you not often read in Divines of Justificatio
Juris, vel Legis, as distinct from Justificatio Judicis, vel per sententiam? I
refer you to what I said in the cited place.

. 24.
Mr Bl. FOrgiveness of sins is preached in the Gospel, Act. 13.32. But it is
those that believe that are justified. Faith through the Spirit gives efficacy
and power of working to it.

. 24.
R. B. I Should tremble to say so: What Romanist by the doctrine of merit gives
more to man in the work of Justification! If our faith give efficacy and power
to the Gospel to justify us, then we justify our selves when the Gospel
justifies us! then the Gospel is our instrument of Justification! And can this
be unless it be also said that we made the Gospel? Then God and we are
concauses in the Gospels act of Donation: And is it the same power and efficacy
for justifying, which the Gospel receives from God, and which it receives from
faith? or are they diverse? If diverse, show us what they are; and which part of
its power and efficacy the Gospel receives from faith, and which from God? If
they are the same, then God must convey justifying efficacy and power into
faith first, and by faith into the Gospel: which who imagines? or why should I
be so vain as to stand to confute it? O that you had condescended so far to
your Readers weakness, as to have deigned to show him, Quomodo patitur
Evangelium recipiendo? and Quid recipit ut siat potens and efficax? and quomodo
haec potentia and efficacia fuit in fide? utrum eminenter an formaliter? aut
utrum fides id communicavit quod nunquam habuit? and quomodo agit fides in hoc
influxu causativo in Evangelium? with many more of the like, which you make
necessary to be enquired after. And why gave you no proof from Scripture or
reason for a point that is so new, that I think never man printed before you,
for so far as I can learn at present: That says gives efficacy and power of
sanctifying or exciting Grace, perhaps some before you have delivered: but that
it gives efficacy and power of justifying, I think not any.

2. And sure you do not take the foregoing words for proof: If you do, I desire
your Reader may not do so, What though only Believers are justified by the
Covenant? Does it follow that faith gives efficacy and power to the Covenant to
justify? Then either there are no conditions or causes sine quibus non: or
else they all are efficient^, and give efficacy and power to other efficients:
What if your father bequeath by his Testament 110 a piece to each of his sons?
to one on condition he will ask it of his elder brother, and thank him for it:
to another, if he be married by such a time: to a third, if he will promise not
to wast it in prodigality: Do any of these conditions give efficacy and power
to the Testament? No: Yet the Testament does not efficaciter agere till they
are performed. Why is that? Because all such instruments work morally, only by
expressing ut signa the Will of the Agent: and therefore they work both when
and how he will; and it is his Will that they shall not work till such a time,
and but on such terms; and so he frames the conditions himself, as obices to
suspend his Testament or other instrument from acting or effecting, till they
are performed: but not to give efficacy and power to his Testament. If the gift
be in diem, the instrument receives not efficacy and power from the Time,
quando venit dies: no more does it per praestationem conditionis.

3. Your terms of [Faiths giving power through the Spirit] tell me, that sure
you still look at the wrong act of the Gospel; not at its moral act of
Conveyance or Donation, but at its real operation on man's heart: For neither
Scripture nor Divines use to say, The Gospel remitteth sin, or justifies by
the Spirit: Nor does the Spirit otherwise do it, then by enditing the Gospel;
unless by the Spirit you mean the Godhead in Essence, and not in Personality.
Sanctification is ascribed to the Spirit as the efficient, but so is not
forgiveness and Justification. Nor do I like your phrase, as to sanctification
it self, That faith conveys efficacy and power to the Gospel through the
Spirit: For 1. I had rather say, The Gospel and Spirit, or the Spirit by the
Gospel, convey efficacy and power to faith, then faith to the Gos^el. 2. How
faith should convey this through the Spirit, is quite beyond my reach: Does the
Spirit receive any influx from faith, and thereby a power, and then convey this
to the Gospel from our faith? But its like you mean, the Spirit does it through
faith.

. 25.
Mr Bl. SO that neither the Gospel, nor faith in the Gospel, should in this
office of an instrument in Justification be denied their due honor. The Gospel
received by faith, is a plenary instrument in this work: and faith embracing
the tender and promise of the Gospel. The Gospel is an outward instrument,
says Ravanelly: faith an inward: they both make up one instrument full and
complete: yet faith is more aptly and fitly called an instrument: Seeing that
faith gives efficacy, as an instrument to the Word: the Word may be without
faith, and so no instrument at all: but faith always presupposes the Word of
promise: it is not without its object.

. 25.
R. B. 1. HAd you first proved any such honor due to faith, and so to man, as
to be the instrument of Justification, yea and more fitly then the Gospel, so
to be called, then you might fairly have thus concluded. But I like not
Arguments that have but one part, being all Conclusion. I will say more for the
Gospels instrumentality. Signum voluntatis Donatoris constituens jus ad
beneficium Donatum (etsi in diem vel sub condition) est Donatoris instrumentum
maxim proprium: Sed Testamentum Christi est signum voluntatis divi^^ jus
nostrum ad Christum and Justificationem passivam constituens, (viz. sub
condition, and actualiter quando praestatur conditio:) Ergo Testamentum
Christi est instrumentum hujus donationis, maxim proprium. For the major,
examine it by all the qualifications of an instrument, and it will appear
undoubted. 1. Subservit causae principali, scilicet voluntati donatoris. 2.
Actio ejus and principalis sunt eadem actio: scilicet Donatio, vel constituere
debitum beneficii. 3. The true definition of an instrument agrees to it:
Instrumentum est quod ex directione alterius principalis agentis influit ad
produceudum effectum se nobiliorem: Vel, per quod causa alia operatur, sic, ut
hoc elevetur ad effectum se nobiliorem, seu ultra perfectionem and suam and
actionis suae. 4. Yea it is the most perfect instrument; for instrumentum eo
melius est quanto magis est fini proportionatum: ut Aquin. 1.2 ae. q. 188. a.
7. But Gods Legal grant is most perfectly proportioned to the conveyance of
right to Christ, and his benefits. Prove this much of faith, as to
Justification, before you again tell the world that faith is more fitly called
an instrument of Justification.

2. If the Gospel received by faith be a plenary instrument of justifying, as
you say: Then 1. How is faith more fitly called an instrument? 2. Then Recipere
Evangelium is instrumentum justificandi maxim proprium (as you think) making
the Gospel a complete instrument.

3. If faith and the Gospel be both full complete instruments, then either
ejusdem effecti per eandem actionem, vel per diversas: not per eandem actionem,
For 1. Then they should be one instrument. 2. Their esse is so different that
their operari must needs be different. 2. If per diversas actiones, then
coordinate or subordinate: You think subordinate, it seems, and that faith
gives power and efficacy to the Gospel; If so, then faith does modo and sensu
nobiliore Justificare quam Testamentum. But that's far from truth: For 1. It
is most proper to say, The Covenant-grant justifies: or the Law of grace
justifies; but it is less proper to say, Faith justifies: and Scripture never
says so that I know of; but that we are justified by faith. 2. You say your
self that faith is but a passive instrument: but the Testament is active,
(morally in its kind.) 3. Recipere Evangelium is not so properly Justificare,
as is immediate Justificare, Remittere, Jus ad Christum and remissionem
constituere, which is the Gospels act. Credere non est tam proprie Justificare.
Much more might be said of this, if necessary.

4. How plain a contradiction do you speak, that faith and the Gospel are two
instruments: and that both make one complete instrument. They might have been
said to be materially two things, making one instrument without contradiction;
but not without notorious untruth.

5. For it is no better when you say, they make up one complete instrument. For
1. You said before that faith gives power and efficacy to the Gospel: which if
true, then the Gospel is an instrument subordinate to faith, and therefore not
one with it. 2. The Gospel is causa totalis in suo genere, fully as an
instrument conveying right, quando vel venit dies, vel praestatur conditio:
therefore it is not causa partialis, vel pars causae. 3. There is such a
disparity in the actions of each, viz. Credere, and Remittere vel donare
Christum and Remissionem, that they cannot possibly as causae partiales,
constitute one complete cause: For one immediately and properly produces the
effect: the other not so. 4. You say, that they are both passive instruments:
But so they cannot make one instrument: For surely nec patiuntur idem, nec ab
eodem; nec formam Justificationis Evangelium patiendo recipit. Though indeed
your authority must do more then your reasons, to prove it of either.

6. If ^aith be more aptly and fitly (as you speak) called, an instrument, then
it is a properer speech to ^ay, Faith, or m^n by faith, forgiveth sins; then
that The Covenant-grant or Condonation, or act of pardon does forgive them. Se^
Absit!

7. When you have well proved that repeated dangerous assertion, [That faith
gives efficacy as an instrument to the Word;] you may next take the boldness to
speak out its consequents, and say, Gods Word is the Believers word^: the
Believer enableth Gods Law of grace to forgive him: The Law of grace is
defective in power, till the Believer perfect it: Credere non est actu^
subditi, vel Legatar^^, sed Rectoris, Judi^is, and Testatoris* Ergo Homo habet
authoritatem seipsum Justificandi, and sibi ipsi condo^andi, and credendo hanc
exc^^et authoritatem.

8. Your strange proof is often answered. What though the Word without faith is
no instrument? Does it follow that therefore either faith makes it an
in^trument, or is an instrument it self? The King grants an Act of Oblivion or
Pardon to a thousand Traitors, on condition that by such a day they come and
seek and thankfully accept it: Does their seeking or thankful Acceptance,:
give power and efficacy as an instrument to the Kings Pardon? Or are the Pardon
and Acceptance one complete instrument? Or is it more fit to call the Traitors
Acceptance, the instrument of his Pardon, then the Kings Act? Credat qui
credere potis est.

Twisse says, An audebit Arminianus aliquis affirmare Remissionem pec^^torum
esse effectionem fidei? tametsi nisi credentibus contingat ista Remissio.
Dices, fidem saltem praerequisitum quiddam esse ad Remissionem peccatorum
consequendum. Esto* atque hac ratione dicatur effectio fidei, sed ^u genere
tantum causae dispusitivae. Twiss. Vin^. Great. l. 1. part. 2.. 25. p. mihi 273.
So he often: says both of Faith and Works, that they justify only ut causae
dispositivae: and therefore in one kind of causality; and not as instruments
properly so called.

. 26.
Mr Bl. THerefore to wind up this whole Dispute in which I have studied to be
brief, (though I fear some will think I have been too tedious:) seeing that
those that make faith the instrument in Justification, make the Gospel an
instrument likewise, and dare not go about to strip it of its honor: I hope
that they that make the Gospel an instrument, will acknowledge faith to be an
instrument in like manner, being in their efficacy as instruments so
inseparably joined, and so all the Controversy will be fairly ended and
concluded. Amen.

. 27.
R. B. 1. IF this be a Dispute, I am none of those that think it too long: I
scarce find a line in many Pages: It is in my eyes so short, that it seems as
nothing.

2. Your motion for decision will take, when man is proved to be God: then man's
act of Believing may fairly share of the same honor with Gods act of Legal
forgiving: And yet then I shall demurre on the preferring it: But till then, I
love Peace and Unity, but not on such a compromising, as to share the honor of
the Redeemer with the redeemed, of the Creator with the creature, of the
Sovereign pardoning, with the Traitor pardoned.

3. I like Amen better then Ergo: and Herberts transformation I much applau^^
but not the substitution of Amen, for a necessary Ergo. This ^imium (...)
disputandi genus, that can prove all with a word; an ipse dico, and wipe off
all that is opposed with a wet finger, I never liked. I must next take in what
you add afterward.

. 27. Mr Bl. Page 91.
Obj. IT is said by another, If faith be a condition of the Covenant of Grace,
then it can be no instrument of our Justification: If it be a condition in this
Covenant, it justifies as a condition, and then it cannot justify as an
instrument, and so I pull down what I build, and run upon contradictions.

Answ. I answer, I should rather judge on the contrary, that because it is a
condition of the Covenant in the way as it is before expres^, that it is
therefore an instrument in our Justification. God ^enders the gift of
righteousness to be received by faith* He Covenants for this faith; for
acceptance of it: By believing the^ we keep Covenant and receive Christ for
Justification; we as well do what God requires, as receive what he tenders; we
do our duty, and take Gods gift; and thereby keep Covenant, and receive life,
and so faith is both a condition and an instrument.

. 27.
R. B. BUt do you take officium and conditio to be all one? I easily yield that
we may do our duty in believing, though it were an instrument: But a condition
is more then a duty: yea then a duty to be performed for the obtaining of a
benefit* Cujacius says, Conditio est Lex addita negotio qua do^ec praestetur
eventum suspendit, Vel est modus vel causa quae suspendit id quod agitur, donec
ex post-facto confirmetur. Or as Mynfinger, Cum quid in casum incertum (i. e.
contingens) qui potest tendere ad esse vel non esse conferiur And they are
divided into Potestativas, Casuales, Mixtas* Ours is of the former sort, and I
define it, viz. the condition of the Covenant to be, Actio voluntaria de
fu^^ro, a Deo Legislatore and Christo Testatore in neva Leg^, Federe,
Testamento requisita, ut ex ejus praesta^ione constituatur jus actuale ad
beneficium: vel, ut obligationem and eventum suspendat don^^ praestetur. For ex
stipulatione conditionali neque obligatio ^eque actio ulla est, an^equam
conditio eveniat: Quia quod est in condition, non est in obligatione. Vt
My^sing* in Iust^^. Schol. page* 5 ^^)

^. You must consider that it is not de condition contractus venditionis and
emptionis, vel (...)* vel ^^^ationis, or any the like, that is propter pre^ium:
but it is the condition (...), but somewhat partaking naturae Feudi, as to some
of the Benefits. This being premised, it is evident that faith cannot justify
both as a condition, and as an instrument of Justification. For 1. Either of
them imports the proximam and causalem rationem of faith, as to the effect:
But it is utterly inconsistent with its nature to have two such different
nearest causal interests. To be an instrument of justifying, is to ef^ect it
per modum instrumenti: To be the condition, is to be the causa sine qua non,
which does not effect, but suspend the effect till performed: It has the name
of a cause, (and sometime is ex materia a moral impulsive, and sometime not)
but it has the tru^ nature of such a medium ad finem, as is no cause. As faith
cannot be both efficiens effecti, and effectum ejusdem ^ficientis, nor be both
the efficient and constitutive cause (material or formal,) no more can it
produce one and the same effect of Justification per modum instrumenti
efficientis, and per modum conditionis sine qua non. 2. Else you must feign the
pardoning act to run thus [I will pardon thee on condition thou will pardon thy
self by believing, as the instrument] and not only [on condition thou accept
Christ.] 3. It belongs to the pardoning instrument to confer the right to
the thing, that is, to dissolve the obligation to punishment, and to constitute
the condition of this Right or Pardon: For Dona^tis est constituere conditionem
etiam in ipsa instrumentali Donatione. But faith does not confer Right; for
your self say, It does but receive it: It does not dissolve the obligation, but
accept a Savior to dissolve it: It does not constitute the condition of right;
for you acknowledge it is the condition it self.

To conclude this Point, for the compromising or shortening this difference
between you and me, I will take your fairer offer, page 75. or else give you as
fair an offer of my own. Yours is this: [Faith is considered under a double
notion. First as an instrument (or if that word will not be allowed) as the way
of our interest in Christ, and privileges by Christ.] In this general I easily
agree with you.

If that satisfy not, I propound this, Call you it an instrument of receiving
Christ, and consequently righteousness; and give me leave to call it precisely
a condition, or a moral disposition of the subject to be justified; and I will
not contend with you: So be it, you will 1. not lay too great a stress on your
own notion, nor make it of flat necessity, nor join with them that have made
the Papists believe that its a great part of the Protestant Religion, and
consequently that in confuting it, they refell the Protestants. 2. Nor say any
more that it gives efficacy and power to the Gospel to justify us, and is more
fitly then the Gospel called an instrument. 3. Yea, I must desire that you will
forbear calling it at all an instrument of Justification, and be content to
call it an instrument of receiving Justification: and I would you would confess
that too to be an improper speech. If you resolve to go further, let me desire
you hereafter 1. To remember that its you that have the Affirmative, that faith
is the instrument of justifying us: and I say, It is not written, you add to
Scripture: Therefore show where it is written, expressly or by consequence. 2.
Do not blame me for making sincere obedience part of the mere condition
(wherein I think you say as much as I) and so as giving too much to man, when
you give intollerably so much more as to make him the instrumental efficient
cause of forgiving and justifying himself. 3. Above that I have yet said, I
pray forget not one thing: to prove faith to be the instrumental efficient of
sentential Justification (which is most properly and fully so called) as well
as of Legal constitutive Justification. For that's the great point of which you
have just nothing ( pace tui si ita dicam) of which you should have said much.
And so much for the Controversy.

28. Of Evangelical Personal Righteousness. Mr Bl. Page 110, etc.
THere is yet a third opinion, which I may well doubt whether I understand, but
so far as I do understand, I am as far from assent to it as either of the
former: and that is of those, who do not only assert a personal inherent
Righteousness, as well as imputed, against the Antinomians; but also affirm
that this Righteousness is complete and perfect: which if it were meant only of
the perfection of the subject, as opposed to hypocrisy, dissimulation, or
doubleness, implying that they do not only pretend for God, but are really for
him; that they do not turn to him feignedly (as Israel was sometime charged,
Jer. 3.10.) but with an upright heart: Or of the perfection or entireness of
the object: (respecting not one, or only some, but all Commandments) which is
called a perfection of parts; we might readily assent to it. The Covenant calls
for such perfection, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me and be thou perfect: and many
have their witness in Scripture that they have attained to it, as Noah, Genesis
7.9. Job 1.1. Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. But a perfection above these is maintained;
a perfection complete and full. [Righteousness signifies (as is said) a
conformity to the Rule, and a conformity with a quat^nus or an imperfect
rectitude is not a true conformity or rectitude at all: Imperfect Righteousness
is not Righteousness but* unrighteousness. It is a contradiction in adjecto^;
Though holiness be acknowledged to be imperfect in all respects, where
perfection is expected, in reference to the degree that it should obtain, or
the degree which it shall obtain, or in reference to the excellent object,
about which it is exercised, or in reference to the old Covenant, or the
directive, and in some sense the preceptive part of the new Covenant; In all
these respects it is imperfect; and Righteousness materially considered is
holiness, and therefore thus imperfect: but formally considered, it is perfect
Righteousness or none; this not in relation to the old Rule, but the new
Covenant.] Upon this account they are charged with gross ignorance, that use
and understand the word Righteous and Righteousness as they relate to the old
Rule; as if the godly were called Righteous (besides their imputed
Righteousness) only because their sanctification and good works have some
imperfect agreement with the Law of works. This and much more to assert a
personal perfect inherent Righteousness, as is said: all which as it is here
held out, is new to me, and I must confess my self in ignorance all over. I
never took imperfect Righteousness to imply any such contradiction, any more
then imperfect holiness.

. 28.
R. B. THe third opinion you rise against, is that which you take to be mine,
as your citing my words does manifest: but you confess your self uncertain
whether you understand it or not. There is a possibility then that when you do
understand me, you may prove your self of the same Opinion.

In the mean time it is your Reasons which must justify your strong dissent,
which I shall be bold to examine. Where you say, I [do not only assert a
personal inherent Righteousness, as well as imputed, against the Antinomians,
but also affirm that this Righteousness is perfect.] I Reply: Either you
suppose the later proposition to be an addition to the former, in terms only,
or in sense also: If only in terms, the sense being the same, I suppose you
would not oppose it. If in sense, then it is either somewhat real, or somewhat
modal, which you suppose the later to add to the former: Real it is not, for
Res and perfectio Rei, are not distinguished as Res and Res, but as Res and
Modus. It is therefore but a modal addition: And it is such a Modus as is
convertible with Ens. And therefore there is as much imported in the first
Proposition [We have a personal inherent Righteousness] as in the second* [We
have a perfect personal inherent Righteousness.] For Ens and Perfectum are as
convertible as Ens and Bonum, or Ens and Verum.

You add [If it were meant only of the perfection of the subject, as opposed
to hypocrisy, etc. or of the perfection or entireness of the object
(respecting not only One or Some, but All Commandments) which is called a
perfection of parts, we might readily assent to it.]

To which I Reply: 1. Your terms are un^outh to me, but I will do my best to
guess at your meaning. A perfection of the subject is perfectio essentialis vel
accidentalis. The former ^s no more but ^sse subjectum, vere and proprie. The
later may be variously taken, according to the variety of accidents: But
certain I am that the subject is imperfect, quod ad perfectionem accidentalem.
And therefore in this large expression, you seem to say much more then I. You
and I, who are the subjects of Righteousness, are imperfect, though perfectly
subjects.

2. That which you call here perfectio subjecti, is nothing but the truth of
the immediate subject, as I understand you. Justitia est vel causae, vel
personae, vel saltem considerata vel ut causae vel ut personae. Causa est
subjectum proximum: Persons est subjectum primum and principale. Justitia
causae, est vel actionum vel habituum aut dispositionum. Perfecti sunt habitus
and dispositiones, and actiones vel perfectione essentiali Transcendentali,
(and ita perfecti sunt, quia vere sunt, and vere sunt tales:) vel perfectione
accidentali: and ita aliquo modo perfecti, and alio imperfecti sunt. It seems
therefore that you here say as much at least as I, for the perfection of the
matter of our inherent Righteousness, (if not more) for I am sure you speak
more unlimitedly.

3. I do charitably conjecture, that when you speak of [a perfection of the
object] you do not mean as you speak, but you mean a perfection of our Acts as
they respect the object, extensively (for whether you include or exclude
intension, I know not.) Here must I distinguish between objects of absolute
necessity, (and so of the acts about those objects) which a man cannot be
justified or saved without: and 2. Objects of less necessity (and so acts)
which its possible to be justified and saved without. In regard of the former,
I confess our acts may be said to be [Truly acts that are exercised about such
objects] if you will call that perfection (as in a larger sense you may:) But
as to the later, I acknowledge no such perfection. And therefore (for that
which you call [A perfection of parts] I acknowledge that every righteous man,
has a perfection of the essential parts (that is, he wants them not) but not
of the integral always; much less of accidents, which are improperly called
parts.

Next you repeat some of my words, and then add [All which as it is here held
out, is new to me, and I must confess my self in ignorance all over.] Reply: I
cannot help that, but I will do toward it what I can, that it may be none of
my fault: and therefore will let you know my meaning. And in opening the sense
and nature of [Perfection] I cannot give you more of my mind in a narrow room,
then Schibler has laid down in Metaph. l. 1. c. 11. Perfectum est cui ad
essentiam nihil deest. Scaliger Exercit. 140. p. 470. Omne quod est, sibi est,
and bonum, and totum, and perfectum. It is a Metaphisical Transcendental
Perfection that I speak of, which has no contrary in Being; which consists
in the presence of all things necessary to Being: and that only of an
inferior, derived Being, such as the creature is; for we meddle not with the
infinite Divine Being or perfection; Nor do we take it in a comparative sense,
but in an absolute: this being a Righteousness perfect in its kind, though a
more perfect kind accidentally, may be found out: I take it rather nominaliter
then participaliter: but still remember that I take it not de perfectione
accidentali, sed essentiali. And therefore I still maintain that in several
accidental respects our Righteousness is imperfect.

Now to know how our Righteousness is essentially perfect, let us consider what
is essential to it. Its form is a Relation of our actions and dispositions
immediately, and our selves remotely, as compared with the Law or Rule. This Law
(besides the constitution of the reward and punishment considered in
themselves, of which we now speak not) does 1. Constitute (I mean efficiently
determine) what shall be our duty in general. 2. It determines more specially,
what part of this duty, shall be the condition of our Justification and
salvation, sine qua non. When we come to be judged at Gods bar, he that has
performed the condition shall be justified, though he have omitted much of the
other duty: but all that have not performed the condition shall be condemned.
(But remember of what it is that this is the condition: viz. of the new Law of
grace, whose office is to make over to us Free remission of sins, and salvation
through the satisfaction and merits of Christ: and not the condition of that
Law, which gives the reward directly for the work.) Take up altogether then,
and you will see that 1. Righteousness is formally a relation: 2. And that not
of our Actions or dispositions to the mere precept of the Law, determining of
duty as such, (commonly called the moral Law;) but 1. to the Law, as
determining of the condition of life or death; 2. to the promise and threatening
of that Law, which are joined to the condition. So that [to be righteous]
signifies ( quoad legem novam) these two things: 1. [ Non obligatus ad paenam,
and cui debetur praemium.] 2. [ Qui conditionem impunitatis, and praemii
praestitit.] The first question in judgment being [ An sit obligatus ad
paenam, vel non? and an praemium sit debitum?] therefore the former is our
first and principal righteousness, and here to be pleaded. But before the first
question can be determined, the second must be raised and resolved, [ Utrum
praestitit conditionem?] And here the second is our Righteousness ( conditionis
praestatio) by which we must answer the accusation [ Conditionem non
praestitit.] That is, [He lived and died an unbeliever or impenitent.] So that
3. You see that our first Righteousness [ Non reatus paenae: vel jus ad
impunitatem and ad praemium,] as it requires Christ's perfect satisfaction, as
a medium to it, by which all the charge of the Law of works, must be answered;
so it requires our performance of the condition of the Law of grace, as another
medium, by which Christ and his benefits are made ours, and by which the false
accusation of [being unbelievers and impenitent, and so to be condemned by the
Law of grace it self, as having no part in Christ] must be answered, and we
justified against it. 4. It is not only the form of our righteousness, that is
transcendenter perfect, but also the matter, as such, as it is the matter: that
is, the subject actions and dispositions, are subjects truly capable of that
relation. All this is no more but that it is a true Righteousness, and not
equivocally or falsely so called: and so that even the matter or subject, is
really the matter or subject of such a Righteousness. 5. The form here being a
relation, in it self, admits not of degrees. 4. The matter or subject (our
dispositions and actions) though qua materia, they have the foresaid
metaphysical perfection, yet considered in it self, or considered in reference
to the mere precept of the Law, and so in its mere morality, it is imperfect.
As Schibler says, Omne perfectum est ens: and omne ens est perfectum
transcendentali, and essentiali perfectione: Duobus tamen modis adhuc possunt
entia vocari imperfecta. 1. Accidentaliter, quod scilicet desit id quod ad
integritatem vel Ornamentum, vel altiorem and intentiorem statum pertinet. Et
sub bac imperfectione etiam continetur imperfectio, quae est in defectu partium
materiae minus principalium. Nam materia pertinet ad essentialem perfectionem,
sed id completur satis secundum parts principales in toto heterogeneo, quae
sufficientes sunt ad radicandam and sustentandam formam, manifesto iudicio,
quod ablatis partibus minus principalibus, manet prior species. Veluti si homo
and careat pedibus, and brachiis and naso and oculis, adhuc tamen est homo,
etc. Atque ita per ablationem partium minus principalium nihil adhuc deest quod
pertineat ad transcendentalem perfectionem, quae essentialis est ipsius
hominis. Atque ita homo adhuc est perfect homo, and perfect ens: indeque nec
hac imperfectione tollitur perfectio transcendentalis, etc. 2. Possunt vocari
entia [Imperfecta] comparate, quod scilicet non habeant essentiam tam perfectam
and nobilem, quam alia. Ita materia est imperfecta, quia non fit, tam nobile
ens ac forma, etc. Haec igitur imperfectio iterum non tollit perfectionem
transcendentalem, quo minus transcendenter, perfecta dicantur quae sic sunt
imperfecta, l. 1. c. 1^.

In both these respects I confess and maintain that our Righteousness is
imperfect: that is 1. Our graces, holiness, obedience, good works, are
gradually imperfect, yea often numero, as well as gradu. 2. The Righteousness
which we have in or from Christ's perfect satisfaction and merits, is a
Righteousness of a more noble and perfect kind, then this inherent
Righteousness required by the Law of grace: for the later stands in
subordination to the former, as a necessary means, i. e. condition to make it
ours. Omne tamen ens est perfectum, non solum in genere entis, sed etiam in
genere talis entis, etc. Et sic etiam materia, etsi in comparatione ad alia
entia, fit satis imperfecta, tamen in suo genere habet omnino perfectionem,
neque sic deest ^i quicquam little, quae ad ipsius esse pertinent. Schib. ubi
sup. n. 7, 8.

The like doctrine has Calovius Metaphys* Divin. p. 246, etc. de perfectione,
fully: where of our imputed and inherent Righteousness, he says, Prior
denominatione extrinseca, posterior intrinseca, utraque vere, and realiter,
ipsis competit. And these are two of his Porismes, Perfectio non admittit magis
and minus: and Perfecto nihil petest accedere vel decedere. Multitudes might
quickly be cited to the same purpose with these abovesaid, but that it is so
known a case.

And thus I have done what at present I thought my duty, that it might not be
my fault that you are [in ignorance all over.] But I have said the less because
I have lately more exactly opened the nature of our Righteousness, in Answer to
the Animadversions of another Learned Brother.

You add [I never took imperfect Righteousness to imply any such
contradiction, any more then imperfect holiness.] Reply: 1. Holiness is taken
1. For [the relation of a Person or Thing dedicated to God:] and so I confess
it admits not of a magis or minus any more then Righteousness. 2. But our
common use of the word [Holiness] when about persons, is for the qualities or
actions of a spiritually-renewed man: and so I further say: 2. That this also
has its transcendental perfection, as well as Righteousness. But here is the
difference (which if you add to what is said before, you will more fully see
my thoughts.) Holiness thus taken is a quality, which though it have the truth
of Being, yet is intended and remitted, or does recipere magis and minus.
Righteousness is a relation, which in suo formali is not intended or remitted.
Nay if you will exactly open it, it will appear that the Righteousness in
question is a Relation founded in a Relation (the real conformity of our Acts
to the Law or Rule, as it determines what shall be the condition.) Yea more,
that the very subjectum proximum hujus relationis, nec intenditur nec
remittitur: and this is it that I mean by perfection, besides the foresaid
transcendental perfection. But (because these things are exactioris
indagationis) understand that the reason of this my assertion lies here: The
Law as it is the rule of obedience, does require perfect obedience in degree;
and so here is an imperfection in our actions in the degree, as being short of
what the Rule requires; and it being these actions with their habits that we
call our holiness ( ab efficiente and fine) therefore we must needs say, Our
holiness is imperfect: And if our Righteousness were to be denominated from
this Law, commanding perfection, we must say, not that such Righteousness were
imperfect, because the holiness or obedience is imperfect; but it is none at
all, because they are imperfect: For imperfect obedience or holiness is not a
subject or matter capable of the relation of [Righteous] according to that
perfect Law which condemns them, and admits only gradually-perfect
obedience, as capable matter, without which the form cannot be received. And so
our faith, repentance, and sincere Gospel-obedience, as compared to this
perfect Law, are no perfect Righteousness, nor any Righteousness at all: And so
this being the matter of our inherent Righteousness, I say, our faith and
obedience are imperfect (though not imperfect Righteousness, because none) as
thus compared. But then the Law as it is the determiner of the conditions, on
which Christ and life shall be ours, has made the matter or immediate subject,
to be in puncto, as it were, so that it cannot be more or less, because it is
the sincerity only of our faith and obedience, that is made the condition of
Life, and not the gradual perfection. So that when we must be justified, the
Question will not be, [Hast thou believed and obeyed perfectly?] but [Hast thou
done it Truly.] So that no imperfection of the matter consistent with
sincerity, makes it less capable of the form, nor no perfection of degrees
makes it capable of more of the form. The condition here is as truly performed,
by true believing and obedience, in a lower measure, as in a higher: yea and
this true performance is as full a Righteousness (in relation to this part of
the Law) as if the matter of faith and obedience were more perfect: The
strongest faith does not make you Righteous in a higher degree, then the
weakest that is true: For the strongest is but praestatio conditionis (which is
the Righteousness in question) and so is the weakest. It is not therefore from
this act of the Law (determination of the condition) that our graces or duties,
are diversified as more or less perfect in degree, but it is in respect to the
other act or part of the Law (determination of duty, as such.) So that in a
word, Duty simply as duty, and holiness, or supernatural grace, as such, may be
more or less. But holiness and duty, as the Materia requisita vel subjectum
proximum Justitiae, consistit in indivisibili.

Only let it be remembered, that I speak this of the promise of impunity and
glory everlasting absolutely considered, and not of a comparative degree of
glory: For it may be yet consistent with this, that a greater faith, love and
obedience, may have a promise of greater glory.

Remember also I pray you (if you will do me justice) 1. That I did only assert
in my Aphorisms [1. A metaphysical perfection of Being, and 2. A perfection of
sufficiency in order to its end] in our righteousness: 2. And the same
transcendental perfection of Being, I affirmed of holiness it self, only
adding, that it being a Quality may be intended and remitted, but Righteousness
being a Relation cannot ex part sui. Now which of these perfections of
Righteousness do you deny? Not that of sufficiency as to the end, as you
expressly affirm. It must therefore be the transcendental perfection of Essence.
And if that be denied, then righteousness is no righteousness: for so omne ens
perfectum est: And then you must maintain that it is but equivocally called
righteousness, but indeed is not sn. But yet this I find you not about, but
rather confess the contrary, not only by affirming inherent Righteousness, but
also affirming a double perfection of it, which you are pleased to call
subjective and objective, and which can be no less then I here affirmed.

. 29.
Mr Bl. (1) ISaiah I am sure says, All our Righteousness are as filthy rags,
Isa. 64.6. No greater charge of imperfection can lie against the most imperfect
holiness, then the Prophet lays upon our Righteousness. (2) Neither do I
understand how holiness should be imperfect taken materially, and righteousness
perfect, taken formally in reference to a Rule.

. 29.
R.B. 1. WIll not all the imperfections of our Righteousness which in the
Aphor. I asserted, serve to warrant the Prophets comparison, without our
denying the perfection of Being? That is, that it is truly Righteousness?

2. My opinion of that Text is, that the Prophet means plainly, [We are an
unrighteous people,] or [we have no other Righteousness to glory of, but what
is indeed no righteousness at all, no more then the filthy rags are clean] no
nor so much; for they may possibly have some part clean. Yet that this is
called Righteousness, is no wonder, when the next words are Negative, q. d.
[our Righteousness, is none; or is unrighteousness:] yea it is not unusual to
give the name either from common estimation, or the persons profession, and
especially from those actions which use to be the matter of Righteousness,
though the form being wanting, they are not now actually the matter. So I think
Solomon forbids overmuch Righteousness. Further, it is considerable, what
Righteousness it is that the Prophet there speaks of, whether universal or
particular? and whether Legal, consisting in absolute perfection; or
Evangelical, consisting in sincerity? and also whether he speak of himself and
each individual, or only of the Jewish Nation described according to the
generality or main part of them.

3. As for that next passage, where you tell us what [you understand not] I
confess it seems strange to me: but I hope you make it no argument against the
opinion which you oppose. If it were a good argument indeed, then the less a
man understands, the better he might dispute. But let us see what it is that
you understand not. 1. [How holiness should be imperfect taken materially?]
Sure you understand that: for what else did you mean in the foregoing words,
[No greater charge of imperfection can lie against the most imperfect
holiness?] 2. It is therefore, no doubt, the other branch that you mean, how
[Righteousness is perfect taken formally in reference to a Rule.] 1. That
Righteousness in sensu Legali and sorensi is a relation consisting in a
conformity, or congruency to the Rule, I suppose you understand, seeing both
Schoolmen, and Protestant Divines do so commonly affirm it: e. g. Scotus and Dr
Twiss often. 2. That omne ens est essentialiter perfectum, I suppose also you
understand; and so that this Relation must be a perfect Relation, or none at
all: where there is the form, there is the being; and therefore the word
[Righteousness] spoken formaliter of our Righteousness, must needs express that
which is truly Righteousness, and not equivocally so called. 3. Yea I suppose
you understand, that Relations do not admit of magis and minus ex part sui,
but only when they are founded in quality, ex part fundamenti vel subjecti: At
least if any would deny that, yet the relation in question, being of the nature
of [Parity,] and not of similitude only, (which are both implied in conformity)
does not so much as ratione fundamenti admit of intension or remission. These
things being all so generally acknowledged, you leave me only to admire that
you should say, You understand them not.

. 30.
Mr Bl. WE may (for ought I know) as well make holiness formal, and refer it
to a Rule; and Righteousness material, in an absolute consideration, without
reference to any Rule at all.

. 30.
R.B. 1. WHether you take holiness as signifying a Quality or Relation, there
is no doubt but it has its form, or else it could not have a Being? Did you
indeed imagine that I had denied that? 2. But that holiness in our common use
of the word, does formally consist in the relation of our qualities or acts to
the Law, especially in that relation of conformity, that we are now speaking
of, I find not yet proved. Holiness taken for the qualities and acts
themselves, is no relation. Holiness taken for Dedication to God, is such a
kind of Relation as Donation is: It referres to God as the terminus: For omne
sanctum est Deo sanctum. But to be [Dedicated to God] and to be [conformed to
the Law or Rule] are not all one. 3. If you or any man resolve to use holiness
in the same sense as righteousness, if I once know your minds, I will not
contradict you, for I find no pleasure in contending about words. But for my
self I must use them in the common sense, if I will be understood. 4. That you
may use the word [Righteousness] materially, without relation to any Rule, is
as much as to say, We may denominate a materia sine forma. The form is
relative. If you mean, We may denominate that which has a form, from the
matter, and not from the form, then I Reply, 1. Then you must not denominate
properly and logically: 2. And then you must not call it Righteousness; except
you mean ludere aequivocis, and speak de Justitia particulari ethica qua suum
cuique tribuimus, when we are speaking de Justitia Legali, Civili, Forensi,
called by the Schoolmen Justitia universalis in our case. I am not of the
Papists mind that make our Righteousness to be our new qualities, and confound
Justitiam and Sanctitatem, and inde Justificationem and Sanctificationem.

. 31.
Mr Bl. ANd in such consideration I do not know how there can be perfection or
imperfection either in holiness or righteousness: It is as they come up to, or
fall short of the Rule, that they have the denomination of perfection or
imperfection.

. 31.
R.B. 1. AT the first view, the first sentence seemed so strange to me, that I
thought it meetest to say nothing, because it is scarce capable of any apt
answer but what will seem sharp or unmannerly, For that which you say you may
consider, is something or nothing: If something, and yet not capable of
perfection or imperfection, it is such a something as the world never knew till
now. But upon second thoughts I find that de justitia your words may be born:
For it is nothing that you speak of. Legal Righteousness not related to the Law
or Rule, is Nothing: And Nothing cannot be more perfect or less; nisi negative.
But that holiness taken for spiritual habits and acts, can have neither
perfection or imperfection; or that they are capable of no perfection or
imperfection in any other sense, but as related; nor yet in any Relations to
God, or the person dedicating, save only in the relation to the Rule; all these
for the first reason shall have no answer but a recital.

. 32.
Mr Bl. PAul's Gospel frame, whether you will call it righteousness or holiness
is set out I am sure, Romans 7. full of imperfection; yet all this as in
reference to the Rule, as is answered, or fell short in conformity to it, verse.
22. I delight in the Law of God after the inner man.

. 32.
R. B. 1. IS not [Righteousness] or [Holiness] as Scriptural, as Logical, as
plain a term, and as fit for Disputants, as [Gospel-frame?] Till I know whether
by [Gospel-frame] you mean, Habits, Acts, Relations (and what Relations) or
what else, I shall pass it as incapable of a better Reply. 2. Did not I
acknowledge expressly as much imperfection as you here affirm of Paul^s frame?
Why then do you intimate by your arguing as if I did not? 3. There is a twofold
Rule, or action of the Law, which our Habits and Actions do respect, as I have
often said. The first is the Precept determining of Duty simply. This all our
Actions and Habits come short of, and therefore no man has a Righteousness
consisting in this conformity. The second is the promise, or that act going
along with the promise, whereby God determines of the condition. This is
twofold: One of the Law of Nature and Works; and according to this no man is
Righteous: for the condition and the duty are of the same extent, it being
obedience gradually perfect, that is here the condition. The other is of the
Law of Grace; which determines what shall be the condition of our Right to
Christ and Life. Paul never complains of an imperfection of Essence, of this
last. It is of the former that he speaks. These necessary things should not be
hidden, by confounding the several Rules, or Offices of Gods Law, which so
apparently differ.

. 33.
Mr Bl. ANd whereas a charge of ignorance is laid even upon learned Teachers,
that commonly understand the word [Righteousness] and [Righteous] as it refers
to the old Rule, I profess my self to have little of their Learning, but I am
wholly theirs in this ignorance. I know no other Rule, but the old Rule, the
Rule of the Moral Law; that i^ with me a Rule, a perfect Rule, and the only
Rule.

. 33.
R:B. EIther I am an incompetent judge, through partiality, or else you had
done but the part of a friend, yea of a candid adversary, to have taken in the
rest of my words, which must make up the sense; which were these [ As if the
godly were called Righteous (besides their imputed righteousness) only because
their sanctification and good works have some imperfect agreement to the Law of
works.] I pray let the word [ only] be remembered. 2. It is but in this one
point that I charge them with Ignorance. And who is not ignorant in more points
then one? If it be so proud and arrogant a speech as some other Brethren have
affirmed it to be, then every man is proud and arrogant that differs from
another, and disputes the difference. For I cannot differ from any man unless
I suppose him to Err: And doubtless every man is so far Ignorant as he
Erreth. Must I then differ from none? yea from no Learned Divines? Why then
when one affirms and another denies, I must be of both sides, for fear of
censuring one side as Ignorant or Erroneous. 3. I confess I was not well
acquainted with the genius of many of my Reverend and truly Honored Brethren.
I thought that no godly man would have taken himself wronged, if a man told
him, he had Error, no more then to tell him he had sin. I took it for granted
that humanum est errare, and that we know but in part, and that sanctifying
grace had so far destroyed pride, and made the soul apprehensive of its
imperfection, that, at least, men of eminent godliness could have endured
patiently to hear that they are not omniscient nor infallible, and that they
have some ignorance with their eminent knowledge? and why not in this point as
well as another? If any think that I arrogate that knowledge to my self which I
deny to them: I reply, So I do in every case wherein I differ from any man
living: For if I thought not my judgment right, it were not indeed my
judgment: and if I thought not his opinion wrong, I did not differ from him.
But if they will affirm that therefore I do either vilify them, or prefer my
self in other things, I hope they will bring better proof of their affirmation.
For my own part I unfeignedly profess my self conscious of much more ignorance
then ever I charged on any of my Brethren in the Ministry: yea I must profess
my self ignorant in a very great part of those Controversies, which are most
commonly and confidently determined by my Brethren. I speak not all this as to
Mr Bl. but to other Brethren that have made so strange an exposition of this
one word, and of one more page 51. [Vulgar Divines] as that they can thence
conclude and publish me a slighter and contemner of my Brethren: As if they
that know England, could be ignorant, that the Churches among us have many such
guides, as may well be called Vulgar Divines: Take them by number, and judge
(in those Counties that I am acquainted in) whether the greater number be of
the Profound, or Subtle, or Angelical, or Seraphical, or Irrefragable sort of
Doctors? or equal to some of these Reverend Excepters, whose worth I confess so
far beyond my measure, that had I spoke of them as Vulgar Divines, they might
well have been offended. But O that it were not true that there are such,
through most of England, Wales, and Ireland (if any) on condition I were bound
to Recant at every Market Cross in England, with a faggot on my back; so be it
there were the same number of such choice men, as some of these my offended
Brethren are in their stead. And then who knows not that the Vulgar or ordinary
weaker Teachers, do take up that opinion, which is most in credit, and which is
delivered by the most Learned Doctors whom they most reverence? So that the
sum of my speech can be no worse then this: [It is the most common opinion]
which is all one as to say [It is the opinion of the Vulgar Divines and some of
the Learned, the other part of the Learned going the other way,] which is it
that men censure for such an approbrious, injurious speech. Yet I will not
wholly excuse it, nor this that Mr Bl. touches upon. I confess it was spoken
too carelessly, unmannerly, harshly, and I should better have considered how it
might be taken.

As for Mr Blake's profession [That he has little of their Learning, but is
wholly theirs in this ignorance.] I did still think otherwise of him, and durst
not so have described him: but yet my acquaintance with him is not so great, as
that I should pretend to know him better then he knows himself; and I dare not
judge but that he speaks as he thinks. Let me be bold to show him part of that
which he says he is wholly ignorant of: That [our personal inherent
Righteousness, is not denominated from the old Law or Covenant, as if we were
called Righteous (besides our imputed Righteousness) only because our
sanctification and good works have some imperfect agreement to the Law of
Works] I prove thus:

1. If no man be called Righteous by the Law of Works, but he that perfectly
obeys (so as never to sin) then no imperfect obeyer is called Righteous (
nisi aequivoce) by that Law. But the Antecedent is true, Therefore so is the
consequent.

2. If the Law of Works do curse and condemn all men, then it does not judge
them Righteous ( nisi aequivoce.) But it does curse and condemn all men:
Therefore, etc.

3. If the Law of Works do judge us Righteous for our works (taking righteous
properly and not equivocally) then we must be justified by our works, according
to that Law: Lex (n.) est norma judicii: and omnis vere justus, est
justificandus. Justificatio Legis est virtualiter justificatio judicis. He that
condemns the Just is an abomination to God. But we must not by the Law of
Works be justified by our works: Therefore, etc.

4. He that is guilty of the breach of all Gods Laws, is not denominated
Righteous ( nisi aequivoce) by that Law: But we break all Gods Laws: Therefore.
Yea he that offends in one is guilty of all. Read Brochmond in Jac. 2.10.
and Jacob. Laurentius, and Paulus Burgensis (in Lyra) on the same Text. Vid.
and Placaeum in Thesib. Salmuriens. Vol. 1. page 29.. 13, etc. Wotton de
Reconcil. Part. 2. l. 1. c. 5. n. 16. Twiss. Vindic. Great. li. 2. part. 1. c.
15. page ( vol. minore) 214. col. 2. See whether yours or mine be the
Protestants doctrine. Here, if ever, its true, that Bonum est ex causis
integris.

5. If imperfect works are all sins or sinful, then they are not our
Righteousness according to the Law of works. (For it justifies no man for his
sins.) But the former is true: Therefore the later. I doubt not but you know
the state of the Controversy on this point, between us and the Papists.

6. If the Law of works do denominate a man righteous, for imperfect works
(which truly and properly are but a less degree of unrighteousness) then it
seems that all wicked men (if not the damned) are legally righteous: For they
committed not every act of sin that was forbidden them, and therefore are not
unrighteous in the utmost possible degree. And the Law of works does not call
one degree of obedience [Righteousness] more then another, except it be
perfect. But certainly all the wicked are not Legally Righteous ( nisi
aequivoce) Therefore, etc.

7. If our Faith, Repentance and sincere Obedience, may be, must be, and is,
called our Righteousness, as it is the performance of the conditions of the new
Covenant, or Law of Grace, then (at least) not only as they have an imperfect
agreement with the Law of Works. But the antecedent is true: Therefore the
consequent.

Let us next peruse Mr. Blake's Reasons, why [He is wholly theirs in this
ignorance.] He says [ I know no other Rule, but the old Rule, the Rule of the
moral Law; that is with me a Rule, a perfect Rule, and the only Rule.] Rep.
Sed distinguendum est. The moral Law is taken either for the entire Law of
works consisting of Precept and Sanction (and that either as it is the mere Law
of nature, or as containing also what to Adam was superadded) or else it is
taken only for the mere preceptive part of a Law, which is not the whole Law.
In the later sense, it is taken 1. For the preceptive part of the Law given to
Adam. 2. For the preceptive part of the Law of nature redelivered by Moses. 3.
For the preceptive part of the Law of nature, now used by Christ the Mediator,
as part of his own Law. 2. We must distinguish of a Rule. 1. There is the Rule
of obedience, or what shall be due from us: This is the precept (under which I
comprehend the prohibition, it being but praeceptu^^ non agendis.) 2. There is
the Rule of reward, determining what shall be due to us: This is the
conditional promise or gift, so far forth as it determines de ipso praemio. 3.
There is the Rule of punishment, determining what shall be due to man upon his
sin: This is the threatening. 4. There is the Rule of the condition of the
reward or punishment, and of judging to whom they do belong, determining on
what conditions or terms on their parts, men shall be saved, or else damned;
(though the same acts were before commanded in the precept as they are duties,
yet to constitute them conditions of the promise, is a further thing.) This is
the promise and threatening, as they are conditional, or as they constitute
their own conditions. I think the solidity and great necessity of all these
distinctions, is beyond Dispute. These things being thus, 1. What confusion is
it to talk of the moral Law being the only Rule, when it is not one thing that
is called the moral Law? and who knows what you mean? 2. How strange a thing is
it to my ears, that you, even you, should so wholly own this, and so heartily
profess that you take the Moral Law for the only Rule? For suppose you take it
for the preceptive part of the Law of nature only (as I think you do:) 1. That
is but part of that very Law of nature: Does not the Law of nature, as well as
the positive Law, determine de Debito paenae, as well as de Debito officii? and
is a Rule of punishment as well as duty. 2. Or if you took it for the whole Law
of nature, is that the only Rule? 1. What say you for matter of duty, to the
positive Precepts of the Gospel? of Baptism, the Lords Supper, the Lords day,
the Officers and Government of the Church, etc. Is the Law of nature the only
Rule for these? If you say, They are reducible to the second Commandment: I
demand 1. What is the second Commandment for the Affirmative part, but a
general precept to worship God according to his Positive Institution? And does
this alone suffice? Does it not plainly imply that there are and must be
positive Laws instituting a way of worship? 2. Do you take the Precept de
genere, to be equivalent to the Precepts de speciebus? or to be a sufficient
Rule without them? If the Moral Law, or Law of Nature, be to you, the only
Rule, and a perfect Rule, then you need no other. And if God had only written
the ten Commandments, or only said in general, [Thou shall worship God
according to his positive Institutions] would it have been your duty to have
Baptized, administered the Lords Supper? etc. Does the general Precept
constitute this particular Ordinance as my duty? If not (as nothing more
certain) then the general Law, is not the only Rule, nor sufficient in omni
part (though sufficient in suo genere, and ad partem propriam) for the
constitution of Worship, Ordinances, Church, Offices, etc. or acquainting us
with our duty therein. Moreover, did Christ in Instituting these Ordinances and
Officers, do any more then was done before, or not? If no more, 1. It is
superfluous. 2. Show where it was done before. 3. Sure the fourth Commandment
did not at once command both the seventh day of the week and the first. If
more, then the former was not sufficient, nor is now the only Rule.

Moreover, does not the Scripture call Christ a Lawgiver? and say, The Law
shall go out of Zion, etc. Isa. 2.3. And is he not the Anointed King of the
Church; and therefore has Legislative power? And will he not use the principal
part of his Prerogative?

2. I think the Moral Law, taken either for the Law given to Adam or written in
Tables of stone, is not a sufficient Rule to us now for believing in Jesus
Christ; no nor the same Law of nature, as still in force under Christ. For a
general command of believing all that God revea^ (...), is not the only Rule of
our faith; but the particular revelation and precept are part. And a general
command to submit to what way God shall prescribe for our justification and
salvation, is not the only Rule, but that particular prescript is part. And a
general command of receiving every offered benefit, is not the only or
sufficient Rule for receiving Christ, without the Gospel-offer of him and his
benefits.

3. And I suppose you grant that as man's soul has an understanding and a will,
the former being a passage to the later, in the former practical receptions
being but initiate and imperfect, and in the later perfected; so Laws have
their prefaces declaring the grounds and occasions of them, often times; and so
the Laws of God have their Narratives, Histories and Doctrines, concerning the
grounds, the subject, the occasion, etc. as well as the more essential parts,
viz. Precepts and Sanction. These I spoke not of before in the distinctions.
Now do you indeed think that the Law of nature, or what ever you now mean by
the old Rule and Moral Law, is the sufficient and only Rule of Knowledge,
Judgment and Faith? I take it for granted that you will acknowledge the
assenting act of faith to be in the understanding: and that the Word of God is
the rule of this assent. Had you in the old Rule or Moral Law, a sufficient and
only Rule for your faith, in the Article of Christ's Incarnation, Birth, Life,
Innocence, Miracles, Death, Burial, Resurrection, Assension, full Dominion in
his humane nature? etc. Was this Article in the Creed before Christ's coming [
Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins?] Besides, matter
of faith is also matter of duty: for it is our duty to believe all these
Truths. But I think it was then no man's duty to believe that this Jesus the son
of Mary was the Savior, before he was Incarnate; or to believe that Christ was
Dead, Ascended, etc. Therefore that which you call the Old Rule, is not as you
say the Only Rule of our Duty in Believing.

4. But what if all this had been left out, and you had proved the Moral Law,
the only Rule of duty? does it follow that therefore it is the only Rule? Sure
it is not the only Rule of rewarding! For if you take the Moral Law, for the
mere preceptive part of the Law of nature, then it is no Rule at all of
rewarding; for it is the promise, and not the precept that does make due the
reward. And if you take the moral Law for the whole Law of nature, it is a very
great Dispute whether it be Regula pramiandi at all; much more as to that great
reward which is now given in the Law of grace by Christ (your self deny it,
page 74.) I dare not say that if we had perfectly obeyed, Everlasting Glory in
Heaven had been naturally our due. And for Remission of sin, and the
Justification of a sinner, and such like, they are such mercies, as I never
heard the Law of nature, made the only Rule of our right to them.

5. The same I may say of the Rule of punishment. The privation of a purchased,
offered Remission and Salvation, is one part of the penalty of the new Law, of
which the Moral Law can scarce be said the only Rule. ( None of them that were
bidden shall taste of the Supper.

6. But the principal thing that I intend, is that the Moral Law is not the
only Rule what shall be the condition of Life or Death: and therefore not the
only Rule according to which we must now be denominated, and hereafter
sentenced Just or Unjust. For if the accuser say He has not performed the
conditions of the Law of grace, and therefore has no right to Christ and Life]
or say simply that [we have no right to Remission and Salvation;] if we can
deny the charge, and produce our performance of the said conditions, we are
then non-condemnandi, and the Law of grace, which gives Christ and Life on
those conditions, will justify us against that charge, of having no right to
Christ and Life: But I think so will not the Moral Law. The Law of works
justifies no man but Christ: therefore it is not the Law of works by which we
are to be justified in judgment. But some Law we must be justified by: for the
Law is the Rule of judgment: and the word that Christ has spoken shall judge
us: therefore it must be by the perfect Law of Grace and Liberty. If it be then
said against us that we are sinners against the Law of nature; we shall all
have an answer ready [Christ has made sufficient satisfaction.] But if it be
said that we have no right to the pardon and righteousness which is given out
by virtue of that satisfaction, then it is the Law of Grace, and not the Moral
Law, that must justify us: Even that Law which says [ Whosoever believes
shall not perish, etc.] Moreover does not the Apostle say plainly, that [
Christ is the Mediator of a better Covenant, established on better promises:
and if that first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been
sought for the second: but finding fault with them he says, Behold the days
come says the Lord that I will make a new Covenant, etc.] Heb. 8.6, 7, 8.
which speaks not only of Ceremonial precepts, but principally of the promisory
part.

If you should say, This is the Covenant and not the law. I Reply 1. Then the
law is not the only Rule. 2. Its the same thing in several respects that we
call a Law and a Covenant (except you mean it of our Covenant act to God, of
which we speak not.) Who knows not that praemiare and punire are acts of a Law?
and that an act of oblivion or general pardon on certain terms, is a Law: and
that the promise is the principal part of the Law of grace. So that I have now
given you some of my Reasons, why I presumed to call that [Ignorance] which I
did not then know that you would so Wholly own.

. 34.
Mr Bl. THe perfection of this holiness and righteousness in man's integrity,
stood in the perfect conformity to this Law; and the reparation of this in our
regenerate estate (in which the Apostle places the Image of God) must have
reference as to God for a pattern, so to his Law as a Rule.

. 34.
R.B. 1. IT was the very transcendentall perfection which is convertible with
its being (as to Righteousness) which then stood in a perfect conformity to the
Law. Adam after his first sin, was not only less righteous, but reus mortis,
condemnandus, and not righteous in sensu forensi according to that Law For I
hope you observe that we speak not of that called Moral Righteousness,
consisting in a habit of giving every man his own: but of Justitia forensis.

2. There is a partial reparation of our holiness in regeneration, but no
reparation of our personal inherent legal Righteousness at all. Is
Righteousness by the Law of works? I take this for dangerous doctrine.

. 35.
Mr. Bl. AS an Image carrying an imperfect resemblance of its Samplar, is an
Image; so conformity imperfectly answering the Rule, is conformity likewise.

. 35.
R.B. 1. EIther that Image is like the Samplar (as you call it) in some parts
and unlike in others, or else it is like in no part, but near to like. If the
later, then it is but near to a true Image of that thing, and not one indeed.
If the former, then it is nothing to our case. 1. Because it is Justitia
universalis, and not particularis, that according to the Law of works must
denominate the person righteous, and not-condemnable. 2. Because indeed no one
word, action, or thought of ours is truly conform to the Law of works.

2. Similitude, as Schibler tells you truly, does lie in puncto as it were, and
ex part sui admits not of magis or minus: and therefore stricte and
philosophice loquendo (says he) that only is simile, which is perfectly so:
but vulgariter loquendo that is called simile, which properly is but minus
dissimile. Scripture speaks vulgariter often, and not stricte and philosophice,
as speaking to vulgar wits, to whom it must speak as they can understand. And
so that may be called the Image or likeness of God, which participated of so
much of his excellency as that it demonstrateth it to others, as the effect
does its cause, and so is less unlike God. I dare not once imagine, that a
Saint in heaven is like God in a strict and proper sense.

3. If all this were otherwise, it is little to your purpose. For in this
conformity of ours, there is something of Quantitative resemblance, as well as
Qualitative; and so it has a kind of parity and equality in it, as well as
similitude to the Rule. And I hope you will yield it past doubt, that parity
admits not of magis and minus, what ever similitude does.

. 36.
Mr Bl. SIncerity is said to be the new Rule, or the Rule of the new Covenant.
But this is no rule, but our duty, taking the abstract for the concrete,
sincerity, for the sincere walking, and this according to the rule of the Law,
not to reach it, but in all parts to aim at, and have respect to it. Then shall
I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. And
this is our inherent righteousness, which in reference to its rule, labors
under many imperfections.

. 36.
R. B. WHen I first read these words, which you write in a different
character, and father on me, I was ashamed of my nonsense, for they are no
better: but it came not into my thoughts, once to suspect a forgery in your
charge: Far was I from imagining that so Reverend, Pious and Dear a Friend,
would tell the world in Print, that I said that which never came into my
thoughts, and confute that soberly and deliberately, as mine, which I never
wrote; and which any man that would read my Book might find, is wrongfully
charged on me. And truly I dare not yet say that you are guilty of this: For
though I have read my Book over and over of purpose in those parts that treat
of this subject, and can find no such word as you here charge me with; yet
before I will lay such a thing to your charge, I will suspect that it may
possibly be in some odd corner where I overlookt it, or cannot find it. But I
see (if I am not overseen) how unsafe it is to report men's words themselves,
much more their opinions, from the reports of another, how Grave, Sober, Pious
and Friendly soever. If when we are dead, men shall read Mr. Blake's Book that
never read mine, and there see it written that I said [Sincerity is the new
Rule, or the rule of the new Covenant.] Can any blame them to believe it, and
report it of me, as from him, and say [ What, shall I not believe such and such
a man, that reports it in express words?] But let this go, with this
conclusion: If indeed I have spoken any such words, I retract them as
nonsense, and when I find them I shall expunge them: If I have not, patience
is my duty and relief; and I have long been learning, that we must suffer from
Godly and Friends, as well as from ungodly and enemies; and till I had learned
that lesson, I never knew what it was to live quietly and contentedly.

The rest of this Section has answer enough already. No doubt but sincere
obedience consists in a faithful endeavor to obey the whole preceptive part
of Gods Law, both natural and positive: But no man can by it be denominated
righteous ( nisi aequivoce) but he that perfectly obeys in degree.

. 37.
Mr Bl. A Perfection of sufficiency to attain the end, I willingly grant, God
condescending through rich grace, to crown weak obedience: in this sense, our
imperfection has its perfectness: otherwise I must say that our inherent
righteousness is an imperfect righteousness, in an imperfect conformity to the
rule of righteousness, and without this reference to the rule, there is
neither perfection nor imperfection in any action. See D. Davenant disputing
against Justification by inherent righteousness upon the account of the
imperfection of it, de instit. habit. p. 349. and how fully he was persuaded of
the imperfection of this righteousness appears by sentences prefixed before two
Treatises, as may be seen in the margent.

. 37.
R.B. 1. YOur term [otherwise] is ambiguous. If you mean that in some other
respects you take righteousness to be imperfect, so do I, and that a little
more then you acknowledge. If you mean that in [all] other respects you take
this righteousness to be imperfect; why then do you wrong your Reader with
equivocation, in calling it [Righteousness] when you know that transcendental
perfection is convertible with its Being? 2. A natural perfection or
imperfection, actions are capable of without a relation to the Rule: though
that be nothing to our business, yet you should not conclude so largely. 3.
Many a School Divine has Written (and Gibie^f at large) that our actions are
specified a fine, and denominated Good or Evil, and so perfect or imperfect a
fine more specially and principally, then a Lege. But this requires more
subtilty and accurateness for the decision, then you or I in these loose
Disputes do show our selves guilty of.

As for what you say from Reverend Davenant, I Reply, 1. Do you not observe
that I affirm that which you call Our righteousness inherent, to be imperfect,
as well as Bishop Davenant, and that in more respects then one? yet one would
think by your words that you had a mind to intimate the contrary. 2. Yea I say
more, that in reference to the Law of works, our works are no true
righteousness at all: And I think he that says, They are no righteousness,
says as little for them, as he that says they are an imperfect righteousness.
Yet, if the truth were known, I do not think but both Davenant, and you and I
agree in sense, and differ only in manner of speaking. My sense is this: Our
obedience to the Law of God is so imperfect, that we are not just but guilty,
and condemnable in the sense of the Law of works: therefore speaking strictly,
we are not righteous at all in sensu forensi according to this Law: but
speaking improperly, and giving the denomination a materia, or ab accidente
aliqua, and non a forma, so we may be said to have an imperfect legal
righteousness, while equivocally we call him just, that is but comparatively
less unjust then another. For though righteousness in sensu forensi, have no
degrees, yet unrighteousness has many. 3. And I suppose you know that Bishop
Davenant does not only say as much as I concerning the interest of works in
Justification, but also speaks it in the very same notions as I did. If you
have not observed it, I pray read him de Just. Hab. and Act. cap. 30. page
384. etc. 31. p. 403, 404, 405. and 570, 571, 572, 633.

And then I would ask you but this Question: If the accusation charge us to
have no right in Christ and Life, because we died unbelievers and impenitent,
or rebels against Christ; must not we be justified against that accusation, by
producing our faith, repentance, and sincere obedience it self? and if so (then
which nothing more certain) are not these then so far our righteousness
against that accusation to be pleaded? And if it be not a true righteousness,
and metaphysically perfect, and such as will perfectly vindicate us against the
accusation of being prevalently and finally unbelievers, impenitent or rebels
against Christ, there is no Justification to be hoped for from the Judge, but
condemnation to endless misery.

Moreover, the Thesis that Davenant proves in the Chapter which you cite, is
inhaerentem justitiam non esse causam formalem justificationis nostrae coram
Deo. And if that be true, then it is impossible that it should have the formal
reason of righteousness in it. For if there be vera forma, there must needs be
the formatum, and he that has true formal rigteousness, must needs be thereby
constituted Righteous, or justified constitutive, and then he must needs be
sentenced Just, who is Just.

But then note that Davenant speaks of that universal righteousness, whereby we
are justified against the accusation of being sinners condemnable by the Law of
works; (and here Christ's satisfaction is our righteousness) and not of that
particular Righteousness whereby we must be justified against the accusation of
final nonperformance of the conditions of the Covenant or Law of grace: For
there it is the performance of those conditions, which must it self be our
righteousness, and so far justify us.

Doctor Twisse against Doctor Jackson, page 687. says, [ Yet I willingly grant
that every sin is against Gods good will and pleasure, as it signifies his
pleasure what shall be our duty to do; which is nothing else but his
commandment. And it is as true that herein are no degrees; every sin is equally
against the Commandment of God.] I think I may with much more evidence of truth
and necessity, say it as I did of Personal Gospel-righteousness, then he can do
of sin. And so much be spoken of that Controversy.

. 38. How far unbelief and impenitency in professed Christians are Violations
of the New Covenant.
R.B. Mr. Bl. page 245. c. 33. does lay down a Corollary, That Impenitence and
Unbelief in professed Christians, is a breach of Covenant. Though I take that
to be intended as against me, yet I am uncertain, because he recites no words
of mine. I have no more to do in this therefore but to clear my own meaning. 1.
The word [Covenant] is sometime taken for Gods Law made to his creature,
containing Precepts, Promises and Threatenings: Sometime for man's promise to
God. [Violation] is taken either rigidly for one that in judgment is esteemed
a non performer of the conditions: Or laxly, for one that in judgment is found
a true performer of the conditions, but did neglect or refuse the performance
for a time. Taking the word [Covenant] in the later sense, I have affirmed that
man breaks many a Covenant with God, yea even the Baptismal vow it self is so
broken, till men do truly repent and believe. But taking the word append
[Covenant] in the former sense, and [Violation] in the stricter sense, I say
that so none violate the Covenant but final unbelievers and impenitent; that
is, no other are the proper subjects of its peremptory curse or threatening. I
think not my self called to give any further answer to that Chapter of Mr.
Blakes.

R. B. Mr. Blake's 32. Chap. I take to be wholly against me, and though I know
nothing in it that I have not sufficiently answered, either in the place of my
Book of Baptism, whence he fetches my words, Whether justifying faith be
prerequisite to Baptism.
in the Appendix in the Animadversions on Doctor Ward, or before to Mr. Tombs,
yet because I take it to contain doctrine of a very dangerous nature, I will
more fully Answer it.

. 39. Mr Bl. Chapter 32. A Dogmatical faith entitles to Baptism.
3. IT further follows by way of Consectary, that a Dogmatical faith
(ordinarily called by the name of faith Historical, such that assents to Gospel
truths, though not affecting the heart to a full choice of Christ, and
therefore was short of faith which was justifying and saving) gives title to
Baptism. The Covenant is the ground on which Baptism is bottomed: otherwise
Church Membership would evince no title, either in infants or in men of years
to Baptism: But the Covenant (as we have proved) is entered with men of faith
not saving: and therefore to them Baptism is to be administered. How the
consequent can be denied by those that grant the antecedent; Baptism denied in
foro Dei, to men short of saving faith, when they are in Covenant, I cannot
imagine: Yet some that confess their interest in the Covenant, deny their title
to Baptism, and affirm, [If men be once taught that it is a faith, that is
short of justifying and saving faith, which admits men to Baptism, it will
make foul work in the Church.

. 39*
R. B. BEfore I give a direct Reply to these words, I think it necessary that I
I tell you, How far I take Unregenerate men to be in Covenant with God, and
how far not: and that I also discover as far as I can Mr. Blake's mind in
this Point; that it may be known wherein the difference lies.

The [Covenant] is sometime taken for Gods part alone, sometime for our part
alone, sometime for both conjunct, even for a mutual Covenanting. As it is
taken for Gods act, it signifies 1. Either some absolute promise of God, made
1. Either to Christ concerning men, or on their behalf (and so the elect may be
said to be in Covenant before they are born, because Christ has a promise that
they shall be saved, and the non-elect are in Covenant before they are born,
because Christ has a promise of some good to them.) 2. Or to men themselves:
And that is either 1. Common, or 2. Peculiar to some. 1. Common: as the promise
made to fallen mankind that a Savior should be sent to Redeem them. The
promise made to the people of Israel that the Messiah should be of them
according to the ^^esh, and personally live among them, and preach the Gospel
to them. The promise made to Noah and the world, that the earth should no more
be drowned with water: The promise of preaching the Gospel to all Nations
(which is common, though not absolutely universal:) the promise of a
Resurrection to all the world, and that they shall be judged by Christ the
Redeemer, and (at least those that heard the Gospel) on the terms of the new
Law, and not on the mere rigorous terms of the Law of entire nature: the
promise of a fuller and clearer promulgation and explication of the Law of
grace, when Christ should come in the flesh: the promise of a fuller measure of
the Spirit to be poured out, for Miracles to confirm the Christian Doctrine to
the beholders, hearers and actors; that there shall be a Ministry Commissioned
to Disciple and Baptize all Nations, maintained to the end of the world (which
gives Ministers right and authority to Baptize them;) and if there be any other
the like promise of the means necessarily anteceding faith. Thus far many
thousands that are unregenerate, and non-elect, may be said to be in Covenant,
that is under these promises. 2. Some of these absolute promises are peculiar
to some: as to one Sex (though common as to that Sex) as the man's superiority:
to one Age: to one Degree in order of nativity (as to the elder brother to have
some superiority over the younger, Genesis 4.7.) to one Nation, as to the
Israelites were made many peculiar promises; and those before mentioned which I
called common as to all Israel, were peculiar to them (some of them) in
exclusion of other Nations. And some to particular persons, good or bad: as for
success in battle, or other enterprises; for aversion of some threatened
judgment; for the abating of some inflicted punishment; for some temporal or
common blessing; of which sort we find many particular promises which God by
some Prophet made with particular men. In all these respects I say wicked men
have been under a promise, yea men not elect to salvation: and thus far they
may be said to be in Covenant with God. But this is but a lax and improper
speech, to say (such are in Covenant) to be used now among Christians that have
used to give the name [Covenant] by an excellency, to another thing. Also now
wicked men are not under peculiar personal promises of temporal things, as then
they were, because now there are no extraordinary Prophets, or other the like
Messengers o^ Revelations from God to make such particular promises to men.
(Yet I will not say God has restrained himself from this, or cannot, or will
not do it at all, or that no man has such Revelations; but only 1. That it is
not usual. 2. Nor is God engaged to do it.)

So for the absolute promise of the first special grace (first faith and
repentance) to be given to all the Elect (supposing that there is such a
promise:) this is made to none but the ungodly and unregenerate, though elect
(unless you will say, it is made to Christ for them, or rather is a prediction
of good eventually to be conferred on them.)

But though in all these respects wicked men are under a promise, yet it is
none of all these that gives them right to Baptism. There is no question of any
but the last: and for that I have proved in my Appendix against Mr. Bedford,
that it is not that Covenant that Baptism seals, Whither I refer you to avoid
Repe^i^ion: much more easy is it to prove, that it is not that bare promise
that gives right to Baptism. For many are Pagans and Infidels to whom that
promise belongs. So much for the Absolute promise.

2. As for Conditional promises to man, they are either

1. Peculiar: as extraordinary promises of temporal blessings conditionally
made to some particular persons heretofore. Of these I say, as of the former:
Wicked men may be under such promises; but these give not right to Baptism.

2. Common: such as are not made to this or that man more then others, but to
all, at least in the tenor of the grant, though it be not promulgate to all.
Of this sort 1. Some suppose certain promises to go before the great Law of
grace. 2. But I yet know not of any but the Law of grace it self, (anon to be
described.) 1. Those that do suppose some such antecedaneous promise, are of
two sorts: 1. The Arminians and Jesuits. 2. Such as Mr. Blake about
Church-Ordinances. 1. The Jesuits and Arminians speak of two such common
promises. 1. One is of the giving of supernatural means of Revelation, to men,
on condition of the right use of natural Revelation. As if God had promised to
all Heathen and Infidels that never heard of Christ, that they shall have the
Gospel sent them, if they will use the light of nature well, or will seek out
for the Gospel. 2. The other promise which they imagine is, that God will give
supernatural or special grace ( viz. the first grace of faith and repentance)
to men, on condition they will use well their common grace and means. I know of
no such promise as either of these in Scripture (of which see Davenant in his
Dissertation of Universal Redemption.) When any Arminian will show such a
promise in Scripture, we shall yield. But yet I will tell you how far I yield.
1. I yield that God does actually give temporal blessings to wicked men: But
this is no Covenant or promise. Yet it gives them a right to enjoy them de
praesenti while they do enjoy them; so that it is not sound Doctrine of them
that say, Wicked men have no right to the creature, in whatsoever they possess,
and that they are but usurpers. For if you see one naked in the street, and put
him on a garment; he has right to wear that and enjoy it, while you permit
him: But yet because you promise him nothing for the future, he is not certain
a moment of the continuance of that right or possession, for you may take it
off him again when you will. So wicked men have right and possession of Gods
mercies by actual collation de praesenti, but not by promise de futuro, or by
such proper donation, as gives them the full propriety (for so God uses not to
part with the propriety of his creatures to any.) 2. I yield that God does give
to Heathens, who have but natural light, some helps which have a tendency to
their further advancement, and does appoint them certain means to be used for
the obtaining of a higher light, and that he gives them sufficient
encouragement to go on in the cheerful use of those means, in possibilities
and probabilities of success; so that they are unexcusable that use them not.
These Mr. Cotton calls half promises (as who knows but the Lord may do thus and
thus? Pray therefore if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee,
etc.) But promises properly they are not. God has thought meet to keep himself
disengaged from this sort of men. 3. The very same I yield of men in the
visible Church using common grace, as well as they can: that is, that God has
appointed certain means which such men are to use for the getting of special
grace: that those that perish, do justly perish, for not using those means so
well as they could, and so for not believing: that he has given them
sufficient encouragement to use such means by examples, experiences, the nature
of the means, and some half promises of success: but no promise properly so
called. 4. I yield that he actually gives saving grace to wicked men: or else
none could have it. But this they can plead no right to before they have it.

2. The second sort of promises before the great Covenant of grace, is feigned
by Mr. Blake (and if there be any other that go that way, as some do, and that
with some difference among themselves:) and that is A promise of
Church Priviledges upon condition of a faith not justifying or saving. Here
some annex special grace to these Church Priviledges, and so fall into the
Arminian strain. So Dr. Ward against Mr. Gataker, does make a common
(not-justifying) faith, the condition of Baptism, and then that Baptism a means
non ponenti obicem of the certain Justification of all the Baptized, and so, at
least, the infants of all common professors, baptized, should be certainly
justified. But I find not Mr. Blake any where owning this connection of special
grace, and efficacy of Baptism on such: therefore I suppose it is but some
common mercies that he supposes this promise to make over to the Baptized. But
I will enquire further into his opinion anon.

2. The common or general promise-conditional, which I acknowledge, is the new
Law of grace, or of faith, wherein God promises [to be our God, so we will
take him for our God, and will be his people] and [to give us Christ and Life,
if we will accept him as he is offered in the Gospel] or [that he that
repents and believes, shall be justified and saved] and he that does not
shall be damned: Whereto is also annexed, the promise of temporal mercies, so
far as they are good for us; as appurtenances to the main blessings of the
Covenant. Now I will tell you how far wicked men are under this great promise
or Covenant, 1. As it is a conditional promise on Gods part, or a Law of grace
enacted conditionally giving Christ and Life to all men, so All men are under
it, or the subjects of it: that is, All the whole world, as to the tenor of
the Law of grace, following the mere enacting; and all that hear the Gospel, as
to the promulgation. 2. So as it has a precept conjunct, requiring them to
believe and repent for remission and salvation, so all are under it, that hear
it. 3. So are they as to the annexed threatening upon their unbelief and
impenitency. 4. So as the Preachers of the Gospel do by Commission from Christ,
apply all this to them, and entreat them by name to repent and believe, and
offer them Christ and the other benefits of the Covenant, if they will repent
and believe; so wicked men are still under the promise or Covenant, as to the
Nunciative offers and exhortations, which is somewhat more then a mere
Promulgation of it as a Law. All these ways, or in these respects, I yield
that wicked men, or unregenerate men, may be under promise, or Gods Covenant.
But this is not strictly to [be in Covenant:] nor is this it that the right of
Baptism belongs to: For all this belongs not only to Pagans, but even to
obstinate Pagans that persecute this Gospel, and draw out the blood of those
that thus Preach it to them: whom I suppose, few Divines Judge meet subjects
for Baptism.

And thus we have spoken of Gods act in the conditional promise, before the
condition be performed by man, and so before Gods promise do actually confer
right to the sinner. As for the act of Gods Covenant afterward, I shall speak
of it anon.

2. Having said thus much of Gods act of promise or Covenant, and seen how far
the wicked may be said to be under that promise or Covenant, we must next
consider of their own promise to God, or the act of Covenanting on their own
part. Man's Covenanting with God, or his entering the Covenant of God propounded
to him, is either 1. to be considered in respect of the efficient; 2. or of the
object. As to the efficient, it is either 1. The act of the whole man* i.e. of
mind and body: 2. Or of part only: and that 1. either of the mind alone: 2.
or of the outward man alone. 2. Objectively considered, it is either 1. A true
proper consent agreeable to the formal object (or to the object in its
absolute necessary respects and nature.) 2. Or it is an imperfect consent,
analogically or equivocally called [Covenanting] when it is not suited to the
formal nature of the object. This error is 1. About the object simply in it
self considered. 2. About the object comparatively considered: as God compared
with the creature. And both or either of these errors is 1. Either in the
intellect: when it does not understand the nature of the object, and Gods terms
on which only he offers his blessings; or at least does not practically
understand it, but speculatively only. 2. Or of the Will: when it does not
really consent to the object, and terms of God, though they be understood, at
least, speculatively. 3. Or it is, both the error of the understanding and the
will.

Having thus necessarily distinguished, I will lay down in these Conclusions,
how far man is in Covenant with God as to his own act. 1. Man may oblige
himself by Vows to particular duties, that are not of the substance of the
Covenant, and yet be wicked. 2. Yea man may oblige himself to things
indifferent, and some think to evil, as Jeptha, so far as to ensnare himself in
a necessity of sinning, whether he perform it or not. 3. That which God
requires of man on his part, as a necessary condition, to his right in the
benefits promised by God, and that God may be, as it were, obliged actually to
man, is the sincere resolved consent of the Heart or Will. 4. Yet he requires
for several reasons, that the external profession of consent be added, where
there is capacity and opportunity. 5. God does as absolutely require to our
participation of his blessings, and that his Covenant may be in force actually
to give us right to them, and he, as it were, obliged to give us the things
promised, that we understand the absolutely necessary part of the object of our
consent, or acceptance; and that with a practical knowledge. 6. As absolutely
does he require that we do really consent according to that practical
understanding. 7. It is essential to God as the object of man's faith, to be his
supreme Lord and Rector as Creator, and his ultimate end and chiefest good: and
so must he be apprehended and willed by all that indeed take him for their God:
as also to be perfect in Being, Wisdom, Goodness and Power, and of perfect
Veracity. 8. It is essential to Christ as the object of our faith, to be
God-man, that in our nature has Ransomed us, by the Sacrifice of himself on
the Cross for us, and Died, and Rose again, and is now Ascended in Glory with
the Father, and is Lord of us all, and will Judge according to his Word to
Everlasting Joy or Punishment. 9. It is essential to the object of our faith,
as such, to be considered comparatively. As that God be taken not only as our
good, but our chief Good, to be preferred before every creature: that he be
taken not only as our Lord, but as Sovereign Lord, to be obeyed before all
other: that Christ be taken for our only Savior, and for our Lord-Redeemer, to
be also obeyed before all creatures; particularly before and against the devil,
the flesh, and the world. 10. Where these essentials are not in the
apprehension of the object, there is not truly the consent, or faith, or
covenanting which God has made the condition of his Promise; and therefore
such are said (as to the Faith, Consent and Covenant so required) but
equivocally or analogically to Consent, Covenant or Believe: when truly and
properly it is to be said, that they do not Consent or Covenant. Consent has
relation to the offer: and if it be not the offered thing that is consented to
but somewhat else under that name, then it is not indeed Consent: for there is
no Relate without its Correlate. Covenanting (in the present sense) implies
Gods propounded Covenant and terms. For our entering the Covenant, is not a
Making of terms, but an Accepting of the terms made to our hands and tendered
(with a command to accept them.) Now if we do not consent to the same terms
propounded, it is truly no Accepting, nor no Covenanting: For God never offered
to enter into Covenant on such terms, and that which was never offered, cannot
be properly accepted; nor can we Covenant with God in a mutual Covenant, on
terms contrary to those which he propounded. The Civil Law says, Ignorantis
non est Consensus. A God that is inferior to creatures in Rule, or in Goodness
and Desirableness, is not God indeed. And therefore he that takes God in this
sense for his God, takes but the Name of God, and not God himself, but an Idol
of his brain. A Christ that is only a Justifier and not a King and Governor,
is not the Christ that is offered us of God; and therefore no man is called to
accept such a Christ. To err therefore about the very essence of the Object,
as such, is to null the Act, it can be no Consent or Covenant or Acceptance
truly at all, but equivocally only. 11. The same may be said of counterfeit
Covenanting, when it is only ore tenus, with the mouth and not the heart. 12.
Yet may an oral counterfeit Covenanting oblige the party to the duty promised
(in our case) though it give him no right to the benefit offered, nor is God as
it were obliged to perform his Covenant to such. 13. The like may be said of
the foresaid equivocal erroneous Consenting, Accepting, Covenanting. If the
error be through the fault of the man himself, his act may oblige himself,
though God remain disobliged, and though he have no right to the thing promised
by God. Thus much I thought meet to say, for the opening of that branch of the
Question, How far men unregenerate may be in Covenant, as to their own act.

But the great Question is yet behind, Whether these men be in Covenant with
God, as to Gods actual engagement to them: so far as that Gods premise is in
force for conveying actual right to them as to the promised blessings? and so
whether it be a mutual Covenant, and both parties be actually obliged? And thus
I say that wicked men are not in Covenant with God, that is; God is not in
Covenant with them: Neither have they any right to the main blessings given by
the Covenant, viz. Christ, Pardon, Justification, Adoption, Glory: Nor yet to
the common blessings of this Covenant, for they are given by the same Covenant
and on the same conditions as the special blessings: So that though they may
have right to them at present on the ground of Gods present collation, or
trusting them with them (as a servant has in his Masters stock) yet have they
no right by Covenant: For it is Godliness that has the promise of this life,
and of that to come, as being the condition of both; and it is seeking first
Gods Kingdom and Righteousness, that is the condition on which other things
shall be added to us. The same holds of Church Priviledges and Ordinances quoad
possessionens not proper to the faithful.

So that in the conclusion, I say, that though wicked men have many promises
from God, especially the great conditional promise of Life, if they will repent
and believe; and though they are also obliged by their own imperfect, equivocal
Covenanting with God; yet God remains still unobliged to them, and they have
no actual right to the benefits of his promise; because they have not performed
the condition of their first right, that is, have not Covenanted truly with
God, or entered the Covenant which he propounded; having not consented to his
terms, nor accepted Christ and Life as offered in the Gospel: And therefore it
is the most proper language to say, that none but sincere believers are in
Covenant with God: For the rest have but equivocally Covenanted with God, and
God not actually engaged in Covenant with them (for while the condition is
unperformed there is no actual obligation on the promises) and so it is no
proper mutual Covenant. And consequently these men in proper strict sense, are
no true Christians, but analogically only.

Yet because we have no access to their hearts, and therefore must judge of the
heart by the profession and outward signs, therefore we must judge these
probably to Covenant with the heart, who do profess to do so with the tongue;
and those to Covenant entirely and without error in the essentials, who
profess so to do: and therefore we must judge them probably to be true
Christians, and truly godly men (till they retract that profession by word or
deed:) and therefore we must judge them probably to be truly in Covenant with
God, and such as God is, as it were, obliged to justify: and therefore we must
give them the name of Christians, and men in Covenant with God: and therefore
we must use them as Christians in works of charity, and in Ordinances, and
Church communion: and so must use their children as Christians children. The
warrant for this usage and Judgment, I must desire the Reader to take notice
of, in what I have written to Mr Tombs Objections on 1 Cor. 7.14. and to Dr.
Ward, and against Mr. Tombs Precursor more fully: For to repeat all here again
would be tedious and unnecessary. When Christ says to us, [ If a Brother
repent, forgive him] here by [Repenting] does Christ mean plainly Repenting, or
the profession of it? No doubt, repenting it self. Why, but how can we that
know not the heart, know here when our Brother repents? Will Mr. Bl. say
therefore that none is obliged to forgive? Rather we know that man must judge
him to repent that professes so to do: and therefore forgive him that
professes it. Not because professing was the assigned requisite condition: but
a sign of that condition: and therefore we are to accept of no profession, but
what probably signifies true repentance. For if we knew a man dissembled, or
jeered us in professing repentance, we are not bound to do by him as a
penitent. So God commands us to love and honor them that fear the Lord, that
are faithful, that love Christ, etc. But we know not who these be: Are we
therefore disobliged from loving and honoring them? Or will Mr. Bl. say that
we must not honor them, lest we mistake and give that honor to one that has
no right to it? (as he says about the Sacrament; herein joining with Mr.
Tombs.) Those that profess to fear God and love him, we must love and honor
as men that do fear and love him: yet in different degrees, as the signs of
their graces are more or less propable. In some common professing Christians,
we see but small probability: yet dare we not exclude them from the Church, nor
the number of true believers, as long as there is any probability: Others that
are more judicious, zealous, diligent, and upright of life, we have far
stronger probability of; and therefore love and honor them much more.

Mr. Blake therefore in my judgment had done better, if, with that moderate,
Reverend, Godly man Mr. Stephen Marshall, he had distinguished between these
two Questions, [Who are Christians or Church Members?] and [Whom are we to
judge such and use as such?] and to bring in the unregenerate in the later rank
only.

Next we are to see what is Mr. Blakes judgment herein, that we may not argue
against him before we understand: which yet I think I shall in some measure be
forced to do, or say nothing, 1. I find it very hard to understand what
persons they be that he takes to be in Covenant: 2. And as hard to understand
what Covenant he means. For the first, I find it clear that negatively he
means, They are not truly Regenerate persons, but Positively how they must be
qualified I find not so clear. Page 189. he says it was with all that bore
the name of Israel (which is no further true then I have laid down in the
former Conclusions) so that it may seem that he takes all to be in Covenant
that bear the name of Christians. What? though they know not what Christ or
Christianity is? Is taking a name, entering into Covenant? The poor Indians
that by thousands are forced by the Spaniards to be baptized, are said to know
so little what they do, that some of them forget the name of [a Christian]
which they assumed.

Page 192. he says [All professed Christians, so called, are in an outward and
single Covenant] 1. What? those that are called professed Christians, and are
not? No: sure that is not the meaning: else men's miscalling might put them in
Covenant. It is then those that are so, and are called so: But will it not
serve, if they are so, unless called so? 2. He means either those that profess
the name of Christianity, or the Thing. Of the insufficiency of the first, I
spoke before. For the second, if they profess the whole Essence of Christianity
undissembledly, I think they are truly Regenerate. If they profess but part (as
to the Matter both of Assent and Consent, of which I spoke before in the
Conclusions, and which we have in this County lately set down in our Profession
of Faith) then it is not Christianity which they profess: for part of the
essence is not the Thing: where an essential part is wanting, the form is
absent. If it be the whole matter of Christianity that is professed, but
Dissembledly; then as he is equivocally or analogically a Believer or
Christian, so I yield he is a member of the Visible Church, which so far as it
is only Visible, is equivocally called The Church: of which I have fullier
spoken in Answer to Mr Tombs Praecursor. I know Mr Bl. thinks, that there may
be an undissembled Profession, which yet may not be of a saving Faith. But then
I yet conceive it is not an entire Profession of the whole essential object of
Christian faith, viz. of Assent and Consent. It will be a hard saying to many
honest Christians to say, that a man not justified may believe every
fundamental Article, and withal truly profess Repentance of all his sins, and
to Take God for his Sovereign to Rule him, and his chief Good to be enjoyed to
his happiness; and to take Christ for his Lord and only Savior, and his Word
for his Law and Rule, and the holy Ghost for his Guide and Sanctifier, and the
rest which is essential to Christianity.

Page 192. He says of all that externally make Profession (These engage
themselves upon Gods terms.] But if they do so sincerely they are sincere
Christians: If not sincerely, they are but equivocally Christians. Some think
that in the 11th Chapter of the 3d part of my Book of Rest, I gave too much to
an unregenerate estate: and yet I think there is nothing contrary to this that
I now say. He that professes not to prefer God and the Redeemer before all
other things, professes not Christianity: and he that professes this and
lies not, is a Regenerate justified Christian.

Page 200. he describes his unregenerate Christians to be such [as Accept the
terms of the Covenant.] And this none does indeed but the sanctified. If Mr.
Bl. will say, that the unregenerate may do it, he will make them true
believers: For what is true faith but an Accepting of Christ and his Benefits
on the Covenant terms? Though I confess others may falsely say, they Accept him.

Page 220. he says [Laws tendered by a Prince, and received by a People, make
up the Relation of King and people (yet indeed, that is not true, for it is the
Receiving the man to be our King which is antecedent to the receiving his Laws,
that makes the Relation.) A marriage Covenant tendered by a man, and accepted by
a Virgin, makes up the Relation of Husband and Wife: Covenant draughts between
man and man for service, make up the Relation of Master and Servant: Now the
Gospel Covenant is all of these between God and a People.] Rep. The Accepting
Christ in this Covenant is true Justifying Faith: If an unregenerate man have
this indeed, then he is justified, and Faith and Justification are common
things, which I will not believe. If Mr. Bl. mean that the external profession
of this Acceptance, alone, does make up the Relation, I say, as before; It may
oblige the Professor, but makes not up the Relation of Real Christians,
because God conse^teth not, nor is actually in Covenant and obliged. The
differences Mr. Bl. must take notice of, between his humane Covenants, and ours
with God, or else he will mar all. Men know not one another hearts, and
therefore make not Laws for hearts, nor impose Conditions on hearts: and
therefore if both parties do profess Consent, though dissemblingly, they are
both obliged, and the Covenant is mutual. But God offers to Consent, only on
Condition that our hearts Consent to his terms; and therefore if we profess
Consent, and do not Consent, God Consents not, nor is, as it were obliged.

Next Mr. Bl. proceeds there to tell us, that the Accepting the Word preached,
is the note of the Church. But that is a more lax ambiguous term then the
former. Some call it an accepting the Word, when they are content to hear it:
Some when they speculatively believe the truth of it. These are no true notes
of true Christians, or Churches (in the first sense of the word Church.) Others
Accept but part of that word, which is the necessary object of Faith, of whom
the like may he said. It is the Accepting Christ and Life in him, offered by
this word, which is Christianity it self, or true Faith: and the profession of
this, is that which makes a man a Member of the Visible Church (He may accept
it for his Infants also.) So much for the indagation of Mr. Bl's meaning about
the description of his visible Christians.

Next, what he means by [Covenant] I confess I despair of knowing. Sometime he
speaks as if he meant it but of their own act of Covenant, whereby they oblige
themselves. But ordinarily, it is evident, that he speaks of a mutual Covenant,
and makes God to be also in Covenant with them. But what Covenant of God is
t^is? Page 192. He says [they are in an outward and single Covenant.] But what
he means by a single Covenant, I know not. He there also chooses to express
himself in Paraeus words, who distinguishes inter beneficia foederis (which he
denies them) and Jus foederis (which he allows them.) But I confess I know
not what Jus foederis is, except one of these two things: 1. A Right to enter
Covenant with Christ: and so have Infidels. 2. Or a Right to the Benefits
promised in the Covenant: and this he denies them. If he means (as Par^eus
seems) a Right to be esteemed as Covenanters, and used as Covenanters, by the
Church (though indeed God is not in Covenant with them) this we easily grant.

But Mr. Bl's common phrase is, that they are [in the outward Covenant] and
what that is, I cannot tell. I know what it is to covenant ore tenus, only
outwardly, or by a dissembled profession, or else a profession maimed, or not
understood; and I have said* that hereby they may further oblige themselves (so
far as the creature can be said to oblige it self, who is not sui Juris, but
wholly Gods, and is under his absolute obligation already.) But it is Gods
Covenant act that we are enquiring after. In what sense is that called Outward?
1. It cannot be as if God did as the dissembling creature, ore tenus, with the
mouth only covenant with them, and not with the heart, as they deal with him:
2. I know therefore no possible sense but this, that it is called [Outward]
from the Blessings promised which are outward. Here therefore, 1. I should have
thought it but reasonable for Mr. Bl. to have told us what those outward
Blessings are that this Covenant promises. 2. That he would have proved out of
Scripture that God has such a Covenant, distinct from the Covenant of Grace,
which promises Justification and Salvation, and having other Conditions on our
part. For both these I cannot find what outward blessings he means but Church
Ordinances and Privileges. These consist in the Word, Sacraments, Prayer,
Discipline. For the Word, God often bestows it on Infidels, and in England
there are men that deride the truth of Scripture, and esteem it a fiction, and
yet for credit of men, come ordinarily to the Congregation. These have the Word
given them, and so have other unregenerate men: but not by Covenant that I know
of. Even the godly have no Covenant assuring them that for the future they
shall enjoy the Word, further then it is in their hearts (except that promise
with a reserve, If God see it Good, etc.) Where has God said, If thou will
with thy mouth profess to believe, I will give thee my Word preached? 2. For
Baptism, It is part of our profession it self. And though God has commissioned
us to Baptize such professors and their seed, yet that is not a Covenant with
them: Nor do I know where God says, I will give thee Baptism, if thou will but
say, thou believe, or if thou will profess seriously a half faith: More shall
be said against this anon. 3. For the Lords Supper the same may be said. God
has no where made a Covenant, that they shall have the Lords Supper that will
profess faith. To feign God to make a Covenant with man, whose condition shall
be orall profession, and whose Blessing promised, is only the nudum signum, a
little water to wash men, and a little bread and wine, without that Christ, and
Remission of sin, Mortification and Spiritual Life, which these Sacraments are
in their Institution appointed to signify, seal and exhibit, this is, I think
a groundless and presumptuous course. 4. The same may be said of Discipline:
which, alas few Churches do enjoy. I desire therefore that those words of
Scripture may be produced where any such outward Covenant is contained. I take
outward Ordinances and other blessings to be a second part of, or certain
appurtenances to the blessings of the great Covenant of Grace, and given by
Covenant on the same condition (of true faith) as Justification it self is: but
allowed or given by Providence, where and when God pleases, and sometime to
Infidels that never made profession, as to some of them (the Word and temporal
mercies) and not assured by promise to any ungodly man, that from Providence
receives them.

At last, after this necessary explication, I come to Mr. Bl's words which I
propounded to Reply to. And first, when he says [A dogmatical faith entitleth
to Baptism.] I reply, 1. A mere Dogmatical, Historical faith, is only in the
understanding; and that not Practical neither. Now if this be the condition of
the outward Covenant, then it may consist with a Renouncing Christ, and open
disclaiming him, yea a persecuting the very Christian name: For a man may
speculatively and slightly believe the word of God to be true, and yet may
openly profess [I love the world, and my pleasure, and honor, so much better
then Christ; that I am resolved I will be no Christian, nor be baptized, nor
take Christ on the terms that he is offered on.] At least, he that professes
Assent only, and will not profess consent also, does not profess Christianity:
For Christianity and true faith lies in the Wills consent, as well as the
understandings Assent. 2. And how can Mr. Bl call this Dogmatical faith, a
covenanting? when covenanting is known to be the expression of the Wills
consent, and not the profession of an opinion. 3. If a Dogmatical faith be the
condition, and make a man a Christian, then he may be a Christian against his
Will: which was yet never affirmed.

But Mr. Bl. in his explication of this Dogmatical faith, adds by way of
exclusion [though not affecting the heart to a full choice of Christ.] Where he
seems to imply (though he express it not) that the faith which he means does
affect the heart to a choice of Christ which is not full. But if so, then 1. It
is much more then Assent, or a mere Historical Dogmatical faith. 2. But is the
choice which he intimates Real, as to the Act, and suited to the Object? That
is, the real choice of such a Christ as is offered, and on such terms? If so,
it is Justifying faith. If not, either it is counterfeit as to the Act, or but
nominal as to the Object, and is indeed no choosing of Christ. Though perhaps,
it may not be suited to the Accidentals of the object, yet to the Essentials it
must, or else it has but equivocally the name as a corpse has the name of a
man.

He says, [The Covenant is the Ground of Baptism, otheewise Church Membership
would evince no Title, etc.] Repl. 1. I take Gods precept to be the Ground of
Baptism, as it is officium a Duty, both as to the baptizer and the baptized:
and his Promise, or his Covenant Grant, to be the Ground of men's Right to it,
as it is a Benefit given directly by God: and their own true consent, faith or
covenanting (which with me are all one, for all that you say against it) to be
the condition of that Right. But then I think that in foro Ecclesiae a
dissembler may claim that Right which strictly he has not, and we must grant
him what he claims when he brings a Probable ground of his claim: And in that
it is Ministers duty to Baptize such, they may indirectly, and quoad Ecclesiam
be said to have Right to be Baptized. I say Indirectly, yea and improperly: for
it is not the result of Gods Covenant Grant to them; but of his precept to his
Ministers, and his Instructions, whom they ought to Baptize.

2. I argued from Right of admission to Church Membership, with Mr. T. and that
Right I take the heart-covenant (of Parent or parties themselves) to be the
condition of, as to the Invisible Church State, and the Profession of that
Covenant, not alone, but joined with it, to be the condition of true Right
before God to Visible-membership; though men are but to use him as one that
has true Right, who by an hypocritical profession seems to have Right.

Where he takes me to grant his Antecedent, that [the Covenant is entered with
men of says not saving] he does me wrong: For in the properest sense ( i. e.
as if God were actually, as it were, obliged to such, in the Covenant of Grace,
I never said it: But how far such are in Covenant or under promise, I have by
necessary distinction explained before: and I think it beseems not a serious
Treatise of the Covenants, wherein this Question is so largely of purpose
handled to have confounded those several considerations, and dispute so
seriously before the Reader can tell about what.

The words which Mr. Bl. questioneth, I confess are mine, against Dr. Ward, and
I did not think in so gross an opinion Dr. Ward would have found any second to
undertake that cause.

. 40.
Mr. Bl. 1. ALL that has been said for the latitude of the Covenant, may sitly
be applied in opposition to this Tenent, for the like latitude of Baptism.

. 40.
R. B. THerefore did I say the more of the Covenant before, to show your
confusion and mistake in that. It is not every Covenant or Promise that Baptism
is the Seal of.

. 41.
Mr. Bl. ALL the Absurdities following the restraint of the Covenant to the
Elect, to men of faith saving and justifying, follow upon this restraint of
interest in Baptism.

. 41.
R. B. WHat Absurdities follow such a restraint of it to sound believers, as I
have asserted, I should be willing to know, though with some labor I searched
for it. Bear with me therefore, while I examine what you refer me to. It is
page 209. where you charge those Absurdities. And the first is this, 1. This
restriction of the Covenant (to shut out all the non-regenerate) makes an utter
confusion between the Covenant it self and the conditions of it: or (if the
expression do not please) the Covenant it self and the duties required in it;
between our entrance into Covenant, and our observation of it, or walking up in
faithfulness to it. All know that a bargain for a sum of money, and the
payment of that sum; the covenant with a servant for labor, and the labor
according to this covenant, are different things. Faithful men that make a
bargain, keep it; enter covenant, and stand to it: But the making and keeping;
the entering and observing are not the same; and now according to this opinion,
Regeneration is our entrance into Covenant, and Regeneration is our keeping of
Covenant: before Regeneration we make no Covenant, after Regeneration we break
no Covenant, there is no such thing as Covenant Breaking. All this makes an
utter confusion in the Covenant.

Reply 1. I have seldom met with a complaint of confusion, more unseasonably,
where the guilt of it in the plaintiff is so visible as to mar all the work
so much. 2. I cannot give my judgment of the intolerableness and great danger
of your mistake here manifested, without unmannerliness. I will therefore say
but this; It is in a very weighty point, near the foundation, wherein to err,
cannot be safe. In my Aphorisms I gave my reasons ( page 265) for the
contrary. It is a truth so far beyond all doubt, that our own Covenanting is a
principal part of the condition of the Covenant of Grace, as that it is, in
other terms, a great part of the substance of the Gospel. 1. The conditions are
imposed by God, and to be performed by us; the same act therefore is called our
conditions as the performers, and Gods conditions as the Imposer and Promiser,
giving his blessings only on these imposed conditions. Most properly they are
called the conditions or Gods Covenant or Promise, rather then of ours: for our
own Promise is the first part of them, and our performance of that Promise but
a secondary part. For 2. Gods Covenant is a free gift of Christ and Life to the
world on condition of their Acceptance: this our Divines against the Papists on
the Doctrine of merit, have fully proved. Only this Acceptance must have these
necessary modifications, which may constitute it suitable to the quality of the
object, and state of the receiver. It must be a Loving, Thankful Acceptance:
and it being the Acceptance of a Sovereign, and Sanctifier, it contains a
Resolution to obey him. Our Acceptance, or Consent, is our Covenanting, and our
faith. So that our Covenanting with Christ, and our faith is the same thing:
that is, our accepting an offered Savior on his terms: Or a Consent that he be
ours and we his on his terms. And who knows not that this Faith, or
Covenanting, or Consent, is the condition by us to be performed, that we may
have right to Christ and Life offered? 3. Indeed there is herewith joined a
promise for future duty: but mark 1. what; 2. and to what end; 1. It is
principally but a promise of the same consent to be continued, which we already
give: and secondarily, a promise of sincere obedience. 2. It is not that these
future promised acts shall be the condition of our first Justification, or
right to Christ; but only the condition of the continuance of our
Justification, it being certainly begun, and we put into a state of favor and
acceptance, merely on our first consent or covenanting, that is, believing or
receiving Christ.

That all this is no strange thing, (that our own Covenant Act should be also
the Primary condition of Gods Covenant) may appear by your forementioned
similitudes, and all other cases, wherein such Relations are contracted. If a
King will offer his Son in marriage to a condemned woman and a beggar, on
condition that she will but have him, that is consent, and so covenant and
marry him: here her covenanting, consenting or marrying him, is the performance
of the condition on her part, for obtaining her first Right in him and his: but
for the continuance of that Right, is further requisite, Primarily the
continuance of that consent; secondarily the addition of subjection and
marriage-faithfulness. Yet though consent begun, and consent continued, be both
called consent, and are the same thing, it is only the beginning that is called
marriage: so is it only begun faith, which is our marriage with Christ, and
constitutes us Regenerate, or converted. And therefore you do not well to talk
of Regeneration being the keeping of our Covenant. If by Regeneration you mean
not Gods Act, but our repenting and believing, then it is our keeping Gods
Covenant, by performing the condition, i. e. Our obeying him in entering his
Covenant; but it is not the keeping of our own Covenant: for our making or
entering Covenant, is our principal condition, on performance whereof we are
justified; yet in so doing, we promise to continue that consent or faith: and
so the continuance is our Covenant-keeping.

As for your instances of the Covenant of paying money, and doing work, had I
used such instances, what should I have heard from those men that already
charge me with giving too much to works in ^ustification? you should have
considered, that our Covenant 1. is not principally to pay, and to labor, but
to receive. 2. nor is it only de suturo, but de praesenti: A consent to have
Christ for our Lord, Redeemer, Savior, Head and Husband in present and for the
time to come, though the very relation consented to, does indeed oblige us to
the future duties of that Relation. By this time, I leave it to the Reader to
judge, who it is that introduced confusion about the Covenant, and whether this
be an error of the lower size?

As for that you add, that then there is no Covenant Breaking; I Reply, 1.
Q^oad essentiam and possibilitatem there is. 2. Quoad existentiam, there is a
breaking of mere Verbal and of Erring half Covenants, But if you think that
sound Covenanting may be utterly broken, then you are against the certainty of
perseverance. As for the texts you cite, I say 1. The Israelites broke Gods
commands, which are called his Covenants. 2. They broke their particular
Covenants, about reforming Idolatry and such particular sins. 3. They broke
their Verbal and equivocal Covenant or Promise to God, whereby they seemed to
Accept him on his terms, but did not; and therefore had not his obligation
again to them, but yet thereby obliged themselves.

Your 2. Absurdity is, that then there are no Hypocrites. Reply; Rather, Then
all unregenerate professors are Hypocrites. They pretend merely to real proper
Covenanting, and they do Covenant but Verbally, and equivocally. Your Answers
to the objection therefore, page 211, 212, have not the least strength, where
you say, The Covenant which they enter is their pretense for God; I Reply, they
do therefore but pretend to take God for their God, which is the proper
Covenanting. How else could you next say, that they are guilty of hypocrisy?
Doubtless they had hypocrisy as well in entering the Covenant, as after in
pretending to stand to it. Is it not you rather, that consequentially say,
There is no Hypocrites (among these at least) in Covenanting, who make them all
to Covenant truly and unfeignedly? And where you say, that then they do but
pretend to the stage, and to hypocrisy: It is a strange feigned consequence,
without the least show of proof. What! is he but a pretender to Hypocrisy,
that takes on him a Christian, when he is none? (Suppose he never Covenanted)
or he that takes on him to consent or covenant in heart, when he does it but in
words, and wilfully dissembles? Yea, if they think they Accept Christ, not
knowing what Christ is, and so do not Accept him as he is offered them, and yet
go on in a supposition that they are Christians; these seem to have done what
they did not, and to be what they are not: and therefore are Hypocrites, though
not purposely dissembling.

For your 3. Absurdity, I have said enough against that charge to Mr. Tombs,
which shall stand, till you confute it, as the confutation of yours. And so
much for your feigned Absurdities.

. 42.
Mr. Bl. TO make the Visible Seal of Baptism, which is the Privilege of the
Church Visible, to be of equal latitude with the Seal of the Spirit, which is
peculiar to invisible members, is a Paradox.

. 42.
R. B. BUt you take it for granted that we do so; which is too easy disputing.
We give the Seal of Baptism to all that seem sound Believers, and their seed;
and we say, the Seal of the sanctifying Spirit, is only theirs that Are such
Believers. But if you speak only of Covenant-Right to Baptism, Coram Deo, by
his gift of Covenant, then I make them of the same extent: supposing that by
the Seal of the Spirit, you mean somewhat common to every true believer. 3. But
if it be the formalis Ratio of Sealing that you look at, I say, God seals to
the wicked his Covenant or Promise as it is made to them, (of which before): He
sealed the conditional Covenant, which they seemed to Accept, (which if they
had not seemed to Accept, he would not have commanded the annexing of the
Seal): and so God may be said to do it, in that he commands his Ministers to
do it. But it is not such a sealing, as leaves God actually obliged to fulfill
the promise, as he is to them that perform the condition. But of this more in
its own place.

. 43.
Mr. Bl. THe great conditon to which Baptism engages, is not a prerequisite in
baptism. This is plain; no man is bound to make good his condition, before
engagement to conditions: no servant is tied to do his wook, before he has
received his earnest: no Soldier to fight before he is listed, or has given
in his name. But faith that is Justifying to Accept Christ, is the Condition to
which Baptism engages.

. 43.
R. B. WHat is the conclusion therefore Justifying faith is not a prerequisite
in Baptism: or according to the simile, therefore no man is bound to aceept
Christ to Justification before he is baptized. I confess* the reading of such
passages in Grave, Learned, Godly Divines, and that with such confidence
uttered as undoubted truth, and that in zeal to save the Church from the errors
of us that are contrary minded, does very much convince me of humane frailty,
and that the best of men do know but in part, and in a little part too: and it
makes me less angry at those unlearned mistaken men, that have of late so
troubled the Church: and to say with Seneca, Iniquus est qui commune vitium
singulis objicit, etc. quanto in his Justior Venia sit, quae per totum g^nus
humanum vulgata sunt? Omnes inconsulti, and improvidi sumus; omnes incerti,
queruli, ambitiosi. Quid lenioribus verbis ulcus publicum abscondam? Omnes mali
sumus. Quicquid itaque in alio reprehenditur, id unusquisque in suo sinu
invenic^. Quid illius pallorem? illius maciem notas? Pestilentia est.
Placidiores itaque invicem sumus. Mali inter malos vivimus. But to the matter.

1. Then it seems, if a man believe sincerely and savingly, the main use of
Baptism, as engaging, is past already. Must any sound believer then be
Baptized? or only unsound believers and Infidels that will promise to believe
hereafter? But I will show the foulness of this error anon, and therefore let
it pass now. 2. But you say, This is plain; to whom? all men have not the
truth, that are confident that they have it; I see that you say, No man is
bound to make good his Condition before engagement, etc. very dangerous: It is
not our condition only nor principally, as to the efficient obligation, nor at
all as to the Justification. Are we poor worms, our own Gods and Lords, that we
should be disobliged till we will be pleased to oblige our selves? Our faith is
Gods Condition as the Imposer; three several Bonds has he laid upon us. 1. As
Legislator of the Law of Grace, he has commanded us to believe in, and accept
an offered Christ. And is Gods command insufficient to oblige us, till we
oblige our selves? then more happy are Pagans then I imagined. 2. As the Donor
of Christ and Life, and the Author of the Promise or Deed of gift (and so
Christ as Testator) he has made our sincere faith the condition; saying, If
thou believe, thou shall be saved. Hereby we are bound to believe, as a
necessary means to salvation. This is but a sanction of the first obligation.
3. The like may be said of the threatening, He that believes not shall be
damned; which God adds as Legislator to this Law, so that every man is bound
to sound Believing, as the necessary condition of salvation, before he does
consent himself, or oblige himself to it: even by an obligation which is ten
thousand fold stronger then any that he is capable of laying on himself.

3. It is also a very high mistake, to think that our Covenanting or Consent,
(which is our actual believing) is none of our condition, when it is the great
and principal part of our condition; yea all the condition of our begun
Justification (not taking the word Faith too narrowly). You will perhaps say,
These are our conditions as subjects, but not as Covenanters. Reply. They are
our conditions as subjects called to Covenant, as we are the persons to whom
the Covenant is offered: They are constituted by God as Donor, Benefactor, and
Author of the Covenant or Promise, and not merely as Rector. It belongs to
the Donor to determine of the conditions of his own gift, on which they shall
become due or not. Yet does God make no transactions with men but as with
subjects; and therefore even when he deals with us as Benefactor and Donor in
free gifts, it is still as Dominus and Rector Benefaciens: he lays not by his
Dominion or Soveraigntie, nor these Relations to us.

4. For your instance of servants and soldiers, they leave out the great part
of the condition of the Covenant of Grace: which is, that we consent to be
servants and soldiers. The Relation must first be entered; God must be taken
for our God, and Christ for our Redeemer, Lord, and Savior; the Holy Ghost for
our Guide and Sanctifyer: This is Faith and Covenanting. This goes before
working and fighting. But this Covenanting is the great condition of Gods
Covenant. As when the forementioned Prince is offered in marriage (with his
Dignities and Riches) to a condemned beggar; as it is a gift, and covenant
propounded on his part, and actually to be entered, it is consent, or
marriage-covenanting on her part that is the condition; yea, and all the
condition of her first right to him and his riches and honors. So in your
instance: It is the servants consent or covenant to have such a man for his
master; and the soldiers consent and covenanting to have such a man for his
General; that is the condition on which one has all his first right to the
Privileges of the family, and the other to the Privileges of the Army. Is
not this consent necessary in our present case? If you would have spoke to the
point, you should have said thus, No servant is tied sincerely to consent or
covenant to be a servant, before he have received his earnest: No soldier is
tied to consent or covenant truly to be a soldier, till he be listed; which
are both plainly false. Baptism is as the listing; Consent (which is saving
Faith) is the heart covenant, prerequisite to listing, and not the work to be
done after, except you speak of the continuance of consent. Baptism is the
solemnizing our marriage with Christ. And it is a strange marriage, wherein the
woman does only promise that she will begin hereafter to take that man for her
husband, but not at present. Nay where such present consent is not Requisite,
is a fe^gned or nominal, or half-consent, the condition on which a woman has
Right to the man and his estate, and a full consent hereafter the thing that
she is engaged to.

5. In your minor, But faith that is Justifying to accept Christ, is the
condition to which Baptism engages; either you mean only the continuance of
that faith, and that is true, (but not your meaning I think). Or you mean, the
beginning of that faith (as doubtless the foregoing words show that you do);
and then why had we not one word tending to the proof, which would in this
place have been very acceptable to me. I will anon make an argument of the
contrary.

You seem to me in all this to mistake the very formal nature of a condition,
as if it received its denomination from our promise to perform it; when as, by
the consent of all Lawyers that I have read of it, it is denominated from the
determination of the Donor, Testator, or other Imposer; and most evidently and
unquestionably it is so, in unequal contracts, where one is the Benefactor, and
has the absolute power of disposing his own favors.

. 44.
Mr. Bl. THat Faith upon which Simon Magus in the Primitive times was baptized,
is that which admits to Baptism; Simon himself believed and was Baptized,
Act. 8.13. But Simons Faith ^ell short of saving and justifying.

. 44.
R. B COncedo totum; sed desideratur Conclusio; That may be said to admit to
Baptism, which so qualifieth the person as that we are bound to Baptize him, as
being one that seems sound in believing, as Simon did. But this is not
Entituling, or, having Coram Deo and a faedere, Right to Baptism: nor does
prove that it is not saving Faith which God in his Covenant makes the condition
prerequisite to such a Right to Baptism.

. 45.
Mr. Bl. 6. IN Case only justifying Faith give admission to Baptism, then none
is able to baptize, seeing this by none is discerned: and to leave it to our
charity, affirming that we may admit upon presumption of a title when God
denies, I have spoken somewhat, Chap. and I refer to Mr. Hudson in his
Vindication, whom learned Mr. Baxter so highly commends, to show the
unreasonabless of it.

. 45.
R.B. 1. Seeing you have read what I have said to Mr. Tombs against this
Objection, I shall take it as needless to say more, till you confute it: 2. I
say not that only justifying Faith gives Admission to Baptism. I say that the
seeming, or Probable Profession of such a faith gives Admittance. 3. Nor is it
left to our Charity, but imposed on us as a Duty to Baptize those that profess
sound belief: but whether the profession be probably serious, or not, our
understanding, and not our Charity must judge. And if you go not that way too,
then it seems you would Baptize a man that should apparently jest or deride
Christ under color of professing: which were to Accept that as a profession
which is no profession. For it is no further a profession then it seems to be
serious and express what is in the heart. 4. Though God deny the justness of
the hypocrites Title in foro Dei, yet he does not deny it to be our duty to
deal with them, for their profession, as with those whose Title is just. 5. I
know not what Chapter it is that you refer us to for more. 6. Having lent Mr.
Hudsons book out, I have it not now by me, and therefore cannot consult him:
but I suppose you would use the Arguments which you thought strongest.

. 46.
Mr. Bl. HEre it is objected: 1. When Christ says* Make me Disciples of all
Nations baptizing them, he meant sincere Disciples, though we cannot ever know
them to be sincere. I Answer, In Case I make this first Objection brought
against me, my seventh and last Argument for me, it will fully discover the
weakness of it; and thus I form it. All that are Disciples unto Christ, and
made Disciples for Christ, are to be baptized: But some are made Disciples to
Christ, that are short of Faith saving and justifying, as has been proved at
large: This Discipleship that Christ here mentions, is such of which whole
Nations are in capacity, as is plain in the Commission; to which this Nation
(with others) has happily attained according to the manifold Prophesies before
cited: Of these the whole Universal visible Church consists, so irrefragably
proved by Mr. Hudson in his Treatise of that subject, and his Vindication. Now
if whole Nations, yea the whole Universal Visible Church (consisting of
discipled Nations) were all Believers, it were a great happiness; the Election
would be as large as Vocation, when Christ says, Many are called, but few
chosen.

. 46.
R.B. 1. TO vindicate my Objections: If it be not sincere Disciples that Christ
means in that Text, then no Apostle was bound by that Commission and great
Precept to endeavor the making of sincere Disciples (but only counterfeits and
half Christians:) But the Antecedent is false, therefore, etc. 2. For your
Argument, I grant the Conclusion; and what would you have more? But knew you
not that it is not the thing in Question? 3. I grant the Minor, taking the word
Disciples equivocally, as a Corpse is called a man; and I confess it usual so to
take the word: but otherwise I deny the Minor. To be Christ's Disciple (as to
the aged) is to be one that has unfeignedly taken Christ for his Master, to
Teach him and Rule him, renouncing the contrary guidance of the Flesh, the
World, and Devil: and it implies that he has already learnt his necessity of
Christ's Guidance, and who Christ is, and what a Master, and to what End it is
that we must learn of him, and what are the great conditions on which he
receives his Disciples. And I think they that do this sincerely, are
justified: and they that do not, are but seeming Disciples; but if you will
call such Disciples (as we must because they seem so) then you may say, They
are Really such (seeming) Disciples. 4. To your confirmation, I deny the Minor:
and I say, that it is so new Doctrine to affirm that whole Nations are not
capable of being sound Believers, that it deserved one word of proof. Much less
should you have hid your Minor, and turned it into a Negatio existentiae, when
it should have been but a Negatio Capacitatis. Does it follow that a Nation is
not capable of sound faith, because they have it not? or will not have it? 5.
Do you think Preachers yet be not bound to endeavor the saying Conversion of
whole Nations? If you say, No: you take them off the work that their master
has set them on. If you say, Yea, then you think they must endeavor to
persuade men to that which they have not a capacity of. 6. If there be any
Nation incapable of Faith, then God cannot make them Believers. But that is not
true, therefore, etc. 7. You say not well that the whole Universal Visible
Church consists of Discipled Nations, if you mean [only] as you seem. For
then poor scattered Christians in a Heathen Nation, should be no part of the
Universal Visible Church. 8. Vocation uneffectual, is common to Pagans.
Vocation thoroughly effectual, is of the same extent as justification, and (I
think) Election. Vocation which is effectual only to bring men to an outward
Profession of saving Faith, is larger then Election, and makes men such whom we
are bound to Baptize.

. 47.
Mr. Bl. OBject. 2. When he says, He that Believes and is baptized shall be
saved, here Faith goes before Baptism; and that not a common, but a saving
Faith; for here is but one Faith spoken of, and that is before Baptism. Answ.
1. This is the weakest of all Arguments, to reason for a precedence of one
before another, from the order in which they are placed in Scripture. So we may
say, John Baptized before he preached the Baptism of repentance, for his
baptizing is mentioned before preaching of Baptism, Mar. 1.4. So we may say, We
must have glory first, and Virtue after; for so they are placed by the Apostle,
2 Pet. 1.3. All that can be collected, is, that we must in Gods ordinary way of
conferring salvation, have both Faith and Baptism; though there be not the like
absolute necessity of Baptism as of Faith: Baptism being necessary, necessitate
praecepti, Jesus Christ having Instituted and commanded it; but Faith necessary
both necessitate medii and praecepti, seeing Christ not only commanded it, but
salvation can at no hand be obtained (by men in capaicty of it) without it: And
it has been well observed, that in the words following, the like stress is not
laid on Baptism as on Faith: not [he that is not baptized] but [he that
believes not] shall be damned.

. 47.
R. B. IF affirmations be good proof of the weakness of Arguments, then this is
sufficiently confuted. But to the rest: 1. I confess there may be a Hysteron
Proteron in the Scripture: and in such a case we may not gather the real
precedence of that which is first named. But otherwise, I know not whence we
should better gather the natural order then from Scripture order in expression.
If I may by the order of your speeches gather the order of things in your
conception and intentions, then may I observe the Holy Ghosts order also to the
like ends: for I suppose you speak not more orderly then the Holy Ghost. But I
may sure to that end observe the order of your expressions, therefore.
Moreover, this is not one Text going against the order expressed in most
others: but contrarily, the same order is usually observed in other Texts that
speak of Faith and Baptism, putting Faith first. Furthermore, this is not a
mere Historical Narration, or circumstantial by-passage, but it is the very sum
of the Law of Grace, solemnly delivered by Christ to his Apostles (with their
grand Commission) before his Ascension: and where may we expect if not here;
where in so few words is expressed the substance of the Covenant? Moreover, it
is not doctrinally and in general precepts only, that this order is held, but
in particular precepts* directing in present matter of execution. The Eunuch
must Believe with all his heart, and so others commonly must profess belief,
before they must be Baptized: and the Scripture gives no hint that this is one
kind of Faith, and that another, Mar. 1.4. shows first in General what John
did in the wilderness, viz. Baptize: and 2. in what order he did it* viz. first
preaching that Baptism of Repentance to them. That 2 Pet. 1.3. is spoken in
perfect Logical order: It speaks not of Christ's order of Execution, and our
order of Assecution, but of Gods and our order of Intention. If it had been
said* that he gives us glory and virtue, it had been a Hysteron Proteron: but
it is only, he called us to glory and virtue: And of ends the Ultimate is the
first in Intention, and all ends are so before their means; and therefore may
well be so in expression.

2. I think as Baptism is truly Medium ad salutem, so it may be said to be
necessary, necessitate medii, as well as necessitate praecepti: only with a
distinction of necessity, according to its: Degrees; Faith is absolutely
necessary; as sine qua non, and Baptism is of an inferior less necessity,
sometime but ad been esse, and solemnitatem. Lastly, the command foregoing,
Disciple me all Nations, Baptizing them: sets Faith (in present or persons
at age themselves) before Baptism, as included in Discipling: And if this text
which contains the Commission, put not Faith before Baptism, its like others do
not, and then why may no^ any H^athens that will, be baptized: and the text
speaks but of one faith, for ought I can find.

. 48.
Mr. Bl. 2. LEt Peter where he speaks of salvation by baptism, interpret these
words, Baptism does now also (says he) save us by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. and then explains himself. Not the putting away the filth
of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God; this answer or
restipulation to the outward administration of Baptism, is that which follows
upon Baptism, but Justifying Faith is that restipulation (at least a principal
branch of it) and therefore there is no necessity that it go before, but a
necessity that it must follow after baptism. It is true that in men of years,
Justifying says sometimes goes before baptism, as in Abraham it went before
Circumcision: but it is not of necsesity required to Interest us in a Right,
neither of Baptism nor Circumcision.

. 48.
R. B. I Will not now stand to enquire of the fitness or unfitness of your
term, Restipulation, as here used. Varro uses Restipulari as being the same
act as stipulari: and Civilians use it but rarely. In every stipulation they
make two parties, the Stipulator (which is he that asks the question) and the
Promiser (which is the answerer, that obliges himself). Though rarely and
unusually also, the Promiser be called Stipulator. But I suppose it is
Responsio Promissoris, that you mean by Restipulation, and not another
Interogation whereby a double stipulation is made; supposing this your meaning
I Reply: 1. Why did you not give us one word for proof, that this Restipulation
is a thing following Baptism? This is too dilute and easy disputing. I took
the contrary for an unquestionable truth. The best Interpreters judge, that
Peter means here, the Answer whereby the Promiser in Baptism did solemnly
oblige himself: which was to two Questions. Credis in Patrem, filium and
spiritum sanctum? Credo. Abrenuncias Diabolum, mundum and Carnem? Abrenuncio.
And who knows not that these went before the application of the water? (of
which more anon.) Does not mutual consent expressed go before the sealing of
the Covenant? Does Christ bid us Baptize men into the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; and would you have us do this before they profess their
consent? shall we Baptize them first, and ask them whether they believe and
consent after?

2. I gratefully accept your Concession, that Justifying Faith is that
Restipulation. Which is your minor: (that is, Justifying Faith, professed). And
thence I conclude, that then Justifying faith is Essential to the mutual
Covenant, and so without it, God is not thus in Covenant with men: For who
knows not, that ever read Civil Law, that there is no stipulation sine
Promissione, which you call (and so do other Divines) Restipulation? and that
this Restipulation is an essential part of the contract, called stipulation?
This being past doubt, it follows, that Justifying Faith being our
Restipulation, is an Essential part of the contract or Baptismal Covenant. And
it is apparent that Peter meant not any other contract which was to be entered
between God and man, after the Baptismal Contract, and different from it* for
then he would not have said Baptism saves us; and have interpreted it, de fida
responsione vel promissione, and non de nuda lotione.

3. The Concession which you were forced to, about men of years, how it does
cut the throat of your cause, I shall show you anon.

. 49.
Mr. Bl. OBj. 3. That faith to which the promise of Remission and Justification
is made, it must also be sealed to, (or that faith which is the condition of
the Promise, is the condition in foro Dei of the Title to the Seal). But it is
only solid true faith which is the Condition of the Promise (of Remission).
Therefore it is that only that gives Right in foro Dei, to the Seal. Answ. Here
is an argument first proposed; 2. in a parenthesis paraphrased: For the
proposition, I say, Faith is not sealed to, but Remission of sins, or salvation
upon condition of Faith. A professor of Faith that goes no further, may engage
himself to a lively working Faith, and upon those terms, God engages for, and
puts his Seal for Remission and salvation. For the parenthesis, That faith
which is the condition of the Promise, is the condition in foro Dei of Title to
that Seal; I judge the contrary to be undeniable, that Faith which is the
condition of the Promise, is not the condition in foro Dei, of Title to the
Seal. An acknowledgment of the Necessity of such faith, with engagement to it,
is sufficient for a Title to the Seal, and the performance of the condition of
like necessity to attain the thing sealed. To promise service and fidelity in
war, is enough to get listed, as to do service is of necessity to be rewarded.

. 49.
R. B. 1. BOth Sacraments rightly used, are a mutual Sealing to the mutual
Covenant. As in the Lords Supper; Taking and eating, is our Sealing, professing
action; so in Baptism, receiving the water applied, is our Seal and professing
Passion: (For we are more Passive in our new birth, then in our feeding for
growth). So is the presenting our persons, or our children, of our delivering
them up to Christ, as his Disciples. It is therefore our part, as well as Gods,
that is Sealed to.

2. Where you say, A professor of Faith may engage to a lively working Faith;
you mean, either a Professor of that lively faith, or a Professor of a dead,
not working Faith. If the first, it is a contradiction to say, He professes to
have a lively Faith; and He only engages so to believe hereafter. For if he
profess to have it already, then he can engage only to the Continuation, and
not the Inception of it. If you mean the latter, then I shall show you anon,
that a man professing a Dead, not-working Faith, is not in Scripture called to
Covenant with God in Baptism, to believe lively for the future, ( incepive) and
to believe for the future with a working Faith. In the mean time, this should
be proved, which yet I never saw. You suppose then, such a professor as this,
coming to Baptism, saying, Lord I believe that Thou art God alone* and Christ
the only Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost, the Guide and Sanctifier of thy people;
and that the World, Flesh, and Devil is to be renounced for thee: but at
present these are so dear to me, that I will not forsake them for thee; I will
not take Thee for my God, to Rule me, or be my Happiness, nor will I take
Christ to Govern me, and Save me in His way, nor will I be Guided or Sanctified
by the Holy Ghost; but hereafter I will, and therefore I come to be Baptized.

3. That which you judge undeniable, you see I deny. It is not therefore de
facto undeniable. When you and I can each of us attain to such a height of
confidence, of the Verity of our several Contradictory Propositions, in a
matter of such moment, and about the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
which the Apostle reckons as the milk of Babes, who are unskilful in the word
of Righteousness ( Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. and 6.1.2.) it increases my conviction
of the great necessity of toleration of some great errors, even in Preachers of
the Gospel; For either yours or mine seem such. I find no proof of your
undeniable Proposition. 1. The Seal is but an affix to the Promise: therefore
that which is the condition of the Promise, is the condition of the Seal. 2.
The use of the Seal is to confirm the Promise to him to whom it is Sealed:
Therefore the condition of the Promise is the condition of the Seal. 3. If the
Promise and Seal have two distinct conditions, then there are two distinct
Covenants (for from the conditions, most commonly are contracts specified: and
therefore Wesenbechius and such like Logical Civilians, call it the form of the
contract, or stipulation to be either Dura vel in diem, vel sub condition, and
those sub-conditions are specified often from their various conditions). But
there is not two Covenants, therefore* but of this more anon.

4. Is it not against the nature and common use of Sealing* that it should be
in order before the Promise or Covenant? and that men should have first right
to that Seal on one condition, before they have right to the Promise; and then
have right to the Promise after on another condition? 5. If it be so
undeniable, that that Faith which is the condition of the Promise, is not the
condition in foro Dei of Title to the Seal; as you affirm: why do you then
build so much against Mr. Tombs, on that argument from Act. 2. The Promise is
to you and your children; arguing a Right to the Seal, from an Interest in the
Promise?

6. Where you say, that An acknowledgement of the necessity of such faith, with
engagement to it, is sufficient for a Title to the Seal. I Reply, then those
that at present renounce Christ, so it be against their knowledge and
conscience, and will engage to own him sincerely for the future, have right to
Baptism. A convinced persecutor may acknowledge this necessity, and engage,
that before he dies he will be a true Believer, and yet resolve to be no
Christian till then, no not so much as in profession.

7. Your instance of service and fidelity in war, runs upon the great mistake
which I have so often told you of. The formal Reason and denomination of a
condition, is from the Donors constitution or imposition, giving his benefits
only on the terms by himself assigned; and not from our Promise to perform
them. And therefore our Promise it self, is the chief condition of Gods
Promise, and (to speak as your self did). Our Justifing faith being our
Restipulation, that Restipulation is not only part of our condition, but the
whole as to our first Right to Christ, Justification and Salvation; though that
Right shall not be continued, nor we actually glorified, but on condition both
of continuing that faith, and of adding (if there be opportunity) sincere
obedience, in perseverance to the death.

. 50.
Mr. Bl. 4. AS for the argument ad hominem, framed against those who make
initial or common faith, sufficient to entitle to Baptism, and yet affix
Remission of sins to all Baptism, even so received without any performance of
further engagement; I leave to them to defend, who maintain such Doctrine, and
to speak to the Absurdities that follow upon it.

. 50.
R. B. THough you avoid the dint of this argument, by forsaking Dr. Ward here,
yet it may perhaps appear that your own way is clogged with more Absurdities
then a few.

. 51.
Mr. Bl. 5. THat of Philip to the Eunuch, seems to carry most color; The
Eunuch must believe with all his heart, before he must be baptized; and I have
known it trouble some, that are fully convinced, that a Dogmatical faith gives
title to baptism, satisfying themselves with this answer, that howsoever Philip
called for such a faith which leads to salvation, yet did not express himself
so far, that no faith short of this gives title to baptism.

It may be answered, that a Dogmatical faith is true faith, suo genere, as well
as that which Justifies; therefore I know not why men should give it the term
of false Faith, seeing Scripture calls it Faith, and such as those Believers,
and the heart in such a Faith (as to an entire assent) is required. If we look
into the Eunuchs answer, in which Philip did rest satisfied, and proceeded upon
it to baptism, it will take away all scruple: his answer is, I believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God: There is no more in that then a common Faith:
this is believed by men not justified: yet this Faith entitles to baptism, and
upon this confession of Faith the Eunuch is baptized.

. 51.
R. B. THat will not trouble you, which troubles others. To your answer I
Reply, 1. When we do, with the Scriptures, enquire after Faith in Christ
crucified, we may well call that a false Faith which pretends to be this, and
is not this, however true in suo genere. Faith in Jupiter, Sol, Mahomet, is
true in suo genere: and so is humane Faith: yet I would call it a false Faith,
if this should be pretended to be Faith in Christ. To believe in Christ as man
only, or as God only, or as a Guide to Heaven only, and not as a Redeemer by
ransom, or as one that is to justify us, but not to Sanctify or Rule us; each
of these is true in suo genere, but false if they pretend to be that which
Scripture calls Faith in Christ, and which denominateth Believers. So is it to
believe with the understanding speculatively and superficially, and yet to
Dissent with the will. I think, if a man say, This is the Son, the heir, come
let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours; we will not have this man
Reign over us: that these are not true Believers, nor have right to Baptism,
though their belief that he is the heir, be a Dogmatical Faith, true in its
kind.

2. As Amesius Medulla li. 1. cap. 3.. 20. Quamvis in Scripturis aliquando
Assensus veritati quae est de Deo and Christo, Joh. 1.50. habetur pro vera
fide, includitur tamen semper specialis fiducia, atque adeo omnibus in locis
ubi sermo est de salutari fide, vel praesupponitur fiducia in Messiam, and
indicatur tantum determinatio vel applicatio ejus ad personam Jesu Christi, vel
per assensum illum designatur, tanquam effectum per suam causam. And as words
of Knowledge and Assent, do in Scripture often imply affection and consent, so on
the contrary, words of consent and affection do always imply Knowledge and
Assent. And therefore Faith is sometime denominated from the Intellectual act
Believing, and sometime from the Wills act Receiving.

3. Do you not know how ordinarily even saving Faith it self is denominated
from the Intellectual Act alone? when yet you will confess the Will is necessarily
an Agent in this? many texts might quickly be cited to that end. Those that
Amesius cites may suffice: Joh. 11.25, 26, 27. He that believes in me shall
live. Believe thou this? yea Lord, I believe that thou art that Christ the
Son of God, that was to come into the world. Such was Nathaniels faith. Joh.
1.49, 50. 1 John 4.15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God,
God dwells in him, and be in God. And 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes that
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. Here is more then Right to Baptism. The
great doubt was then whether Christ were the true Messiah, and therefore this
was the greatest and most difficult part of Faith, to Assent to this; and
therefore the whole is denominated from it, it being supposed, when they
believed him to be the only sufficient and faithful Physician, that they were
willing to be healed by him in his way.

4. If you think, as you seem by your answer to do, that a man may Assent to
the Truth of the Gospel with all his heart, and yet be void of Justifying
Faith, you do not lightly err. Though an unregenerate man may believe as many
truths as the Regenerate, yet not with all his heart; Christ says Math. 13.
The word has not rooting in him. Doubtless, whether or no the Practical
understanding do unavoidably determine the Will, yet God does not sanctify the
understanding truly, and leave the Will unsanctified: which must be said, if
the Dogmatical Faith, that is the Intellectual Assent of a wicked man, be as
strong as that of a true Believer. Dr. Downam in his Treatise of Justification,
and against Mr. Pemble has said enough of this, to which I refer you. I take
that answer as equal to silence, which yet Mr. Bl. so highly values, as to say,
It will take away all scruple.

. 52.
HAving Replied to your Answer, I shall be bold to trouble you with some more
Arguments to this point. Mr. Blake affirms, that Justifying Faith is the
great Condition to which Baptism engages, Rivet in Animad. in Annotat. Grotli
in Cassandr. in art. 4. p. 13. fol. Fides quae non parit obedientiae
propositum, non est vera fides. Haec cum primum ingeneratur cum poenitentia
conjuncta est, quae non potest esse sine obedientiae proposito. Fidei formatae
and insormis apud Veteres Catholicos ne Vestigium quidem reperitur, si de fide
Justificante and salvifica, etc.
and therefore not prerequisite to Baptism; and that an acknowledgment of the
Necessity of such Faith with engagement to it, is sufficient for a title to the
Seal: and so it is a Dogmatical Faith which entitles to Baptism, in which
Baptism we must engage to believe with a lively and working Faith hereafter:
Against this Doctrine I argue. 1. From Authority (beginning with the lowest
Argument). The Reverend Assembly in their Advice for Church Government, Printed
after the Directory, page 58. of the Church say thus, Particular Churches in
the Primitive times were made up of Visible Saints. viz. of such as being of
Age, professed faith in Christ, and obedience unto Christ, according to the
Rule of Faith and Life, taught by Christ and his Apostles; and of their
children: and they cite Act. 2.^8, 41, last: compared with Act. 5.14. 1 Cor.
1.2. compared with 2 Cor. 9.13. Now if the Profession of this Saint-ship in
Faith and obedience according to the Rule, were necessary, then the profession
of Justifying Faith was necessary: For this is justifying Faith without doubt.
And if so, then it is not a Faith short of this which is the condition of
Church member-ship; for then the profession of that other imperfect Faith might
suffice; of which more anon. See also the Assemblies Confession. cap. 28.. 1.6.
and the two Catechisms of Baptism, where 1. observe the ends of Baptism, that
it Seals Remission, Regeneration, Adoption, etc. 2. the subject, that none
are to be Baptized at age till they profess their Faith in Christ and Obedience
to him. Which if they do sincerely no doubt that Faith is no less then
justifying. See also what that truly Judicious, Learned, Reverend Divine, Mr.
Gataker has Replied to Dr. Ward, (viz. against those words which I confuted,
not knowing that it was Mr. Gataker that the Doctor dealt with) in Mr. Gatakers
Desceptatio de Baptismatis Infantilis vi and efficaci^, page 71. where he also
cites Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Whitaker, etc. and therefore I will cite no more,
(Mr. Marshal in his late Sermon for Unity, I mentioned before.) A hundred might
easily and truly be cited to this purpose.

Argu. 2. My Second Argument shall be from the Testimony and Practice of the
purest Antiquity. 1* Justin Martyr in his second Apology, relating the
Churches custom in Baptizing, says, As many as being persuaded do believe
these things to be true which we teach, and do promise to live according to
them, they first learn by prayer and fasting to beg pardon of God for their
former sins, our selves also joining our prayer and fasting: Then they are
brought to the water and born again, in the same way as we our selves were born
again: So for the other Sacrament he adds, This food we call the Eucharist*
to which no man is admitted, but he that believes the Truth of our Doctrine,
being washed in the Laver of Regeneration, for Remission of sin, and that so
lives as Christ has taught.

2. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 13. shows that Abraham's Faith by which he was justified,
is the same with the Christian Faith, yea with that whereby we begin to be
saved. And cap. 76. having reference to the Baptismal Covenant, wherein men
deliver up themselves to Christ, he says, Si igitur tradideris ei quod tuum
est, id est, fidem in eum and subjectionem, percipies ejus artem, and eris
perfectum Dei opus: si autem non credideris ei, and fugeris manus ejus, erit
Causa in te, etc. Ille enim misit qui vocarent ad Nuptias; qui autem non
obedierunt ei semetipsos privarunt regia caena.

3. Athenagoras in Legate. pro Christianis p. 3. (...). Nullus enim Christianus
(...) est, nisi ^anc professionem simulaverit. He therefore that only
professes, is but a counterfeit Christian; and he that professes any thing
lower then Holiness, or an obediential Faith, does profess somewhat short of
Christianity, and not Christianity it self.

4. Tertullian Apolog. cap. 44. Speaking how the Heathens were fain to punish
one another in Prisons and houses of Corrections, adds, Nemo illic
Christianus, nisi plane tantum Christianus, aut si and aliud, jam non
Christianus; No Christian comes there unless merely because he is a Christian:
or if otherwise ( i. e. as a wicked liver) then he is no Christian. And de
Baptismo, he says, (cap. 6.) Ita and angelus baptismi arbiter superventuro
spiritui sancto vias dirigit ablutione delictorum quam fides impetrat,
obsignata in Patre and Filio and spiritu sancto. Many places might be cited in
him, that show, they took the Baptized for justified Believers.

5. Cyprian Epist. 23. Nam cum Dominus dixerit in nomine Patris, Filii and
Spiritus sancti gentes tingi, and in Baptismo, praeterita peccata dimitti, etc.
And Epist. 2.. 2. Sed postquam unde genitalis auxilio superioris aevi labe
detersa, in expiatum pectus ac purum desuper se lumen infudit, postquam
caelitus spiritu hausto in novum me hominem Nativitas Secunda reparavit, etc.
But it is so well known a Case, that Antiquity runs wholly this way, that I
think I may spare the labor of transcribing any more. I had at hand the full
testimonies of Clemens Alexand. Origin, Epiphanius, Athanasius, Lactantius,
Nazianzen, Nyssen, Basil, Cyril of Alexandria, Cyril of Jerusalem, Synesius,
Hierom, Macarius, Eusebius, with diverse others, which I now cast by as tedious
and unnecessary, but shall produce quickly, if I once find it of any use. Yet
two or three brief ones I will add, which show that it is the Covenanting or
Professing of true Obedience, and consequently of a lively working Faith that
is required, and not the profession of an unsound faith only.

6. Nazianzen Orat. 40. p. 641. vol. 1. (Edit. Morel.) says, For to sum up
all in a word* we ought to judge, that the force and faculty of Baptism, is
nothing else but a Covenant entered with God, for (or a Promise made to God of)
a Second Life, (or a new Life) and a more pure course of living: And therefore
that we shall all exceedingly fear, and with all diligence keep our Souls, lest
we be found to have violated this Covenant. And doubtless to enter such a
Covenant sincerely, is the work of a Faith not short of justifying: and
therefore it is justifying Faith which in Baptism is professed, and thereto
required.

7. Basil. Amph. c. 9. As we believe in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, so are
we Baptized into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And Confession as
Captain leads the way to salvation: and Baptism sealing up our Promise (or
Covenant) follows. (It is then a Seal of our Promise, as well as of Gods.)

8. Chrysostom, Tom. 5. Hom^l. ad Neoph. Would we did answerably go on, and
those Symbols and Covenants wherewith we are bound, did stick in our hearts; we
have confessed Christ's Government; we have renounced the Devils Tyranny; This
Handwriting, this Covenant, this Symbol we are taught is conscribed: See that
we be not again found Debtors to this handwriting.

9. Hierom, Dial, advers. Lucif. says again and again that Baptisma non est
(and nullum est) sine spiritu sancto: which saying, though I approve not, yet
that and many more passages in that Dialogue fully show his judgment in this
point.

10. Salvian de Gubern. l. 4. initio, says, Nam cum hoc sit hominis Christiani
fides, fideliter Christi mandata servare, fit absque dubio ut nec fidem habeat
qui infidelis est, nec Christum credat qui Christi mandata conculcat. Ac per
hoc totum in id revolvitur, ut qui Christiani nominis opus non agit,
Christianus non esse videatur. Nomen enim sine actu atque officio suo nihil
est. Et lib. 3. p. 66. Quid est igitur Credulitas vel fides? opinor fideliter
hominem Christo credere, id est, fidelem Deo esse, hoc est, fideliter Dei
mandata servare. page 67. Infidelis sit necesse est, qui fidei commissa non
servat.

Argu. 3. If it be required in Baptism* that men do sincerely promise for the
future to Believe savingly, and to obey Christ sincerely, then Justifying Faith
is required in Baptism. But the Antecedent is acknowledged by Mr. Bl. (except
the word sincerely.) He yields that men must in Baptism engage to do this
hereafter. Now I would know of him, whether God require them to make this
engagement seriously, sincerely, and firmato animo, or not? If not, then God
calls them but to Dissemble, which is not true. If yea; then I say, This is
justifying Faith it self, or at least comes from it, if it be a Promise to do
this presently without delay. For he that will heartily engage himself to obey
Christ as his Sovereign, and rest on him for salvation, must needs be resolved
so to do. But he that is so resolved, is a true Believer: For his will is
sanctified; or else he could not be thus resolved. But if it be only for so
long time hence, that a man promises to believe and obey sincerely, with a
reserve and resolution to live wickedly till then, I hope few will believe that
this is the condition of Baptism, or the true Baptismal Covenant.

Argu. 4. They that are to Renounce the World, Flesh, and Devil, are to be true
believers (to justification); but they that are to be baptized, are then to
Renounce the World, Flesh and Devil: therefore etc. The major is evident, in
that renounceing these, is a renounceing them as Rulers that would command us
before God, or as worldly, fleshly pleasures or profits, might seem our chief
good, to be preferred before God. Now it is none but the sincere believer that
can so renounce these. All others are servants to them, and make them their
end. The Minor is proved thus. 1. There can be no motus to the Terminus ad
quem, but there must also be a Terminus a quo. The World, Flesh and Devil, are
the Terminus a quo; without which we cannot be said to take God for our God, or
Christ for our Lord-Redeemer. 2. De facto, this Abrenunciation has been used
in the Churches Baptism, ever since the Apostles days, as far as we have any
History to guide us. Tertullian, Cyprian, and all Antiquity uno ore that write
of these things, put that past question. And I dare not think that Christ's
Church has ever required that as necessary in Baptism, which was not requisite
till afterward. And if Mr. Bl. say, that they did but promise for the future,
not to follow the World, Flesh and Devil before Christ: I Reply, They renounced
them at present, and thereby showed the present conversion and Resolution of
their hearts, that it was afterward that this was to be manifested in action.

Argu. 5. They that are required to believe sincerely in the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, are required to believe to Justification. But such are all that
come to baptism. Therefore. For the major, it requires no more proof, but to
explain what it is to believe in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And our
Divines against the Papists have enough proved, that the phrase of Believing
in, comprehends the act of the will as well as of the understanding. To
believe in God, is to take him for our God: to take him for our God, is to take
him for our Sovereign, Ruler and Chief good. This none but a sound believer can
truly do. Mr. Bl. confesses elsewhere, that ^his is the sum of the Covenant,
to take God for our God, and give up our selves to be his people.

For the Minor: They that are to be baptized into the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, are to believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But all that
are baptized, are to be baptized into the name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost; therefore.

Were it necessary, many Texts might be cited that prove it is not only Assent,
but a believing in Christ, that is requisite. The very Creed shows it, which
has Credo in Deum, etc. which Creed, for the main Articles of it, the Church
has ever required all to profess, that would be baptized, before the
application of the water. And then that this is required to be done sincerely,
needs no proof with them that will not believe that God commands or loves
dissembling. So that I conclude, This sincere Faith is required in and before
baptism, and not only to be promised that we will perform it hereafter.

Argu. 6. They that are required to repent sincerely are required to believe to
justification at the same time. But all that come to baptism (at age) are
required to repent sincerely; therefore.

The major is evident, 1. In that sincere Repentance and true Faith are
inseparable. 2. In that Remission is promised to all that truly Repent, as well
as to them that believe. The Minor is proved from several plain Scriptures.
Act. 2.38. Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ
for the Remission of sins: And it was no half or common Repentance that he
calls them to; for Remission of sins was to be its Consequent. If Mr. Bl. say
here also, That it is the weakest of all Arguments, to argue from the order
expressed in Scripture: I shall say I will not believe him; because I suppose
Scripture in such Practical directions, speaks not more confusedly or
preposterously then he or I would do: Act. 11.18. It is called Repentance unto
life, which the Gentiles had before and in their Baptism: yea they had first the
Holy Ghost, Act. 10.47. And Heb. 6.1. Repentance from dead works is a
Principle. Paul, the Jailer, and all that we read of that were Baptized, did
repent or seemed so to do, and were required to do it before Baptism. If Mr.
Bl. s^y, It is a Repentance short of that which is saving, that is here
required; I would he would describe it to us, and tell us wherein it is short?
1. Objectively, I hope he will not deny but it is every sin, that men should
repent of. 2. Subjectively, it is doubtless, sincere, and not counterfeit, that
is required. I conclude therefore, that seeing saving Repentance is
prerequisite to Baptism, by Gods appointment, and not only to be promised to be
afterward performed, we must say the same of saving Faith.

Argu. 7. If saving Grace be not required in Christ's Baptism, then it requires
less then John's Baptism did. But the Consequent is false: therefore so is the
Antecedent.

The Consequence of the major is all that requires proof. Which I prove from
many Texts, Mat. 3.2.6, 8. He first preaches Repentance, and causes them to
confess their sins, and reprehendeth the Pharisees that came in Hypocrisy, or*
with unsound Repentance. And it was true Repentance; for Remission of sins was
annexed, Mar. 1.4. And it may not only be required after Baptism, but before;
and it is called the Baptism of Repentance, because in it they professed
Repentance. So Act. 13.24 and 19.4.

Argu. 8. If Faith-Justifying be required before Remission of sin, then is it
required of God before we come to Baptism (or in us before we bring our
Infants). But such Faith is prerequisite to Remission of sin; therefore.

The consequence is proved thus. Remission is the end and immediate consequent
of Baptism, where men come as God has required them. Therefore, if sincere
Faith be prerequisite to Remission, it is prerequisite also to right to Baptism.

I prove the Antecedent: Act. 22.16. Ananias says to Paul, Why tarryest thou?
arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. This was a present Remission,
and not a future only. So Act. 2.38. Be baptized every one of you, in the name
of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins. And it is a Faith which has the
Promise of Remission which Peter requires of the Gentiles before he baptize
them. Act. 10.43. Act. 13.39. the Apostle tells them, All that belive are
Justified, when he is persuading them to believe. It is therefore a believing
to Justification, which he was persuading them to. Romans 6.3, 4. Know ye not,
that as many as were Baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?
therefore we are buried with him, ^y baptism into death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead, etc. It is therefore in the act of Baptism, that
we are buried and rise Sacramentally, to signify the present change of our
state from the Grave of sin. So Col. 2.11, 12, 13. and 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism is
said to save us, but not the external washing, without the answer of a good
conscience; which affords two arguments. One in that Baptism saves, and
therefore leaves not man (when rightly used) a child of wrath afterward. 2. In
that the Answer of a good conscience is required to concur with Baptism: for
so the Apostle plainly intimates, and the best Expositors understand it, and
not of a thing to follow, as Mr. Bl. does. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of water by the word. Wherefore Paul supposes them cleansed that
are Baptized: 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are Justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc. And
Expositors judge that the Holy Ghost refers to the sign as well as the thing
signified, to the Sacrament as well as Substance, when he makes washing so
necessary, and speaks of washing us from our sins in the blood of Christ, Rev.
1.5. Though he make them not equal in necessity. Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born
of water, etc. Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
our bodies washed with pure water. If it be the end of Baptism, to wash our
hearts from an evil conscience, (i. e. a Conscientia mali.) then it is the end
of Baptism, to Seal the present Remission of sin: But etc. therefore, Tit. 3.5.
He saved us by the washing of Regeneration: It is a saving work that Baptism is
appointed to do. By Regeneration I understand, our new Relative state, at least
principally. He that is in Christ is a new creature; old things are passed
away; behold all things are become new. He has a new head, is a member of a
new society, the old guilt of sin is done away, the old enmity between God and
us; we have a new Father, new brethren, new right to farther blessings, as well
as a new heart. Regeneration is too narrowly taken for a Renovation of the
heart alone. So that I think Remission and Reconciliation and Adoption, are
meant by Regeneration, in Tit. 3.5. and Col. 2.11, 12. The speaking of Baptism,
and the heart-circumcision therein received or professed, says, they put off
the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, being buried
with him in Baptism, etc. So in 2 Pet. 1.9. The Apostle says, He that lacks
these things is blind, and cannot see far off, and has forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins: that is Sacramentally, and as far as the Church could
go in purifying him: which shows that the end of Baptism is (by obsignation and
solemnization) to purge men from their old sins* or as Paul speaks, The sins
that are past, through the forbearance of God, etc. Romans 5. So that Remission
of sins at present, being the end of Baptism rightly received, it must needs
follow that Justifying faith is prerequisite to the right receiving it, and
that it is not some other Faith, nor is it enough to promise Justifying Faith
for hereafter.

Argu. 9. If the Apostles use to communicate the proper Titles of the Justified
to all that are Baptized, (till they see them prove apostates or hypocrites)
then they did take all the Baptized to be probably justified (though they might
know that there were hypocrites among them, yet either they knew them not, or
might not denominate the body from a few that they did know) But the Antecedent
is true; therefore.

I need not cite Scriptures to prove that the baptized are called by the
Apostles, Believers, Saints, Disciples, Christians: Mr. Blake has done it
already, chap. 28. Now who knows not that salvation is made the Portion of
Believers, Saints, Disciples? But what, is it another sort of them? or does
Scripture use to divide Saints, as the Genus into two Species? Not that I know
of; It is but as an aequivocum in sua aequivocata: The Apostles naming men
according to their appearance and Profession, and calling them such as they
probably might be. Why else should they call them such, had not they seemed to
be such, and professed it? The names therefore do not primarily agree to these
as a true Species of Believers, Saints, Disciples, Christians; but secondarily,
as the name of a man to a Corpse, or as the name of a Habit to a disposition, by
translation, or Analogy.

But to put the matter beyond doubt, I wish Mr. Bl. to consider, that its not
only these forementioned titles, but even the rest which he will acknowledge
proper to the Regenerate, which are given by the Apostles generally to the
baptized. Adoption is ascribed to them, Gal. 3.26, 27. For ye are all the
children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus: for as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. 2. The same ^ext ascribes to them
Union with Christ; ye have put on Christ. 3. And Union with his body; ye are
all one in Christ Jesus. 4. Yea the next verse adds, And if ye be Christ's, ye
are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the Promise. What more proper to the
truly sanctified? So the Apostle says to all the Churches of Colloss in
general. 5. That they had put off the body of sin, being buried with Christ in
Baptism, wherein also they were risen with him, through the Faith of the
operation of God; Col. 2.11, 12. 6. Yea in 1 Cor. 6.11. He tells the
Corinthians, they were washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus; so that Justification it self is ascribed to them. Col. 2.13. The
Apostle tells them, God had quickened them with Christ, having forgiven them all
trespasses. 7. Yea the like he says of their salvation, 1 Cor. 15.2. Ephesians. 2.5,
6, 7, 8. yea he tells them verse 19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and
sorreiners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints and of the household of God; and
lest any should think that Saints and Citizens, and the household of God, do
here signify but common Privileges of the visible Church, he adds, And are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief Cornerstone, in whom all the building fitly framed together,
grows to an holy Temple in the Lord; in whom you also are builded together
for an habitation of God through the Spirit. Where most planly the Church is
manifested to be but one, and that one to have saving Privileges, and
consequently, those that have not these, to be but equivocally Christians.

Many more texts might be produced, where the most particular Privileges of
the Saints are given to whole Churches in common: which (...) that the name is
by Analogy or equivocally given from the sincere, to the rest, because we are
to judge and denominate on probabilities.

Argu. 10. If the profession of Justifying Faith be requisite in Baptism, then
the Faith so professed is requisite to the right receiving of it (and not only
to be performed hereafter.) But such profession is requisite; therefore.

The major is as true, as that God requires no man to lie and dissemble, and
to profess that with his mouth which is not in his heart: nor does he make
lying the condition of his Covenant, (let them call it an outward Covenant, or
what they will: if it be Gods Covenant, this can be none of the condition.) For
it must first in order be a Duty, before it be made Conditional. And no lie is
a Duty. Professing is a Duty to them that have the thing they profess: but to
others, immediately and in sensu composito, it is a heinous sin, and no duty:
though it be their duty still to get Faith first, and then to profess it.

The minor is proved already, in the foregoing arguments, and more shall be
anon. It is no less then justifying Faith that Christ's Church has ever to this
day required the Baptized to profess before the application of the water. To
believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and profess Repentance for all
sins, and to renounce the world, the flesh and Devil, etc. And when Mr. Bl.
makes profession enough to give Right to baptism, I would know whether he mean
the profession of Justifying-Faith, or not. If yea, then Justifying Faith is
prerequisite, or else the profession of it could not. If not, then the
profession of true Christianity is not requisite; but of some part of it. For,
as I have showed, it is not the true Christian Faith, but some part of it only,
if it be short of that Faith which is justifying. And let men say no more, that
profession is it that entitles to Baptism, without the thing professed, when
they take even profession it self of true Christianity to be consequential,
and not prerequisite.

Argu. 11. If Baptism be the solemnizing of the mystical marriage between
Christ and the baptized, then true justifying Faith is of God required thereto:
but the Antecedent is true; therefore.

Therefore is it said that we are baptized into Christ, and into one body. And
the Church has ever held the Antecedent to be true. The consequence is
evident; in that no man but the sound believer, can truly take Christ as a
Husband and Head; for so to do, is justifying Faith. It is Christ himself first
in order, and then his benefits that are offered in the Sacraments. The main
business of them is to exhibit Christ himself to be received by a marriage
Covenanting. The signs are but means and instruments, as a twig and turfe and
Key in giving possession; When the minister in Christ's name says, Take, Eat,
etc. it is not only bread that he bids men take, but first and principally
Christ by Faith. Joahimus Vadianus (Aphorism* de Eucharist. li. 3. page 82.)
much commends a saying of Chrysostoms, viz. If thou had no body, then
Christ would have delivered thee all these gifts nakedly (or immediately): but
because thy Soul is conjoined with a body, he has delivered them in and with
these sensible things. It is one of the greatest errors that can be committed
in the Sacraments, to overlook Chirst himself who is offered, and to look only
either to the signs or to his other gifts. We receive him first as our Savior,
our Sovereign, Redeemer, our Head, our Husband, our Captain and Guide. He
therefore that comes to these ordinances, does pretend thus to receive Christ:
and doubtless to receive him thus sincerely, is true jus^^^^ing saying Faith:
and therefore it is saving Faith that is called for to the due Receiving of the
Sacraments. And doubtless God means a sincere, and not a seeming, dissembled,
nominal Faith, in his command.

Argu. 12. If there be no such Covenan^ mentioned in the Scripture, (specially
to be sealed with baptism) wherein men engage themselves to perform hereafter
their first act of true Repentance and justifying Faith, then Mr. Blakes
Doctrine is unsound: but there is no such Covenant; therefore.

Men are often in Scripture called to Repent and Believe; but nowhere (that I
know of) to Covenant with God that they will hereafter begin to do it
sincerely; much less is there such a Covenant sealed with Baptism. They that
affirm such a thing, let them prove it, if they can.

Argu. 13. If according to Mr. Blakes Doctrine no true sound Believer, or
Penitent person, can regularly be baptized; then his Doctrine is unsound. But
the Antecedent is true; therefore.

The consequence is proved before. The Antecedent is proved thus: According to
his Doctrine, saving Faith, accepting Christ to Justification, is the great
condition to which Baptism engages, and is not prerequisite therein. Therefore
he that already performs that condition, is past such engageing to do it
initially hereafter: and so has no use for baptism as to that engagement to
the great condition: so that if such a person be baptized, it must be to other
ends then the Ordinance is appointed for, and so not Regularly. The like may be
said of Gods part? for to such a Believer God should Seal Remission past or
present; whereas according to Mr. Bl. the Ordinance is instituted to seal
Remission future.

Argu. 14. If the Doctrine opposed be true, then the Gospel preached before
baptism, was not instituted, nor is to be used as a means (at least an ordinary
means) of saving conversion ( i. e. of produc^ng saving Faith and Repentance)
But the consequent is false; therefore so is the Antecedent.

It would be tedious and needless to the Intelligent, to heap up Scripture
proof of the minor, viz. that the Gospel preached before baptism, is appointed
for an ordinary means of working true conversion. We see it was ordinarily
done, else Preachers could not endeavor it, or hope or pray for it. The
consequence is manifest, in that Mr. Bl. makes this true justifying Faith, and
consequently true Repentance, to be not prerequisite to baptism, but to be
engaged for as to the future performance. And therefore regularly it must be
only the word after Baptism that must truly Convert, or not at all.

Argu. 15. If Mr. Blakes Doctrine be true, then regularly it must be supposed
that all persons are in a state of damnation immediately on their baptism; and
if they then dyed, should perish. But the consequent is false; therefore so is
the Antecedent.

For the Consequence; if Mr. Blake mean, that it is any space of time after
baptism that we engage to begin our justifying Faith in, then the consequence
is undeniable: for till then, the person is unjustified. But if he mean that in
baptism they must engage to believe to Justification in the same instant of
time, then this is to make such Faith necessary in the instant of baptism; and
this is but an evident vanity, to suppose a man not believing to justification,
who yet can and must promise to do it in the same instant, or the next.

Argu. 16. If it be only true justifying Faith that gives men right coram Deo
(by virtue of his Covenant) to the Sacrament of the Lords Sup^^r* and so be
prerequisite to that Sacrament, and not only to be promised for ^he future;
then the same may be said of baptism. But the Antecedent is true; therefore.

The consequence is proved, 1. In that the Sacraments are both Seals of the
same Covenant. 2. It is right to Church Priviledges in general that Mr. Bl.
ascribes to his Dogmatical Faith, and therefore to one Sacrament as well as the
other. For the Antecedent, I think our brethren that would so fain keep the
Church and Ordinances pure, would hardly admit a man to the Lords Table, that
they were sure did not take Christ for his Lord, or that would say, I believe
all the Creed and Word of God, but I will not have Christ Reign over me at the
present, but I promise that hereafter. I will see Doctor Drake against Mr.
Humfrey, whether they would admit such. Hierom argues thus, from Baptism, to
the Administration of the Lords Supper: therefore I may do it as to the
receiving* Quamobrem oro te utaut sacrificandi ei licentiam tribuas cujus
baptisma probas, aut reprobes ejus baptisma, quem non existimas sacerdotem.
Neque enim fieri potest, ut qui in baptismate sanctus est, sit apud altar
peccator. Hier. Dialog. adv. Luciferian.

Argu. 17. That Doctrine which feigneth an un-sealed Covenant for giving right
to the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, is unsound: But such is Mr. Blakes;
therefore.

No Scripture can be brought to prove such an outward Covenant of Gods: And it
is against the common reason and custom of men, that a second Covenant should
be drawn to convey right to the Seal of the first Covenant, seeing right to
Covenant and Seal go together: and if there must be another Covenant to give
right to that, then by the same reason there must be another to give right to
that, and another to that, and so in infinitum.

To the Antecedent, it is apparent that Mr. Bl. distinguishes ex part Dei,
between the outward and the inward Covenant. It is probable that he thus
distributes them from the blessings promised, whereof some are inward, and some
outward: for though he explain not himself fully, yet I know no other sense
that it will bear. It is evident that his outward Covenant has no Seal. For it
is a Covenant de sigillis conferendis. If therefore it have a Seal, it is
either the same which is promised, or some other. Other I never heard of: they
nowhere tell us what is the Seal of their outward Covenant. The same it cannot
be: for the same thing cannot be the materia foederis or the Legacy it self, or
the benefit given, and the Seal too of that Covenant whereby it is given.

Argu. 18. That Doctrine which makes it the regular way in Baptism for all men
to promise that which they can neither sincerely promise nor perform, is
unsound: but such is Mr. Blakes, therefore.

The disabilitie which I here speak of, is not such as is in a Godly man, to do
any good without Christ and the Spirit, as is in the second cause to act
without the first: or in a partial cause, to act without its compartial: but
such as is in an unregenerate man to do the work of the Regenerate; or in any
broken instrument, or disabled agent, to do its own part of the work till it be
altered, and made another thing, as it were. For the consequence, it is evident
in that, 1. No man should ever perform Gods command concerning covenanting. 2.
And no man's word were fit to be taken concerning the performance of his own
Covenant. 1. Whether God may or do command some men, or all men, that which
they have not ability to perform, is nothing to the point. For yet he gives
some of them ability, and causes them to perform it, when he makes it
necessary to salvation. But in this case God should enable no man (regularly)
to that Baptismal Covenant which he commands, nor should any obey his
command. For he commands them sincerely to take him for their God, and
promise to Love, Believe, and Obey him hereafter. (For to dissemble, he
commands none). But this no unrenewed Soul can do, or ever did to this day.
They cannot resolve it; therefore they cannot sincerely promise it; and if
justifying Faith must regularly begin after baptism (as being the great
condition to which it engages, and not prerequisite) then it is only
unregenerate men that are the regular subjects of baptism. 2. And its plain
that he who cannot sincerely promise, (and therefore does it dissemblingly, or
with a half heart) nor is able to perform his promise, is not to be credited.
God himself never enableth an unregenerate man, to believe and repent savingly,
while he is such, in sensu composito: and therefore is it likely that it is
ordinarily and regularly such dead men that must Covenant to Repent and Believe
to justification? Renewing Grace must intercede, which is not in their hand:
how then can they promise to do the works of the truly Gracious. God may invite
and command the dead to live, yea and to do the works of the living, because he
gave them life, and gives them means for revival. But I know not where he calls
such men to promise to do it: much less is the constant Baptismal Covenant such.

Argu. 19. If the Distribution of the Church into visible and invisible, be but
of the subject by diverse Adjuncts, and not of a Genus into its Species, then
that part, or those members which are merely visible, are indeed no part or
members of the Church so distributed, (but are only equivocally called a
Church, Christians, Church Members, etc.) But the Antecedent is true; therefore.

The Antecedent is not only the common Doctrine of the Reformed Divines against
the Papists, but is expressly affirmed by Mr. Blake in this his Book. The
consequence is undeniable, in that Adjuncts are no part of the Essence, much
less the Form, or the whole Essence; and therefore cannot denominate, (but
equivocally) instead of the Essence. Note, that visibile is not the same with
visum.

Argu. 20. If the man without the wedding Garment, had coram Deo Right to be
there, then would not the Lord have challenged him therein with a friend, how
came thou in hither, not having on a wedding Garment? If you will help him
that was speechless to an answer, and say for him, Lord, he was compelled to
come in all thy command; I Reply, He that compelled him by invitation, did not
only bid him come, but to come, not only to come in, but to come in as a Guest
should, to honor and not disgrace the Feast. At lest it should have been known
as employed. It was no unrevealed thing.

Argu. 21. If Circumcision were the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, even a
Justifying Faith already in being; then so is Baptism; but the former is
certain, Romans 4.11, 12. He received the sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of the Faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might
be the Father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
Righteousness might be imputed to them also. The last words confirm the
consequence also.

Argu. 22. Many texts of Scripture show that it was Justifying Faith that was
by God required in the aged in baptism: which I will cite together, and not
stand to fetch an argument from each alone. Act. 2.38, 39. was before cited,
verse 41. It was they that gladly received the word that were Baptized. Act.
8.37. also, is before spoke to; It must be believing with all the heart. Mar.
16.15, 16. is very plain; first Christ commands them to preach the Gospel: then
he enacteth that on this preaching, He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved. It is then a saving Faith. It is plain that Christ purposely puts it
before baptism, as its due place, even as that preaching to which Faith is here
related is put before; and in that he gives us here the exact compendium of his
new Law. And if it be not this saving Faith that goes before baptism, then
Christ does not so much as mention it. And to imagine that in this sum of his
Covenant, he does both leave wholly unmentioned that Faith which is the
prerequisite condition of Baptism, and also put in its place another Faith
which is consequential, this is to suppose Christ to clogg the most essential
parts, and clearest compendiums of his Law, with such insuperable obscurities
that it cannot be understood. And say the like by all other Scripture, and you
will make it more dark then the Papists accuse it to be. Act. 16.31, 32, 33.
The Jailer asks what he shall do to be saved; Paul answers him, Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy house; to which end, they
spoke to him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house; and so,
He was Baptized, believing in God with all his house. The Faith that Paul here
commends to him, was a saving Faith expressly: He that is said to believe upon
that command and instruction, is supposed to believe with the same faith that
was so required of him, Act. 10.47, 48. The Gentiles there were not only true
Believers, but had the Holy Ghost before baptism, Act. 16.15. The Lord opened
Lydias heart (which seems to signify a special operation of the Spirit) before
she was baptized. Act. 18.8. Crispus and all his house believed on the Lord,
which signifies more then an Historical Faith. So Act. 19.4, 5. It was
believing on Christ, and in his name, that was the Antecedent to their baptism.
Mat. 28.19. Go, Disciple all Nations, baptizing them; that Discipling which is
here commanded, is in order to go before baptism: but it is making men sincere
Disciples that is here commanded; therefore. It is presupposed, what ever
Discipling it be, that it is not the Event, but the Endeavor that is here made
their duty. And if it be only common Discipleship, then the Apostles and other
Preachers of the Gospel, are not commanded to endeavor to make men true sound
Believers and Disciples, till they had first baptized them, which is untrue.
Moreover the Baptismal Faith, must be a Faith in Christ's blood; for the
application of the water signifies the application of Christ's blood; and
therefore their reception of the one, signifies the other: But Faith in
Christ's blood, is Justifying Faith, Romans 3.25, 26. The Righteousness of God
which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, is unto all and upon all them that
believe; Romans 3.22. It is therefore but equivocally called believing in Christ,
as being but some part of that belief, which attaineth not this Righteousness.
How many times over and over, do Christ and his Apostles promise pardon and
salvation to all that believe in Christ, without distinction of believing?
whence it seems evident, that it is but improperly and equivocally called
Believing in Christ, which is not Justifying and saying. See Joh. 3.15, 16, 18.
and 11.25, 26. and 7.38. and 12.46, 44. and 5.24. and 6.35, 40, 47. and 14.12.
1 John 5.1, 5, 10. 1 Pet. 2.6. Romans 9.33. and 4.5. and 10.11. Act. 13.48.
Moreover, how easy is it to bring many Texts that prove that it was true
saying Faith it self that Christ and his Apostles preached to men, and
endeavored to bring them to before baptism? Nay find any one of them that ever
did otherwise; whereas according to Mr. Blakes Doctrine, they should have
persuaded them to a Dogmatical Faith only before baptism (I mean, to be before
performed) and a justifying Faith after. But I will add no more of this.

Argu. 23. The Church has ever supposed baptized persons to be saved; unless
they afterward did violate that Covenant. Therefore they supposed them to have
the condition of salvation, Faith and Repentance.

Hence those high elogies of baptism in most of the Fathers, wherein they are
now mis-interpreted by many, as if they ascribed it to the external ordinance,
whereas they presuppose, as the blood and Covenant of Christ, so the right
qualifications of the party baptized; upon which supposition (which we are
bound to entertain of all that make a probable profession) they did so
predicate the glorious effects of Baptism, as well they might.

Argu. 24. Mr. Blakes Doctrine of Baptismal Faith, leaves us in utter
obscurity, so that no man according to it, can tell whom to Baptize. He has
not (that I can find) given us any description of that Faith which entitles to
baptism; and I verily think is not able to tell us what he would have himself
to be taken for it. If it were a mere Dogmatical Faith, then those should be
baptized that were utterly unwilling, or at least unwilling to take God for
their God, or Christ for their Lord and Savior, and the Holy Ghost for their
Sanctifier; and should openly profess, I will not have this man reign over me,
for I cannot yet spare the pleasure of my sin. If Mr. Bl. mean that there is
requisite somewhat of the will and consent, though not so much as to justify;
why did he not tell us what acts of the Will they be that are necessary? Is it
only a consent to have God called their God, and themselves named his people? I
will not be so uncharitable as to think that is his meaning; Is ^t only a
consent to be baptized, and to hear the Word, and receive the Sacraments? then
might it stand with the foresaid disclaiming of the Government of God and the
Redeemer, and so of obedience. I think by that time Mr. Bl. has but adventured
to give us an exact definition or description of that Faith which he makes
prerequisite and sufficient to baptism (which I hereby entreat him to do) he
will have set us up so fair a mark to shoot at, that with a very little skill
it may be smitten to the dust.

Argu. 25. 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if
they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went
out, that it might be made manifest that they were not all of us. They were not
therefore truly Christians, Disciples, Church Members, but equivocally.

Argu. 26. I will end as I begun, with humane testimony. 1. Our Divines against
the Papists, do generally plead that hypocrites are not true members of the
universal Church, but as a wooden leg is to the body. I am loath to turn over
books and transcribe without need, but I shall soon do it, if it be denied. 2.
Our Divines against the Arminians, do suppose the first act of believing to be
the first time that God is as it were engaged to man in the Covenant of Grace;
and that it is dangerous to make God to be in actual Covenant with men in the
state of nature, though the conditional covenant may be made to them, and
though he have revealed his decree for the sanctifying his elect: but he is
supposed to dispense his mercies to the unregenerate freely, as Dominus
absolutus, or as Rector supra leges, and not by giving them a Legal or
Covenant-right. And indeed, in my opinion, the Transition is very easy from
Mr. Blakes opinion to Arminianism, if not unavoidable, save by a retreat, or by
not seeing the connection of the Consequents to the Antecedent. For grant once
that common Faith does coram Deo give right to baptism, and it is very easy to
prove that it gives right to the end of baptism, God having not instituted it
to be an empty sign to those that have true Right to it. And it will be no
hard matter to prove that it is some special Grace that is the end of Baptism,
at lest Remission of sin. And so upon the good use of common Grace, God should
be in Covenant obliged to give them special Grace: which is taken for
Pelagianism.

. 53.
WHen I had Replied thus far to Mr. Blake, I was much moved in my mind to have
Replied to his answer to Mr. Firmin on the like subject: and also to have then
proved that the children have no Right to baptism, except the immediate Parent
be a believer, for the sake of any of his Ancestors: and that the children of
Apostates and wilful obstinate wicked livers, should not be baptized, (as
theirs): and to have answered what Mr. Bl. has said to the contrary: and this
merely in love to the Truth, lest the reputation of man should cloud it: and in
love to the Church and the luster of the Christian name, lest this fearful gap
should let in that pollution that may make Christianity seem no better then
the other Religions of the world. For I fear this loose Doctrine of Baptism
will do more (...) the pollution of the Church, then others loose Doctrine of
the Lords Supper; or as much. But I am very loath to go any further in
Controversy, then I shall be necessitated: And if Mr. Firmin be living, I
conjecture by his writings, that he is able easily to vindicate his own words:
Not that I have low thoughts of the abilities and worth of my dear and Reverend
friend Mr. Blake, but that I take his answers on those subjects to be very
dilute, si pace tanti viri ita dicam: so great a disadvantage is an ill cause
to the most learned man. Mr. Firmin I know not any further then by his Book
against Separation. But in that Book I see so much Candor, Ingenuitie,
Moderation, Love to Peace, and some convenient terms for Peace discovered, that
I am heartily sorry that there are no more to second him, and that his
incitements to accommodation are no more laid to heart. But the Peacemakers
shall be blessed in the Kingdom of Peace, how little soever they may succeed in
this tumultuous world. For as where envy and strife is (contentious zeal) there
is confusion and every evil work; so the fruit of Righteousness is sown in
Peace of them that make Peace.

54.
I Had thought also at the first view, that it would have been necessary to
have confuted Mr. Blakes 31. Chapt. when I found this Title: A man in Covenant
with God, and received into the Universal Church Visible, needs no more to give
him accesss to, and interest in particular Visible Churches. But I know not
whether he mean the access and interest of a stranger in passage or a Transient
Member, or of a fixed Member. If of the latter, I should have proved moreover
that there is Necessary, both his Cohabitation, and his Consent to be a Member
of that Church; and his consent to submit to the particular Pastors of that
Church as his Teachers and Spiritual Guides in the Lord. But I find in the
following pages, Mr. Blake does acknowledge all this himself.

I shall therefore pass on to some other subject; only remembering Mr. Bl. that
as it is not Number of Arguments but Weight that will carry the Cause, so it
is not Number that I trust to: and therefore if any one of those 26 Arguments
foregoing be good, though 25 be bad, I must needs think the Cause bad which I
argue against.

. 55. Whether Faith and Repentance be Gods Works.
Mr Bl. CHap. 15. So Mr. Baxters Questionist qu. How do you make Faith and
Repentance to be Conditions of the Covenant on our part, seeing the bestowing
of them is part of the condition on Gods part? Can they be our Conditions and
Gods too? Answer, etc. And I shall not stand to distinguish of an Absolute and
Conditional Covenant, and so making the whole in the Absolute Covenant to be
Gods, and in the Conditional this part to be ours (which I know not whether
exactly understood, the Scripture will bear) but in plain term^ deny that they
are Gods Conditions, and affirm them to be ours. I know what God speaks in his
Word, concerning these works; that He will write his Law in our hearts, and put
it into our inward parts; that he will take away the heart of stone, and give
an heart of flesh: which implies this work of which we speak. I know likewise
what in particular is affirmed of Christ, that he is the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, etc. Yet all this rises not up higher to make them formally Gods
acts, and not ours. Whose acts they be, his Conditions they are; this is
evident. But they are our acts; we Believe and Repent; it is not God that
Believes, it is not God that Repents, etc. Faith and Repentance are man's works,
not Gods works, which man in Covenant does, respective to salvation in the
Covenant tendered. But the Apostle (some may say) in the next words tells us,
That it is God that works the Will and the Deed. There he seems to take them
from us, and ascribes the formality of them to God. In this Cooperation of
Gods, whether they be formally our works, or Gods, let Isaiah determine, Isa.
26.12. Thou have wrought all our works in us. When God has wrought it, the
work is ours; we have the reward, etc.

55
R. B. MR Blakes business here, is to confute the answer that I gave to that
objection. A brief Reply may easily satisfy this confutation. 1. I did explain
in what sense these were called Covenants, showing that that which is called
the Absolute Covenant, is in some respect no part of Gods Legislative Will, and
so does not jus confer, but only part of his Decretive Will revealed: but
that in other respects it belongs to the Legislative Will, and may be called an
absolute promise. And so the word Conditions applied to God, is taken for the
thing promised, improperly called a condition; but applied to us, it is
strictly taken: nor had I used the term Condition as to God, but as it was
necessary to satisfy the Objector, who so called it, intimating the
improprietie of it. Also I did plainly show that the thing called Gods
Condition, was not precisely the same with that called ours: Ours was Believing
and Repenting; Gods is the bestowing of these, as the Question expressed; or
the giving us new and soft hearts, that we may do it our selves, and do it
readily and willingly, etc. as I expressed, page 46. because I was not willing
to meddle (affirmatively or negatively) with the question of Gods immediate
Physical Efficiencie of our own act; yet I doubt not but God does truly,
powerfully and effectually (to the removing or overcoming all resistance) move
the Soul to the act it self; and therefore it may truly be said, that not only
Gods own Action, but also our action of Believing, is the thing promised,
(called his Condition by the Querist; and though improperly, yet in a language
very common in Mr. Blakes Treatise). This much being premised, I Reply more
particularly. 1. I will yet say that God has such an absolute Promise, as well
as a Conditional, till you give me better Reasons of your denial, or your
Questioning whether Scripture will bear it. And I shall yet say that the giving
of our Faith and Repentance, is the matter of that absolute promise. For your
Argument to the contrary, has little in it, to compel me to a change. Your
Mayor is, Whose acts they are, his conditions they are; instead of proof, you
say, This is evident. I Reply, 1. Negatively, it had been evident de Action
qua talis, that it is no ones Condition but his that performs it; as the
condition is said to be his that performs* and not his that imposes it. But
Affirmatively the proposition holds not universally. Nor Negatively, speaking
de Action qua est quid donandum. To your Minor, I could better answer if I
could have found it. I expected it should have been this, But our Faith and
Repentance are not Gods acts. But I know not whether I may be so bold as say,
you will own that. Before you say, This rises not to make them formally* Gods
acts, and not ours: where 1. you cautelously speak the two Propositions
copulatively; and 2. you put in the word formally, which may do much to help
you out. For the former, it is enough according to your own Rule to prove them
Gods Conditions and ours, if they be Gods Actions and ours: for you say, Whose
actions they are, his Conditions they are; that is evident. It is not therefore
necessary that I prove them Gods and not ours. 2. It is hard to know whether
your formally respect a natural or moral form. If the former action is the form
it self, it is harder to find out its matter. Accidents have not properly
matter and form; but the subject is called its matter; but Action has scarce
so proper a subject as other Accidents have, seeing it is rather Agentis, then
in agente inhaesive: Of transients, its beyond doubt; and I think so of
Immanents, unles we may with Scotus, take them for Qualities; If you speak of
Moral formality, were it sinful Action, I should deny God to be the Author; but
of Faith and Repentance I dare not do so; I think God is the Author of them
formally as well as materially. But in your following words you say, But they
are our acts, etc. God believes not, etc. Reply; 1. To believe is our act; but
to give us Faith, or to move us effectually to Believe, as a superior Cause,
this is not our work, but Gods. 2. Let it be so; to believe is our work, and
our condition; It follows not, that it is not Gods. 3. There are sufficient
reasons why God is not said to Believe, though he cause us to believe. If you
go on the Predeterminants grounds, I suppose you know their reasons, who take
notice of the Armenians making this objection. If you enquire of the Jesuits
and Arminians, that go the way of determined concourse, or of partial
Causality, they think they have yet more to say, of which I suppose you not
ignorant. Durandus his followers, think they have most of all to say, both why
God should be said to believe, and why he is not the Author of our sin, in that
they suppose that he causes not the act immediately. And yet all these
acknowledge God to be the cause of our acts.

But you adventure a step further, and say, Faith and Repentance are man's
works, not Gods Works. Reply; 1. What mean you then to yield afterward that God
works all our works in us. (those which he works are sure his works) And
that, It is God that works in us the Will and the Deed.

2. I never met with any orthodox Divine, but would yield that* Faith is a work
of Gods Spirit. And the Spirits work is doubtless Gods work.

3. If you go the common way of the Predeterminants, you must acknowldge that
God is the Physical, Efficient, Predetermining, Principal, Immediate cause of
every act of every creature: and therefore doubtless of our Faith; and that
both Immediatione Virtutis and Suppositi, so that it is more properly his act
then ours. For my part, I confess my self of Bishop Davenants mind who says,
(against Hoard p. 116) As for the predetermination of men's Wills, it is a
Controversy between the Dominicans and Jesuits, with whose Metaphysical
speculations our Protestant Divines love not to torture their brains; Or at
le^t they should not. I take it to be a point beyond the knowledge of any man,
which way Gods works on the Will in these respects. Though if I must incline to
any one way, it would be rather to Durandus (for stronger reasons then I find
in Ludov. a Dola who yet has more then I have seen well answered), and lest of
all to the Predeterminants, for all the numerous arguments of the Dominicans,
and the seeming strength that Dr. Twisse, Heereb^ord, Rutherford, and others of
our own, do add to their cause. But yet I am far from denying our Faith and
Repentance to be Gods Works; for I doubt not but he causes them ut causa
Vniversalis, by his general Providence, as they are natural Actions; and also
by his special effectual Grace, contra omnem Resistentiam, infallibly causes
them as they are the special gifts of the Spirit. So that I marvail that you
should say they are not Gods Works.

In the conclusion you add, Our dexterity in holy duties is from the frame
into which Grace puts us: so still the work is ours, though power for action is
vouchsafed of God. Reply; Both Velle and Perficere is the gift of God, and not
only Posse Velle and perficere. Why should I trouble the Reader to say any more
to that point, when Dr. Twisse and others against the Remonstrants have said so
much; and Austin so much before them all? And yet I never read a Remonstrant
that would say that the work is so ours, as that it is only the power that is
vouchsafed us by God. I conclude therefore that you have not confuted my
answer; 1. In that you have not disproved the absolute Promise of the first
special Grace. 2. You have not disproved God to be the Author of our Faith, so
as that it is his work. 3. If you had, yet Believing which is our work, is not
the same thing with giving Faith, or moving us to believe, which I say is Gods
Work.

. 56. Of the Life Promised, and Death threatened to Adam in the first Law.
Mr. Bl. I Find no material difference in the Conditions on Gods part in these
Covenants; Life is promised in both in Case of Covenant-keeping: and Death is
threatened in both in case of Covenant Breaking. Some indeed have endeavored to
find a great difference in the Life Promised in the Covenant of Works, and the
Life that is promised in the Covenant of Grace; as also in the Death that is
threatened in the one and in the other; and thereupon move many, and indeed
inextricable difficulties, What Life man should have enjoyed in case Adam had
not fallen? and what Death man should have dyed, in case Christ had not been
promised? From which two, endlessly more by way of Consectary maybe drawn, by
those that want neither wit nor leisure to debate them. In which the best way
of satisfaction, and avoidance of such puzzeling mazes, is to enquire what
Scripture means by Life, which is the good in the Covenant promised, and what
by Death, which is the evil threattned. Now for the first, Life contains all
whatsoever conduces to true Happiness, to make man blessed in Soul and body.
All good that Christ purchases and Heaven enjoyes, is comprised under it in
Gospel expressions, etc. On the contrary, under death is comprised all that is
injurious to man or mankind, that tends to his misery in Soul and body; The
damnation of Hell, being called death (the uttermost of evils being the
separation of Soul and body from God, Joh. 8.51. 1 John 3.14.) Sin which leads
to it, and is the cause of it, is called death in like manner, Ephesians. 2.1. And
the separation of Soul from the body being called Death, sickness, plagues, are
so called in like manner, Exodus 10.17. Now happiness being promised to man in
Covenant, only indefinitely, under that notion of Life, without limit to this
or that way of happiness, in this or that place; God is still at liberty, so
that he make man happy, where or however to continue happiness to him, and is
not tied up in his engagement either for earth or heaven. And therefore, though
learned Camero in his Tract. de triplici faedere. These. 9. make this difference
between the Covenant of works and the Covenant of Grace; In the Covenant of
Works (which he calls nature) Life was promised, and a most blessed Life, but
an animal life in Paradise; in the Covenant of Grace, a life in Heaven and
Spiritual. And Mr. Baxter in his Aphor. of Justification, p. 5. says, That
this Life promised was only the continuance of that state that Adam was then
in, in Paradise, is the opinion of most Divines; Yet with submission to better
Judgments, I see not grounds for it: seeing Scripture no way determines the
way and kind, etc. And indeed there are strong probabilities, Heaven being set
out by the name of Paradise, in Christ's speech to the theif on the Cross, and
in Paul's vision, etc.

. 56.
R. B. 1. YOur opinion in this point is moderate, and (I think) sound. I have
nothing therefore to say to you, but about our different expressions, and
therefore excuse me if I be short; for I love not that work. I think your
judgment and mine are the same. 2. Only, remember, that it is Mr. Blake also
that has these words, page 74. The Conditions on man's part in the Covenant of
Works, were for man's preservation in statu. quo; in that condition in which he
was created; to hold him in Communion with God, which was his happiness; he
expected not to be bettered by his obedience, either respective to happiness
(no more is promised then in present he had) nor yet in his Qualifications
respective to his conformity to God in Righteousness and true holiness. What
improvement he might have made of the Habit infused, by the exercise of
obedience, I shall not determine; but no change in Qualifications was looked
after or given in Promise; so far Mr. Blake.

If the Reader cannot reconcile Mr. Blake and me, let him reconcile Mr. Blake
with himself, and the work is done.

3. But I confess that upon more serious consideration of several passages in
the New Testament, naming and describing the work of Redemption, I am ready to
think it far more probable that Adam was not created in Patria, but in Via; not
in the highest perfection which he should expect, but in the way to it. But
whether God would have given it him in the same place that he was in, or in
some other (called Heaven) upon a remove, I take as Mr. Bl. does, to be
unrevealed, and undetermined in the Promise. So that I could find in my heart
to fall a confuting the same opinion in Mr. Blake, expressed in these last
words, which he confuteth in me; but that his former save me the labor.

4. I confess also that I spoke rashly in saying that it was the opinion of
most Divines; seeing it so hard a matter to know which way most go in the
point. I also confess that the judgment of Camero, Mr. Ball, Mr. Gataker, etc.
swayed much with me; but the silence of the text in Genesis much more: but I had
not so well weighed several Texts in the New Testament, as I ought, which
describing Redemption, give some more light into the point. The same I say
concerning the quality of the Death threatened.

5. I agree to Mr. Blakes first conclusion, that the thing is indeterminate; or
at lest, hard for us to know; but I cannot reconcile his premises with that
conclusion; much less with this his latter speech p. 74. For if (as he says)
the Life promised was all whatsoever conduces to true happiness, to make men
blessed in soul and body; (by conducing to, I suppose he meant constituting of)
then either the Caelestial Degree of Grace and Glory conduces not to that
happiness (and then not to ours, who have no greater natural capacity); or
else I see not how it can be said that this greater blessedness was not
Promised. Doubtless Adam had not in present possession so great a measure of
holiness, so confirmed a state of Holiness or Glory, nor so great and full a
fruition of God, as Christ has given us a sure hope of: in the Gospel. And
therefore, though he say, God is at liberty for the place and way, yet that is
nothing to the kind and measure.

6. Observe that the words of mine, which Mr. Bl. opposes, are but that
Divines are of that judgment.

. 57.
Mr. Bl. ANd what I have said of the Life promised, I say of Death threatened,
etc. My Learned friend Mr. Baxter, enquiring into this Death, that was here
threatened, says, that the same Damnation that followed the breach of the
second Covenant, it could not be. Aph. p. 15. When I suppose, it rather should
be said, that in substance and kind it can be no other. Infidels that were
never under any other Covenant, etc.

. 57.
R. B. 1. WHat also I have answered to the former, may suffice to this for the
main. 2. One would think that you intended directly to contradict me: but
whether you do so indeed, I cannot well tell. I know nor what you mean by
substance and kind, Pain and Loss have no substance, but a subject: I never
doubted but that it is the Loss of the same God, and Blessedness (formally
considered) but I am yet very uncertain whether the Blessedness promised by
Christ, be not far greater in Degree, then that to Adam, and consequently
whether the Poena Damni threatened in the Gospel be not far greater. Also I know
as to the mediate Blessings, Relative, they are not the same: To be deprived by
Unbelief, of Remission, Reconciliation, Adoption, the everlasting praising of
him, that Redeemed us by his blood, etc. these are true punishments on
unbelievers, that reject the mercies offered to them: but these were none of
Adams punishments. That was a Negation only to him, that is a Privation to them.

I profess also that I ever took the pain of Sense to be of the same nature,
which was due to Adams Soul, and which is due to unbelievers. Only I then did
and still do doubt, whether any Scripture speak of the everlasting Torments of
Adams body; or whether it were not only his Soul that should eternally suffer,
his body being turned to dust and so suffering the penalty of loss: Nay,
whether the New Testament do not make Resurrection the proper fruit of Christ's
death and Resurrection? But of this I am not fully resolved my self, much less
will I contend for it.

But I must needs say, that I took not a gradual difference in punishments to
be inconsiderable. Nay I know that moral specifications are grounded in natural
gradual differences. And Rewards and Punishments being moral things formally,
they may and often must be said to differ specie, and not to be the same, when
naturally they differ but in degree. Yea, whether in naturals themselves, we
may not sometimes find a specification in mere degrees, is not so clear as
rashly to be denied. There is but a gradual difference between the smallest
prick with a pin, and to be thrust throow with daggers in 20 places; yet I will
not say that it is the same punishment.

. 58.
Mr. Bl. NEither can I assent to that speech, To say that Adam should have gone
quick to Hell, if Christ had not been promised, or sin pardoned, is to
contradict the Scriptures that make death temporal the wages of Sin. It were I
confess to presume above Scripture, but I cannot see it a contradiction of
Scripture. A burning Fever, Consumption, Leprosy, Pestilence, etc. are in
Scripture made the wages of sin. Yet many go to hell through those diseases,
etc.

. 58.
R. B. I Willingly leave every man to his own judgment in this: But I think it
most probable, that the s^paration of Soul and body was particularly intended
in the threatening, Thou shall dye the death. Reas. 1. Because this is it that
is in prima significatione called Death, and the miseries of Life, but
Tropically, much more this or that particular misery: which answers your
objection about sicknesses. 2. This is it that Christ was necessarily to suffer
for us: and if it had not been necessary for man to dye thus, by the
Commination of that Law, then it would not thence have been necessary for
Christ to dye this Death. For it was not the following sentence (which you call
Leges post la^as) which Christ came to satisfy or bear, but the curse of the
Law. Gal. 3.13. be being made a curse for us. Phil. 2.8. Col. 1.22. Heb. 9.15.
by means of death he was to Redeem the transgressors of the first Law; without
Blood there is no Remission: The death of the creatures in sacrificings
signified the necessity of this Death of Christ. I have met with none but Mr.
John Goodwin that says, Christ's readyness or willingness to have dyed, might
have served the turn, though the Jews had not put him to death. Col. 1.20.14.
Ephesians. 1.7. Romans 3.25. Its true, the Apostle speaking of the necessity of Blood,
in Heb. has reference to the Constitutions of Moses Law: but then it must be
confessed that that Law did in its Curse much explicate the former, and direct
us to see what was threatened, and what must by the Messiah be suffered for us.
Heb. 2.14. Christ was to destroy by death, him that had the power of death,
that is the Devil: but it seems, that the Law gave him his power, at the Will
and Sentence of the Judge, for execution. 1 Cor. 15.26.54. Death is the last
enemy to be overcome. O Death, where is thy sling? O Grave, where is thy
victory? This is no doubt, the death now in question; It is the evils befallen
mankind in execution of the violated Law, that are called enemies. Though we
dye, it seems, there was a necessity of Christ's dying to loose the bonds of
our Death, and procure us a Resurrection. Romans 5.17. As by one man's offense
death reigned by one, etc. That one man must dye for the people, C^iaphus
prophesied, Joh. 18.14.

3. The sentence uses to contain what is threatened in the Law, and though part
may be remitted, yet the other part is the same threatened. But Gods Sentence on
Adam, contained the penalty of a temporal Death. Though he mentioned not the
Eternal, because he would provide a remedy, yet the temporal, as one part meant
in the threatening he laid on man himself: Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou
return; This is not as you imagine, Lex post lata; but sententia Judicis Legis
viola^ae comminationem exequentis. When it is said, 1 Cor. 15.22. in Adam all
dye; it is, in Adams finning all became guilty of it, and in Adam then
sentenced, all were adjudged to it. Which is intimated also Romans 5.12. Sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed on all men* for
that all have sinned.

So that the sentence expressing this Death particularly, and Christ bearing it
necessarily, and (add moreover) all mankind, for the generality, bearing it
certainly, and also Death signifying primarily the separation of Soul and Body,
it seems to me most probable, that this Death was in special meant in the
threatening.

But you say, He takes the same way where his Justice has satisfaction; those
that are privileged from death as the wages of sin, thus Dye. Reply. I do not
believe you that any are Privileged from death as the wages of sin, who dye.
This is the part of the penalty which the sentence passed on the offender
himself, for all the promised satisfaction by a Redeemer: Nor did the Redeemer
satisfy to that end, to prevent our death, or to cause that it should not be
the wages of sin but to deliver us from under the power of it. Where you say,
that this way of God with unbelievers is voluntary, not necessitated: I Reply;
So it may be nevertheless, because it was meant in the threatening. It is
dangerous to imagine that God is ever the less free, or more necessitated, so
as that his actions should be less voluntary, because of his determinations. He
does as voluntarily do what he has predetermined to do, and foretold he will
do, as if he had done neither. God changes not, and therefore he is as
voluntary in the execution, as he was in the determination.

. 59. Of the Law as made to Christ.
Mr. Bl. CHap. 6. p. 25. And though Mr. Baxter doubts whether it be any part of
Gods Legislative Will, as it referrs to Christ, but only as it belongs to us as
a Prophecy what God would do in the advancing of Christ and his Kingdom, and
so of us; Append, p. 39. Yet me thinks it is plain, seeing Christ acknowledges
a command from his Father, in laying down his life, Joh. 10.18. and the Apostle
speaking of the work, says, He was obedient in it, etc.

. 59.
R. B. ONe that had not read what I write, would think by your Answer, that I
had made a doubt whether there be any Law made to Christ at all or not? Whereas
I spoke only of that called the Covenant between the Father and the Son made
from Eternity: or the promises expressed by the Prophets as to Christ in his
mere Divine nature, not yet incarnate: For I conceive that Christ before the
incarnation, may not be said to be a subject; and that God is not properly said
to command himself, or covenant with himself, or make promises by Prophets to
himself. But I deny not but that Christ as man was under a Law, yea and a Law
peculiar to himself, whereto no other creature is subject; even the Law of
Mediation, which deserves in the body of Theology a peculiar place, and the
handling of it, as distinct from all the Laws made with us men, is of special
use, and if well done, would do much to remove the stumbling blocks which the
Antinomians fall upon.

. 60. Whether the Sacraments seal the conditional Promise absolutely? or the
conclusion conditionally, when only one of the Premises is of Divine
Revelation? And whether this conclusion be de fide, I am Justified and shall be
saved.
Mr. Bl. p. 38. But that which I may not pass, is somewhat of concernment both
to my self and the present cause in hand, etc.

. 60.
R. B. I Need not transcribe these words, being of another, and not spoke to
me. But I will pass my conjecture to his questions. 1. I conjecture that the
Querist by Evading, meant Owning and Justifying the fact, and so evading the
blame. 2. To the second I conjecture the Querist had been lately conversant in
Mr. Blakes book, and so it was in his memory: and whether he knew what those
whom you mention do hold I cannot tell. 3. To the third; If by Sacramental
sealing, you mean Conditional sealing, I conjecture his conceit might be this,
that as the Promise may be conditionally tendered to Infidels, Murderers, or any
other* so might the Seal, if it were but Conditional as the Promise. As we may
say to the worst; If thou will believe, thou shall be saved; so might we
conditionally seal salvation to him. But I take this to be a great mistake.

. 61.
Mr. Bl. p. 40. MR Baxter (who is put to it, to stoop too low in the answer of
such trifles) in his answer to this now in hand, has taken much pains to find
out the way of the Sacraments sealing; and in the result, he and I shall not be
found much to differ; yet seeing providence made me the occasion of starting
the question, I shall take leave to take some view of what is said. Mr. Baxter
says, It is in vain to enquire, whether the Sacraments do seal Absolutely or
Conditionally, till you first know what is that they do seal; and in order to
the finding this out, he lays down the way that a Christian does gather the
assurance of his Justification and Salvation; which is thus, He that believes
is Justified, and shall be saved: but I believe, therefore I am Justified and
shall be saved; I confess if I had been put upon a discovery of that which is
sealed in the Sacraments, this Syllogism (I think) would scarce have come into
my thoughts, seeing the Seal is Gods (as Mr. Baxter observes) I should have
rather looked for one from him, then to have supposed a believer to have been
upon the frame of one.

. 61.
R. B. THis dispute is so confused, and so much about words that I would not
have meddled with it, (let men have made what use of yours they pleased) but
only for some matters of greater moment that fall in upon the by, in your
handling it. I think your meaning and mine is the same. 1. I not only said, (as
you express) that the Seal is Gods, but gave my Reasons to prove a mutual
Sealing as well as a mutual Covenanting. 2. What reason have you why I might
not illustrate the matter by this Syllogism, as well as another. 3. If you will
have a Syllogism of Gods making, why did you not tell us when or where you
found it? and let us see as well as you, whence you had it, that we may know
God made it. God does not nectere Syllogismos for himself, nor actu immanente:
if he do it, it is only for us per actum transeuntem: and then it may be found
in his word. But more of that anon. 4. I should think (though for illustration
I judged it not unuseful) that it is of no necessity for you or me to talk of
any Syllogism at all, in the enquiry after the sealed proposition. If it be but
one proposition, we may express it alone: If more, we may distinctly express
them; rather then that shall breed any difference, I care not whether my
Syllogism be mentioned any more: Let us see what yours is.

. 62.
Mr. Bl. ANd such a one I should have looked to have gathered up from the
Institution, and thus (I conceive) framed; He to whom I give Christ, to him I
give Justification and Salvation: But here I give thee Christ; therefore to
thee I give Justification and Salvation.

. 63.
R. B. 1. WHat mean you by gathering it? Do you mean that you will read it
there ready formed? If so, show us the Chapter and Verse? But that must not be
expected; for you say anon, that it is something not written that is sealed. Or
do you mean that in the Institution, God gives you the materials, and you form
it your selves? If so, why blamed you mine, which is of man's forming, but yet
as you suppose, the materials so far of God, that the conclusion is de fide. To
give you the materials of a Syllogism, is not to give you a Syllogism; for the
form denominates. I must therefore suppose a Believer yet to be upon the frame
of one (as you speak). For I take you to be a Believer* and I find you here at
it very seriously. 2. I confess, (though I have no mind to quarrel with your
Syllogism) that I am never the better for the substitution of this in the room
of the humane one. I know not the meaning of the first word, (but I will not
stand on that, as being I know but a verbal slip) I do not apprehend what use
there can be for this Syllogism in this business. 1. It is supposed that every
Christian knows that Christ and Remission are given together; and when they
know it, what use for syllogizing toward the explication of the use of that
Seal? 2. Nay does not your arguing intimate that the believer is more assured
that Christ is given to him, then that pardon is given him? Or else if the
former were not quid notius, how could it be a fit medium? you suppose his
doubt to be of pardon and salvation, and the former brought to prove that,
whereas I think, few doubt of one, but they doubt of the other: and I think the
Sacrament seals the gift of Christ, as well as of pardon, as you confess. I
see not but you might have laid down as conveniently in this one proposition,
all that you say is sealed, I give thee Christ and Justification and Salvation.
But this is of small moment.

. 64.
Mr. Bl. THe major here is not sealed; for the Sacraments seal to the truth of
no general Propositions, but they seal with application to particular persons
to whom the Elements are dispensed, as Protestant Writers have defended against
Papists, and put into the difinition of a Sacrament, it seals then that which
supplies the place of the minor in this tender, which is Gods gift of Christ.
In the Sacrament Christ says, This is my body; he says this is my blood; and
this is said to all that communicate. Now whether this gift of the body and
blood of Christ be Absolutely or Conditionally sealed, will be easily resolved.
The outward Elements are given on this condition that we receive them, that we
eat and drink them. We have not Christ Sacramentally, till we have taken and
eaten and drunk the Elements. We have not Christ in the Sacrament before our
Souls h^ld f^^th that which answers to this eating and drinking. That which all
do not partake of that receive the Sacrament, is not Absolutely but
Conditionally sealed in the Sacrament. None can miss of that which God
absolutely grants and absolutely seals. But all do not partake of Christ in
the Sacrament; therefore he is not Absolutely but Conditionally sealed in the
Sacrament.

. 64.
R. B. 1. COnfusion makes Controversies endless, and gives advantage to
mistakes to prevail with the weak Reader. I shall first tell you what I mean by
sealing, before we further dispute what is sealed, and how. Some sober men, no
way inclined to Anabaptism, do think that we ought not to call the Sacraments
Seals, as being a thing not to be proved from the word; (for all Romans 4.) But I
am not of their mind. Yet I think it is a Metaphore; and to make it the
subject of tedious disputations, and lay too great stress upon a Metaphorical
notion, is the way not to edify, but to lose our selves. I am not so well
skilled in Law as to be very confident, or to pretend to any great exactness in
^hese matters; but I conceive that in general, a Seal is an Appropriative sign,
when it is set upon things, as Goods, Cattels, etc. it signifies them to be
ours: when they are applied to Instruments in writing, they have 1. the common
end of a Seal. 2. a special end. 1. The common end is to signify by a special
sign our owning of that writing or Instrument to which it is annexed. 2. The
special end is according to the nature and use of the Instruments viz. 1. Some
Instruments directed to a Community, or indefinitly to any whom it may
concern. 2. Some to particular persons, or some few Individuals. Both of them
are, 1. either Narratives de re. 2. Or obligatory Constitutions or
acknowledgments de Debito. The former are either 1. Doctrinal, and so a man may
give it under his hand and seal that he owns such or such a Doctrine, or
confession of Faith, or form prescribed by him as Teacher to his Scholars or
Hearers, etc. 2. Or Historical; and so a man may give it under his hand and
Seal, that such a person is thus or thus qualified; or did this or that act, or
suffered losses, pain, etc. 2. The Constitutions de Debito, are 1. De Debito
officii, the Constitution of Duty. 1. By equals upon voluntary obligation by
contract (which concerns not our business). 2. By Superiors to their Subjects
or Inferiors, which is either a Law to any or to some Community: Or else a
Precept to some particulars. And so Sovereigns may give out Laws, and
Proclamations under their hand and Seal? and Justices and Inferior Magistrates
may seal their Precepts and Warrants, and Orders, etc. 2. Or they are de Debito
Beneficii; Constituted 1. by a Legislator or Rector as such, 2. by a
Proprietary or Owner or Lord, as such. 1. The former is either Absolute, as the
Collation of some honors may be, and some acts of pardon, and the Divisions of
Inheritances, as among the Israelites at their first possessing Canaan: Or they
are Conditional; And the Condition is either pure Acceptance (which is so
naturally requisite, that it is usually supposed, and not expressed, and such
Collations go commonly under the name of Absolute and Pure Donations, though
indeed they are not). Or else some requite service or moral action, which may
properly make the Benefit to be Praemium, a Reward. All these being sealed, the
Seal does oblige the Benefactor or Donor, because the Instrument is obligatory,
if it be for future conveyance. If a present Collation, then the Seal does
confirm the Receivers Right, against any that may hereafter question it. The
like may be said of Acknowledgments, as of Constitutions: The Subject may
acknowledge his subjection and Seal it; the Stipulator may cause the Promisor
to acknowledge Duty or Debt, and to Seal it: So for Acknowledgments of Debts
discharged, Rewards received, Conditions performed, etc. 3. The like may be
said de Debito Panae, when Penal Laws are sealed: and of Commissions and
Warrants for execution; but this less concerns our case.

So that the use of a Seal as such, is but to testify in a special manner that
the Thing or Instrument is really ours, or that we own it: and so as Amesius
says, to be Testimonium Secundarium, added to the Primary Testimony of the
Covenant or other Instrument. But the special end of the Seal arises from the
nature and use of the Instrument sealed, and not from the nature of a Seal as
such.

My opinion now upon the present Controversy, I give you in these Conclusions.

Concl. 1. Taking the word as strictly as we use to do in English, the
Sacraments are not properly Seals, but Metaphorically. But taking the word Seal
more largely, as it signifies any instituted sign for testimony of ones owning
the Instrument, Revealing, Promising, Exhibiting, etc. so they may be called
Seals.

2. The Sacraments are not to be applied to universal or indefinite subjects,
but to particulars: Indeed they cannot be entire Sacraments, without particular
Application; that is, either to that particular Congregation, or a particular
person: and still the Receptive Application must be personal.

3. Therefore not mere universal, or particular, or indefinite Enunciations are
to be used by the Administer, but singulars also.

4. Yet I conceive that as the Universal Enunciation is first to be expressed,
so it is that universal that is sealed, though with application to singular
persons; it being not a Collective, but a Distributive Universal; and not
Distributive only in Genera singulorum, but in singula Generum: and therefore
may be applied ad singula Generum.

5. I conceive that God may be said to Seal first the truth of the History of
Christ's death and blood shed: and also the Truth of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
that this Blood was shed as a Ransom for sinners, and that it was for our sins
that he dyed.

6. And this quoad institutionem Sacramentorum, may be said to be intended to
his universal Church; but quoad exercitium, and actual^m applicationem, it is
directly still to singulars.

7. I conceive also that in the Ministerial act of offering, and saying, Take,
Eat, Drink, Christ may be said to Seal his Precept, whereby he has made it the
duty of man, to Take or Accept an offered Savior with his benefits, on the
Offerers terms.

8. Thus far there is no question but he seals to Hypocrites, as well as to
true Believers.

9. Concerning the Promise or Testament, we must yet distinctly consider, 1.
the Promise it self which goes first. 2. the sealing of this Promise, which is
next. 3. the Delivery or Application by offer which is next. 4. the Reception
or Acceptance of the thing offered, which is next. 5. the actual efficacy of
the Promise in Constituting the Right of the Receiver in the Benefit, which is
next. 6. the mutual obligation of each Party to fulfill the remainder of the
Covenant for the future, which is the last.

10. That Seal which properly confirms the Gospel to be true, is miracles and
other gifts of the Holy Ghost; but the Sacraments, though they may do much also
to that, as they are a continued public Commemoration, and so an excellent way
of Tradition, yet are they especially Applicatory signs for renewing clear
apprehensions, helping memory, assisting in our Application of the general
Promise, resolving our Wills* exciting our affections to a more lively sense of
Christ's Love, and our sin and Duty, etc. and actually to help us in the Praises
of the Redeemer by so solemn and sensible a Commemoration of his Redemption of
us.

11. Ministers are Christ's Officers in Explication and Application of his Laws
and Covenants.

12. Their Application or Explication is no Addition to the sense, nor any
making of a new Law or Covenant. Therefore when God says, Whosoever will
Believe, shall have Christ and Life; and the Minister says, If thou A. B. wilt
Believe, thou shall have Christ and Life; The Minister adds not to the
Promise, but applies it according to its proper sense; seeing a universal
Enunciation absolutely so called, may be distributed in singula generum, though
a Universal secundum quid may be only distributed into Species or genera
singulorum.

13. And therefore to seal to that singular Enunciation, is no more then to
seal to the Universal, but much less, if it were to that alone.

14. It is Gods Legal Deed of Gift, or Promise written in Scripture, or
otherwise expressed, to which the Sacrament is a Seal, and consequently to that
singular enunciation, which is but part of the same Promise, and that as it is
contained in the universal: but not as it is a thing distinct from the
universal Promise, or as supposed to add to it, or contain more, for sense, in
it; nor to the Application of the Minister, as such.

15. But for the right understanding of this, we must explain this word, to
Seal to, which is of several significations: 1. It is one thing to seal to a
thing as the Testimonium primarium, to which the Seal is the Testimonium
secundarium. So the Instrument is sealed to. 2. It is another thing to seal to
a thing as the subjectum materiale obsignatum: so the matter contained in that
Instrument is sealed to. 3. It is another thing to seal to a thing as the finis
cujus ultimatus: so the good which the party ultimately receives from that
Donation, Contract, etc. as its end, is sealed to. 4. And its another thing to
seal to a thing as the finis cujus proximus, vel propior: and so to our Right
to Christ, our Remission, Justification, Adoption, etc. are sealed to. 5. And
its yet another thing to seal to a person as the finis cui: and so God seals
to us, the forementioned Covenant, etc. I mean that according to its several
respects to these things; the words seal to has several significations. Now
the application, the Right delivered, etc. may be said to be sealed to, as the
finis proximus cujus: for it is sealed that it may be delivered and applied for
conveying Right: but these are not sealed to as the subjectum obsignatum: that
is the Promise (...) Grant it self, whereby Right is conveyed.

16. The Sacraments are not only Seals to the Grant or Promise, but furthermore
are Exhibiting or Conferring signs, in subserviencie to the Promise; as
Instruments to solemnize the Collation of Christ and his Benefits. And this
seems to be a far more remarkable end of them, then proper sealing: For
Sacraments are such kind of signs, as those in the solemnization of marriage,
in giving hands, putting on a ring, expressing Consent, etc. Or as the Crowning
of a King, or the listing a Soldier: or as a twig, a turf, or a Key in giving
possession. So that the main use follows the mere sealing.

17. As Gods Universal Grant of Christ and pardon is but Conditional (in form
or sense) to which the Sacrament seals; so the minister that distributeth the
Universal to singulars, must do it but Conditionally, If thou A. B. wilt
Believe, thou shall have Christ and Life: So that still it is no Absolute but a
Conditional Promise or Grant that is sealed.

18. This Conditional Promise is sealed Absolutely and actually; for were it
sealed only Conditionally, then it were not Actually sealed at all, till the
Condition is fulfilled: but the sense would run thus, This Action shall be my
Seal, when you believe, or perform some other Condition. But I conceive God
seals Actually, and therefore Absolutely, before men truly or really believe,
when a Minister on his Command and by his Commission does it.

19. Yet though God Seal the Conditional Promise Absolutely to such as profess
to receive it; that is, though he hereby attest that he owns that Promise as
his Act or Deed; yet does he not either Exhibit or Convey Right to Christ and
his Benefits, nor yet oblige himself for the future, Absolutely, but
Conditionally only. For in this Conveyance and Obligation the Grant or Covenant
is the principal Instrument, and the sign the less principal; and both to the
same use: and therefore the latter cannot Absolutely Convey, or Oblige the
Promiser, unless the first do it absolutely too.

20. God may therefore seal his Promise, and thereupon offer Christ and Life to
men that pretended a willingness to Receive it, and yet not actually convey
Right to Christ and Life, nor Actually oblige himself to pardon or save the
sinner, because the party may refuse the offer, either refusing Sacrament and
all, or only Refusing in heart the benefit offered, at lest as such and on the
terms that its offered on, and on which only it may be had. And so when the
sealing use is past, the Sacrament may lose its Conveying and obliging force
(so far as we may say God obliges himself) for want of true Reception: and
thus it does with all unsound Believers.

I desire the Reader, according to this explanation to understand that which I
wrote against Mr. Tombs in my book of Baptism, about the Sacraments sealing to
the ungodly.

Having said thus much for the opening of my opinion, and the avoiding of
Confusion, I return to Mr. Blakes words. And 1. where he says, The mayor is
not sealed; for the Sacraments seal not to the truth of any general
propositions, but they seal with application to particular persons: I Reply,
They seal no doubt with respect to particular persons; but that they may not
seal both the general Promise and the singular as comprised in it, to that
particular person, I hear not yet proved, viz. q. d. Having promised Christ and
Life to every one that will Accept him, lest thou should stagger at this my
Promise, I own it by this seal. 2. Where he says, It seals that which supplies
the place of the minor; viz. I give thee Christ: I Reply, 1. Its true; because
this is no addition to the general Grant, but part of its proper sense: For he
that says, I give it to all Believers, says in sense, I give it to thee if
thou be a Believer. Otherwise God seals not to what he promises not: and
were not the singular Enunciation comprehended in the sense of the Universal,
you could never prove that the singular is sealed. 2. But what is the meaning
of your Minor, which you say is sealed? Is it an Absolute and simple
Proposition or Enunciation, as you express it? Or is it a Conditional one? Do
you mean, I will give thee Christ on Condition that thou Accept him as offered:
or, I will give him Absolutely: And by giving, do you mean proper effectual
giving which conveys Right? or only an offer which conveys not Right till it be
Accepted on the terms on which its offered? If you mean by gift, a mere offer,
then it may be sealed Absolutely; for God does Absolutely offer, where he does
but Conditionally Give. He does not say, I will offer you Christ, on condition
you will take him; for he offers him whether men Accept him or not. If you
mean a full gift, and mean the Enunciation to be Absolute, then that man shall
certainly have Christ and Life, whether he accept him or not; or at lest,
accepting is no Condition. And then all that God so seals to, shall be saved.
Nor will it help you to say, that he seals this Absolute Promise but
Conditionally: for however, the man must needs be saved by such a Gift or
Promise it self, though it were never sealed at all. If you mean (as I suppose
you do) I give thee Christ to be thine, on condition that thou Accept him as
offered; then 1. Why did you express a Conditional Gift, in Absolute terms,
leaving out the Condition? 2. Why then are you so loath to yield that this
Conditional Grant is Absolutely sealed, that is, owned by an express sign; As
long as the Grant is but Conditional, yea and the sign it self does Exhibit or
Convey but Conditionally, what danger to say that it seals Absolutely? Is
there not more inconvenience in saying that both the Grant is Conditional, and
yet also that it is but Conditionally sealed?

3. You add, The outward Elements are given on this Condition, that we receive
them, that we eat and drink them: Reply, I never gave them but on a higher
Condition, viz. If you will take Christ offered, take this which signifies,
etc. And I think Christ never gave them but on condition, that men Accept him
as well as the sign; though when they performed not what they pretend to do, he
does not suspend his act of Tradition: And in such a case it is a Delivering,
but not a proper Giving. And I do not think that you use your selves to give
the Sacramental signs merely on condition that men will Take, and Eat, and
Drink them: As you charge a further Condition on them, so I conjecture that if
they should profess no more, then so to Take the signs, you would not deliver
them.

Next you argue thus, That which all do not partake of that receive the
Sacrament, is not Absolutely, but Conditionally sealed in the Sacrament. But
all do not partake of Christ in the Sacrament; therefore he is not Absolutely,
but Conditionally sealed: Reply, 1. What if I should grant all this? what is it
to our present question? to Seal Christ, is somewhat an uncouth phrase. It is
either the Grant or Promise of Christ that you mean, which Gives Christ: or it
is the Jus so Given: (For Christ himself in substance is not Given by the
Covenant, otherwise then by giving us Right to him.) If you mean it of Right to
Christ, then this is the Terminus proximus exhibitionis, and the more remote
end of sealing; whereas our Question was of the subject sealed, and not of the
end of sealing. And therefore you should not have thought that you conclude the
Question, when you speak only to another question. But if by sealing Christ,
you mean only sealing the Promise or Grant of Christ and Life in him; then 2. I
deny your major proposition. If you had said only, That which all do not
partake of that receive the Sacrament, is not absolutely Given; I should easily
have granted it: for it is Given on condition of Receiving: and even a sealed
Grant may be uneffectual to Conveyance, through the interposition of the
Dissent and Rejection of him that should receive. But you add for the
confirmation of the major, None can miss of that which God Absolutely Grants,
and Absolutely seals; Reply, 1. But what is this to your major? was there any
mention of Absolute Granting? This is somewhat a large Addition. 2. And what is
this to the question between you and me? You know and acknowledge, that I say,
It is the Conditional Grant that is Absolutely sealed: why then do you dispute
against Absolute Granting and Sealing? This is loss of time to the best of your
Readers; and for the worst, it may make them think my opinion is clean contrary
to my own profession.

. 65.
Mr. Bl. OR in case the Soul frame any Argumentation, I suppose it is to be
conceived to this purpose; If God give me Christ, he will give me Justification
and Salvation by Christ; but God gives me Christ; therefore he will give me
Justification and Salvation. The major is supposed not sealed: the minor is
there sealed: The Elements being tendered by the Minister in Gods stead, and
received with my hand, I am confirmed that God gives Christ to my Faith: And
the minor being sealed, the Conclusion eo nomine is sealed. The proof of any
proposition in a Syllogism, is in order to the proof of the Conclusion; and so
the sealing of any proposition is in order to the sealing of the Conclusion;
which indeed Mr. Baxter grants; where he says that the Proposition that God
seals to runs thus, If thou do believe, I do pardon thee, and will save thee:
Yet several passages in that Discourse, are I confess beyond my weak
apprehension.

. 65.
R. B. 1. TO your Argument there needs no more to be said then is said to the
former. When God has in one Deed of Gift bestowed on us Christ and Life,
Remission, Justification, Adoption, etc. (1 John 5.10, 11, 12. Joh. 1.11, 12.)
it must be in case of great ignorance that the person that knows that God
gives him Christ, must yet be constrained by after arguings to acknowledge
that he gives him Justification. And how this argument tends to explain the
nature of Sacramental sealing, I neither know, nor see any thing here to help
me to know. If you will suppose such an Argument as this used for Application,
I would not stick to yield it useful; What God does by his Testament give to
all men* on condition they will Accept it, that he gives to me on condition I
will Accept it. But he gives Christ and Life in him, to all men if they will
Accept it; therefore to me: (Or if you will say, to all that hear the Gospel.)
Though the use of such an Argument is more for lively Application, then
confirmation of the Truth of the Grant.

2. Your supposition that your minor is sealed, and not your major, has enough
said to it.

3. The Sacraments may confirm your faith in Christ as given to you, otherwise
then by sealing, viz. as they are signs for Remembrance, Excitation to sense
and lively apprehensions of Gods Donation, and as they are signs instrumental
in sole Conveyance of the benefit Given, as a twig and a turfe, and a Key in
giving possession, and the words and actions of matrimonial solemnization or
Contract.

4. It is new Logic to my understanding, that the minor being sealed, the
Conclusion eo nomine is sealed: The minor of many an Argument may be true, and
the conclusion false. And therefore when the case so falls out, that both minor
and conclusion are true, or sealed, it is not eo nomine, because the minor is
true, that the Conclusion is so, (or is sealed, eo nomine because the minor is
so) but because both major and minor are so, and not then neither, but upon
supposition that the Syllogism be sound.

5. But to prove this, you say, the proof of any Proposition in a Syllogism, is
in order to the proof of the Conclusion: and so the sealing of any Proposition
is in order to the sealing of the Conclusion: Reply; The first is true. 1. But
what is this to the matter? Is it all one to prove it and to be in order to
prove it, to seal it and to be in order to the sealing of it? Is the Conclusion
proved on the proof of one Proposition? No: therefore according to your own
arguing, neither is it sealed by the sealing of one Proposition. 2. That the
sealing of one Proposition is in order to the sealing of the Conclusion, I
deny. 1. It may be a single Proposition that is sealed, not standing as part of
a Syllogism: as this, I Give Christ and Life in him to you all that will Accept
him. 2. If it be supposed part of a Syllogism, it is enough sometime that the
Conclusion be cleared or confirmed, or we enabled igfallibly to gather it, by
the sealing of one Proposition: but it is not necessary that it be the very
sealing of the Conclusion, to which the sealing of that Ptoposition does tend.
When a Landlord has sealed a Lease to his Tenant, he has sealed this
Proposition, If A. B. well and truly pay such Rents, he shall quietly enjoy
such Lands: suppose the minor to be, But A. B. does or will well and truly pay
such Rents: suppose this minor Proposition either false or uncertain, will you
say then that the sealing of the major was in order to the sealing of the
Conclusion? No: the Conclusion is Absolute, therefore A. B. shall enjoy such
Lands: but the Proposition sealed is Conditional. It is enough that it secure
his Right, if he pay his Rent, and that it enable him infallibly so to
conclude, while he performs the conditions, though it tend not at all to seal
the Conclusion. We seldom use seals to Syllogisms: and not to Conclusions as
such, or eo noimne, because a major or minor Proposition is proved: though the
thing sealed may be to other uses made part of a Syllogism.

Yet I grant that where the Syllogism is such as that one of the Propositions
does morally contain the Conclusion in sense, though not in terms, there the
conclusion is sealed when that one Proposition is sealed: because it is the
sense and not mere terms that are sealed; and undoubted naturals are
presupposed in morality, and therefore the sealing of one is the sealing of
both: For example, if you argue either from a Synonimal term, or from the thing
as Defined to the thing as named, or from the Genus to the Species, or from the
Species to the Individual; thus, succinum corroborat cerebrum: At Ambarum, vel
electrum est succinum: therefore Ambarum vel electrum corroborat cerebrum: or
thus, Privatio visus est naturae malum. Caecitas est Privatio visus: therefore,
Caecitas est naturae malum. Or thus, God made every creature: Man is a
creature: therefore God made man. Or thus, All men on earth are sinners. I am a
man on earth: therefore I am a sinner. In all these, if you seal the major
proposition, or affirm it true, you do indeed, though not in terms, affirm or
seal the conclusion morally. The confession that you say I make, reaches no
higher. But observe that its only morally that I say you may be said to say or
seal the conclusion; because unquestionable naturals are presupposed in Morals
and Legals.

. 66.
Mr. Bl. HE that Believes is Justified and shall be saved; is his major
Proposition. This he says is sealed unquestionably: when indeed I have ever
thought, and yet think, that it is not at all sealed. Sacraments seal not to
the truth of any general Proposition, but with particular application as they
are dispensed, so they seal; but they are applied particularly, Take, Eat, etc.
This Mr. Baxter sees page 69. and therefore in that absolute universal
Proposition, he finds a particular Conditional Promise, to which he says God
seals: If thou believe, I do pardon thee and will save thee.

. 66.
R. B. ALL this is answered sufficiently already. Only observe that by shall be
saved, and I will save thee, I mean but shall have, or I will give thee present
Right to salvation; For the continuance of that Right, has more then Faith for
its condition.

. 67.
Mr. Bl. THat it seals not to the truth of the minor Proposition, But I
believe, (he says) is beyond dispute, giving in his reasons. It should seal
then to that which is not written; for no scripture says, that I do believe;
so certainly Sacraments do seal; they seal to that which is not directly
written, they seal with particular application, but the man to whom they are
applied has not his name in scripture written; they seal to an individual
person, upon the Warrants of a general Promise: though I do not say that
Proposition is sealed; yet me thinks this reason is scarce cogent.

. 67.
R. B. YOu deny not my assertion, but argue against the reason of it; as before
by telling us what you thought, so here by affirming the contrary certain, you
attempt the confutation of mine. To your instance I give these two returns 1.
It is equivocation, when our question is of sealing to a thing as the subjectum
obsignatum, for to instance in sealing to a person as the finis cui. The seal,
that is to application as an end, not to application as the subject sealed. 2.
But if you respect not the person as the end of application, but as the party
expressed in the Promise which is sealed, then I say, If you can prove that the
universal Proposition does not in sense contain the singulars, so that this
singular, If thou believe thou shall be saved, be not in Moral Law sense
contained in this universal, All that believe shall be saved, (the Law
supposing them all to be men and sinners) then I will prove, that God does not
properly seal to the singulars; But till then I suspend.

. 68.
Mr. Bl. MR Baxter says, The great question is, whether they seal to the
Conclusion, as they do to the major Proposition? To which he answers, No,
directly and properly it does not. If the Proposition seems directly to prove
the Conclusion, then that which directly confirms any Proposition in a rightly
formed Syllogism, confirms the Conculsion. If the Conclusion be not sealed,
then no Proposition is sealed, or else the Syllogism is ill-framed.

. 68.
R. B. TThis is too new Doctrine to be received without one word of proof. Does
he that seals the major of this following Syllogism, seal the Conclusion? All
that truly Receive Christ, are the Sons of God, and shall be saved. Judas did
truly receive Christ; therefore Judas was the Son of God, and shall be saved. I
think both Premises must be true, before the Conclusion will thence be proved
true. And it is not sealed by God, when it is false.

. 69.
Mr. Bl. REasons are given. This Conclusion is nowhere written in Scripture,
and therefore is not properly the object of Faith; whereas the seals are for
the confirmation of our Faith; To which I say, It is written Virtually, though
not expressly. That I shall rise in Judgment is nowhere written, yet it is of
Faith that I shall rise; and when I have concluded Faith in my heart, as well
as Reason in my Soul, knowing my self to be a Believer as I know my self to be
a man, I may as well conclude that I shall rise to Life, as that I shall rise
to Judgment.

. 69,
R. B. 1. WHen you oppose Virtually to Expressly, you seem by Virtually to mean
in sense, though not in terms. If so, then your Syllogism is tautological. But
take it in what sense you will in any propriety, and I deny that it is
Virtually written in Scripture, that you or I do Believe, or yet that you or I
are Justified and shall be saved. Yet I confess that some Conclusions may be
said to be Interpretative vel secundum loquutionem moralem in Scripture, when
but one of the premises is there: but that is when the other is presupposed as
being as certain: but of this more anon, where you speak of this subject more
largely.

2. To your instance, I say, It is by Faith and natural knowledge mixed that you
conclude you shall rise again. The Conclusion participateth of both Premises,
as to the ground of its certainty. That it does sequi, is a right gathered
Conclusion, is known only by Reason, and not by Faith: that it is true, is
known partly by Reason, and partly by Faith, when the Premises belong to both.
Yet though in strict sense, it be thus mixed, in our ordinary discourse we must
denominate it from one of the Premises, and usually from the more notable,
always from the more Debile. Scripture says, All men shall rise; Reason
says, you are a man. Though the Conclusion here par^^^e of both, yet it is
most fitly said to be de fide, both because Scripture intended each particular
man in the Universal; and because it is supposed as known to all, that they are
men; and therefore the other part is it that resolves the doubt, and is the
notable and more debile part.

Its I know undoubted with you, that Conclusio sequitur partem debiliorem. Now
though Gods Word in it self is most infallible, yet in respect of the evidence
to us, it is generally acknowledged that it is far short of natural principles,
and objects of sense, in so much that men have taken it for granted, that the
objects of faith are not evident (of which I will not now stand to speak what I
think, but touch it anon). Therefore it being more evident that you are a man,
then it is that all men shall rise, it is fittest to say the Conclusion is de
fide as the more debile part. But can we say so of the present Conclusion in
question? Have you a fuller evidence that you are a sincere Believer, then you
have that, All sincere Believers are Justified? I have not for my part: But it
seems by your following words that you have, or suppose others to have; to
which I say* 3. If you have as evidently concluded that Faith is in your heart,
(saving Faith) as that Reason is in your Soul, and know your self to be a
Believer as evidently as you know your self to be a man, then your Conclusion
may be denominated to be de fide, as a part delibiore. But if this be not your
case, it is most fit (for all the mixed interest of the Premises) to say that it
is not de fide, but from the knowledge of your sincerity in the Faith, as a
part debiliore. And if it be your case indeed, you are the happiest man that
ever I yet spoke with. But I know that no man ordinarily can have such evidence
of his sincerity; yet because I will not speak of you or others by my self, nor
judge others hearts to be as bad as my own, or as all those that I have
conversed with, we will if you please thus comprimize the difference: All those
whose evidence of sincerity is as clear as the evidence of their Reason and
manhood, yea or more then Scripture evidence, so that Gods Testimony is pars
debilior in the Syllogism; these shall take the Conclusion, that they are
Justified, to be de fide: and all the rest shall take the Conclusion to be not
de fide, but from the knowledge of themselves: and then let the issue show
whether more will be of your mind or of mine. I think this a fair Agreement.

. 70.
Mr. Bl. OTherwise (says he) every man rightly Receiving the Seals, must needs
certainly be Justified and saved. I see no danger in yielding this Conclusion;
every man rightly receiving and improving the seals, must be saved and
Justified. He that rightly receives the seals, receives Christ in the seals,
and receiving Christ, he receives salvation. So he that rightly hears. Hear and
your Souls shall live. Isa. 55. So he that rightly prays. Whosoever calls on
the name of the Lord shall be saved. Romans 10.

. 70.
R. B. 1. BY Rightly, I meant, having Right to it, and that only in foro
Ecclesiae, and not Recte. But I confess I should have plainlyer expressed my
meaning. 2. ^hether you here contradict not your Doctrine of Baptismal Faith,
where you suppose Justifying Faith to be the thing promised by us in Baptism,
and therefore not prerequisite in it, I leave you to judge, and resolve as by
your explication.

. 71.
Mr. Bl. ANd no man can groundedly administer the Sacrament to any but himself,
because he can be certain of no man's Justification and Salvation; Upon the same
terms that he knows any man may be saved, upon the same he may give him the
Sacrament sealing this salvation. This argument as we heard before, is
Bellarmines, and concludes indeed against Absolute seals in the Sacrament, but
not against Conditional sealing, as is confessed by Protestant Divines.

. 71.
R. B. 1. I know it not to be true of any man that he shall be saved. therefore
I may not seal it to any, by your Concession. God-Seals to no falsehood; I know
not whether it be true or false that A. B. shall be saved. Yet it is on some of
the Opposers principles that I now argue.

2. I desire you not to answer it as Bellarmines argument, but as mine, seeing
you choose me to deal with. 3. The Argument makes as much against my asserting
the Truth of your Conclusion, as the sealing it: so that let your sealing be
Conditional or none at all, I may not so much as affirm to any man whose heart
I know not, the Conclusion which you say I must seal. The Conclusion is
Absolute, Thou A. B. art Justified and shall be saved; though the Major
Proposition, or or Universal Grant be conditional. Now if you will Seal this
Absolute Conclusion conditionally, then 1. you will sin in the bare affirming
it a true Conclusion, before you seal it, if you go but so fat. 2. What is the
Condition that you mean? I suppose true Faith. But if so, then where there is
not true Faith, thete you do not Actually seal: For a Conditional sealing, is
not Actual sealing till the condition be performed; for the condition not
performed suspends the act. And then you have mistaken in thinking that the
Covenant is sealed actually to the unregenerate or ungodly. But if you mean any
thing short of true Faith, how can you on that condition seal to any man, that
he is Justified, and shall be saved. I do therefore rather choose to say, If
thou Believe thou shall be saved: and thus, as contained in the general Grant,
I absolutely seal; then to say, Thou shall be saved, and this I seal if thou
Believe. Though I say again, I make a small matter of this, and suppose your
meaning and mine is the same, for all these words.

4. Where you say, It concludes an Absolute sealing; I say, No, if it be but to
a Conditional Grant, and if Absolute Exhibition or Collation be not added to
absolute sealing.

. 72.
Mr. Bl. MR Baxter adds, I am sorry to see what advantage many of our most
learned Divines have given the Papists here, as one error draws on many, and
leads a man into a Labyrinth of Absurdities; being first mistaken in the
nature of Justifying Faith, thinking it consists in a belief of the pardon of
my own sins (which is the Conclusion) have therefore thought that this is it
which the Sacrament seals. And when the Papists allege that it is nowhere
written, that such or such a man is Justified; we answer them that it being
written, that He that Believes is justified, this is equivalent. But Mr.
Baxte^ doubtless knows that many Divines who are out of that error concerning
the nature of Justifying Faith, and have learned to distinguish between Faith
in the Essence of it and Assurance; yet are confidently persuaded that the
Sacrament seals this Conclusion, knowing that the Sacrament seals what the
Covenant promises to the persons in Covenant, and upon the same terms as the
Covenant does promise it. Now the Covenant promises forgiveness of sins (as
Mr. Baxter confesses) conditionally, and this to all in Covenant, and this the
Sacrament seals.

. 72.
R. B. 1. IF there be any that mistake but in one of those points, when others
mistake in them all, those are not the men meant that I speak of. I intended
not every man that held your opinion, but only those that held it on the ground
and with the worser consequent or defense which I expressed. 2. I shall know
whom you mean, when I see the Authors and place in them cited. 3. I think most
of our great transmarine Divines who write of it against the Papists, do own
that which you acknowledge an error; and what advantage that will give the
Papists, who are so ready to take a Confutation of one Doctrine of the
Protestants for a Confutation of all, you may easily conjecture. 4. This
Conclusion many confess sealed, If thou A. B. do believe, thou shall be saved:
but not this Conclusion, Thou A. B shall be saved. 5. I have showed you that it
is one thing to seal to the Promise for form and matter, and another thing to
seal to the persons Right to the thing promised. This actual Right is but the
end, which is not obtained, till Delivered or offered; Reception and actual
Collation go before; and then is not the subjectum obsignatum. Your argument I
conceive does nothing for your cause, yea is wholly for mine. Your Conclusion
is, therefore this the Sacrament seals; what is this? why Forgiveness of sins
Conditionally, and this to all in Covenant. Here 1. you seem to yield that it
is not the Absolute but Conditional Promise which is sealed, which is the main
thing that I stood on: 2. You seem to apply the word Conditionally to
forgiveness, and n^ to sealing: and so to confess that the sealing is actual;
and if actual, then not merely conditional. For to say I conditionally seal, is
to say, It shall be no seal, till the performance of the Condition. But you
seem to confess it a seal before of Conditional forgiveness. 3. You seem to
acknowledge the general Promise sealed, though with application to particular
persons.

. 73.
Mr. Bl. ANd as it is an error to hold that to believe my sins are forgiven, is
of the nature or essence of Faith, as though none did believe but those that
had attained such assurance, (true Faith has assurance in pursuit only,
sometimes, and not always in possession) So on the other hand it is a mistake
to say, that it is no work of Faith. The Apostle calls it the full assurance of
Faith, Heb. 10.22. and describes Faith to be the substance of things hoped
for; Faith realizeth salvation which we have in hope to the Soul. A Description
of Faith (says Dr. Amesius out of a Schoolman) by one of the most eminent acts
that it produces; therefore I take that to be a good answer that is here
charged with error, that when it is written, He that Believes is Justified, it
is equivalent, as though it were such or such a man is Justified, in case with
assured grounds and infallible Demonstrations he can make it good to his own
self that he believes.

. 73.
R. B. 1. IF assurance be not of the nature or Essence of Faith, then it is not
Faith: for nothing is Faith, but what is of the nature and Essence of Faith:
But according to Mr. Bl. assurance is not of the nature or Essence of Faith
(for he says, its an error to hold it); therefore according to Mr. Bl.
assurance is not Faith. But I suspect by the following words, that by nature
and essence, he means the minimum quod sic.

2. That which is but either Pursued or Possessed by Faith, is not Faith it
self, (for nothing is the Pursuer and Pursued, the Possessor and Possessed; as
to the same part: nor will Mr. Bl. I conjecture, say, that a less degree of
Faith possesses a greater) but according to Mr. Bl. assurance is but pursued
or possessed by Faith; therefore is not Faith.

3. I know none that denies Assurance to be a Work of Faith, which Mr. Bl.
here says is a mistake to say, Love and Obedience are wroks of Faith, but not
Faith it self.

4. I must have better proof before I can believe that it is Assurance of our
own sincerity, or actual Justification, which the Apostle calls The full
assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. Though how far this may concur, I now enquire
not.

5. And as hardly can I discern assurance of our sincerity, in the description
of Faith, Heb. 11.1. Unless you mean that hope is part of Faith, and assurance
the same with hope; both which need more proof. Hope may be without assurance:
and when it is joined with it, yet it is not the same thing. Only such
assurance is a singular help to the exercise of Hope.

6. Its true that Faith may be said, as you speak, to Realize salvation to the
Soul; that is, when the Soul doubts whether there be indeed such a Glory and
Salvation to be expected and enjoyed by Believers, as Christ has promised,
here Faith apprehends it as Real or Certain, and so resolves the doubt. But
when the doubt is only whether I be a true Believer, Faith resolves it not: and
when the doubt is, whether this certain Glory and Salvation shall be mine,
Faith only cooperateth to the resolve of it, by affording us one of the
Propositions, but not both, and not wholly the Conclusion.

7. I am of Dr. Ames mind that it is one of Faiths most eminent acts, by which
it is there described: But so think not they that tell us that is none of the
Instrumental Justifying act which is there described.

8. This which you took to be a good answer, is that great mistake which has
so hardened the Papists against us; and were it not for this point, I should not
have desired much to have said any thing to you of the rest, (about Conditional
sealing) as being confident that we mean the same thing in the main.

9. You forsake them that use to give this answer, when you confine it to those
only that with assured grounds and infallible demonstrations can make it good
to themselves that they Believe, i. e. savingly. I doubt that answer then will
hold but to very few, if you mean by Assured grounds, etc. such as they are
actually assured are good and demonstrative.

10. Demonstrations may be infallible, and yet not known to be such to the
person: but I suppose that by the word Demonstration, you intend that the
party discerns it to be an infallible Demonstration: which sure intimates a
very high kind of certainty.

11. Yet even in that case, I deny that the general Premise, in the major, is
equivalent to the Conclusion, I am Justified and shall be saved; though I
should acknowledge that the Conclusion may be said to be de fide, in that the
Major has the predominant Interest in the Conclusion, if so be that the man
have better evidence of his sincerity, then of the Truth of the Promise.

. 74.
Mr. Bl. But this is said to be a gross mistake, and thus proved, as though the
Major Proposition alone were equivalent to the Conclusion: But here being in
our Syllogism, both a Major and a Minor, there is added further, or as if the
Conclusion must or can be merely Credenda, a proper object of Faith, when but
one of the Propositions is of Faith, the other of sense and knowledge: Here the
Major is confessed to be of Faith; but the Minor, I sincerely Believe, is
affirmed to be known by inward sense and self-reflexion. Here I must enter my
dissent, that a Conclusion may be Credenda, an object of Faith, when but one of
the Propositions is of Faith, and the other of sense and knowledge: yea that it
will hold in matters of Faith both fundamental and superstructive.

. 74.
R. B. 1. IT was not this according to your limitations that was said to be a
gross mistake; but as applied to ordinary Believers, though my reasons make
against both.

2. You deal more easily to your self, then fairly with me, in your entered
Dissent. 1. I said merely Credenda, as confessing it is partly of Faith, and
partly of knowledge, as the Premises are: and you leave out merely, and put in
Crendenda alone, as if I denied it to participate of Faith. 2. I denied it
therefore to be a proper object of Faith; that is, a mere Credendum or Divine
Testimony; acknowledging that it may be participative and partially, and less
properly called an Object of Faith; and you leave out properly, and only affirm
it an Object of Faith, of what sort soever, in general.

3. I have answered this sufficiently, in telling you my opinion: i. e. The
Conclusion still partakes of the nature of both Premises: and therefore when
one is de fide, and the other naturaliter revelatum vel cognitum, there the
Conclusion, is not purely either supernatural or natural, de fide, or ex
cognitione naturali; but mixed of both. That its truly a Conclusion, following
those Premises, is known only by Rational discourse, and is not de fide: but
that it is a true Proposition, is known partly naturally, partly by
supernatural Revelation (which is that we mean, when we say it is de fide). But
because it is fittest in our common speech to give this Conclusion a simple and
not a compound Denomination (for brevitie sake) therefore we may well
denominate it from one of the Propositions, and that must always be a part
debiliore: And therefore when it is principia naturaliter nota that make one
proposition or sensible things, or what ever that is more evident then the
truth of the Proposition which is of Divine Testimony, there it is fittest to
say, The Conclusion is de fide, or of supernatural Revelation; As when the one
Proposition is that there is a God, or I am a man, or God is Great, or Good, or
True. But when the other Proposition is less evident then that which is of
Divine Revelation, then it is fittest to say, that the Conclusion is such as
that Proposition is, and not properly de fide. For the Conclusion being the
joint issue of both Premises as its parents or true Causes, it cannot be more
noble then the more ignoble of them. This explication of my opinion is it that
I referr you to as the substance of my answer to all that follows.

. 75.
Mr. Bl. WHen Fisher the Jesuit told Dr. Featley that it was solid Divinity,
that a Conclusion de fide must necessarily by inferred out of two Propositions
de fide, Dr. Goad (being present as Dr. Featleys Assistant) interposed in these
words, I will maintain the contrary against you or any other: That a Conclusion
may be de fide, although both Propositions be not de fide, but one of them
otherwise evidently and infallibly true by the light of Reason or experience;
giving instance in this Conclusion, Christus est risibilis, which he said and
truly, was de fide, though both Propositions whence it is inferred be not de
fide. Omnis homo est risibilis, is not a Proposition de fide, or supernaturally
revealed in Scripture; yet thence the Conclusion follows in this Syllogism.
Omnis homoest risibilis: Christus est homo: therefore Christus est r^sibilis,
which is a Conclusion de fide, affirming that Melchior Canus had judiciously
handled and proved this tenent, which he said he could otherwise demonstrate to
be infallible: To whom Dr. Featley assents, second Days dispute, page 85. It
were casie to frame many such Syllogisms. If an Heretic should affirm that
Christ had only a fantastic body in appearance only, how would you prove the
contrary but with this Syllogism, He that is truly man, has a true body, and
not a fantastic body only. This is a Position in reason, Christ is truly a
man: this is a Position de fide in Scripture, whence follows the Conclusion de
fide, that Christ has not a fantastic body; If one should deny that Christ
had a reasonable soul, affirming that his body was informed by the Dietie
instead of a Soul, must it not be thus proved? Every true man has a reasonable
Soul: Christ is a true man, and therefore Christ has a reasonable Soul. The
City that rules over the Nations of the earth, and is seated on seven hills,
is the seat of the Beast. This is a Scripture Proposition: But that Rome then
ruled over the Nations of the Earth, and was seated on 7 hills, we know by
History and Geography: Whence the Conclusion follows, that Rome is the seat of
the Beast. Abundance of these may be framed, where the Proposition opposite to
the Conclusion, is either an Heresy or at least an error in Faith. The
Conclusion is of Faith Disputing against the Vbiquitarians and
Transubstantiation; to hold up the Orthodox Faith, we are necessitated to make
use of maxims of known reason. If they were denied us, the new Crew now start
up, that deny all consequences from Scripture, and will have none but Scripture
words, had here a notable advantage. This Argument well followed, would put Mr.
Baxter himself to a great loss in some of his Arguments (for which yet I give
him thanks) to prove that the Scripture is the word of God.

. 75.
R. B. THis is fully answered before, even in my last Section. 1. Dr. Go^d
says but the same that I say: only I distinguish 1. Between that which is
purely de fide, and that which is only denominated de fide as the more debile
of the Premises. In the latter sense the Doctors conclusions are de fide, in
the former not. 2. When a Conclusion is denied to be de fide, it may be meant
either as a Diminution of its evidence, or as magnifying its evidence above
that which is purely de fide, or as equaling it thereto. When I say this
Conclusion is not de fide, A. B. is Justified and shall be saved, I speak it by
way of Diminution of its evidence and authority. And I confidently speak it,
and doubt not to maintain it. But when I deny this Conclusion to be simply or
purely de fide, I R. B. shall rise again, I distinguish nothing of the evidence
or necessity of it. And when I thus argue, Omne quod sentit and ratiocinatur,
est Animal. Ego R. B. sentio and ratiocinor: therefore ego sum Animal; though I
say that here the Conclusion is not de fide, yet I intend thereby to extol it
for evidence above that which is de fide. And when I affirm this Conclusion to
be de fide, I R. B. shall rise again, as denominated a part debiliore, I do
speak it in Diminution of its evidence, in comparison of that which is more
evident in nature: The Premises are these, All m^n shall rise again: I am a
man; therefore I shall rise again (supposing we spe^k of men that dye). If the
Major which is de fide, were as evident as the Minor, which is not, the
Conclusion would be more evident then it is: and if neither were de fide, but
both known naturally as the Minor is, the Conclusion would not be de fide, but
would be more evident. This I speak that you may not think that I deny the
Certainty, Evidence or Necessity of every Conclusion, which I deny to be de
fide, either pur^ly, or by prevalent participation.

3. For the Papists, though ofttimes they take the term de fide, as you and I
do, for that which is by supernatural Revelation Divine, yet sometimes they
take it for any point which is necessary to salvation to be held, without
respect to the supernaturality of the Revelation, How Fisher used it, I know
not.

4. I think your Conclusion, that Christ has a true body, is purely de fide,
and may be proved by mere Scripture Testimony, without your medium.

5. The advantage that you say the new Crew would have upon denial of the use
of Maxims of known reason, I know not who gives them (except Veronius and his
followers, against whom its long since I read and consented to Vedelius in the
main). But once again, and once for all, let me tell you, that if the other of
your Premises be less evident or proveable then the very Word of God, and be
more to be doubted of, then your Conclusion is not de fide. For nothing that is
truly de fide, is less evident then the truth of Gods Word, and that part of
the word in particular. But yet though in such a case we tell them that the
Conclusion is not de fide, yet it follows not that it is untrue, yea or not
evident: nor do we therefore deny the use of Reasoning from mediums of lower
evidence then Scripture; much less of clearer evidence. But many consequences
may be true, and yet not de fide when one of the Premises is de fide.

Note also for the understanding of what I have said concerning the evidence of
the objects of Faith, that whereas we do usually so compare Science, Opinion
and Divine Faith, as to conclude that Science is an assent both firm, certain
and evident; Divine Faith is an assent, fi^me and certain, but not evident;
Opinion is sometime firm, but never certain or evident; I do not speak in the
language of these Divines and Philosophers, when I ascribe an Evidence to
Divine Faith: But then you must understand that the difference is not (as I
conceive) de re, but de nomine; For I take not the term evident, in so
restrained a sense as they do: As to instance in Rob. Baronius (that second
Camer^) who says, Assensus evidens est cum quis per se, hoc est, vi sui sensus
aut rationis, absque alterius informatione and testificatione percipit eam
propositionem, cui assentitur, esse veram: and he makes that an inevident
Assent, cum quis Assentitur propositioni, non quod sensus, aut solida ratio eam
veram esse Demonstret: sed vel quod levis and inefficax ratio illud suadeat,
vel quod alius testetur eam esse veram; Philos. Theol. an. p. 148. But I think
the term evident, is here too much restrained; and that with great
inconvenience, and some wrong to the Christian Faith. I take that to be
properly evident, which is to the understanding truly Apparent, or Discernable;
which has diverse degrees: And the Negative addition (that it must be absque
alterius testificatione) is not only superfluous, but unsound; And may appear
even from the Authors words; 1. where he opposes these two, in describing
inevident Assent; non quod sensus aut solida Ratio eam veram esse demonstret,
and sed quod alius testetur eam esse veram. Where he grants that whatsoever
solid reason demonstrateth to be true, that is evident. Now I say, that he
should not have opposed all Testimony to this. For solid reason does
demonstrate Gods Testimony to be true, and this to be his Testimony. 2. He
ascribes Certainty to Divine Faith, which he describes to be an Assent, qui
nititur certo aliquo aut solido fundamento, non vero levi aut fallaci ratione;
and he notes diligently, that ad certitudinem assensus requiri, ut fundamentum
quo men's nititur dum assensum praebet, non solum ut sit in se certum, sed etiam
ut assentienti tale videatur; nisi enim ille sciat rationem qua nititur esse
certam, ejus assensus nullo modo erit certus and stabilis. Now he confesses
that the object of Science must be evident: and here he says, nisi scia^
rationem esse certam. If he must scire certitudinem, then he must scire
eviden^iam, if all objects of science are evident. And what is it to know, but
to discern or understand a discernable, cognoscible, or evident object? How
then can we scire certitudinem, nisi sciendo aliquam Certitudinis Evidentiam? I
conceive therefore that it is true proper evidence which is allowed to Divine
Faith, under this name of Certainty, even by them that say it is not evident; I
know what a stir the Schoolmen make about this point. The Question is not only
de Evidentia sidei, but de Evidenti Theology also, which they distinguish from
fides, as habitus primorum principi^rum, and scientia Conclusionum are
distinct. Though the most of the Schoolmen go the other way, yet some (as
Henricus Quodlib. 12. q. 2. and Beza Archiepisc. Hispalens. qu. 1. prolog. art.
3. not. 3.4.) do affirm our Theology to have Evidence. Aquinas and his
followers maintain it to be a Science; but that is, because they suppose it to
be subalternate to the Science of God and the Gloryfied. And therefore Aquin.
22. qu. 1. art. 5. c. denies those things to be scita quae communiter and
simpliciter s^b fide c^ntinentur, and that because omnis scientia habetur per
aliqua principia per se nota, and per consequens visa. But I think that per
consequens visa, will not hold without exceptions and limitations; and I
suppose it to be ex principiis per se notis originally: Yet in the foregoing
Article, Aquinas grants that though quae subsunt fidei Considerata in speciali
non possunt esse simul visa and Credita, tamen in generali sub communi ratione
Credibilis sic visa sunt ab eo qui Credit. Non enim Crederet nisi videret ea
esse Credenda, vel propter Evidentiam signorum vel propter aliquid hujusmodi.
And I easily confess that matters of mere supernatural Revelation are not in
themselves evident, nor ab Evidentia ipsius rei must we prove it; But that we
have Evidence of the Verity of the Conclusions, by the Evidence of the great
Principles and the Conexion, I take yet for sound Doctrine. The Scotists in
opposition to the Thomists make much a do on the question Virum Theologia sit
Scientia: And if properly Scientia, it seems it must be evident. Scotus lays
down four things necessary to Science strictly and properly so called; 1. Quod
sit Cognitio cer^a, i. e. sine deceptione. 2. Quod sit de objecto necessario,
and non contingente. 3. Debet esse Causata a Causa Evidenti intellectui, id
est, a principiis evidenter notis intellectui; by which he says Science is
distinguished from Faith which is cognitio obscura, aenigmatica^^^ inevidens.
4. Quod hujusmodi principia seu causa ex terminis evidens intellectui debet
applicari per discursum Syllogisticum bonum and legitimum ad inferendam
conclusionem: and so Science is defined Notitia intellectualis, cert^ and
Ev^dens alicujus very, necessarii, evidenter deducti ex princ^p^is necessa^^is
pr^us Evidenter notis. Yet Rada says, the fourth of these is accidental. And I
see not but we have even such a rigid strict Science of the objects of Faith.
1. It may be Notitia Intellectualis certa, as all confess. 2. And de objecto
necessario. Only let me add, that when we make use of infallible Tradition de
facto, in proving the soundness of our Records, that this was Contingens a
priori, yet is it necessary a posteriore necessitate existentiae; and that as
to the verity, though it be contingent, whether this or that particular man
speak truth, yet considering but the force of objects and common natural
inclinations in determining the Will, it may certainly be concluded that as to
a whole Nation, or World, some voluntary actions are so Contingent, as that yet
they are of a most certainly discernable event: Even men before hand may
infallibly know that they will come ^o pass, (supposing the world to continue
Rational): As that all this Nation, or all Europe will not famish themselves
wilfully, and will not hang themselves, etc. is a thing that may as certainly
be foreknown, as if it were not Contingent: much more may the Verity of such
past actions be known. 3. And that it may have evident principles, shall be
shown anon. 4. And then that it is discoursive, is clear. Though Credere it
self as it is the quieting and repose or confidence of the mind upon the
authority or apprehended Veracity of the Reveale^* is an effect of this
discourse seeing siducia is not purely or chieflly, an Intellectual act, nor
sidem alicui habere as it signifies this repose: Yet the Truth received on the
Speakers Trust or Credit, is received by the Intellect in a discoursive way.

Rada grants these Conclusions, 1. Theologia secundum se est vere and proprie
scientic. 2. Theologia Dei respectu eorum quae funt necessaria secundem se, est
vere and proprie scient^a. 3. Theologia in beatis est proprie and vere scientia
quoad omnes. 4. Conditiones scientiae. Yet this eighth Conclusion is that
Theologia prout est in nobis viatoribu^ non est proprie and stricte scientia.
And the great Argument to prove it is, prout est in nobis est inevidens, quia
principia nostrae Theologiae sunt tantum Credita, so that all the weight is
laid on this inevidence Briefly, my reasons for the Evidence of the Object of
Divine Faith, are these. 1. If it be evident that Deus est Verax, and Deus haec
testatur, that God is true of his Word, and that this is his Word or
Revelation, then Faith has evident principles. But the Antecedent is true;
therefore* Into these principles we resolve all points of Faith: Whatsoever God
witnesses is true; but the Doctrine of the Resurrection, judgment, etc. God
witnesses or reveals; therefore; That God is true, we have the same Evidence
as that he is perfectly good, and that is, that he is God: and that there is a
God, I take to be as evident a Truth as any in Nature to Reason, though God
himself be so far above our comprehension. That this is a Divine Revelation,
has also its evidence, in evident miracles sealing it to the first witnesses;
and in Evidently Infallible Tradition delivering down to us the Records with
the seals. I doubt not to affirm that some humane Testimony affords such a
Certainty as is unquestionable, because of the Evidence of that Certainty: as
that King James was King of England, etc. and of the matter in question we have
as great, and in it self far greater. But of this elsewhere. 2. If Divine Faith
give us a Certainty without objective Evidence, then it is miraculous or
contrary to nature, or at least above it (not only as rectifying disabled
nature, which I grant, but) as moving man not as man, or the Intellect not as
an Intellect, which knows naturally no other Action but upon fit objects, and
what is wrought by them: It knows no apprehension of truth, but as it is
apparent or evidenced truth. To understand this Axiom to be true, All men shall
be Judged, and to see no Evidence of its truth, are contradictions. 3. At lest
it cannot be concluded in general, that the objects of Faith are not evident to
any, in that they were evident not only to the Prophets and Apostles
themselves, but to all the Churches in that age where they wrought their
miracles. For as the formale fidei objectum, viz. Veracitas Revelantis, is
evident to Nature, and so to all that have not lost reason; so that God himself
was the Author or Revealer, was evident to all them whose eyes and ears were
witnesses of the frequent Miracles, Languages and Gifts of the Spirit, whereby
the truth was then sealed by God. 4. That which has no Evidence, cannot be
Rationally preached to the world: But the Doctrine of Faith may be Rationally
preached to the world; therefore Preaching has a natural tendency to men's
Conversion. It is a showing men the Evidence of Gospel Truth, and the goodness
of Gospel objects, and so thereby persuading men to Believe the one, and Love
and Accept the other. He that does not praedicare Evidentiam veritatis
Evangelicae, does not preach the Gospel, in the first respect, as he that
preaches not the goodness of Christ and his benefits, does not preach it in
the other. Preaching is not like Christ's laying on clay and spittle, which has
no natural tendency to open the eyes: For the effect of Preaching, as such, is
not miraculous, no nor supernaturally otherwise then as the Doctrine preached
being of supernatural Revelation, may be said to be a supernatural Cause, and
so relatively the effect called supernatural: though the same effect as
proceeding from the Spirit which is a Concause, or superior Cause, may be truly
called supernatural. 5. That which may be discerned to be certain Truth,
without special or extraordinary Grace, even by wicked men and Devils, has
some evidence which causes this discerning or belief: But such is the Doctrine
of Faith; therefore. I know some Divines to the no small wrong of the Christian
Faith, say, None can really believe it, but the Regenerate. But the Jews
believe the supernatural Revelations of the Old Testament, and the Devils and
many a thousand wicked men believe, both old and new; experience tells us so:
Christ tells us so, that many believe who fall away in persecution. James tells
such men, that they do well in believing* but the Devil does so too: else men
could not reject or persecute the known Truth. To conclude it is commonly said
that infused Habits, infunduntur ad m^dum acquisitorum; and therefore the habit
of Faith in the Intellect must be caused by an Impress of evidence: Though the
Spirits supernatural act be moreover necessary, yet that makes not other causes
unnecessary.

Rada, who concludes, that Theologia nostra non est evidens, gives but these
two poor reasons (and I should as soon look for strong ones from him, as almost
any man of his Religion or party) 1. Principia Conclusionum nostrae Theologiae
non sunt nobis Evidentia, sed Condita: therefore nec Conclusiones, etc. I deny
the Antecedent, which he proves nor; Veracitas Divina est formale objectum
fidei, and that is evident, so is the Revelation, as is said. 2. He says, Si
conclusiones nostrae Theologiae essent Evidentes, possemus convincere
Infideles, ut fidem nostram susciperent, quia Evidentia convincit Intellectum.
I answer, 1. The greatest Evidence supposes other necessary concurrents for
conviction, as a Will to understand, and diverse other things which the wicked
want. As it is not for want of Evidence of present Objects, but for want of
good eyes that a blind man sees not; so it is here. 2. Many Infidels do
Believe without special Grace: though not so deeply and clearly as to prevail
with their Wills for a through conversion; yea the Devils themselves believe.
And whereas he adds Paul's words, 2 Cor. 5. We walk by Faith, not by sight; it
speaks not of Rational Evidence, but of sensitive, and that we confess is
wanting. Faith is the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. Were it not for
digressing too far, I would examine the 9. Quest. Matter. 14. de fide of Aquinas
de Veritate, and show how ill he answers the nine Arguments, which he
undertakes to answer, and how weak his own Arguments are for the proving that
fides non potest esse de rebus scitis. And I should show that Faith is a kind
of Science; or if we will distinguish it from Science, it must not be so widely
as is usual, nor upon the reason that it wants Evidence. But I suppose he
that will impartially read Aquinas ubi sup. will without any help see the
weakness of his answers, and how he seemed to stagger himself.

Yet let me add this caution or two; 1. I do not mean that every man who has
true Faith, does discern the great and chiefest Evidence of the Truth of the
Doctrine of Faith. 2. Where there is the same Evidence in the thing, there may
be such different apprehensions of it, through the diversity of Intellectual
capacities and preparations, as that one may have a firm Belief, and certain,
and another but a probable opinion, and another none at all. 3. Though I take
the Evidence of the Doctrine of Faith to be as full as I have mentioned, yet
not so obvious and easily discerned as sensitive evidence; and therefore (as
one cause) there are fewer believe, 4. Also the distance of the objects of
Faith makes them work less on the affections, and the presence and other
advantages of sensual Objects for a facile moving the Spirits, makes them
carry men away so potently, by making greater Commotions in the passions; so
that no wonder if sense do prevail with most. I confess also that men have need
of good acquaintance with Antiquity and other History, and the Seal of the
Church in most parts of the world, to see the strong Evidence that there is of
the Infallible Tradition of the Scriptures down to us: and to some obscure men,
this may be inevident; as it may be to one brought up in a secret Cloister,
whether ever we had a King or Parliament or Laws in England. But the thing is
not therefore inevident to the industrious; No though it depend on that verity
of Report, which as proceeding from each particular person is contingent;
seeing there is Evidence of Infallible Verity even in the Circumstances of
these Contingent reports. And as Rada, when he concludes boldly that Cognitio
Dei respectu Contingentium non est proprie and scientia, etc. yet seems to
grant that God may scire Contingentia u^ necessaria, and si non ut
Contingentia: so it may be said in our present Case: the same Reports which are
Contingent, are yet in other respects of Evident Verity, and so we know them.

But I find I have been drawn beyond my intent to digress far on this point:
but it is because it tends to clear the main point in question. To return
therefore to Mr. Blake, I do not know the meaning of his next words, where he
says, that This Argument Well followed, would put me to a great loss in some
of my Arguments for Scripture, etc. Does he think that I argue to prove the
Divinity of Scriptures, from themselves alone as the Testifier thereof to our
Faith? or that, I take it to be merely or primarily de fide, that Scripture is
Gods Revelation? when I have professedly published the contrary, before those
Arguments? where I have also added these words of Mr. Rich. Hooker, wherewith I
will conclude this Section. Truly it is not a thing impossible, nor greatly
hard, even by such kind of proofs so to manifest and clear that point, that no
man living shall be able to deny it, without denying some apparent principles,
such as all men acknowledge to be true. Again, Scripture teaches us that
saving Truth which God has discovered to the world by Revelation; but it
presumes us taught otherwise, that it self is Divine and Sacred. Again, These
things we believe, knowing by Reason that Scripture is the Word of God. Again,
It is not required, nor can be exacted at our hands, that we should yield it
any other Assent then such as does answer the Evidence. Again, How bold and
confident soever we may be in words; when it comes to the trial, such as the
Evidence is which the Truth has, such is the Assent; nor can it be stronger if
grounded as it should be; so far Mr. Hooker cited once more; Eccles. pol. p.
102, 103, etc.

. 76.
Mr. Bl. TO wind up all, though there be some difference in the way between me
and my learned friend, yet there is little in the thing it self. Mr. Baxter
says that the Proposition to which God seals, runs thus, If thou believe, I
do pardon thee and will save thee. The soul must assume the Minor. But I
believe; from whence the Conclusion will follow, I shall be pardoned and saved.
And I infer, the Major being sealed, the Conclusion that rightly issues out of
it, having its strength from it, is sealed likewise; sealed to him that can
make good that Assumption, But I Believe, and upon these terms that he be a
believer.

. 76.
R. B. 1. THe difference is so small that were it not for some scattered
by-passages, I should scarce have replied to you. 2. All the quarrel arises
from the diverse understanding of the term sealed. I suppose that you include
the confirming of the Receiver, and the conferring of Right to the Benefit,
both which I have said are done Conditionally, as being to follow the Delivery
and Reception; whereas I take it for the Testimonium secundarium, or that
Obsignation whereby the Instrument is owned: the following effects belonging to
it in a further respect. I ever granted that by the sealing of the Conditional
Promise, the Believer has a singular help to raise the Conclusion, and be
confirmed in it; but not a help sufficient, without the discerning of his own
Faith, which is the Assumption. So that if you will, participaliter and
consequenter, the Conclusion may be said to be sealed to him that has the
Condition (whether he see it, o^ not). But totaliter and direct only the
Conditional grant is sealed. 3. The Conclusion issues from, and has its
strength from both Premises jointly, and no more from one alone, then if it
were none at all: and therefore where only one of the Premises is sealed, and
the other unsealed, there the Conclusion can be but as I said, participaliter
and consequenter sealed: And though I grant thus much to you for
reconciliation, yet I conceive it unfit to say at all, as in proper speech,
that the Conclusion is sealed: which I make good by this Argument. Conclusio
sequitur partem debiliorem, vel deteriorem. At Propositio non obsignata est
pars debilior vel deterior: therefore Conclusio sequitur Propositionem non
obsignatam. And so it is on the same grounds to be denominated, not sealed; as
a Conclusion is to be denominated Contingent, when one of the Premises is
Contingent and the other Necessary; or to be Negative, when one of the Premises
is Negative and the other Affirmative; or to be Particular, when one of the
Premises is Particular and the other Universal; And therefore I still say, that
it is fittest for you and me to say, that this Conclusion, Thou A. B. art
Justified, and have Right to Salvation, is an unsealed Conclusion: till you can
prove the Minor sealed, Thou A. B. art a sincere Believer. For my part, I know
not what objection can be made against either part of the fore-recited
Argument, (the major being a Common Canon or Rule that holds in all Figures,
and the Minor being yielded by your self) else I would answer to it.

. 77.
Mr. Bl. MR. Baxters fourth and fifth Positions in the closing up of his
Discourse should be considered, The Sacrament seals to Gods part of the
Conditional Covenant, and seals this Conditional Promise, not Conditionally
but absolutely, as of an undoubted Truth. To which an easy answer may be
given, in order to a fair Reconciliation. When the Covenant ties to the
Condition, and the Sacraments seal upon the same terms that the Covenant ties,
the seal is properly Conditional, in case there is any such thing in the world
as a Conditional seal. Neither is this Conditional Promise any absolute
undoubted Truth, but upon supposal of the Condition put, and so both Promise
and Seal absolutely bind.

. 77.
R. B. 1. I Never heard of, nor knew a Conditional sealing in the world: though
I have often heard of the effects of Obligation and Collation of Right to be
Conditional, which are not only separable from the Terminus proximus of
sealing, but also are directly the effects of the Covenant, Promise, Testament,
etc. only, and but remotely of the Seals, inasmuch as that Seal is a full
owning of the Instrument of Conveyance. Yet such a thing as a Conditional
sealing may be imagined, seeing sealing is a Moral Civil action, and so
depends quoad formam on the will of the Agent after the matter is put; the
Agent may if he please put the matter now, and introduce the form upon a future
Condition (or a present, or a past) as if he should set the wax and material
seal to a Deed of Gift, with this addition, I hereby seal to this, or own it as
my deed, if such a man be now living in France; or if such a Ship be safe
arrived: or if such a man shall do such a thing; otherwise this shall be no
seal. But such exceptions or conditions being always added to the Instrument
or Principal obligation or conveyance, and being of no use as to the seals
only, I never heard of such, nor I think ever shall do. For if all these or any
of these Conditions be in the Deed or Obligation, the Seal does but confirm
that Conditional Obligation, though it be absolutely and actually a Seal: and
therefore does not oblige the Author actually, but conditionally: and therefore
to feign a Conditional sealing, besides the conditional Covenanting or
Granting, seems very useless and vain, to say no more.

2. I confess that neither Promise nor Seal bind absolutely, till the
Condition be performed (which I pray you remember hereafter, if you be tempted
to think any person in Covenant with God (the mutual Covenant where both stand
obliged) before they perform the Condition of the first benefits or right). But
when you say that the Conditional Promise is not any absolute undoubted Truth,
but upon supposal of the Condition put, you make me see still the necessity of
mutual forbearance, and that all our writings must have an allowance, as it
were, in respect to some inconsiderateness; and the Authors not to be charged
with holding all the Doctrines which they write. I dare not say it is Mr.
Blakes judgment, that Gods conditional Promises be not absolute undoubted
Truth, till men perform the condition. 1. Though they are not Absolute
Promises, yet they are Absolutely and not Conditionally true: Otherwise either
it must be said, that till the condition be performed, they are Actually false,
and Conditionally true, or else that they are neither capable of Truth or
Falsehood. The former I will not dare to supppose from you; nor yet the latter.
For whether you put it in this form, Whosoever will Believe, shall be
Justified: or in this, If thou will Believe, thou shall be Justified: there is
no question that both must be either true or false; and not like an
Interrogation that is capable of neither.

2. And then as it is an Absolute Truth, so it is an undoubted Truth: For
Veraci^as Divina est formale objectum fidei: and if Gods Truth be not
undoubted, then our Faith has an uncertain Foundation, and Christianity is not
undoubtedly a true Religion. But I charge none of these on you, as not doubting
but it is an oversight.

. 78.
Mr. Bl. WHen Caleb had engaged himself, He that smites Kiriath-Sepher and
takes it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife* Othniel the Son of
Kenaz taking it, there was an absolute tie upon him for performance, Josh. 15,
16, 17. When Saul promised his Daughter to David on this condition, that he
would bring him an hundred of the foreskins of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 18.25,
David having made it good with advantage, now there is an absolute tie upon him.

. 78.
R* B* THis is nothing but what is granted. I yield that God is not as it were
obliged till men perform the Condition. But the Question is whether he
Absolutely seals before, and not whether that Seal oblige before.

79.
Mr. Bl. EVen the Arminians Conditional incompleate Election, upon Condition of
Faith and perseverance, they confess is absolute and complete, upon supposal of
Faith and perseverance. This I take to be Mr. Baxters meaning, that upon
supposal of Faith it Absolutely seals, which I willingly grant: but it is
administered to many who never put in that Condition, nor come up to the terms
of God, that believing they may be saved, and so in our sense it seals
Conditionally.

. 79.
R. B. 1. I Have better expressed my own meaning. It is pity that the Reader
should be troubled with so much, about so low a question, which of us two does
best express our meaning? but that I hope he may gather some things more useful
on the by. In your sense, if it be according to your terms, God does not
actually Seal at all to any but the Godly, which is my maine Argument against
you. A Conditional seal, is not a seal till the Condition be performed.

. 80.
Mr. Bl. ANd I can make nothing else of Mr. Tombs his* Aptitudinal and Actual
seal, but that the Sacrament has an Aptitude to seal in an Absolute way to all
that communicate: it does Actually seal to Believers and Penitent ones.

. 80.
R. B. 1. I Perceive Mr. Tombs and you are more of a mind then I was aware
of. 2. Sealing of, must not be confounded with sealing to, as respecting the
end: nor the next end, which is Essential to the Seal, (as the Terminus to the
Relation) with more separable ends. It is in regard of the first only that I
spoke against Mr. Tombs, and affirmed it to be Actual and not only
Aptitudinal, but not in regard of the Obligation (as we may speak) on God, or
the actual conveyance of Right, which follow the condition, which I desire Mr.
Tombs to take notice of, according to my foregoing explication, if he mean to
Reply to that.

. 81.
Mr. Bl. NEither let any think that here I seek a starting hole to recede from
any thing that heretofore I have published on this subject. In my answer to Mr.
Tombs, page 99. I explain my self no otherwise, having quoted Dr. Ames and Mr.
Rutherford, in the words now recited, I there add, The Conditional seal of the
Sacraments is made Absolute, by our putting in the Condition of believing, etc.
In case my answer had been in Mr. Baxters hand when his Appendix came out, as
he says it was not, that he might have seen how I explained my self, I suppose
he would have seen that in the result of the whole I little differ from him, so
that I can scarce see, that when the matter is brought home, that I have any
adversary.

. 81.
R. B. 1. IT is so rare a thing for men to manifest so much ingenuity and self
denial and impartial love to the Truth, as freely to recant what they have once
asserted when they find it a mistake, that if this had been your case, I would
not have been one that should have blamed you for it, or charged you with
unconstancy or levity. To err, is common to all men: but freely to recant it,
is not so. I never write, but with a supposition that I shall manifest the
weakness of my Intellect, and do that which needs reformation. 2. I did not so
much as pretend you to be my Adversary; I did defend you, and not argue against
you: and therefore you have little need to persuade me to have lower thoughts
of our differences then I did express, or that you and I were no adversaries.

But though I make light of our seeming difference about sealing, I must
entreat you to remember, that I not only maintain my former Assertion, that the
Conclusion, I A. B. am Justified, is not de fide, but that I account it a
matter of far greater moment.

It has been too common Doctrine among the most renowned Divines, that it is
not only de fide, but every man's duty also, yea a part of the Creed, and so a
fundamental, for to Believe that our sins are remitted, (for so they expound
the Article of Remission of sins). I will not name the Authors, because I honor
them, and would not seem to disparage them; and the Learned know them already:
yea they earnestly press men to Believe the pardon of their own sins in
particular, and tell them that they have but the Faith of Devils else. By which
dangerous Doctrine, 1. most men are persuaded to believe a falsehood: for most
are not forgiven. 2. The careless world is driven on faster to presumption, to
which they are so prone of themselves. 3. Painful Ministers are hindered, and
their labors frustrated, whose business is first to break men's false hopes and
peace; which they find so hard a work, that they need not resistance. The
ungodly that I deal with, are so confident that their sin is forgiven, and God
will not damn them for it, that all that I can say is too little to shake their
confidence, which is the nurse of their sin. 4. Gods word, yea the Articles of
our Creed, must be abused to do Satan this service, and men's Souls this wrong.
All the world cannot find so strong a prop to the Kingdom of the Devil, nor so
powerful an encouragement to presumption or any sin, as mistaken Scripture
(either misinterpreted or misapplyed). 5. When wicked men, that have but the
Faith of Devils, are immediately required to believe the pardon of their own
particular sins, and this made to be de fide, God is dishonored with the charge
of such untruths, as if falsehoods were de fide, and God commanded men to
believe them.

And for the Godly themselves, it has in a lower degree many of the same
inconveniences. If there be any one that has as good Evidence of his soundness
in Faith, Love and Repentance, as that the Word of God is true, and all sound
Believers are Justified; what is such a man to many a thousand that have no
such Evidence* yea and for that man, it is impossible that his Evidence should
be as constant, as Scripture Evidence, though it were as full. Scripture
Evidence varieth not, as the Evidence of Grace does in our mutable unconstant
Souls: But for my part I never yet saw the face of that sober man (to my
knowledge) who durst say, That he was as sure or as confident of his own
sincerity, as of the Truth of Gods Word, and particularly of that Promise, He
that Believes shall not perish, but have Everlasting life. And as I have often
said already, The Conclusion may not be said to be de fide, unless the other
Proposition he as evident as that which is de fide* because Conclusio sequitur
partem deteriorem. Yea let me be bold to grow a little higher, and to tell you
that it seems to me impossible and a contradiction that any man should be more
certain that he Believes sincerely, then he is that Gods Word is true, or that
the Promise is Gods Word, which he does Believe. For the truth of God in his
Word, is the formal object of Faith, without which there can be no Faith. No
man therefore can be more certain that he believes truly, then he is that Gods
Word is true: For to Believe, is to apprehend the certain Truth of the Word.
And none can be more certain that he apprehends the word as certain, then he is
that the word is certain. If you say, I am certain that I believe the certainty
of the word, but weakly: I answer, At lest then the saving sincerity of your
Faith will be as uncertain to you, as the word is, if not the being of that
Faith. And then there is no more certainty, I think, rationally and ordinarily,
then there is Evidence.

So much for that Controversy, and so of all, so far as I have observed, which
Mr. Blake has with me, or has called me to give an account of my judgment.

Whether the Covenant of Grace require perfection, and accept sincerity.
THough I have done with what Mr. Blake says to me, and have no desire to do
any thing unnecessary in a way of Controversy: yet because it is of the like
nature with a subject formerly handled, or tends to clear up some things about
it, I will very briefly touch on his Arguments, page 107.108. upon this
Question.

. 82.
Mr. Bl. A Second opinion is, that the Covenant of Grace requires perfection in
the exactest way, without help of these men's distinctions, in an equal degree
with the Covenant of Works, but with this difference; in the Covenant of Works,
there is no indulgence or dispensation in case of failing, but the penalty
takes hold, the Curse follows upon it: But the Covenant of Grace, though it
call for perfection, such is the exactness of it, yet it accepts of sincerity,
such is the qualification of it through Grace, or the mercy in it. If I should
take up any opinion in the world for the Authors sake, or those that have
appeared as Patrons of it, then I should embrace this: The Reverence deservedly
due to him that I suppose first manifested himself in it, has caused it to
find great entertainment. But upon more then twenty years thoughts about it, I
find it laboring under manifold inconveniences.

. 82.
R. B. 1. IT may seem audaciousness in a young Divine to question that which
you shall now so considerately deliver, after more then twenty years thoughts.
But no prejudice must hinder us from a further enquiry after the Truth.

2. I began to conjecture that the Reverend person that you mean is Mr. Ball;
and yet methinks, you should not suppose him the Author: It is therefore sure
some one much elder.

3. For the thing it self, if I may shoot my bolt, upon a shorter deliberation,
I conceive, that all your difference with the men of that Judgment, is
occasioned by the Ambiguity and various acception of the word Covenant of
Grace, which in my judgment, you ought to have removed, by distinguishing,
before you had argued against their opinion. The term Covenant of Grace, is
sometime taken strictly for the Contract alone; either 1. for the full
Contract, which is mutual or by both parties, which is most properly called a
Covenant: Or 2. for the engagement of one part only: 1. either for Gods
Promise. 2. or man's. Herein the Condition is employed, not as commanded, but as
tendered. Now it is certain that taking the Covenant in this restrained sense,
it does not command Perfection of obedience, for it commands nothing at all:
nor does it propound it as the Condition, for then we were undone. But then it
must be known that this is too restrained a sense for us ordinarily to use the
word Covenant in; God has made no such Covenant with us, which is not a Law in
one respect, as well as a Covenant in another: He lays not by his Sovereignty
in Covenanting. Nay they are all more properly called Laws then Covenants: Even
the Promise it self is most properly Lex Gratiae Remedians, Like an act of
Oblivion or Pardon to a Nation of Rebels. Yet comparatively, the Law of Grace
is far more fitly called a Covenant then the Law of Nature (which perhaps is
never so called in Scripture), because the Promissory part is the predominant
part in the Law of Grace, the precept being but subservient to that; but the
preceptive part is most predominant in the Law of nature; the Promise being not
so much as expressed by Moses, and obscure in nature it self, so that it will
hold great dispute, whether God were obliged at all to Reward man with heavenly
Glory, yea or any proper Reward (besides non-punishment which is improperly a
Reward). The Lutherans are the leaders of that evil custom and conceit of
denying the Gospel to be a Law. 2. In the next place therefore the word
Covenant of Grace is taken for the New Law, containing Precept, Prohibition,
Promise and Threatening. And here it is taken 1. so narrowly as to comprize only
the Precept of Believing, with the Promise and Threatening annexed, as being
indeed the principal parts* 2. Sometime more largely, as containing also the
Precepts that Christ has given the Church since his coming, that were not
before given: Principally that of Believing Jesus to be the Christ, and also
those of Ministry, Ordinances, Church Assemblies, etc. together with the
Doctrines or Articles of Faith which he since revealed. 3. Sometime it is more
largely taken for that whole Systeme of Doctrines, Histories and Laws
(Precepts, Promises, and Threats) which directly concern the Recovery of fallen
mankind. 4. Sometime for as much of these as was delivered before Christ's
coming, in Promises, Prophesies and Types, etc. 5. Sometime for as much of
these as yet remains in force, whether delivered to the Church before the
Incarnation or since, (for many Covenants or Evangelical Promises and Precepts,
are ceased now that were in force before: as that Christ should be born, and
they should accept his birth, etc.) This last sense, contains the Doctrine of
Redemption by Christ, and the History of his birth, life and Death and
Resurrection (as Narrations of the occasion, end and matter are usual
appurtenances of a Law) as also the Precepts of Repenting and Believing; Loving
God for our Redemption, and Christ as Redeemer; Loving men as Redeemed ones,
and as Members of Christ; Ministry, Sacraments, Church Assemblies, proper to
the Gospel, with the means to be used for getting, keeping or improving this
Grace as such; the command of Hope, or looking for Christ's second coming, etc.
and of sincere obedience. I conceive the first (as containing the sum of all)
and specially this last (as containing the whole Systeme of the Doctrine and
Laws of our Redemption and Restoration) are the fittest senses for us
ordinarily to use the word Covenant of Grace in ( vide Grotii dissertationem de
nomine (...) ante Annotat. in Novum Testam.) Now if the question be whether in
any of these senses the New Covenant does command perfect obedience; I answer,
All the doubt is of the 3 latter: But I rather think negatively, that in none
of these Acceptions can the New Covenant be said to require perfect obedience.
6. But then some take the New Law or Covenant for the whole Law that now stands
unrepealed, and obliges the Subjects of the Mediator, supposing the Moral Law
to be now the Law or Covenant of Grace, i. e. the matter of it, as it was
formerly the matter of the Law of Works: and that the Covenant of Works being
totally and absolutely Abrogated, the Moral Law must be the material part of
the Covenant or Law of Grace, or of none: and of some it must be: For God gives
no precepts but upon some terms, or with some sanction of Reward or Punishment:
And hereupon they say, that it is now the Moral Law which is the matter of the
new Covenant, which commands perfect obedience. This is maintained by an
acquaintance and friend of Mr. Blakes, a man of extraordinary Learning and
Judgment, especially as thoroughly studied in these things as any that ever I
was acquainted with. For my part, (though I think, the difference is most in
notions and terms, yet) I still judge, that the Law of Works, that is, the
Precept and Threatening, are not abrogated, though the Promise of that Law be
Ceased, and so it is not so fitly now called a Covenant; and some particular
Precepts are abrogate or ceased; and so I think it is this remaining Law of
nature which Commands perfect obedience, and still pronounces Death, the due
punishment of our disobedience. But I acknowledge even this Law of Nature to be
now the Law of Christ, who as Redeemer of all mankind, has Nature and its Law
and all things else delivered unto him, to dispose of to the advantage of his
Redemption Ends: But still I suppose this Law of Nature to be so far from being
the same with the Law of Grace, that it is this which the Law of Grace
Relaxeth, and whose obligation it dissolveth, when our sins are forgiven. So
that the difference is but in the Notion of Unity or Diversity, whether (seeing
all is Now the Redeemers Law) it be fitter to say, It is one Law; or that, They
are two distinct Laws. For in the matter we are agreed, viz. that the Promise
of the first Law is ceased, (because God cannot be obliged to a subject made
incapable) and some particular Precepts are ceased Cessante materia, and Moses
Jewish Law is partly ceased, and partly abrogate; and that there is now in
force as the Redeemers Law, the Precept of perfect obedience, and the
Threatening of Death to every sin, with a Grant of Remission and salvation to
all that sincerely Repent and Believe, and a threatening of far sorer punishment
to the Impenitent and Unbelievers. Thus far the Agreement. The disagreement is
but this; I think that though these are both the Redeemers Laws, yet they are
to be taken as two; One in this form, Perfect Obedience is thy Duty (or obey
perfectly): Death is thy Due for every sin. The other in this form, Repent and
Believe, and thou shall be saved (from the former curse): Or else damned.
Others thinks that it is fitter to say that these two are but one Law, quoad
formam, running thus, I command to thee fallen man, perfect obedience, and oblige
thee to Punishment for every sin; Yet not remedilesly; but so as that if thou
Believe and Repent, this Obligation shall be dissolved, and thou saved; else
not. To this purpose the foresaid Learned, Judicious, and much honored Brother,
explains his opinion to me. Now as long as we agree that the former Law, or
part of the Law, (call it which you will) does Actually oblige to perfect
obedience, or future Death; and the latter Law, or part of the Law, does upon
the performance of the Condition, dissolve ^his Obligation, and give us Jus ad
impunitatem and salutem; what great matter is it, whether we call it One Law or
Two? For we are agreed against them that look on the Moral Law as to the mere
preceptive part, as standing by it self, being not the matter of any Covenant,
or connexed to any sanction to specify it.

To apply this now to Mr. Blakes Question; It is most likely that those Divines
that affirm that the Covenant of Grace does require perfect obedience, and
Accept sincere, do take that Covenant in this last and largest sense; and as
containing the Moral Law as part of its matter; and so no doubt it is true, if
you understand it of perfection for the future, as speaking to a creature
already made imperfect. Now seeing the whole difference is but about the
Restriction or Extension of the term Covenant, I conceive, after twenty years
study, Mr. Bl. should not make it so material, nor charge it so heavily. And
though I am not of that party and opinion my self which he charge, yet
seeing it may tend to reconciliation, and set those men more right in his
thoughts, to whom he professes such exceeding reverence, I will briefly
examine his Reasons ab absurdis which he here brings in against them.

. 83.
Mr. Bl. 1. IT establishes the former opinion opposed by Protestants, and but
now refused as to the Obedience and the Degree of it called for in Covenant:
and if I should be indulgent to my affections, to cause my Judgment to stoop,
dislike of the one would make me as averse from it, as an opinion of the other
would make me prone to receive it. Judgment therefore must lead, and Affections
be waved.

. 83.
R. B. IF you interpret the Papists, as meaning that the Law requires true
Perfection, but Accepts of sincere, then if it be spoken of the Law of Works or
Nature, it is false, and not the same with theirs whom you oppose, who suppose
it is the Covenant of Grace that so accepts of sincerity. If you take them (as
no doubt you do) as meaning it of the Law of Christ (as the Trent Council
express themselves) then, no doubt, but they take the Law of Christ in the same
extended sense as was before expressed; and then they differ from us but in the
forementioned Notion: But then I suppose you wrong them by making them righter
then they are: For the very passages which you before expressed out of some of
the chief of their writers, do intimate that they do not indeed take the
Covenant or Law it self to command true Perfection: but that which they call
Perfection, is but (as you say) No other then the Grace of Sanctification in
the very sense as the Orthodox hold it out; But it is true perfection that
those mean whom you now write against. So that I see not the least ground for
this first charge.

. 84.
Mr. Bl. 2. IF this opinion stand, then God Accepts of Covenant-breakers; of
those that deal falsely in it; whereas Scripture charges it upon the wicked,
those of whom God complains as Rebellious, Deuteronomy. 29.25. Josh. 7.15. Jer. 11.10.
and 22.8.9. Yea it may be charged upon the best, the most holy in the world
lying under the guilt of it.

. 84.
R. B. THis charge proceeds merely from the confounding of the Duty as such,
and the Condition as such. A Covenant which is also a Law as well as a
Covenant, may by the preceptive part Constitute much more Duty then shall be
made the Condition of the Promises. Properly it is only the nonperformance of
the Condition that is Covenant Breaking; and so the Divines whom you oppose are
not chargeable with your Consequent: For they say not that The Covenant of
Grace does make perfect Obedience the Condition of its Promise, and Accept
Imperfect. That were a flat contradiction: for the Condition is Causa sine qua
non, and cum qua: But only they say, It Requires or Commands perfect
obedience, and Accepts imperfect. And if you will speak so largely, as to
say, that all who break the preceptive part of the Covenant, are
Covenant-breakers, then no doubt but God Accepts of many such, and of none
but such. And as the word Covenant is not taken for the mutual contract, but
for Gods new Law, called his Covenant, his Testament, his Disposition,
Constitution, Ordination, etc. so no doubt, we all are Covenant-breakers. For
whether we say that the new Law commands perfect obedience, or not; yet
unless you take it exceeding restrainedly, it must be acknowledged that the
Precept is of larger extent then the Condition, having appointed some Duties
which it has not made sine qua non to salvation: If you send your child a
mile of an errand, and say I charge you play not by the way, but make haste,
and do not go in the dirt, etc. and if you come back by such an hour, I will
give you such a Reward; if not, you shall be whipped; He that plays by the way
and dirties himself, and yet comes back by the hour appointed, does break the
preceptive part, but not the condition. Or if you suppose a re-engagement by
Promise to do both these: he breaks his own Covenant in the first respect
(which was not the condition of Reward or Punishment) but not in the second.
And so do true Christians both break the preceptive part of the Covenant, and
also some of their own particular covenants with God: as when a man promises,
I will commit this sin no more, or I will perform such a duty such a day. But
these are not the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, which God has made the
Causa sine qua non of Justification or Salvation. So that I conceive this
charge unjust, to say no more.

. 85.
Mr. Bl. 3. THen it will follow that as none can say that they have so answered
the Command of the Law that they have never failed, they have not (if put to
answer in the greatest rigor) once transgressed; so neither can they with the
Church make appeal to God, That they have not dealt falsely in the Covenant, nor
wickedly departed from their God. Psalm. 44.17. Every sin (according to this
opinion) being a breach of it, and a dealing falsely in it.

. 85.
R. B. THis charge is as unjust as the former; and the absurdity supposed to
follow, does not; but is supposed so to do, upon the forementioned confusion of
two acts of the Covenant, or New Law; the one Determining what shall be man's
Duty; the other, what shall be Conditio sine qua non of Justification and
Salvation.

86.
Mr. Bl. 4. THen the great Promise of mercy from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him, and his Righteousness unto childrens children to such
as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his Commandments to do them,
Psalm. 103.17, 18. only appertains to those that so keep the Law that they sin
not at all against it.

. 86.
R. B. IT follows not. If they sincerely keep the Law, they fulfill the
Conditions of the Covenant, though not the Precept. And they keep the Precept
in an improper but usual sense, as Keeping is taken for such a less degree of
breaking as on Gospel grounds is Accepted. This still runs upon the foresaid
Confusion.

. 87.
Mr. Bl. 5. THen our Baptism-Vow is never to sin against God; and as often as
we renew our Covenant, we do not only humble our selves that we have sinned,
but we afresh bind our selves never more to admit the least infirmity, and so
live and dye in the breach of it.

. 87.
R. B. WE do not promise in Baptism to do all that the Precept of the Covenant
requires, but all that is made the Condition of Life, and to Endeavor the
rest. Much less as the Covenant is taken in the largest sense, as those seem to
do whom you oppose, may it be said that we promise to keep all its Precepts.

. 88.
Mr. Bl. 6. THen the distinction between those that entered Covenant and brake
it, as Jer. 31, 32, 33. and those that have the Law written in their hearts,
and put into their inward parts to observe it, falls, all standing equally
Guilty of the breach of it, no help of Grace being of power to enable to keep
Covenant.

. 88.
R. B. WHen sincere obedience and perfect obedience are all one, and when the
Precept and the Condition of the Covenant are proved to be of equal extent,
then there will be ground for the charging of this Consequence. In the first
Covenant of Nature the Precept and the Condition were of equal extent; for
perfect obedience was the Condition; but it is not so in the Covenant of Grace.

. 89.
Mr. Bl. 7. THen it follows that sincerity is never called for as a Duty, or
required as a Grace; but only dispensed with as a failing, indulged as a want.
It is not so much a Christians honor or Character, as his blemish or failing;
rather his defect then praise. But we find the contrary in Noah, Job, Asa,
Hezekiah, Zachary and Elizabeth, Nathaniel an Israelite indeed that entered
Covenant and kept Covenant.

. 89.
R. B. I Will not say it is past the wit of man to find the Ground of this
charge, i. e. to see how this should follow; but I dare say, it is past my wit.
If it had been said, The Covenant commands perfection and not sincerity; Or
The Covenant Accepts sincerity, but not Commands it, there had been some
reason for this charge. But do you think that sincerity is no part of
Perfection! Can the Covenant require perfection, and not require sincerity,
when sincerity is contained in perfection? If you take sincerity, exclusive
only, as excluding perfection, and not at all formaliter; then its true that it
is not commanded, nor is a duty, but a failing: For I hope the Gospel does not
command Imperfection, but tender us a Remedy for it. You might with more color
have argued, that then Repentance is no Duty, because inconsistent with
commanded perfection. But that will not hold neither: For they suppose,
Repentance commanded by the same Law, in case (and upon certain supposal) of
Imperfection, or sin.

. 90.
Mr. Bl. ANd therefore I conclude that as in the Law there was pure Justice, as
well in the command Given, as punishment threatened, without any condescension
or indulgence: So in the Covenant there is mercy and condescension, as well in
the Condition required, as in the Penalty that is annexed to it. The Covenant
requires no more then it accepts.

. 90.
R. B. ALL this will be easily granted you by those of the contrary part, as
nothing to the purpose. It follows not, that because there is condescension in
the Condition, that therefore there is such an abatement in the Precept, or
that the Covenant has no Precept but de praestanda Condition. 2. It were
strange if the Covenant should require more then it accepts. Did ever sober man
(much less such as your Reverend adversaries) imagine a thing so Impious! as if
God would not Accept that which himself commands. But if you would have said,
as your arguing requires, that the Covenant accepts no less then the whole
which it commands or requires, then not only your Antagonists, but my self
and many another will deny it, and demand your proof. But here I take this as
granted by you, that you take not the word Covenant at least so restrainedly as
excluding all Precept; for I suppose you mean Commanding, in the terms
requiring, and calling for as duty.

. 91.
Mr. Bl. THe alone Argument, so far as ever I could learn, that has brought
some of Reverend esteem into this opinion, is, That if the Covenant requires
not exact perfection in the same height as the Law calls for it, then a
Christian may fall short of the Law in his Obedience, and not sin; perfection
being not called for from him, nor any more called for from him then through
Grace he does perform; he rises as high as his Rul^, and sins not through any
Imperfection; therefore to make it out that a Believers Imperfections are his
sins, it must needs be that the Covenant requires perfection; as to make good
that he may be saved in his Imperfections, it must be maintained that he
accepts sincerity. But this Argument is not of weight: Christ entering a
Gospel Covenant with man, finds him under the command of the Law, which
command the Law still holds, the Gospel being a confirmation, not a destruction
of it. All Imperfection th^n is a sin upon that account, that it is a
Transgression of the Law, though (being done against heart, and labored
against) it is no breach of Covenant: we are under the Law as men; we are
taken into Covenant as Christians: retaining the humane nature, the Law still
commands as; though the covenant in Christ through the abundant Grace of it,
upon the terms that it requires and accepts, frees us from the sentence of it.

. 91.
R. B. 1. I Was at first doubtful, lest by the Law you had meant (as the
Lutherans) a Law of God in general, as opposed to the Gospel as being no Law:
and that you had meant by the Law, only the Moral Precepts, which is but the
matter of the Law of Nature or of Works, or of the Law of Grace (in some
respect). But I perceive that you mean the entire Law, both Precept and
Sanction, by your mentioning the Sentence of it. If therefore you do by the Law
mean but one Species, viz. the Law of Nature, acknowledging the new Law of
Grace (commonly called the New Covenant, from the Promise which is the most
eminent part) to be a Law too, then I agree with you in this solution as to the
matter of Perfection; or else not. And yet I dare not hold that the New Law
commands no more then its Condition. But for them that use the word Covenant
for nothing but the bare Promise, I must tell them, that it is but a piece of
Gods Law or Instrument, separated from the body which they fasten a Name upon:
and if they will signify so much, that it is but part of the Redeemers Law of
Grace, which they call a Covenant, and will give another name to the whole,
that so we may understand them, I would not willingly quarrel with them about
words. But if it be the thing as well as the name that they err in, affirming
that the Gospel is a mere Promise, and that God has no Law but one, and that
one the Law of Works; or else that all his Precepts Natural and Positive, are
one Law by themselves as distinct from the Sanctions, when Precepts are but
part of Gods Laws, which by their Sanctions are specified and distinguished (as
most think into two sorts, of Nature and of Grace; but as Camero thinks into
three sorts, of Nature, and of Jewish works, and of Grace) then I not only
profess my dissent, but do esteem the former error very dangerous and
intolerable; and the later, such as tends to great confusion in the body of
Theology.

2. This very Argument which you recite and answer, does undenyably prove, that
the Divines whom you oppose, do by the Covenant of Grace, understand all the
Law that is now in force under the Government of the Redeemer* Otherwise they
would never imagine that there is no sin but what is against the Covenant of
Grace; and that there is no other Rule but this Covenant for a Christians
obedience. It is therefore out of doubt, that this difference is but about
words, (or little more) they taking that Covenant of Grace in a larger sense
then you and I think meet to take it.

If you should reply, that it is an unreasonable thing of them to take it so
largely: I say that I do not think meet to imitate them in it, but I could show
you so much said that way by the forementioned Reverend, Learned man, your
friend and mine, as would convince you that they have more to say for what they
do, then every one that is against them is able to answer.

. 92. The Conclusion.
HAving thus taken the boldness to examine your Exceptions, and deliver my
Reasons against some of your opinions, I do crave your favorable acceptance of
what I have done, and your friendly interpretation or remission of any
unsavory, words that I have let fall: And I must desire you not to suppose that
I judge of all the rest of your Book, as I do o^ this which I have here Replied
to. I value the Wheat, while I help you to weed out the Tares. Pardon my
confident Concluding you in the error, and my self in the Truth: whether it be
from the convincing self-revealing nature of Light; or from the common unhappy
fate of the deluded; I must leave you and others to judge by the Evidence that
is in my arguments, whatever further evidence I may have my self within;
doubtless the various state of Intellects, does cause a strange variety of
apprehensions, of those objects which are in themselves the same. And words be
but defective signs: There is something in Sensation and Intellection, which
words cannot fully show to another. It is but the Species and not the thing it
self which you see in this Glass. My most exquisite description of my own Taste
and the sweetness of what I taste, will not cause another to taste that
sweetness. And there is somewhat like this in Intellection it self; for though
I confess my self ignorant what manner of thing our Intellection will be, when
we are out of the flesh; yet now me thinks I perceive that it does in some sort
participate of sense, and that vid: August. de Trinit. li. 5. c. 1. initio.
Sen^io me Intelligere, is a speech not wholly void of Truth. I confess also
that I should have little modesty or humility, if I should not think more
highly of the understanding of your self and so many Reverend and Learned
Brethren who dissent from me in several points here debated, then of mine own.
But yet we must prove all things, and not so trust to other men's eyes as to
shut our own* or refuse to give credit to our sight. They may far excel me in
many other things, though they mistake in this. I remember Paul's, If we or an
Angel from heaven, etc. And I remember Tertullians, Non ex personis probamus
fidem, sed ex fide personas (li. Prescript. adv. haer. c. 3.) And Irenaeus his,
Presbyteris adhaerere oportet qui and Apostolorum doctrinam custodiunt, and cum
Presbyterit Ordine sermonem ^anum custodiunt, etc. ( li. 4. c. 44.) And
Cyprians, Quae ista obstinatio est, quae praesumptio, humanam traditionem
Divinae dispositioni anteponere? nec animadvert^re, indignari and irasci Deum,
quoties Divina praecepta solvit and praeterit humana traditio. Epist. 74. ad
suba^an. p. 229. And many a one of Austins yet plainer then these, to the same
purpose are commonly known. Paul himself could do nothing against the Truth,
but for the Truth, as having no Authority given him to destruction, but to
Edification. I am willing to stoop to the judgment of my betters as far as is
Reasonable* Conscionable and Possible, and if no further, I hope I may be
excused: when I see plain Reason against them, it is unreasonable to subscribe
to the opinions of the most learned: when Scripture is against them, it were
dishonest and unconscionable: And when they are one against another, to assent
to all is impossible. In such a case, I must needs bear the Accusations of one
party, who think me Arrogant, Proud and Self conce^^ed, as supposing my self to
be wiser then they. But I have long been studying and Preaching, (and I think
practicing) that necessary and excellent Duty, of being so contented with Gods
sole approbation, as those that know they stand or fall at his bar: and
therefore must esteem it a very small thing to be judged by man. I have long
valued and believed that saying of Austin (commonly cited, and found, lib. 3.
de Trinit. cap. 6. the very last words) Contra Rationem nemo sobrius; Contra
Scripturas nemo Christianus; Contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus. In the point of
Faiths Instrumentality, and the nature of the justifying act, which I differ
from you in, I am constrained upon all these three grounds to my dissent. 1.
Lest by renouncing my Reason, I should cease to be sober. (Though yet I think
sober men may be contrary minded, not seeing these Reasons). 2. L^st by
forsaking the Scripture, I should cease to be a Christian, (Though Christians
that observe nor, or understand not that the Scripture is against you in this,
may judge as you)* 3. Lest by contradicting the Church, I should cease to be
peaceable (^o Though men otherwise peaceable may be drawn to it through
prejudice)* If you will bring one sound Reason, one word of Scripture, or one
approved writer of the Church (yea or one Heretic, or any man whatsoever) for
many hundred years after Christ (I think I may say* 1300 at lest) to prove that
Christ as Lord or King is not the object of the Justifying act of Faith, or
that Faith Justifies properly as an Instrument, I am concented so far to lose
the Reputation of my Reason, Understanding, Reading, and, Memory. For though I
have not read all that has been written for so many hundred years, yet I have
read most of the Writers of great note, (except the most* Voluminous, which
(...) but part of) and by that much, I see so far into the sense and language
of those times, that I dare stand to the hazard of this adventure* I speak this
because you tell me, that there was scarce a dissenting voice among our Divines
that are against me about the Instrumentality of Faith. And, if there cannot be
brought one man that consents with them for 1200, or 1400 years after Christ,
I pray you tell me whom a humble, modest, peaceable man should follow* were he
never so much ready to deny his own understanding? Because a word, or an
opinion that is unsound, has got possession of a little corner of the world
for about 150 years; therefore I am suspected as singular and as a Novilist,
for forsaking it. Whereas it is to avoid singularity, and notorious Novelty,
that I assent not to your way. The same I say about the Interest of man's
Obedience, in his Justification as continued and consummate in Judgment. If
either Clemens* Roman* Polycarp* Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Origin, Athonago^as, Tatianus* Clem. Alexand. Minutius F^elix, Arno^^us,
Lactantius, Cyprian, Athanasius, Eusebius, Greg. Nazianzen, Epiphanius, Cyrill.
Hierosol* Synesius, Cyrill Alexandr. Macarius, Hierome, Salvian, Vincentius
Lirin. Vigilius, or any Council were of your mind in any one of these points,
and against mine, then I will confess, at lest my supine negligence in reading,
or my very faulty memory in retaining their words. And for Austin, Chrysostom.
and others, of whom I have read but the lesser part, I do strongly conjecture
by that part, at their sense, and that they concur with the rest. If you say
that the Fathers had their errors, and all this is but humane Judgment, and
all men are fallible, I confess all this to be true: But as I still say, that
Contra. Ecclesiam nemo pacificus, so I desire leave to Judge those Brethren
that oppose me, as fallible, and subject to error, as all the Primitive Fathers
were: and therefore that I may be no more blamed or thought singular for
contradicting them, then they are for contradicting the Primitive Church; I
know as Austin says de Civitate Dei, li. 22. c. 30. Servandi gradus erant
Divini muneris; ut primum daretur liberum arbitrium, quo non-peccare posset
homo; novissimum, quo peccare non posset; atque illud ad comparandum meritum;
hoc ad recipiendum praemium pertineret. And the case of the Intellect being the
same, we must stay til this time of Reward be come, before we shall receive our
non posse errare. I know no Brother that opposes me, does pretend to
Infallibility. All that I desire by my far greater advantage of humane
Testimony, is but to expugn prejudice, that I may stand on even ground with
them that contend with me: And could I but prevail for this, that the cause
might be decided by mere Scripture-reason, and humane Authority wholly stand
by, and the Reader could but impartially consider things, without being,
biased to any side or party, as if he knew not what any man else does judge of
it, I should then make little doubt of the good issue of the Controversy. The
most that I meet with, that explain against my judgment, are they that confess
that they know not what it is, or else apprehend it to be what it is not: but
whatever it is, some that they value are against it, and that is it that
satisfies them that I am in an error. I do unfeignedly desire that in dark
Controversies beyond their reach, the unlearned people would more regard the
generality of sober Godly Divines, then any single and singular Teacher; yea
though it fall out that he be in the Truth, as long as the Evidence of that
Truth is out of their reach. But this may not encourage any to shut their eyes,
or to neglect to search after the Evidence which they might discern, much less
may it excuse such unfaithfulness in Divines themselves; nor yet may it
encourage any to captivate their judgment to a party, against the general
judgment of the Church: For if I were on one side, and all the Divines in
England on the other, there is yet the same reason to prefer all the first
Churches, before all them, as there is to prefer all them before me. In a word,
I shall ever think him more culpably singular, who differs from Christ, and
his Apostles, and all his Church for 1200 or 1400 years, then he that differs
from any party now living, and differs not from them forementioned. And how
the case stands in this between me, and those Reverend Divines that oppose me,
in the foresaid points of difference, I am heartily content to refer to any
sober, impartial Reader, that takes not things on trust from others, nor
judges of the Doctrine of ancient writers, by any imperfect dismembered parcels.

Georgius Calixtus, Epitom. Theolog. Moral. page 463.
INterrogati quae fides nostra, quae doctrina, respondemus eam esse fidem and
doctrinam nostram, quam Complectitur symbolum Apostolicum, symbolum Nicaenum,
Constantinopolitanum, and Athanasianum, Anathematismi Ephesini: Confessio
Chalcedonensis: Quae Nestorianorum and Eutichianorum reliquiis, quinta and
sexta synodi opposuerunt: Quae item Pelagianis Africana plenaria, sive ut
vocari solet milevitana synodus and Arausicana secunda synodus opposuerunt.
Haec symbola hae confessiones and declarationes continent, non modo quae
Credere, sine quibus fidem and assensum prabere hominem Christianum oportet,
and sine quibus creditis atque cognitis salvari nequit; sed illis, etiam qui
haec ipsa docendo tractant, and aliis exponunt (...) quam teneant praescribunt.
Quae autem hisce symbolis confessionibus and declarationibus comprehenduntur e
Sacra Scriptura hausta sunt: quippe in iis quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt
inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi, etc. Denique
exercemus nos ad conscientiam habendam sine offensa apud Deum and homines
semper.

Lutherus, referente Hopffnero Saxon. Evangel. p. 110.
NIhil pestilentius in Ecclesia doceri potest, quam si ea quae necessaria non
sunt, necessaria fiant. Hac enim tyrannide conscientiae illaqueantur, and
Libertas fidei extinguitur; mendacium pro veritate, Idolum pro Deo, Abominatio
pro sanctitate colitur.

I conclude with that of Rup. Meldenius elsewhere, once before cited, Paraenes.
(citante C. Bergio) F. 2.

Verbo dicam: si nos servaremus, in Necessariis Unitatem; in Non-necessariis
Libertatem, in Utrisque charitatem, optimo certe loco essent res nostrae. Ita
fiat. Amen.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
HAving perceived by a friend that perused these Papers since the Printing of
them, that the n. 5th. 11. p. 25. against Mr. Blake, is through too great
brevity like to be misunderstood, I thought meet to add this Explication.

I distinguish between the Real Operations and Mutations on man's soul, by
Objects; and the Conveyance of Right to several Benefits by the Covenant of
God. It is not the former that I speak of in that place. I confess that as the
Apprehension of one of Gods Attributes, makes one effect on the soul, and the
apprehension of another makes another effect, so the apprehension of Christ's
Kingdom, Righteousness, Death, Obedience, Intercession, Judgment, etc. do
make also their several Impressions according to the Nature of the thing
apprehended. But I utterly deny that it is so in Conveying Right to these, as
much as I deny that Justification is Sanctification, or a Real Change of our
Qualities as it is. This therefore is my Argument: If the Apprehension of
Christ's Righteousness, and no other Act, should strictly be the Justifying Act
of Faith, and that eo nomine, because it is the object of that apprehension
which is the matter of our Justification, then it would follow, 1. That the
Apprehension of nothing else is the Justifying Act. 2. And that we have Right
to every other particular Mercy eo nomine, because we apprehend that Mercy, and
so our Right to every particular Benefit of Christ, were Received by a distinct
Act of Faith, But the Consequent is false. Therefore so is the Antecedent.

The minor only requires proof: which is proved by the tenor of the Covenant
of Grace, which Gives us Christ, and with him all things: He that has the Son
has Life: He that believes on him shall not perish, nor come into
Condemnation. As many as Received him, to them gave he power to become the sons
of God. So that one entire faith, which is the Receiving of Christ as he is
offered, that is, as our Savior and King, is the Condition of our Right to all
particular Benefits. Godliness has the promise of this life, and that to come.
It is a woman's taking such a man for her Husband that Gives her first Interest
in him, and then in all that he has: It is not accepting this house, and that
Land, and that Servant, etc. that gives her a distinct right in them. There is
not a marrying to all these, and a particular Acceptance of every of his Goods
and Chattel requisite to a right in them, though there be to a use of them. 2.
And the Opinion being utterly unproved is sufficiently confuted. In what Book
that ever was written have these nice distinguishers proved their Doctrine by
Scripture or sound reason? Lex non distinguit, ergo, etc. 3. And it discovers
its own absurdity: For if this be true, then to apprehend Christ's death is the
only act that gives right to that, and to apprehend his obedience to that; and
to apprehend Adoption is the only act that gives right to that, and so of all
other benefits: So that there should be one act of Faith giving right to Christ
himself, and another giving right to pardon, another to sentential
Justification, another to Adoption, another to the Spirit and Sanctification,
another to Perseverance, another to Glory: Yea one to every particular gift or
part of Sanctification; and one to the pardon of every particular known sin
that is pardoned: One to the Gospel written, another to the Ministry, one to
health, another to life, and one to every blessing. And so that act of faith
which Receives Adoption should not Justify, nor that which Receives Christ
himself neither directly: but only that which receives Justification. Whereas
it is one Reception, or Act of faith morally taken (Apprehending the entire
object) that God has made the Condition of his Promise. So that to apprehend
Christ as the Donor of Glory, does as much toward our Justification, as
apprehending him as Justifier: And to Believe in him as our Sanctifier and
King, does as Really conduce to our Justification, and as much, as the
apprehending him as one that will pardon our sins. He that believes shall be
saved, is the simple Scripture doctrine. 4. And if all this were not so, yet it
is the apprehending of Christ as King according to them then, that must be the
Pardoning and Justifying act, more then as a Sacrifice: For as Satisfier and a
Ransom, he only meriteth our Pardon and Justification. But to pardon by Grant,
is unquestionably an act of Sovereignty as such: It being not the pardon of a
private injury, but a public Crime that we have to speak of. And to Justify
by Plea is Christ's act as an Advocate, and not as a Sacrifice. And to Justify
by sentence is Christ's act as Judge: So that if their own Doctrine did hold (of
the diversifying of our Right by the diversity of the formal reason of the
object apprehended) then would it but infallibly prove against them, that it is
the Receiving of Christ as King and Judge that is the Act of Pardoning and
Justifying faith, more then the Receiving him as a Sacrifice or Ransom.

FINIS.

