Certain Disputations Of Right to SACRAMENTS, and the true nature of Visible
Christianity; Defending them against several sorts of Opponents, especially
against the second assault of that Pious, Reverend and Dear Brother Mr. Thomas
Blake.

By RICHARD BAXTER, Teacher of the Church in KEDERMINSTER.

The Second Edition corrected and amended.

Mark 16.16. He that Believes, and is Baptized shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be damned.

Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he
cannot be my Disciple.

Acts 3.23. Every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed
from among the People.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Nevil Simmons Book seller in Kederminster, and
are to be sold by him there and by Nathaniel Ekins, at the Gun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

Disput. 1. Whether Ministers may admit persons into the Church of Christ by
Baptism, upon the bare verbal Profession of the true Christian saving faith
without staying for, or requiring any further Evidences of sincerity?

Disput. 2. Whether Ministers must or may Baptize the Children of those that
profess not saving Faith, upon the profession of any other Faith that comes
short of it?

Disput. 3. Whether the Infants of Notoriusly-ungodly baptized Parents have
Right to be Baptized?

Disput. 4. Whether any besides Regenerate Believers have a Right to the
Sacraments given them by God, and may thereupon require them and receive them?

Disput. 5. De Nomine, Whether Hypocrites and other Unregenerate persons, be
called Church Members, Christians, Believers, Saints, Adopted, Justified, etc.
Vnivocally, Analogically or Equivocally?

Some Reasons fetched from the rest of M^ Blake's Assaults, and from Doctor
Owen's and M^ Robertson's Writings against me, which acquit me from returning
them a more particular answer.

To the faithful servants of Christ, the Associated Ministers of Worcestershire.
Reverend and dear Brethren.
AS I ow you an account of my Doctrine, when you require it, so do I also in
some regards, when it is accused by others: which accordingly I here give you;
and with you, to the rest of the Church of God. I take my self also to have a
Right to your Brotherly admonitions; which I earnestly crave of you, when you
see me go aside. And that I may begin to you in the exercise of that
faithfulness which I crave from you, I humbly exhort you, that in the study and
practice of such points as are here disputed (yea and of all the Doctrine of
Christ,) you would still most carefully watch against Self, and suffer it not
once to come in and plead its Interest, lest it entice you to be Man-pleasers,
when it has first made you Self-pleasers, and so no longer the servants of
Christ. You are deservedly honored for your Agreements and Undertakings: but it
is a faithful Performance that must prepare you for the Reward, and prevent the
Doom of the slothful and unfaithful, Mat. 25.23, 26. But this will not be
done, if you consult with Flesh and Blood, Self-denial and the Love of God in
Christ, do constitute the New-man; The exercise of these must be the daily work
of your Hearts and Lives; and the preaching of these the sum of your Doctrine.
Where Love does constrain you, and Self-denial cleanse your way, you will find
alacrity and delight in those works, which to the carnal seem thorny and
grievous, and not to be attempted. This will make you to be up and doing, when
others are loytering, and wishing and pleasing the flesh, and contenting
themselves with plausible Sermons, and the repute of being able pious men. If
these two Graces be but living in your hearts, they will run through your
thoughts, and words and ways, and give them a spiritual and heavenly
tincture; They will appear in your Sermons and exemplary lives, and give you a
special fertility in good works; They will have so fruitful an influence upon
all your flock, that none of them shall pass into another world, and take
possession of their everlasting State, till you have done your best for their
Conversion and salvation; and therefore that we may daily live in the Love of
God, in Self-denial and Christian unity, is the sum of the prayers of

Your unworthy Brother, Richard Baxter.
Kederminster, Jan. 17. 1656.
The Preface.
IT is not long ago since it was exceeding far from my thoughts, that ever I
should have been so much employed in Controversies with dear and Reverend
Brethren, as since that time I have been. I repent of any temerity,
unskilfulness or other sin of my own which might occasion it, and I am much
grieved that it has occasioned offense to some of the Brethren whom I
contradict: But yet I foresee that some light is like to arise by this
collision, and the Church will receive more good then hurt by it. We are united
in Christ, and in hearty Love to one another, (which as my soul is certainly
conscious of; so I have not the least doubt of it in most of my Brethren with
whom I have these Debates) we are so far agreed, that we do without scruple
profess our selves of the same faith, and Church: and where the Consequences of
our Differences may seem to import any great distance, which we are fain to
manifest in our Disputes, we lay that more upon the opinion then the persons,
as knowing that they discern not and own not such Consequences. And if any salt
be mingled in our Writings (which is usual in Disputes that are not lifeless)
or it is intended rather to season then to fret, or to bite that which each one
takes to be an error, rather then the man that holds it; (If there be two or
three toothed contenders that have more to do with persons then with doctrines,
that is nothing to the rest) And thus on both sides those that err, and those
that have the truth, do show that Error is the thing which they detest, and
would disclaim it, if they saw it; and that Truth is it which they love, and
are zealous for it so far as they know it* And doubtless the comparing of our
several Evidences, will be some help to the unprejudiced, to the attainment of
a clearer discovery of the Truth.

The greatest thing that troubles me, is to hear that there are some men, yea
(which is the wonder) some Orthodox Godly Ministers (though I hope but few)
that fetch an Argument from our Disputes against the motions to Peace and Unity
and unquestionable Duties, which on other occasions are made to them; and if
any Arguments of mine be used to move them, they presently reply, [If he would
promote peace, he should not break it, by dissenting from or writing against
his Brethren.] But what if I were as bad as you can imagine, will you therefore
refuse any Evidence that shall be brought you, or neglect any duty that God
shall call you to? Will my unpeaceableness excuse yours? But stay Brethren; do
you build the Churches Peace on such terms as these? Will you have Union and
Communion with none but your own Party, that are in all things of your own
Opinions? If these be your grounds, you are utterly schismatical in your
foundations, though you should actually get all the Christians in Europe to be
of your mind. O! me thinks men that are humble (as all are that shall be
saved) should be so far acquainted with the weakness of their understandings,
as to have meaner thoughts of them, and not to make them the Standard of the
Churches Judgment, or the Center of its Peace. There Is no two men of you all,
of one mind in all things among your selves.

But I confess your faults excuse not mine; and I am much too blame, if I be
not willing to hear of them and reform them. But I can do nothing against the
truth; it is not in my power to be of all men's minds, when they are of so many
and inconsistent. If I agree with some Reverend Brethren, it must displease the
rest by disagreeing from them. And therefore I have long resolved to study to
please God, (who may be pleased) instead of men, and do my best to find out the
Truth, and entertain it and obey it, as far as I can understand it, and to
propound it to others, and leave it to God and them whether it shall be
received or not. And for my self to be heartily thankful to any, that will help
me to know more, and deliver me from any Error that I am in.

The Differences that these Brethren have blamed me for are in these three
points or four: 1. About the Interest of Faith, Repentance, and other Graces in
our Justification. Of this I have not heard from any Brother, that yet he is
unsatisfied, since I published my Confession; save what is in an Epistle to the
Sermons on John 17. to which I have long ago prepared an Answer (and the
by-exceptions answered in this Book.)

2. About proving Christianity by Argument; of which I have heard from none
since I published my Papers against Infidelity. 3. About the Universality of
Redemption: and 4. About the Controversies of this Book.

For the former of these last, I find a Reverend, Learned man endeavoring to
load me with some note of Singularity, I mean D. Ludovicus Molinaeus, in his
Preface to his Paraenesis ad aedificatores Imperii in Imperio (a Book that has
much Learning, and more Truth then is fairly used, the face of it being writhen
to frown upon them that own it, and Parties wronged even where Truth is
defended, though through the unhappiness of the Distinction often clouded when it
seems explicated, and through -- I know not what, the Controversy seldom truly
stated.) This Learned man has thought it meet, for the disgracing Amyraldus,
by the smalness of his success to mention me thus, as his only Proselyte in
England, [Forsan eo consilio Amyraldus cudit suam Methodum, ut Lutheranis
subpalparet, and gratiam apud eos iniret, sperans per eam Lutheranos
reconciliatum iri Calvinistis: sed revera dum falsam studet inire gratiam,
nulli parti eo nomine gratus est, nec ulla part haeret apud Lutheranos, ut
censet Calovius clarissimus Wittemberge Theologus; nec de vincit sibi Anglos
aut Belgas: In Belgio enim nulli nisi Arminiano; in Anglia uni Baxtero, apprime
placet ejus Methodus.] And three leaves after, [ Sed in solatium Dallo, ut
Amyraldus Baxterum Anglum, sic Dall is Woodbrigium itidem Anglum, peperit
proselytam and admiratorem] It is an ungrateful task to answer a Writing, whose
Error is a multiplication of palpable U^truths in matter of fact; for they are
usually more unwillingly heard of then committed. But I shall lay these
following considerations in the way of this Learned man, where his conscience
may find them 1. If in England Amyraldus Method do please uni Baxtero, and yet
Dallaeus have proselyted Woodbridge also, and Amyraldus and Dallaeus Method be
the same, Quaer. Whether Baxter and Woodbridge are not the same man? 2. Qu.
Whether this Learned man know the judgment of all England? 3. I meet with so
many of Amyraldus mind in the point of Universal Redemption, that if I might
judge of all the rest by those of my acquaintance, I should conjecture that
half the Divines in England are of that opinion. 4. Is it not a thing famously
known in England, that this middle way of Universal Redemption has been by
Writing and Disputing and preaching maintained by as excellent Divines for
Learning, Judgment, holiness, and powerful Preaching (as far as we can judge)
as ever England bred? Its famously known that Bp Usher was for it, that Bp
Davenant, Bp Carleton, Bp Hall, Dr Ward, Dr Goad, Mr Balcanquall, being all the
Divines that were sent to the Synod of Dort from Britain, were for it: and
Davenant, Hall, and Ward, have wrote for it: that those holy, renowned
Preachers, Dr Preston (of which read Mr Tho. Ball in his life), Dr Stoughton,
Mr Will. Whately, Mr Will. Fenner, M John Ball, Mr Ezekiel. Culverw^ll, Mr Rich.
Vines, etc. were for it: And many yet living do ordinarily declare their
judgment that way. And are not these more then unus Baxterus? An excellent
Writing of Ioannes Be^gius to that end, was lately translated here into
English, and published by Mr Mauritius Bohemus, a Divine residing in
Leicestershire. 5. Is it not famously known that the Divines of Breme go this
way, and the Duke of Brandenburg's Divines, and that Wendeline complains to
Spanhemius of it: and that Ludovicus Crocius, Mat Martinius, and Iselburge
(besides the British Divines gave it in as their judgment at the Synod of
Dort; so that the Synod has nothing against it; and nothing but what this unus
Baxterus, and all of his mind do readily subscribe to herein. Nay, is it not
manifested that Dr Twiss himself has frequently written for it? 6. Can he that
knows the Lutherane and Arminian doctrine believe both these, that the
Arminians in Belgia are pleased with Amyraldus Method, and yet that nulla part
haeret apud Lutheranos? 7. Can he that has read what Davenant, Camero,
Amyraldus, Lud. Crocius, etc. have written against the Arminians, and what
Grotius, Tilenus, and others of them have written against them, be yet
persuaded that the Arminians are pleased with Amyraldus Method, any further
then to be less dispeased with it then with some others? 8. When Mr Woodbridge
does profess but that he is for Universal Redemption in Davenant's sense,
[especially since he read Daile, etc.] does this Learned man well infer thence,
that he was Daile's proselyte, when the contrary is intimated, yea is the [
fatetur se nondum concoquentem Amyraldi Methodum.] true or false? 9. When this
unus Baxterus did write a Book for Universal Redemption in this middle sense,
before he ever saw either Amyraldus, Davenant, or any Writer (except Dr Twiss)
for that way, and was ready to publish it, and stopped it on the coming forth of
Amyraldus, and was himself brought to this judgment, by reading Dr Twiss, and
meditating of it and had in print so long ago professed these things, whether
this Learned man should after all this publish to the world, that I am
Amyraldus proselyte? I speak but as to the truth of the report; for as to the
reputation of the thing, I should think it a great benefit if I had the
opportunity of sitting at the feet of so judicious a man as I perceive
Amyraldus to be 10. Whether is Calovius a competent witness of the judgment of
the Lutherans in general, or a witness capable of dishonouring Amyraldus, when
he so unpeaceably and voluminously pours out his fiery indignation against
the moderate Lutherans themselves, that are but willing of Peace, under the
name of Calixtians, seeking to make them odious from the honorable name of
Georgius Calixtus, who went with them in that peaceable way? 11. If it be David
Blondell that he means, when he says of Daile's Book [ Obstetricante magno
illic Viro, sed Armimianorum cultore] (and Blondell only prefaceth to it)
Whether any that has read the Writings of Blondell, and heard of his fame,
should believe this accusation? or rather -- 12. Is it a certain Truth or a
Calumny that is thus expressed of Dallaeus, [Certum est tamen hac Apologia
maluisse Arminianorum ordinibus inseri, quam sedem inter contra-remonstrantes
tenere]? And is it certain, that Dr Molin knows the mind of Dallaeus better
then he does his own, or is sooner then himself to be believed in the report of
it? 13. Whether the desire which he expresses that Camero had been expelled,
and the words that he pours forth against him, do more dishonor Camero or
himself? And if that Article of Justification were sufficient ground of his
condemnation and expulsion, and consequently Olevian, Scultetus, Vrsinus,
Paraeus, Piscator, Alstedius, Wendeline, Gataker, and abundance more should
have tasted of the same sauce, Whether these persecuting principles savor not
of too high an esteem of their own judgments, and tend not either to force an
implicit faith in the Ministry, or to depopulate the Church, and break all in
pieces? And whether more credit is to be given to the judgment of this Learned
man, against Camero, or to the general applause of the Learned, Pious and
Peaceable Divines of most Protestant Churches? For instance, such as Bp Hall's,
who in his Peacemaker, p. 49. says of him, that he was [the Learned Divine,
be it spoken without envy, that the Church of Scotland has afforded in this
last age.] 14. Whether this Learned man had not forgotten his former Triumph in
the supposed unsuccessfulness of Amyralds Method, and the paucity of his
partakers or approvers, when he wrote this in deep sorrow for the Churches of
France, [Serio ingemisco Patriae and Ecclesiis in ea reformatis, quod jam totos
viginti annos Methodus Amyraldi impune regna verit: nemine intra Galliam
hiscere audente, aut ullo vindice veritatis ibi exurgente] and do these words
show his desire of Peace or Contention in the Church? 15. Whether it be truth
that he says, that all the Divines of the Assembly at Westminster were against
Amyraldus Method, when Mr Vines has often and openly owned Davenant's way of
Universal Redemption; and others yet living are known to be for it? 16. Whether
it be proved from the cited words of their Confession, c. 8.. 5. that such was
their judgment, when they express no such thing? And I have spoken with an
eminent Divine, yet living, that was of the Assembly, who assured me that they
purposely avoided determining that Controversy, and some of them professed
themselves for the middle way of Universal Redemption. 17. Is there one man in
Oxford or Cambridge (besides himself) that believes his next words, [ pari
obelo confodiunt hanc Methodum quotquot sunt body Doctores and Professores
Oxoniae and Cantabrigiae] except on supposition that the foregoing words be
untrue which pari relates to? 18. Is it probable that Dr Twiss was an enemy to
that doctrine of Redemption which he has so often asserted, viz [That Christ
dyed for all men, so far as to purchase them pardon and salvation on condition
they would repent and believe; and for the Elect, so far further as to procure
them faith and repentance it self:] which he has often in many Writings as to Mr
Cranford's charge concerning his severe accusation of Dallaeus, and judging his
very heart to be guilty of such dissimulation, as [that he wrote not seriously,
but contrary to what he thought, and that nothing could be more illiterate. I
shall not put the question, whether it be probable that these words could pass
from such a man, because he is alive to vindicate himself, if the report be
false, or to own it, if true. 19. Do all the contemptuous expressions of a
Dissenter so much dishonor the judgment of Dallaeus, as this Dissenters own
praise of his former Writings does honor it, when he says of him, [ A quo
nihil hactenus prodii^ quod non esset judicii acerrimi, eruditionis
reconditissimae, and dostrinae sanctissimae, aut candidissimum pectus non
referret; in quo nulla suspicio malignitatis insideret; multo minus ea aetate
seria and sera erupturae, cum lenit albescens animos capillus] This is enough
to make a stranger conjecture, that the man is not grown either such a fool as
to err so grossly as is pretended, or such a knave as to write in the matters of
God against his own judgment. And indeed he that will prove himself a wiser, a
much wiser man in these matters then Dallaeus, Blondel, Amyrald. etc. must
bring another kind of evidence for the honor of his Wisdom, then Dr L. Molin's
Preface or Paraenesis is. 20. Is it not an indignity to the dead, which the
living should hear with a pious indignation, for this Learned man to feign that
Bp Usher thought so contemptuously of Amyraldus Method? Whatever he might say
of him in any other respect, its well known that he owned the substance of his
doctrine of Redemption. The high praises therefore which Dr Molin does give to
this reverend Bishop, do dishonor his own judgment, that makes the Bishops
doctrine so contemptible and gross. The like dealing I understand, some
Arminian Divines (I am loath to name them) have used against this reverend man:
One of them of great note has given out, that he heard him preach for
universal Redemption, and afterward spoke to him, and found him owning it;
therefore he was an Arminian: and I hear a Northamptonshire Arminian has so
published him in print. O the unfaithfulness of men seeming pious! The good
Bishop must be what every one will say of him. Though one feigneth him to be of
one extreme, and the other of the other extreme, when (alas!) his judgment
has been commonly known in the world about this 30 years to be neither for the
one, nor the other, but for the middle way. Do you call for proof? If I give
you not better then either Dr Molin, or the two Arminian Divines give, let me
be branded for a factious Calumniator of the dead, whose name is so honorable,
that the forgery is the greater sin. First there is a Manuscript of his own in
many men's hands, dated March. 3. 1617. at Dublin, (which I intend to print, if
no one else do it first) which asserteth this Doctrine in the same middle way
as Davenant and Camero do. And I asked him whether he yet owned it, (not long
before his death), and he said, He did, and was firm in that judgment; I asked
him to whom he wrote it, and he told me (as I remember) to Mr Culverwell (I am
certain it was to him, or to Mr Eyr, who, he told me, was the man that fell so
foul on Mr Culverwell.) 2. If my own word be not sufficient, Dr Kendal can bear
witness that he was present, once when he heard him own this judgment of
Universal Redemption in the middle way, and intimated that Dr Davenant and Dr
Preston were minded of it by him; (as rejoicing that he sooner owned it;) and
that we cannot rationally offer Christ to sinners on other grounds. Now because
the Bishop went this middle way, when he speaks against the Arminians, some
feign him to speak against his own doctrine. And when he spoke for Universal
Satisfaction, the Arminians say he was turned to them. This is the faithfulness
of the world! It shames and grieves me to say, Of siding Divines; and as much
almost to say, Of a public Professor of History in Oxford: For the principal
honor of a Historian, is his veracity, and impartial fidelity; and how much of
that this Preface to the Paraenesis is guilty of, I leave to consideration upon
the taste that is here given. But enough of this.

The fourth and last particular in which I offend some few Brethren by my
judgment, is that which is the subject of these ensuing Disputations. But I
can truly say of this as of the rest, 1. That if I should change my judgment
and please these Brethren, its like I should displease many more. For 2. I take
it for granted, that I go in the common rode that the Church of Christ has
gone in from the beginning to this day; so far am I from singularity. 3. I am
most certain that my thoughts were so far from intending singularity or the
disturbance of the Church, by these or other points in Controversy, that I
apprehended them strongly to be the truths that must be instrumental to the
Churches peace when ever God sees us meet to attain it. And though I never
took a point for true eo nomine, because it was in the middle, or tended to
peace, yet I purposely chose out these truths rather then other to vindicate,
because they tend to peace. And to the praise of God I speak it, that in those
ancient common disturbing Controversies between the Arminian and Antiarminian,
Lutheran and Calvinist, Jesuit and Dominican, I have discerned those
Principles which quiet my own mind, and which I am confident, were they
received according to their evidence, would quiet the now-contending Christian
world: But I am past doubt, to be derided as arrogant for this confidence; and
should the Principles in a Method with Evidence be propounded, though purposely
to heal the divisions of the Church, many of the several parties would but rage
at the Reconciler, and pour out their impotent accusations and reproaches
against him, because he would attempt the healing of their divisions, and would
feign him to be the Author of some new Sect, for seeking to put an end to
Sects. But let any man make good my just demand, that the Principles propounded
shall have an impartial reception according to their Evidence, and I will give
you security to make good my confidence, that they shall quiet the Chrstian
world hereabouts. But I know this is to be expected from none but God; nor at
all on earth in any perfection.

As to the present Controversy, it seemed good to Mr Blake to begin it with
me; and to my Defense he has opposed an angry Reply; not to my whole Book (as
I did to that part of his which concerned me) but to here and there a scrap,
disordered, and maimed, and parcelled as he thought good. I was in doubt
whether to make any rejoinder or further Defense; but while I doubted, diverse
Reverend Brethren from several parts wrote to me, to move me neither to be
silent, nor to answer all his words, which would be tedious to the Reader, but
to handle the Controversies by way of Disputation, and to bring in Mr Blake's
Arguments under them, so far as shall be thought necessary. Though at first I
scarce liked this way, as seeming not a full answer, but such a course as he
took with me, yet I did acquiesce in the judgment of my Brethren. But yet
indeed, I think I had never printed a word at all in Defense of my self against
Mr Blake, but for another providence. The third Disputation, as here printed,
was written before Mr Blake's Book against me was printed, or in the press (as
I have reason to think.) A Copy of this I lent about two years ago to a
friend: But by what means I know not, about three quarters of a year ago I
received tidings from a pious learned Minister in the West (writing to a friend
of his not far from me) that there were such abundance of Copies of that
Disputation in those parts, and some were so purposed, that it would be printed
if I did not do it my self. I confess I was much offended at the news, because
the Disputation was imperfectly written, and on such a subject (as to the later
part, which shows what sins may consist with Godliness) that I would have been
loath it should have been by them made public, as knowing how unfit it was for
the eyes of the Profane: But when there was no remedy, the best I could do, was
to add some cautions, and annex the other Disputations here adjoined, which
were hastily written, that the former might not go alone without that company
that seemed necessary. And this is the occasion of this present writing.

For the Matter of it, I have manifested that I hold the common Doctrine of the
Church. And many another could I mention as consenting in it, besides those
particularly there cited. Mr Will. Fenner in the second part of Christ's Alarm,
p. 92, 93. says [ Another inseparable mark of a true Church, is a sincere
Profession of the word of God and true Christian religion, either in truth and
uprightness of heart, or else so far as man can judge: For though the preaching
of the Word come to a place, yet it does not follow presently that there is a
Church of God -- but when diverse of them embraced the Word either sincerely, or
else to see to, as far as Paul and others could judge, then they were a Church:
There must be a Congregation of People that do profess the pure Religion, and
make it appear (at least to the judgment of man) that they are Godly in Christ
Jesus: this is an inseparable Mark of a true Church, as we may see 1 Cor.
14.33.] See further.

Mr Vines in his Treatise of the Sacrament, p. 150, 151. says, That the
Separatists [laid the foundation, viz. That only Visible Saints are fit
Communicants, which is true as to the Churches Admission: That real Saints only
are worthy Communicants, which is true too, as to the inward Grace or Benefit]
-- And 151. There is a great difference between Christ's real Members and Guests
at this Table, and as I may say, the Visible Churches Members or Guests. If he
be a visible Professor of Faith, unshipwrakt, of capacity to discern the Lords
Body, of Life without Scandal, he is a Guest of the Church. -- ]

And p. 205. Though I should rest in serious Professsion of Faith and
Repentance, which is not pulled down again by a wicked Life, or scandalous Sin,
-- yet when a man lies under the charge of our censure for some scandalous
sin, the case is otherwise, etc.] Read the rest.

And p. 324, 329. [ The Covenant of God with us is, that all that believe in
Christ that died, and receive him for their Lord and Savior, shall have
remission of sins, etc. Answerable to this act of God, the Believer accepts of,
and submits to this Covenant and the Conditions of it, viz. to believe, and to
have God for our God, and thereof makes a solemn profession in this Sacrament,
giving up himself to Christ as Lord and Savior, restipulating and striking
hands with him to be his, and so binds himself, and does as it were seal a
Counterpart to God again; and not only so, but comes into a claim of all the
riches and legacies of the Will or Covenant, because he has accepted and here
declares his acceptance of the Covenant. The Seal is indeed properly of that
which is Gods part of the Covenant to perform and give, and is no more but
offered, until we subscribe and set our hands to it, and then its complete, and
the Benefits may be claimed, as the benefit of any conditional promise may be,
when the condition is performed. And lest you should stumble at that word, I
must let you know, that the Will accepting and submitting to the Conditions, is
the performance of the Conditions required (NB.) --

And page 249, 250, etc. Though as to admittance (which is the Churches part)
to the outward Ordinance, he make Profession (as I do,) sufficient, yet to the
question whether the Sacrament be a Converting Ordinance, he concludes that [
It is not an Ordinance appointed for Conversion] His Arguments are; 1. Because
no effect can be ascribed to this Ordinance which falls not under the
signification of it, etc. as Vasquez. 2. This Sacrament by the institution of
it appears to praesuppose those that reap the sweet and benefit of it, to be
Converts and in grace, namely to have faith in Christ, and to be living
members; and if this be presupposed by this Ordinance, then it is not first
wrought by it. 3. The Word is the only Instrument of God to beget Faith or work
Conversion, etc. And he answers the Objections of the contrary minded: and to
them that argue that the Lords Supper is a Converting Ordinance, because its
possible a man may be then converted; he says, they may as well make
Ordination or Marriage Converting Ordinances, because by the words then uttered
a man may be converted. He cites the words of learned Rich. Hooker Eccles.
Pol. l. 5. page 5^6. [ The grace which we have by it does not begin but
continue grace or life; no man therefore receives this Sacrament before
Baptism, because no dead thing is capable of nourishment; that which grows,
must of necessity first live.] --

And for further Authority he adds, [ And to this purpose all our Learned
Divines have given their suffrage. And the Papists though they differ from us
in denying remission of sins in this Sacrament, in favor to their Sacrament of
Penance, yet they hold it to be an Ordinance of Nutrition, and so do all their
Schoolmen; and so does the Church of England [ The strengthening and refreshing
of our souls, etc] I need not number Authors or Churches. It is so plain a
case, that I wonder they that have stood up in defense of it, as a converting
Ordinance, have not taken notice of it. There is an Army to a man against them;
and the ancient Christian Churches are so clear in it -- So far Mr Vines (and
Hooker in him.)

Concerning the Distinction of Forum Dei and Ecclesiae, and its sense, see that
judicious Agreement of the Associated Ministers of Cumberlan^ and Westmerland,
page 47. where they take notice of Mr. Blakes questioning it.

Since these Papers were in the Press, I was told by a Reverend Brother, that
Mr Blake professes to hold the Necessity of the Profession of a saving Faith,
as well as I; and by one of his special acquaintance, in the Ministry, who
heard me express my mind, that Mr Blake's was the same. I durst not omit the
mention of this, lest it should be injurious to him: And yet how far the
reporters are in the right, and understand his meaning, I am no further able to
tell you, but that they are credible persons. For my part, I defended my own
Doctrine against the charge which in two Volumes he brought against it. And I
supposed he would not write so much of two Volumes against a Doctrine which he
judged the same with his own. And I meddled only with his books, and not his
secret thoughts. Whether I have been guilty of feigning an Adversary, that took
himself for none, I am contented to stand to the judgment of any impartial man
on earth that will read our books. Surely I found it over each page, that a
Faith short of Justifying entitleth to Baptism: and I never met with any such
explication in him, as that by [ A faith short of Justifying,] he meant [ A
Profession of Justifying faith.] And sure [ Faith] and [ Profession] be not all
one; nor [ Iustifying] and [ Short of justifying] all one. Nor do others that
read his books understand him any otherwise then I do, so far as I can learn;
sure the Ministers that were Authors of the Propositions for Reformation of
Parish Congregations, Printed for the Norwich Bookseller, understood him as I
do, p. 17. where they say thus; [Obj. 3. But a dogmatical Faith may entitle to
Baptism, as Mr Blake, Treat. on Con. speaks, though there be no profession of a
justifying faith and repentance. Answ. We cannot think so, seeing the faith
required to be professed before Baptism, is such a Faith as has salvation
annexed to it. Mar. 16.16. It is a Faith of the whole heart, Acts 8.38.
Repentance is also required to Baptism as well as Faith, Acts 2.38. and the
Church in the usual form of Baptism, enjoined the baptized person not only to
profess the doctrine of Faith, but to give up his name to Christ as his servant
and soldier, and to fight manfully against the World, the Flesh and the Devil,
etc. we need add no more. Mr Blake 's mistake lies in this, that the ground of
Baptism is either a Dogmatical faith, or a true justifying faith; which because
no Minister can certainly know, he must only require a Dogmatical faith. But we
conceive neither of them to be the ground of Baptism, but the profession of a
true justifying faith, or Acceptance of the Covenant] So far these Brethren.

And whether it be not the Promise of a justifying faith that Mr Blake takes up
with, besides his faith short of justifying, read his Books, and censure as you
find cause.

But yet if Mr Blake, be really of my mind, I have no mind to persuade the
world that he is not, nor reason so to do; but when I know it from himself, I
shall heartily rejoice in the closure. For I am confident it is in love of
Truth that both of us do dispute; and therefore if Truth get by it, we have our
ends.

For my part, I must still say, that if I took [a Dogmatical faith it self, or
any short of justifying] for the Title and necessary qualifications of them
that I must admit, I would baptize none, because I cannot know who has that
Dogmatical faith, and who not. And I still find that even wise and pious men
are often as far to seek for the truth of their Assent as of their Consent, and
would give a world that they were but certain that they truly Believe the truth
of the Gospel. And I am sure that I am as far to seek for assurance of the one
as of the other in those that I examine, in order to the baptizing of their
Infants.

There is newly come forth a Book of William Morris Esquire, which seems by
the Title page to plead for the sufficiency of this Dogmatical faith. When I
saw the Book, made up of so much reading and expressing so much industry and
learning, I much rejoiced that England had such a Gentleman; and I look on the
Book, as a shaming reprehension of the idleness and ignorance of the multitude
of the Gentry, that spend that time in hawking, and hunting, and complementing,
which if better spent, might make a blessing, and not a burden to the Land. But
out of that learned Volume I am not able to find any clear discovery, what the
Author means by a Dogmatical faith. But I conjecture that it is somewhat that
must be conjunct with the Profession of a saving faith. For page 215. he says,
[ because it is not only probable to Charity they may have found faith, but --
] And page 2^4. [ He that receives the Seals of the Covenant, seals back a
Counter-part to God, accepts of the Terms, and assents to the Condition, (which
as Mr Vines before shows, is justifying faith.) -- ] And I desire it may be
observed what he says, p. 247. to prove Baptism and the Lords Supper to be
administered on the like grounds: And what he says in p. 248, 249. against
Baptizing the children of the Excommunicate, and what he cites out of Rich.
Hooker, Eccl. Pol. l. 3. p. 87. to that end; and that the Child's right is
rooted in the immediate parents: And that which he cites out of Goodwins Mos.
and Aar. l. 5. c. 2. p. 223. that [ Among the Jews the male-children of those
that were but under Niddui were not circumcised.]

And if any think that this learned Gentleman would have Ministers feed the
humors of the carnal unruly multitude by giving them the Lords Supper, while
they obstinately refuse to be ruled or to live a godly life, let them observe,
that it is only Church Members, not living scandalously and still professing
the Christian faith, that he pleads for. And no doubt but he will confess, that
our Parishioners cannot by us be made Church Members against their wills; and he
distinguishes between the Universal and a Particular Church, and well knows
that all the Christian world belongs not to my pastoral charge; and that I am
not bound to deliver the Sacraments to all that have a right to them. And
therefore if upon just reasons I desire of the whole Parish, to know whether
they own their membership in that particular Church or not, and take me for
their Pastor, and consent to the duty of members; and some deny it, and others
will give me no answer by word or writing, no not after I have waited a year or
two; and I told them, that I must take their silence for a denial; but they
will continue silently to hear, and will not once say they own the relation,
nor will submit to the unquestionable acts of Discipline; I am confident that
it is not in the thoughts of this learned Gentleman, that I must needs take
these persons for part of my charge, that will not tell me, they take
themselves for such, or take me for their Pastor; no more then he will think
himself bound to take a woman for his wife, and estate her in his Lands, and
perform conjugal offices to her, that will not once say, She consents that he
shall be her husband. And this is the case of most of our people: The most
Godly Ministers about us that gather not new Churches, but (on sufficient
reasons and joint agreement) do only call the whole Parish to know whether they
own their membership, and them for their Pastors, do find almost none but a few
Godly that will own it, for fear of being troubled by Discipline. If all the
Parish therefore be our Church, it must be against their wills.

And if any think that several passages in that Learned Volumn do make against
the power, and consequently the labor of the Ministry and the Edification of
the Church, I propound to their consideration, 1. That all the applicatory
passages of the Discourse must be expounded as they relate to that controversy
which occasioned them, which must be understood by the help of former writings.
2. Its not unusual with wise men in length and heat of Disputation, to make the
face of Truth it self to seem sometimes to look awry in the application. 3. And
other passages in the same Book may help you to a fair exposition of the
offensive. As, e.g. p. 85. he says, [ Were a Pastor so familiarly conversant
with his flock as he ought to be, and is some think employed not only in Paul 's
preaching from house to house, but also by those alike used idioms, [the Church
in, or among you, and you in the Church,] or did not deem, the feeding of the
Lambs by Catechizing to be beneath his magistery and greatness, he would need
no other marks or signs to know his sheep by, then such as he might take from
common conversation] And you need not question but this Learned Author would
reckon them among the scandalous, that would not speak with a Minister if he
desire it, but get away when they know he will come to their house, yea, or
will not come to him, considering he is made the Ruler over them in order to
their spiritual good, and they commanded to obey him, Heb. 13.17. especially
when a Ministers weakness, or the multitude of his Parishioners and business
will not permit him to seek after them. I may conclude therefore that for all
the word [ Dogmatical faith] in the Title page, this Gentleman is not like to
be my Adversary.

To conclude, the Jesuits themselves do witness that the Doctrine which I have
in this Book maintained, is the ordinary Protestant Doctrine, while they
concur in opposing part of it, under that title without our disowning it, and
tell the Iansenians, that their Doctrine, by which they make the Church to
consist only of those that have charity and true Grace, is the doctrine of the
Protestants; as Petavius de Lege and Gratia passim; and p. 28. [ Au^^enim una
cum charitate ac justitia necessario fidem amittebant, quicunque lethale
aliquod crimen incurrerant, dut si fides in illis haerebat adhuc, ea minime
suffi^iebat, ut in Ecclesiae part aliqua numerarentur. Horum utrum dixerint,
nihil ad haeresim and Catholicae fidei ^abem interest: Nam utrumque pro
haeretico damnatum, and inter caetera Lutheri Calvinique, and ante hos Wiclefi
nefaria dogmata, jampridem Ecclesiastica censura notatum est.] Vid. and p. 118.
de Gratia initiali. But its in regard of the Catholic Church as invisible, and
in the properest acception, that we own this to be our Doctrine.

As to the rest of Mr Blake's Book, and also Dr Owen's and Mr Roberts. I have
said as much as I now intend in the Conclusion of these Disputations.

If any Papists or other Adversaries shall conclude that we are not of the true
Church or Religion, because we thus differ, and are of so many minds; they may
as well prove a man to be no member of an Hospital, or no Patient to a
Physician, because he is not in perfect health; or none of the Scholars of such
a Master, because he knows not as much as his Teacher, or as those of the
highest form: Or that Paul and Barnabas were not both of the true Church,
because they fell out even to a parting asunder: Or that Peter and Paul were
not both of the true Religion, because one of them was to be blamed, and the
other withstood him to the face, because he walked not uprightly, and according
to the truth of the Gospel, (an high charge, Gal. 1.11, 12, 13, 14.) yea, they
may as well conclude that no man is of the Church while he lives on earth,
because while we are here, we know but in part, and see but darkly or
enigmatically as in a glass, 1 Cor. 13.9, 11, 12. and because we account not
our selves perfect, or to have attained, but follow after, and reach forth to
the things which are before us, and press toward the mark; and where any is
otherwise minded, we wait till God reveal this to us, Phil. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.
Or as if they would make us believe, that there are not more differences among
the Papists then with us. But of these things I purposely speak in some
Disputations against Popery, which with this are in the Press.

And lastly, for those that will convert the truths which I here maintain, into
the nourishment of divisions, (when their nature is to heal) either making men
Notoriously ungodly, that are not, and so rejecting them and their Children, or
withdrawing into separated Churches, because such are Baptized or admitted to
Communion, of whose qualifications they are unsatisfied, their guilt is upon
themselves. The doctrine is not made guilty by their abuse: As the ignorant and
unlearned have still wrested the Scripture to their own destruction, so have
the self-conceited and erroneous always misused the Truth it self to the
disturbance of the Church. Its matter of double Lamentation, that yet there
should be such Divisions, and Parties, and Distances; when Bp Hall's
Peacemaker, and Mr Burrough's Irenicum have been extant so long. Were there
but those two Books on that Subject extant in England, they will heal, or
inexcusably condemn our distances. And indeed they are Volumns of accusation
against us, and proclaim the shame (let me speak what must be spoken) even of
the Godly, yea, of the most of the Godly Ministers of these Nations, that have
yet done no more in this healing work. And I entreat all those Ministers and
People (that have time, and any regard to my advice) that they would diligently
read over and over again those two books, though they cast by twenty such as
this for it. And for those that will censure the following disputations, as
being not levelled to the in^erest of their several Parties, I shall be no
further solicitous to remove their offense. And of the foresaid abusers of
these reforming, reconciling verities, I now only crave the sober perusal and
conscionable Practice of Mr Burrough's 2d, 3d, 4th and 5th Propotion in in his
Irenic. Chapter 23 p 163. Had there been but that one healing Leaf or Page in
England, our wounds would be our shame, as truly as they are our hurt and
danger.

Mr Meade on Eccl. 5.1. page, 130, 131. Offer not the Sacrifice of Fools; for
they know not that they do evil.
MY third Proposition was this: That when Sacrifice was to be offered in case
of sin; yet even then, God accepted not thereof primario, primarily and for it
self; as though any refreshment or emolument accrewed to him thereby (as the
Gentiles fondly supposed of their Gods); but secondarily, only as a testimony
of the Conscience of the Offerer, desiring with humble Repentance to glorify
him with a present, and by that rite to renew a Covenant with him. For
Sacrifice was Oblatio foederalis* Now Almighty God renews a Covenant with, or
receives again into his favor, none but the Repentant sinner, and therefore
accepts of Sacrifice in no other regard, but as a token and effect of this.
Otherwise its is an abomination to him, as whereby men professed a desire of
being reconciled unto God when they had offended him, and yet had no such
meaning. Hence God rejects all Sacrifices, wherein there is no contrition, nor
purpose to forsake sin, and keep his Commandments, which are the parts of
Repentance: so is to be taken that Isa. 1. To what purpose is the multitude of
your Sacrifices? -- Bring no more vain Oblations: Incense is an abomination to
me. And Isa. 62.2, 3. -- And surely he that blesses an Idol is so far from
renewing a Covenant with the Lord his God, that he breaks it: so did they who
without conscience of Repentance, presumed to come before him with a Sacrifice;
not procure atonement, but aggravate their breach.

According to one of these three senses are all passages in the Old Testament,
disparaging and rejecting all Sacrifices Literally to be understood; namely,
when men preferred them before the greater things of the Law; valued them out
of their degree, as an Antecedent Duty: or placed their efficacy in the naked
Rite, as if ought accrewed to God thereby: God would no longer own them for any
Ordinance of his: nor indeed, in that disguize put upon them, were they.

And in The Christ. Sacrif. p. 510, 511.
PSALM. 50. God says, [Gather my Saints together unto me, which make Covenant
with me by Sacrifice.] -- [But unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do
to declare my Statutes, and take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee?] Statutes here are Rites and
Ordinances, and particularly those of Sacrifice, which who so brings unto
God, and thereby supplicates and calls upon his name, is said to take the
Covenant of God in his mouth. Forasmuch as to invocate God with this Rite, was
to do it by way of commemoration of his Covenant; and to say, Remember Lord thy
Covenant; and For thy Covenant's sake Lord hear my prayer.]

The Contents of the first Disputation. Quest. Whether Ministers may admit
persons into the Church of Christ by Baptism, upon the bare Verbal Profession
of the true Christian saving Faith, without staying for, or requiring any
further evidences of sincerity? Aff.
THE Question explained, page 2, 3 What Profession is, page 4, 5 Whether
Profession be required for it self, or as a sign of the thing professed? The
later maintained, against Mr. Blake, p. 6, 7, 8 What profession it must be that
we must take, page 9, 10, 11. Objection. This will make Ministers Lords of the
Church. Answered, p. 12 What profession in specie we must require, page 13 Of
the Essentials of our faith, p. 14, 15, 16 The Thesis laid down, and proved
from Scripture and Nature, p. 18, etc. Mr. James Wood's words considered, p. 21
Reasons why Profession must be taken as a sign of the thing Professed, p. 23,
24 More Arguments, p. 27 Objections answered, p. 30 An Observation for the
healing of unjust rigor, and scruples herein, p. 33 Two causes of mistakes, and
dividing among some good people, p. 38
The Contents of the second Disputation. Quest. Whether Ministers must or may
Baptize the Children of those that profess saving Faith, upon the Profession of
any other Faith that come's short of it? Neg.
THE Question opened, page 42 The Judgment of some late Romanists, p. 45, 51
Argument 1. page 53 Argument 2. page 62 Argument 3. page 68 Argument 4. page 71
Argument 5. page 79 Argument 6. page 88 Argument 7. page 91 Argument 8. page 96
Argument 9. page 98 Argument 10. page 100 In what sense whole Churches are
called Saints, Dead with Christ, Risen with him, Sons by Adoption, Abraham's
Seed, Heirs according to promise, Justified.

Argument 11. page 118 None may be admitted to the Lord's Supper without
profession of saving Faith, p. 120 -- Mr. Gilespie's 20 Arguments against
unregenerate men's Right to the Lord's Supper, defended against Mr. Blake, page
123 How far that Sacrament is a converting Ordinance, p. ^38 Mr. Blake's
Arguments considered, p. 139 Argum. 12, and 13. page 144, 145 Argum. 14, 15.
page 147 Argum. 16. from Scripture-example, p. 149 Mr Blake's exceptions
answered, p. 151 Argument 17. page 156 Argument 18. page 160 Argument 19. page
163 Mr Blake leaves us at an utter loss, p. 164 Answers to Mr Blake's
Arguments, whereby he would prove that a Faith short of justifying gives Right
to Baptism, p. 170, to 191 Argument 20. from the constant practice of the
Church, p. 195 The judgment of above 60 Protestant Divines in the case, p. 204,
to 232 Mr Blake's Confessions, page 232, etc. Mr Blake's conceits of my
self-contradictions, ground less, p. 235
The Contents of the third Disputation. Quest. Whether the Infants of
Notoriously Ungodly Baptized Parents have Right to be Baptized? Neg.
THe terms explained: specially [Right] p. 251 The Question divided into three,
p. 253 Quest. 1. Whether such subjects have Right by any Gift or Grant of God
to themselves? Neg. 1. They have no such Title for their own sake, p. 255 2.
Nor for the immediate Parents, p. 256 3. Nor for their Ancestors, p. 261 4.
Whether they have any on the account of Undertakers, page 264 5. Whether on the
Magistrates power to dispose of them, p. 265 Whether as they are Members of a
Discipled Nation, or born in the Church, page 267, 268 Qu. 2. Whether
Providence give them Right, p. 268 Qu. 3. Whether Ministers ought to Baptize
such, page 269. Negative proved. Such are not credible Professors, p. 271, 274,
etc. The Notoriously ungodly are ipso jure excommunicated; which is explained,
confirmed and defended, p. 280, etc. -- More Arguments, page 294, 295, etc.
Arguments Answered which would prove that the Infants of the Notoriously
ungodly have Right to Baptism, p. 303, etc. And first that from Circumcision.
Argum. 9. Of the Nullity of Baptism supposed to follow, p. 315, etc. Quest.
Whom we must take for Notoriously Ungodly, p. 326, etc. Cautions against the
abuse of Answers, p. 333 The Positive Answer in ten Characters, p. 335, 336
Quest. Is it not our duty to refuse the children of more than the Notoriously
Ungodly? Affirm. p. 338 Violenta praesumptio must cause us to forbear; proved,
p. 341, etc. Quest. What is such violent presumption, or ground to take men for
no credible Professors, p. 345. showed in ten Characters.
The Contents of the fourth Disputation. Quest. Whether any besides Regenerate
Believers (and their seed) have a Right to Sacraments given them by God, and
may thereupon require them and receive them? Neg. page 351.
THe terms explained: specially [Right], p. 353 Concessions in six
Propositions, page 355 The Negative proved, page 356 Mr. Blake's judgment
about Investiture, p. 360, 364, etc. -- Receiving Sacraments as a duty must
come after saving faith, and God warranteth none to do it before, p. 369, 370,
etc. Objections answered, p. 370 Whether this confine Sacraments to them that
have assurance, p. 373, 374, etc. More Objections answered, ad p. 403 The
distinction of forum Dei and Ecclesiae, vindicated against Mr. Blake's
opposition, p. 403, etc. Mr. Rutherford's Judgment of that, and the main
cause, ad p. 410 Mr. Blake's further assaults repelled, p. 410, etc. More of
his Objections answered, to p. 419 An Answer to many Arguments of Mr. J. H. in
his second Vindication of free Admission, p. 419, to 431 Some sad
Considerations about Mr. Prin's counsel for forcing Ministers to deliver the
Sacrament, page 426, 432
The Contents of the fifth Disputation. Quest. Whether Hypocrites and other
Unregerate persons be called Christians, Believers, Saints, Church Members,
etc. Univocally, Analogically or Equivocally?
THe judgment of Philosophers about the terms, to page 447 That the terms are
used equivocally, proved by Argument, to p. 452 And by Authority: Thirty three
Protestant Divines cited. Mr. Blake's Objections answered, to page 480 An
APPENDIX fetching Reasons out of Doctor Owen, Mr. Blake and Mr. Robertson,
against a particular Answer of them, p. 480 The little Reason for Doctor Owen's
Indignation, and less for his gross mis-reports, and Socinian parallel, to page
488 The causlesness of Mr. Blake's tears and trembling, page 489 His untrue
reports of my self, and of the profaneness of the Worcestershire Combinations,
p. 500 His untrue and dis-ingenuous report of my abusing Mr. Ball, p. 500 The
complexion of the rest of his Dispute not yet answered, p. 501 A brief
discussion of his doctrine of the Faith that entituleth to Baptism, page 502,
to 513 The impotency of more of his Accusations, page 513, 514 The substance
and quality of Mr. Robertson's Epistolary Disputation, page 515, 516 His
implacable kindeness, and dreadful Protestation, page 517 Of Punishment and
mental Remisson, page 518, 519 Of a creeping MS. p. 520 Of the triumphing Dream
of Dr Owen; and Mr Blake of the terrible Conditions which I impose on my
Answerers in the Preface of my Confession. p. 521
The first Disputation. Quest. Whether Ministers may admit persons into the
Church of Christ by Baptism, upon the bare verbal Profession of the true
Christian saving faith, without staying for, or requiring any further Evidences
of sincerity? Aff.
IN almost all our controverted Cases, the Church still finds the mischief of
Extremes: and among the rest, in this about the due qualification of those whom
we must admit to the Sacraments. Some will not look after saving Faith at all;
but have found out a Faith of another species, which they call Dogmatical,
which they take to be the Title to both the Sacraments. Others, while they look
after saving faith, will not take up with that Evidence of it (a bare
Profession) which God in Scripture has directed them to accept; but they must
either pretend to search the heart, or stay for some better Evidences of
Regeneration. The confuting of these last, shall be the business of this
Disputation; and the confuting of the former, shall be the matter of the rest.

We here suppose that Baptism is a standing Ordinance of Christ, and that the
use of it is to be the sign of our Entrance into the Church of Christ; not only
solemnizing our Covenant with God, in which upon our consent we were before
secretly entered, but also investing us in our Church honors and privileges.
For as the Prince does by a sword conferr the order and honor of Knighthood
(which he might do before by private Grant) or as a man does by a Key deliver
to a Tenant the possession of a House; or by a twig and turf, the possession of
Lands: so does God by Baptism deliver to the true Believer the honorable order
of Christianity, and power to be a member of Christ and his Church, and a son
of God, and therewith he delivers him the pardon of his sins, and other
Privileges of his people: Though to them that come without this saving faith,
there is only an Offer of the Internal Benefits from God, and no Delivery of
possession; and only a Ministerial delivery of the possession of the external
privileges, without that Title which before God will warrant their Claim anh
Reception; though there be enough in the Ministers Commission to warrant his
delivery upon that Claim.

It is here also supposed, that it belongs to the Ministerial Office to
Baptize, and by Baptizing to admit persons into the visible Church. And this is
not the smallest part of their Trust, and Duty, and Honor, nor the least of
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, which is committed to their care.
Ordinarily none can be admitted into the visible Church, or made a visible
Christian as thus listed among such, but by the Office of the Ministry: And
therefore the Minister is made the Judge of men's aptitude to this honor: for
no man must act against, or without the conduct of his own Judgment. And
therefore to whomsoever it belongs to Baptize, ordinarily to them it does
belong to judge who is fit to be baptized.

It may be thought that it is a very great power that Christ has herein
conferred on his Officers; and that it may be easily abused to tyranny, while
every Minister shall have power to refuse persons their visible Christianity,
or the badge of it, and so to make Christians as they please. But first, they
are tied up themselves by certain Rules, as we are further to show in this
Dispute: and second^y, if one should tyrannize, there are enough more to relieve
us; thirdly, there is no power but may be abused; but yet it must be trusted
somewhere; and into what hands should Christ have fitlier put it, than into
theirs that are by Gifts and Offices fitted for the trust? I have marvelled
sometime, when I have heard secular Rulers on one side, and the People on the
other side, cry down the Ministerial power of excommunicating, or so much as
keeping from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that they did not as much or
more contend against their Power of Baptizing and Judging who should be
admitted into the Church. But I think the reason is, because Ministers admitted
all so generally, that they were not awakened to the observation of their power
herein, nor to any jealousy of them, left they should (as they call it)
tyrannize. But undoubtedly they might as fairly say, that it belongs either
to the Magistrate, or to the Bishop alone, or to the Major Vote of the
Congregation, to Baptize, or Judge who shall or shall not be baptized, and so
admitted into the honor of visible Christianity and Church Membership, as to
say that it belongs to the Magistrate or the Bishop alone, or the people to
excommunicate, or to judge who shall be excommunicated. For the Power of taking
into the Church Universal, is as great as that of putting out of a particular
Congregation. And Christ gave the Keys conjunctly and not dividedly; and
therefore he that has the admitting Key, has the Excluding Key.

Had our people but well considered, what Interest the Ministerial Office has
in their very Baptism and Christianity, and that they cannot be Newborn into
the Kingdom of God, without the help of these Midwives, at least, (and
Scripture gives them also the Title of Parentage) they would then have
discerned that by their very Baptism they are engaged to the Ministry
subserviently, to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom they are
principally engaged: For, as the Liturgy speaks, they are Dedicated to God by
our Office and Ministry, and they have their visible state in the Christian
Church and Possession of its Privileges, delivered to them by our Office and
Ministry; and therefore, me thinks, they should well bethink themselves before
they renounce it and despise it, till they dare renounce and despise their
Baptism: and those that do that, I do not much wonder if they renounce our
Ministry.

Furthermore, It is here supposed that a Profession is necessary, before we may
admit men to Baptism; and that this must be a profession of the true Christian
saving faith, and not only of some other sort of faith. And we take it for
granted, that the aged are admitted upon their own profession, and the Infants
upon the profession of the Parent, by whom he has his Title to the Covenant,
even as he is the seed of a believer.

The Question then that we have now to discuss, is only concerning the
sufficiency of this Profession, as to the satisfaction of the Baptizer, without
any further Evidences of sincerity.

For the explaining and resolving whereof, I shall first show you what that
Profession is which we require, and shall be satisfied in: and secondly I shall
prove the Affirmative of the Question.

And for the first, I shall first show you what Profession is in general, and
the formal nature of the thing, and the requisites thereto. Secondly, I shall
show you what this Profession must be in specie, as it is specified from the
subject matter of it.

And first Profiteor, is but palam fateor, in the common acception of the word.
In civil cases, prositeri est public and apud acta aliquid ultro denunciate,
ut Calv. More especially, professio is sometimes, ad interrogata responsio, and
sometimes sponsio; and in military affairs, it is nomen dare. Ours in question
has something of all these conjunct. It is a solemn voluntary declaration
(expression or confession) of our faith in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
(in answer, usually, to the Interrogation of the Minister) with a giving up our
name to God, by solemn sponsion, and renouncing the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil (or in general, all inconsistent ways) Profession is a relative action,
and has in it somewhat Material, viz. the Action; and somewhat Formal, viz.
the Relation, which must be distinctly considered of. For Profession is a
signification of a man's mind concerning the thing professed. The Action, which
is the Matter of the sign, is not necessarily one and the same thing in all and
at all times. The common action is by word of mouth: Where that cannot be had,
(as from the dumb) it suffices that they express by writing: where that cannot
be had, the lifting up of the hand, or motion of other part of the body, or any
thing that is apt to signify what is in the mind, may be a just Profession.
And if word, writing, and corporal motion be all joined together, it is but the
matter of the same Profession. God has tied us to no one particular sign as
necessary, nor restrained us from any, by his Word; but only as the general
Directions, (of doing all things Orderly, decently, to edification, etc.) may
be an Obligation or restraint: but the more particular Direction must be fetched
by Christian prudence from the Light and Law of Nature it self. The nature of
the thing, with concurrent circumstances, will teach us which is the fittest
sign: And sometime the commands of our Teachers or Governors may determine
that case, it being a matter within their power to determine (according to Gods
general Rules.)

The formal Reason of a Profession, is, that it be signum mentis, aut verum,
aut (et si ementitum, tamen) apparens: if it be only a seeming sign, or
counterfeit, it is truly a Profession, but not a true Profession. I mean, it
has a Metaphysical verity, inasmuch as it is an action apt to signify the
mind, and does signify that which the man would have you think to be his mind:
but it is not morally true, but false; because it does not signify that which
is his mind indeed. All words are to be signa mentis; but when a man lies, his
words are truly words, though not true words; and he does speak that which he
would have you take to be his mind, though not that which is so, etc. he uses
a sign that is apt and appointed for the expression of the mind, though he
abuse it to the concealing of his mind, and the deceiving of the Hearer. Yet if
any will insist upon it, that it has not the formal Reason of a Profession,
unless it be true, and agreeable to the mind; let such know, that we take the
word in a larger, and commoner, and (I think) fitter sense, even for that which
a pretended to be a true sign of the mind, whether it be indeed true or not.
Yet still pretended it must be to be a true Discovery of the mind, and to that
use it is that the Minister must receive it: and thence it comes to pass, that
there are besides the bare words, writings, and some modifications, which are
of necessity to the very cons^i^ution of a real Profession, and without which
it cannot properly be called a Profession, or may not by a Minister be taken
for such. Concerning which, 1. I shall enqure further, Whether this be so or
not? 2. What those Modes or concomitant Acts must be? 1. And for the first; the
reason of the doubt is, because some conceive that Profession is so far
required for it self, (or for some other end, I know not what) as that it is
not to be looked at or required as a seeming or probable evidence of the thing
professed. Mr. Blake Treat of Sacr. p. 129. says of me: His Grand Rule is,
That a serious Professor of the Faith is to be taken for a true believer. -- If
this Proposition were a Scripture Maxim, then it would have born a further
superstruction; but being neither found there, nor any proof made that it is
any way deduced thence, mother and daughters may all justly be called into
question. -- I do yield, that charity is to hope the best; but that we should
put our charity to it, or our reason either, for probability or certainty when
we are nowhere so taught, and have a more sure Rule for our proceeding, I see
no Reason. I can scarce meet with a Minister that says (and I have put the
question to many of the most Eminent that I know) that he baptizeth any Infant
upon this ground of hope, that the Parent is Regenerate, but still with earnest
vehemence professes the contrary.

Answ. 1. That serious Profession of true faith is to be taken by us as a
probable Evidence of the thing Professed, till men forfeit their credit, I shall
(God willing) prove anon from Scripture. And if I did not before stand to prove
it from Scripture, I desire Mr. Blake, as he finds cause, by the following
evidence, to impute it either to my disability, or my modesty; If he find that
I now prove it not, let him tell the world that I could not; (but let him not
thence conclude that it is not true; for another may prove it, if I cannot):
but if I now prove it, let him impute the former omission to my charity, which
provoked me to hope, that with such as he (and so many as he here intimates)
it had not been necessary: nay, I thought it had been out of controversy with
us.

2. If he yield that charity is to hope the best, Why not then to be put to it?
Is it not put to it, when it must hope the best? Or is not this a contradiction?

3. What kind of holy Ordinance is this, wherein neither Charity nor Reason
must be put to it, when the state of another is presented to our consideration?

4. What is the more sure Rule for our proceeding, which is here mentioned? I
must profess, that upon my most diligent search, with a willingness to discover
it, I am not yet able to know what Mr. Blakes Rule is, (sure or not sure:) I
mean, what that qualification is, which he says does entitle to Baptism.
Though he call it a Dogmatical Faith, yet he requires the will's consent; but
to what, I am not able to discern, he does so vary his Phrase and contradict
himself. Onle by his Title on the top of the Leaf, I know that it is [ A Faith
short of Justifying] which he means, which tells me what faith it is not,
though not what it is.

5. Either he will require a Profession of true Faith, or not: If not, then we
are not yet fit to dispute about the ends to which that Profession is
requisite, seeing we are not agreed whether the Profession it self be requisite
in those whom we must admit. If the Profession it self be acknowledged
necessary, then either for it self, or for another thing. Not for it self; For,
1. There is nothing in the thing. 2. Nor in Scripture, to intimate any such
thing. But on the contrary. 1. It is signum mentis, and therefore is required
to signify what is in the mind. 2. Else a false Profession should be requisite
and acceptable as well as a true, if it were Profession, qua talis, and propter
se, that were requisite. If it be not for the signification of what is in the
mind; then though it signify not the mind, it is acceptable: But that cannot
be: for God has forbidden lying, and never accepts it, nor makes it a
condition of our Title to his benefits, as given to us by him. 3. It is not any
one sign that God tyeth us to: Not speaking, for then the dumb could not
profess: Not writing; for then none could be Professors that cannot write: But
its any thing that may signify the mind; which plainly shows, that it is
required to this end, that it may signify the mind. God never encouraged any
to speak the bare words, be they true or false; but only to speak the truth.

6. Suppose it were only another species of Faith which is necessary to be
professed in order to Baptism, would not Mr. Blake put either his Charity or
Reason to it, to judge whether the person do in probability mean as he speaks?
If not: 1. Then he will not sanctify God in his Ordinances* but abuse them,
and wrong his Neighbor, by laying by Charity and Reason so much in the
administration. 2. And then, if he knew that they came in scorn, or learn the
word as a Parrot, he would accept them, which I will not imagine. But if he
will put his Charity and Reason to it, to judge of the truth of a common
Profession; let him show us his warrant, and it shall serve us to prove that we
must do so also in case of a special Profession.

What ever the Faith professed be, If you say your Profession is required
propter se, for the matter of the sign, and not for the formality and use of
signifying, it were not only groundless, but a reproachful ascribing that to
God, which we would not ascribe to the silliest man or woman about us, that
has the free use of Reason. And if the Profession be given, and taken (and so
required) not propter se materially, but ut signum mentis, for the signifying
of our minds; then sure I need not dig deep into Scripture or Reason, to prove
that both the Reason and Charity of the minister is here to be Employed, to
judge whether indeed it do signify the man's mind according to his pretenses,
or not. It grieveth me for the Churches sake, to read Mr. Blake's words of the
Ministers he meets with: for if they do scarce any of them so much regard the
probability of the Parents Regeneration in the administration of that
Sacrament, then they either Baptize upon an apparent Lie (if the Parent profess
saving Faith, when he has not the least probability of it); or else they take
up with the Profession of another species of Faith (as Mr. Blake does.) And I
crave their patient sober enquiry, Whether that be not to make another species
of Baptism and of visible Christianity? and also, whether they have yet well
discerned and determined what that Faith is that must be professed, and whether
the world have ever yet seen an exact or satisfactory definition or description
of it? and where? and in what words? and also whether they have not the same
uncertainty of the sincerity of that lower Faith in the Professors, as of true
saving Faith? and consequently, Whether Mr. Blakes doctrine have delivered them
from difficulties, or ensnared them? I crave of all those Reverend Brethren
whom Mr. Black meets with, and are guilty of what he charge them with, that
they would once more consider the matter.

2. Having thus showed that a Profession is necessary and that in its formal
nature, and to its proper end, as it is a signification of a man's mind, and in
order to the discovery of the mind, and not barely for the very terms or signs
of Profession; I am next to show what things are necessary (besides the bare
words or other signs) to the Being of a Profession, or what properties or
requisites are, sine quibus non, to the validity of it to its End, that it may
be indeed taken by us to be signum mentis, and not be accounted Null and vain.

And in General it is necessary that the Profession seem true: for a Profession
that is notoriously falls, is incapable of the Ends atd use that it is required
for: for such a one will not signify a man's mind, but the contrary.

More particularly, 1. The Professon which we must take as valid, must seem to
be made in a competent understanding of the Matter which is Professed. It Is a
known rule in Law that Consensus non est ignorantis. If a Parrot be taugh to
repeat the Creed, it is not to be called a Profession of Faith. The same we may
say of any such Idiot or child, or persons at age, who are notoriously ignorant
of the matter which they speak: therefore it is the duty of those that require
such Professions, to endeavor to discern whether the person understand what he
professes, before he do it: and therefore in the ancient Churches their
Catechists or other Teachers did first see to their understanding the sum of
the Christian Faith, before they baptized any at age: and so should the Parents
themselves be examined, before we baptize their children upon the account of
their Profession, except it be when we have just cause to presume that the
person understands the matter professed. Yet if any shall grounldesly so
presume, and be mistaken this makes not the Profession Null, as to the use
which the Church makes of it, though it be Null as to the real internal
Covenant of man with God, or to the Benefits of such a Profession by any grant
or Gift from God; for in in foro Dei, it is no Profession or worse.

2. We must take nothing for a Profession, but that which has a seeming
seriousness. For if it be Notoriously or apparently ludicrous, or in a scorn,
or not meant as it is spoken, it is then apparently false: and we are not to
believe apparent falsehoods.

3. It must seem to be voluntary or free: I deny not but some force may stand
with a valid Profession: but that is only such a force as is supposed to
prevail with the Heart it self, and not only with the tongue when the heart is
against it. If any should say to a Jew, [If thou will not Profess thy self a
Christian, I will presently run thee through with my sword, the words that
should be forced by this threat are not to be taken for a true Profession, when
it is apparent, that they are merely forced by fear. So that which done in a
passion of Anger or the like, contrary to the ordinary prevailing bent and
resolution of the heart, is not to be taken as a voluntary and valid Profession.

4. It must be a Profession not prevalently contradicted by word or deed:
Otherwise, still it is an apparent or notorious lie, which no man can be bound
to believe. If a man say in one breath, [that he believes in Christ] and in
the next will say [that he does not believe in him,] he nulleth his own
profession by a revocation: and if he revoke it in the direct sense, it is all
one as if he did it in the same terms: As if he say that he believes in
Christ, but withal, that he believes him to be but a man, or a Prophet, or
not to have died to ransom us from our sins, etc. so if he should say [I am a
Christian [but yet] I love the world and the flesh more then Christ] the same
must be said of a Practical contradiction, which is effectual to invalidate a
Verbal Profession. If a man should profess to the Prince, that he honors
him, and when he has done, should spurn at him, or spit in his face: or if a
man should profess that he loves you, and desires your safety, and withal
shall discharge a Pistol at you, or run at you with his sword; I leave it to
your selves whether he be to be believed.

Yet some Contradiction there may be, which may not nullify a Profession: As
when the terms of Contradiction seem not to be understood by him that uses
them, or not to be meant in the contradicting sense; or when he seems not to
discern the contradiction, but thinks both may consist, and seems to hold the
truth practically, and so contradicts it speculatively or ignorantly: or when
the contradiction is more weak, and not seemingly prevalent, as [ I believe,
Lord help my unbelief.]

5. When a man has utterly forfeited the credit of his word; the Profession of
that man must not be merely verbal, but practical. This is all clear in the
Laws of Nature. When a man may be justly said to have forfeited the credit of
his bare word, is a matter of consideration. The common reason and practice of
men, is against trusting a perjured man's bare word, till he give sufficient
evidence of his repentance for that perjury: And the like may be said of one
that has often violated Promise, and given no Evidence of any effectual change
upon his heart, but that still he has the same disposition. The Novatians
thought that those who lapsed hainously after the Baptismal Profession, were
not again to be absolved, and admitted into the communion of the Church, but
they did not exclude them from Gods pardon, as is commonly believed to them.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and others of those ancient Churches, do seem to exclude
all from pardon of sin, after twice or thrice offending: but I suppose, they
meant it only of heinous sin, and of pardon in foro Ecclesiae, and not of
pardon in foro Dei (a distinction that was not then detested.)

The truth is, the temper and quality of persons, and the nature of the fault,
and many circumstances may so vary the case, that it is not the same Number of
promise-breakings, or sins after promises, that will prove the forfeiture of
each sinners Credit. Ordinarily, in case of gross heinous sin, if a man have
often broke his promise, his bare word is no more to be taken, but an actual
Reformation must prove the validity of it. But there are some cases, in which
once or twice breach of promise may forfeit credit, as to the Church, and some
cases wherein more then three or four brecahes may not do it. But as for an
Infidel that newly comes to the Profession of the Faith, or a notorious ungodly
man that newly comes to the Profession of godliness, we must take their first
profession, though their lives were never so vicious before; because though
they have often committed other sins, yet not this of Covenant Breaking with God,
and they seem to be recovered from their former unconscionableness.

Perhaps some one will say, that, if all this be to be looked after before the
validity of a Profession can be discerned, then this is an uncertain Rule for
us to proceed by, in administering the Sacraments: for Ministers will be
uncertain when all these qualifications are found in men's Professions. Besides
that, it puts tyrannizing power into Ministers hands, which you tell Mr. ^ombes
of in your book of Infant Baptism.

Answ. I have there showed that the danger is greater in the Anabaptists way of
using this power than of ours. 2. This objection is as much against them that
are for the title of a Dogmatical faith, as for us that require the Profession
of a saving faith. For they cannot be certain of their lower faith it self, and
therefore must take up with the profession of it: and if they will not require
all these qualifications forenamed of that Profession, then they may as well
admit professed Jews and Heathens, and they will openly subject Gods ordinances
to profanation. 3. Because it is a variable case, and requires Judgment in
the Administrators; therefore has God made it a considerable part of the
office and work of his Ministers, to Judge rightly of men's profession, that
they may discern the meet from the unmeet: and therefore has he required so
much prudence and piety in Ministers, that they might be meet to judge in such
cases. To bear these Keys, and wisely and faithfully to discern who are to be
admitted, and who to be excluded, is no small part of their Trust, and Power,
and Work. The great necessity of Church Officers, and the nature of its
Government, would be the better understood, if this were well considered. It is
not a possibility of men's erring in such Cases as are committed to humane
determination, that will warrant us to condemn that way, or to cast about for
some more Infallible or easy course: such contrivances will have but the
Popish success, and will lose us the credit of our honest just Authoritative
decision, while we will needs pretend to an Infallibility, that the world may
discern that indeed we never had it. The common-course of quarrelling with all
Government where there is a possibility or danger of any great abuse, and evils
thereby, does directly conclude in the simple rejection of all Government by
man and almost any thing else that man must be the agent in: for as long as
such vile imperfect wretches are the Governors, how can you think, the actual
administration will be perfect? Get Angels to Govern immediately, or stay till
men be as Angels of God, and then you shall have a cure for all these
Inconveniences: but till then expect not good without evil, nor that so bad a
creature as Man* even the best of men, should govern any Society, or do any
considerable work, without leaving upon it the Impression of his sinfulness,
and many Imperfections.

2. Having showed what this Profession must be in the General; and the Nature
of the Act, I must next show what it must be Materially, and in Specie, (as it
is morally specified from the subject matter,) And in general, the thing to be
Professed, is: [ that the Professor is a Christian;] or, that he is a true
penitent Believer in Christ.

Object. It is not his own belief, qua creditur, which he is to make Profession
of, but the Christian belief, quae creditur, that is, the Doctrine of the
Gospel.

Answ. 1. This is a contradiction: He that professes the Gospel to be true,
does eo nomine, profess his own belief of the truth of it. For will he profess
it to be true, when he takes it not to be true? otherwise he either speaks but
the words, while he takes it himself to be false which he speaks, or else he
only means or says that, (other men think it to be true) though he do not.
2. We need not to ask any man for a profession to Evidence the Gospel to be
true, but only to evidence his own Belief of it. The Gospel needs not their
testimony, much less a testimony which they believe not themselves, which is as
none. 3. Infidels are meet to be admitted to Baptism, if there be no Profession
of their own faith required. But I suppose I need not to use more words against
this objection.

More part^cularly as Christianity, in sensu famosiori is the saving
entertainment of Christ in the soul; and faith, in sensu famosiori, is that
which is called Justifying saving Faith; and a Church member, in sensu
famosiori, is such a true Christian; so it is true Faith and Christianity whose
Profession is thus necessary: and if there be but a bare profession without the
thing Professed, these are called Christians or believers but Analogically or
(as our Divines commonly tell the Papists) Equivocally.

The Faith thus to be professed must be considered, in its Acts, and in its
Objects. The first Act is the understandings assent to the truth of the
Revelation, upon the credit of the Revealer, which Implies, yea formally
contains a crediting of his Veracity, and so an Affiance therein. 2. A
Consent or Willingness that Christ be ours on the Gospel terms; or an Accepting
Christ and life, as offered: which Scripture calls the Receiving of Christ
Jesus the Lord, Joh. 1.10, 11. Col. 26. which is still employed in the Affiance
or Recumbency by which the Act of Faith is so often entitled in Scripture, and
which must be added.

As the act of faith must needs be both of the Intellect and the Will, so the
Object must be answerably, the Truth of the Gospel, and the goodness of the
benefits there revealed and offered. The Church is more agreed about the
particulars of the Latter, then of the Former: for as the Papists would make us
believe that the Fundamentals and Essentials of the Christian Faith cannot be
known as distinct from the rest, but that all which the Pope says, is de fide,
is of neces^ity to salvation: so among our selves we are not well agreed,
whether Fundamentals (that is, Essentials) can be enumerated. There is no doubt
but we may easily enumerate them in General terms; and so our whole Christian
Faith is contained in our common Profession at Baptism, [I believe in God the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.] If we yet descend to some particulars the
case is clear: that to believe in God the Father, is to believe, that he is the
most Wise, and Great, and Good, and our Maker and Ruler, and our chiefest Good:
to believe in God the Son, is to believe that he is God and man, the Redeemer
and Savior, ransoming us by his blood, and overcoming death by his Death and
Resurrection, and procuring us pardon and everlasting life by his Merits: to
believe in God the Holy Ghost, is to believe that he is the Sanctifier of the
people of God that shall be saved. Thus much is Evidently Essential to the
Christian Faith, and nothing but what is contained in this. But then the great
difficulty lies here, whether a more particlar belief of some truths contained
under these comprehensive terms be not Essential to Christianity.

To which I only say in general, 1. That the belief of the Truth of the
Promise, or other verities, being necessary in order to the determination of
the Will, to the Acceptance of the good revealed therein, there is therefore so
much of the doctrine of Necessity to be believed, as is of Necessity to the
determination of the Will, to accept God for our God, by Creation; and Jesus
Christ for our Savior by Redemption, and the Holy Ghost for our Sanctifier. 2.
All that is essentially contained in these Relative Tit^es [our God, our
Savior, and our Sanctifier] must be particularly conceived of and believed. 3.
The foresaid Explicatory terms well understood, seem to contain all such
Essentials. 4. He therefore, that upon a true understanding of them, does
believe all these, does believe all that is Essential to the Christian Faith.
5. Some persons can understand the Matter contained in these words without any
more words (having first the Grammatical and Scriptural Explication of them):
others have not yet had such Explications, or at least understood them not, and
so must have more particular express, expository terms, that they may
understand. 6. It is Matter that is primarily Essential, and Fundamental, and
that Propter se: Words are to be called Essential, or Fundamental, but
secundarily, and propter aliud, viz. so far as they are Means, without which
the Matter cannot be received, but no further: and therefore no particular
words are properly fundamental, or essential to our Religion; seeing that he
that never heard those words, and yet believes the matter by equiplloent
terms, or any signs, is truly a ^hristian. 7. The Essentials primary in the
Matter are to all the same, but the Terms of Necessity for expressing them are
not the same to all, either for number of words, or sentences; seeing one can
receive that in ten words, another cannot in twenty. And hence is it, that if
twenty men be set to draw up the Essentials of Christianity, they may do it in
twenty several forms of words, and yet all express the same ess^ntial Matter:
and one Confession may be in ten lines, and another in more pages, and yet both
speak the same Fundamental Tru^hs; one more concisely or generally, and the
other more copiously and plainly. 8. Whatever other words may be necessary to
some, besides those that directly express the abovesaid Matter of Belief, in
God the Father, Son, and Ghost, they are not to this end necessary, that we may
have more matter of Faith than is there contained, as if it were not all that
is essential, but that this may by the ignorant be better understood: so that
those other particular Articles, which some call Fundamentals, are but
expositions of those three Fundamentals, that indeed we may receive them. 6. In
point of duty, a Minister must require a more full and large expression of his
Faith from one man than from another, viz. From those that he has apparent
cause to suspect of not understanding, or not believing what the more
Comprehensive Concise Terms do express: but yet, if either he neglect that
duty, (or his previous inquiry and examination) though sinfully, or if the
party that gave no cause of suspicion, be yet ignorant, or an unbeliever, it
does not follow, that the Concise Profession was a Nullity for want of larger
Explication. He that professes to believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, has made a Profession of saving Faith in all the Essentials, as to the
sense of the words, and it is to be taken as valid, in foro Ecclesiastico, in
the Judgment of the Church if there be not some of the abovenamed particulars
apparent to invalidate it, (as Contradiction, apparent Ignorance, Derision,
etc.) May it not be the safest way to imitate the Scripture examples in such
cases, where we always find Profession in order to Baptism, made but in few
comprehensive terms? for, as by this way we follow the surest Guide, so are we
most likely to comprehend all the Essentials, and leave none out; when spinning
out a Profession to a Volumn in more particular Explicatory terms, if these
same generals be not among them, may leave out much of the Essence of Religion,
which these do comprehend. Not that I would have the people hear no longer
discourses for Explication; but it is one thing, to put them into a Sermon, or
Discourse; and another thing, to put them into the Profession of Faith.

If, notwithstanding all that is said, any shall still be prejuced against the
requiring of a Professon of saving Faith, because of the difficulty of
discerning when it is that all the Fundamentals are professed; let such
consider, that it does as much concern those that differ from us, to untye this
knot, if they can, as us. We have long showed the Papists, that themselves must
be forced to distinguish between those points of Faith which some may be saved
without, and those which none can be saved without: and so indeed Bellarmine
and others of them confess. And those that say, it is a Dogmatical Faith that
must be professed, must needs comprehend all the aforesaid Essentials in their
Dogmatical faith, or else they cannot call it the Christian Faith. So that, as
to the Object of Assent, they are equally concerned in the difficulties.

2. And then, for the second part of Faith, which is, the Wills consent, or
Affiance, or Entertainment, Receiving, Acceptance, Embracing (or what other
term to that purpose you will use) of the Good proposed in the Gospel, the same
forementioned words do also comprehend all that is Essential to the Object of
this Act: for the Will as well as the Intellect, to Believe in God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, is all our Faith: that is, [ To receive God as our God,
our Creator, our Soveveraign and Felicity, and Jesus Christ our Savior, from
the guilt and power of Sin, and to bring us to everlasting Glory, and this by
Ransoming us by his death and merits, By Rising, Interceding, Teaching, Ruling
us, and at last Raising and Judging us; and to receive the Holy Ghost as the
witness of Christ, the inspirer of the writers of his Word, and as our
Sanct^fier.] Thus is the Object of true Christian faith expressed, as
containing the Objects of the Will.

To conclude, in a doubtful case, it is safe to be as express and particular
as we can, in our Instructions and Examinations, and not barely to keep to the
mere Essentials: because there are many of the Adjacent truths, or
superstructures, which are of so great use, as that the fundamentals are hardly
and seldom well entertained without them.

And yet when we play not the part of Instructors, and preparers, but of
Administrators of Gods Ordinances, then we must take heed of exacting more as
necessary, then is indeed necessary; and in difficult Cases, when the
difficulty lies in the Darkness of the persons heart, and you doubt, by reason
of the scantness of his expressions, whether he believe as he speaks, we must
give credit to his own words, as far as reason will permit, and to judge the
best, though we may fear the worst: and this will be our Duty; and if we should
be deceived, it will not prove our sin, but his that makes the false
profession: And this leads me up to the next part of my Task; which is,
having thus explained the Nature of the requisite Profession, to prove the
Affi^mative of the Question

THESIS Mi^isters may admit pers^ns into the visible Church of Christ, by
B^ptism, upon the bare Verbal Profession of the true Christian saving faith
(such as before described) without staying for or searching after any further
Evidences of sincerity, (ordinarily, and as of necessity to this end.) This
Proposition I prove (in short) by these Arguments following.

Argum. 1. We have the warrant of their approved Example in Scripture whom we
are to eye as our Pattern in Administrations for the administering of Baptism
upon a bare Verbal Profession: therefore we may so Administer it.

I here suppose the Practice of the Church before Christ's Incarnation; which is
out of all doubt: Moses took the Verbal profession of all Israel, to be a
Covenant between God and them; wherein they avouched the Lord to be their God,
and God avouched them to be his people. On the like terms did Joshua, Asa, and
others renew the Covenant of God with that people; and on the same terms was
circumcision administered. On these terms did John Baptize multitudes, whose
lives he knew not before, and of whom he required no further Evidence than
these present Professions to sati^fie him of their capacity. On the same ground
did Peter's Converts receive their Baptism, Acts 2.41. For they baptized them
suddenly, and the Scripture mentions no further search that was made by the
Apostles after their sincerity; nor is it probable, it could be done upon three
thousand souls. The same may be said of the Eunuch, Acts 8. and the Jailer,
Acts 16. and other Scripture Examples. It is past question, that they then took
up with a present profession, and therefore so must we. For if any will be so
overwise, as to give reasons why they may swerve from these Presidents, let
them consider, whether they teach not the licentious a way as effectually to
avoid other Examples of the Apostles, and so to destroy the order and
Discipline of the Church.

Object. In those times Profession did hazard men's Lives; and therefore it was
then a greater Evidence of sincerity, then it is in prosperous times. -- Answ.
It Is true, that often it was hazardous: yet 1. When 3000 were converted at a
time and when the Rulers durst not persecute for fear of the people, and when
the Churches had rest and were so ed^fied, walking in the fear of the Lord,
Act. 9.31. then it was not so dangerous. 2. This Difference is but gradual and
alters not the case: For as still they that will Live Godly, shall suffer
persecution, so Profession is taken in Scripture for a satisfactory Evidence.

Arg. 2. The Law of Nature, which is the ground of humane converse, requires
that we believe men, till they have apparently forfeited their Credit;
therefore so we must do here: and therefore must take their Profession as a
sign of the thing Professed; and consequently valid.

Deny the Antecedent, and you must overthrow all Communities and Societies,
which is contrary to Gods Will revealed in Scripture, and in Nature: They that
will not believe others, must not expect that others should believe them; and
so humane Converse will be overthrown, and all men must live by themselves, or
live as enemies, in constant diffidence of each other.

Obj But wicked men have forfeited their Credit; and therefore their word is
not to be taken.

Answ. They have not made such a total forfeiture ( qua wicked) as to warrant
our unbelief For 1. There are such remnants of Common honesty in man's Nature,
that commonly makes a Lie to be odious, and a matter apparently evil among
unconverted men. 2. They Profess themselves to be turned from their Wickedness;
and therefore you cannot refuse Credit to them upon the supposition of their
wickedness which they disclaim, without proof. 3. The Apostles took their
Profession who within a few hours before had been persecutors, and guilty of
the murder of the Lord of life: therefore a man's wickedness before, is not
enough to invalidate his following Profession of true faith, repentance, and
reformation.

Argum. 3. We must not censure our Brother to be a Lier without clear evidence
that he is so indeed: therefore we must take his Profession to be true, and
consequently, to be valid.

The Antecedent is plain in Scripture. No man may Judge (that is, ungroundedly,
or without a Call) that would not be Judged. Who art thou that Judge another
man's servant? Romans 14.4. Therefore we may not Judge them to tell a lie, when we
cannot prove it, till they have quite forfeited their credit: no more then we
may lawfully Judge a man to be a thief, or murderer, or adulterer, or Heretic,
when we cannot prove it. If the slander of the tongue be a sin, so is the
slander of the heart.

And for the Consequence, it is most clear, that either the Minister must
believe the man's Profession, or take him for a Liar; there is no third way that
can be pretended, save one, and that is, that we must suspend our belief, and
neither Judge his Profession to be true or false. But this cannot be here
pretended, with any tolerable appearance of reason. For, 1. God would never
make men's profession necessary to their admittance, and put the Minister in the
power of Baptizing upon such a Profession, and consequently, of requiring,
receiving and Judgeing of that profession, if we might wholly suspend our
Judgment of it whether it be true or false. It cannot be that I can be
required, as an officer of Christ to require, and receive a man's Profession,
without any respect of the truth of it: for it is therefore required that it
may declare the mind: or else, why may not an Infidel be received without
Profession: 2. And if I be not to Judge of the truth of a Profes^ion, or of the
falsehood; then a Profess^on apparently false, may be received: but that may not
be, as has been manifested. 3. It is denied by learned Philosophers, that the
mind can possibly hang in equilibrio, in such cases. 4. Its one half the
uncharitable sin of rash Censures to suspend the Judgment of Charity, and not
to Judge the person to speak truth, when he has not forfeited h^s credit, as
it is the other half to Judge him positively to speak falsely. 5. A pari, We
must not suspend our judgment of the truth of men's Profession of Penitence,
that they may be Absolved and Readmitted to Communion; but must discern
whether probably their Profession be true or false: nor may we suspend our
judgment of the Truth of that Profession, which we may have occasion to
require, in order to the Lords Supper; or, to the private comforting of an
afflicted conscience etc. Therefore not here neither; seeing the Profession is
the same; and the reasons, at least, as urgent:

In this point, I find a learned sober Divine, Mr. James Wood, Professor of
Theology at Aberdeen in Scotland* has with much Christian moderation
manifested his d^ssent from me by name, in a book against Mr. Lokier concerning
the matter of the visible Church, page 149.150, 151, etc. (A book that I never
saw till a day or two before the writing of these words, June 12. 1656.) This
Reverend man agrees with me in the main points wherein I differ from Mr.
Blake. He owneth fully he necessity of the Profession of a saving Faith, and
allows of no lower Profession, as a tittle to Baptism: he frequently owneth
the distinction between forum Dei vel interius, and forum Ecclesiasticum and
exterius; and consents too, to the application that I make of it: But he
thinks, that though the profession of true Faith is necessary to Baptism;
yet, not as an Evidence of Regeneration, but that we are to abstract the
Profession wholly from Conversion, or non conversion. Page 8. he says [2. when
he says, Hypocrites have no Right to be in the Church, or, as afterward,
should not be there, if the meaning were, that men, though they make a
Profession of Religion, yet continuing Hypocrites, and graceless in their
hearts, do sin in adjoining themselves to the visible Church; and that they
have no Right in foro interiori, this we should not deny* but if his meaning
be, that no Hypocrites have a jus Ecclesiasti^um and in foro exteriori, to be
in the visible Church, we deny it and he shall never be able to prove it.]

And page 20. He has the like. And page 23 and 25. and passi^o, the like. And
page 20.30. He says [ Concl. 2. A serious sober outward Profession of the
Faith, and true Christian Religion, together with a serious Profession of
former sinful courses -- a serious consideration of these things, as such,
considered abstract^vely (abstractions simplici) from the work (...) saving
Grace, and heart-conversion, by true Repentance, and Faith, is sufficient
qualification in the Ecclesiastic Court to constitute a person sit matter to
be received as a member of the visible Church, accounted (...), i. e. Among
these that are within. If I be asked, what I mean by a serious Profession? I
Answ. Such a Profession as has in it, at least, a moral sincerity (as Divines
are wont to distinguish) though happily, not always a ^upernatural sincerity,
i. e. (that I may speak more plainly) which is not openly discernably simulate,
histrionick, scenical, and hypocritical, in that hypocrisy which is gross: but
all circumstances being considered, by which ingenuity is estimate among men,
giving credit one to another, there appears no reason, why the man may not, and
ought not to be esteemed, as to the matter, to think and purpose as he
speaks, from whatsoever habitual principle it proceeds, whether of saving
Grace or Faith, or of faith historical, and conviction wrought by some common
operation of the Spirit. A man that has such a Profession as this, and
desires Church Communion, the Church ought to receive him as a member. And all
be it I deny not, but where there is just or probable ground of suspicion, that
the Profession has simulation and fraudulent dealing under it, as in one new
come from an heretical Religion, or who has been before a Persecutor of the
Faith and Professors thereof: there may be a delay in prudence, and time taken
to try and prove if he deals seriously and ingenuously -- etc.

And in Page 150, speaking of my self he says, [1. The Learned Author and I,
are fully agreed upon the matter concerning the outward ground, upon which
persons are to be admitted and acknowledged members of the visible Church; viz,
A serious Profession of the faith, including a Profession of subjection to the
commands and Ordinances of Christ, is sufficient for this, and that persons,
making this Profession are without delay, or searching for trial and
Discoveries of their heart-conversion to be admitted. -- I do heartily approve
his weighty Exhortation subjoyned. But I cannot yet agree with him in this,
that men are not to be received into the visible Church but under the notion of
true Believers, and positively judged to be such, though but probably.] And
Page 151. [I confess also, that were a man's outward carriage and way such, as
did discover him to be an unregenerate man -- he were not to be received into
the fellowship of the visible Church: but wi^hall I say, He were not to be
debarred, or not received, not upon the account of non-Regeneration; or upon
that carriage, considered under this formality and reduplication, as a ^^gn and
discovery of non Regeneration, but materially, as being contrary to the very
outward profession of Faith: -- My reason is, because I conceive it is Gods
revealed Will in his Word, that men be received into the visible Church, that
they may be regenerate and converted, and that the Ministerial dispensation of
the Ordinances are by Gods revealed will set up in the Church to be means of
Regeneration and Conversion, as well as Edification of such as are Regenerate.]
[3. I conceive, that between such as are in a course discovering certainly
non-regeneration -- there are a middle sort, of whom there is no sufficient
ground probably to judge them regenerate. -- ] My reason is, because to g^ound
a positive act of Judgment that a man is regenerate in foro exteriori, there
is requisite some seemingness of a spiri^ual sincerity in a man's profession: i.
e, that he does it from a spiritual principle, upon spiritual motives, to a
spiritual End: But a mere sober, not mocking serious Profession, without more,
is not a positive appearance of spiritual supernatural sincerity. -- I humbly
conceive, there cannot be had positive probable Evidences of this ordinarily
without observation of a man's way after Profession for a time, wherein notice
may be taken of his walking equally in the latitude of Duties and constantly in
variety of cases and conditions.] [To conclude; Mr. Baxter and] are at
agreem^nt upon the Matter, concerning the qu^lification that is sufficient for
admitting persons into the visible Church, viz. Serious profession, without
delay to enquire for more: and so we are agreed, in the main* about the matter
of the visible Church. We differ in this, that he thinks persons are not to be
admitted, but under consideration of persons judged* at least, probably
converted and regenerated: My mind is, that they are to be admitted, under the
name of serious, sober outward Professors, abstracting from Conversion or
Non-conversion.

I have thus at large recited the words of this Reverend Brother, that the
Reader may perceive the true state of the Controversy, and how we are agreed
in the main, and on what grounds he proceeds; and that if there be any that
consent not with me, in the point wherein he and I differ, they may yet be
persuaded to take up in his way, and not remove so far from the truth as I
conceive Mr. Blake has done. And, as to the difference it self, 1. The main
thing wherein I perceive that* I differ from this Reverend man and some other
about such matters, is, that my Judgment of Charity is much more extensive
then theirs seems to be. I confess, that when it comes to a confident
persuasion of another man's sincerity, I am apt to be jealous as well as they;
and also when we speak of the Profession of men collectively considered, I am
forced to some harder thoughts of many, then some have: but when I have to do
with Individuals, I am apt to extend this charitable Judgment further then I
see many do: not by making the way to heaven any broader than they: For when we
are upon the point in thesi, what is the proper qualification of a Saint, I
think there is no difference among us: but when we speak of it in hypothesi,
and of the actual qualification of this Individual person, whether he have the
foresaid life or not; I am apt to think it my duty, to judge the best till I
know the worst; and to hope well (though with much fear) where some think they
see no ground of hopes. I confess it seems to me but cold charity, that can
afford men our good thoughts so far, as to take them for visible Church
members; but can find no room for a hope of their being in a state of
Salvation. I have hopes of the Salvation of many thousands, that I perceive
some others have no such thoughts of.

2. More particularly, I cannot yet see, that I can be excused or disobliged
from having a positive Hope (taking Hope in the vulgar sense) of the saving
estate of that man that professes seriously and soberly, that he truly
Repents, and Believes in Christ, and has not yet utterly forfeited the
Credit of his word. Charity thinks no evil, believes all things, hops al
things: 1 Cor. 13.5, 7. I think, the very Maxims of Nature, cleared, and
enforced by Christ in the Gospel, do teach me to believe, that my brother is
not a Liar, till I see convincing evidence of the contrary. I confess, I judge
my self to owe this charitable construction and judgment of his serious
Profession, especially in so so great a cause, to my Neighbor who has not
evidently disobliged me, even as much as I owe my bread to the hungry, and
clothes to the naked, yea, or the liberty of the common Air or earth, if it
were in my power to restrain it.

3. And I do not find myself (at least ordinarily and easily) capable of
suspending my judgment of the truth or falsehood of a man's Profession, and
being wholly neutral in it.

4. Yea, I perceive, that it is the judgment of this Reverend Brother, that we
should no^ be Neutral, nor suspend our judgment about the Truth of the
Profession which we require; but that we should seek after that which he
calls a Moral Sincerity herein, yea, and sometime delay and try them further,
who offer a suspicious Profession.

5. And I must confess, that I take it for a great sin, to censure my Brother
positively to be a Liar, and to be a child of the Devil, and in a state of
Damnation, without clear convincing Evidence.

6. And it seems to me a thing utterly Improbable, if not certainly un^rue,
that God should require any man as sine qua non, to his Church-entrance or
admittance, that he profess true Faith and Repentance to the Minister and
Church, (as before them,) and yet that both Minister and people are bound to
receive this Profession abstractively as to the Faith and Repentance so
professed. God knows the heart without Prof^ssion: it is therefore because of
us that know not men's hearts, that profession is required: And must we then
receive such a profession abstractively from the thing profess^d? Every word i^
ordain^d to be a sign of the mind: and a profession is formally a Relative
Being. The Matter of the Sign, viz. The Word, or the like, a Bruit, a Parrot
may possibl^ have: And if the very Essence of a profession, qua talis, contein
its Rel^tion to the thing professed, and the mind of the Professor, then is it
destructive to the very ends and Use of a Profes^ion, to abstract the material
Sign from the thing professed. If you s^y that it is not Regeneration which
they are supposed to profess: I answer, it is true Repentance, and Faith in
Christ which they are supposed to profess; and that is Regeneration, or the
principal part of it, in sensu passivo. To what purpose should we imagine, that
men should be obliged by God to make so solemn a profession, which none of the
hearers are in the least obliged to believe to be true?

7. We are certainly bound to believe a sober, credible person of proved
fidelity in other things, when he solemnly professes to Repent and believe;
(else we must deny credit to that which bears plain Evidence of Credibility:)
therefore we must believe all others according to the proportion of their
Credibility, and not deny them credit without just cause.

8. I never yet heard any assign any other cause why God should require an open
profession, than the revealing of the thing professed, and the consequents
thereof: therefore, till we hear a proof of some other Reason, we have cause to
adhere to this.

9. All men are bound to judge, that God would have no man to tell a lie:
therefore they are bound to judge that God would have no man to profess that he
Repents, when he does not: therefore, he that is to judge my Profession to be
by Gods commanding and approving Will, is also to judge it to be a true
Profession: But the Ministers and the Church are (judicio charitatis, and fide
humana) to judge, that the Profession of the person is such as God does require
and accept (as to the main substance,) before they baptize him, and receive him
into Communion, upon the account of that Profession.

10. I conceive, that this Reverend Brother grants in effect the thing which
I dispute for, while he affirms, that such a Moral Sincerity may be looked
after, as that [ All Circumstances considered by which Ingenuity is estimate
among men, there appears no reason why the man may not, and ought not to be
esteemed, as to the matter to think and purpose as he speaks.] For I plead
for no more then this. Object. But this is nothing to the Principle that it
proceeds from; special or common Grace. Answ. A true Repentance, and saving
faith, can come from none but a supernatural Principle of special Grace: and
therefore he that professes this Repentance and Faith, does thereby profess
that supernatural Principle: therefore, if am bound to believe, that he speaks
as he thinks, then I am bound to believe that he is a truly penitent Believer,
if he know his own heart: and he is liker to know it better then I.

Moreover he says, that [ To ground a positive Act of Judgment, that a man is
Regenerate, in foro exteriori, there is requisite some seemingness of spiritual
sincerity that is, that he does it from a spiritual principle, motives, etc.]
To which I say, that a serious Profession of Faith and Repentance, is a
Credible seemingness of Faith and Repentance. And he that professes true Faith
and Repentance, must needs profess them as from a spiritual Principle, and
Motives, and to a spiritual End: for they cannot be from any other principle or
motives (principally) nor to any other ultimate End.

I am therefore forced to dissent from the main reason of this Reverend
Brothers judgment herein, viz. [ That there cannot be had a p^sit^ve p^ob^ble
Evidence of this, ordinarily, without observation of a m^ns way after
Profession, for a time, etc.] For though c^nf^ss, this is fuller Evidence which
he pleads for* yet still I judge, that a sober* s^rious Profession is a
credible Evidence of the thing professed, till the person have quite forfeited
the Credit of his word. And ou^ward Reformation may be forced or counterfeit,
as well (though not easily) a^ words. (...) it was a saving faith and
Repentance which Peter invited the I^ws to, Act. 2 and Paul the Ja^lor, Act 16.
etc. So doubt not, but they took the following profession of these men as a
credible Ev^dence of the same saving Faith which they professed.

Argum. 4. That which has Evidence of Credibili^y, ought to be believed. But
the profession of men, or their bare words who have not forfeited the Credit of
their word^, has Evidence of Credibility: therefore they ought to be believed.

The Major is undeniable, taking the measure of belief to be according to the
measure of that Evidence.

The M^nor I prove. 1. From the ordination of nature. 2. From the consent of
the world, and certain experience 1. Nature has not given one man an
inspection into the breast of another; nor has God made any Minister a
searcher of hearts, and beholder of men's thoughts. 2. God has made man capable
of knowing in his own thoughts: though its true, that the heart is so
deceitful, that there is a great difficulty of knowing them of our selves; yet
the meaning of that Text, Jer. 17, 9, 10. is concerning others, [who can know
it?] that is, [who can know another heart?] But yet for all the deceitfulness,
a certain measure of knowledge may be had. For, 3. Man has a certain knowledge
of the Evil of lying, and so a certain credibility naturally, or by the light
of nature: as the examples of the very Heathens can witness. 4. The tongue was
created to be the Index of the mind. Though man's actual language be acquired,
yet his tongue was made for that use. All this set together, shows, ex natura
rei, that though the Evidence be imperfect, yet an Evidence it is.

Moreover, if there be such a thing as fides humana due among men, then there
is such a thing as Evidence of Credibility. But the Antecedent is true:
Therefore so is the Consequent. He that denies the Antecedent, 1. I suppose
will consent that no man believes him. 2. And would not sure have any more
converse used in the world. 3. And I would put it to the consideration of the
contrary-minded, whether, if ordinarily there be no Evidence of Credibility in
men's word, and Professions be not to be taken as signs of the thing professed,
it were not best, either to cut out men's tongues, or else forbear teaching our
children to speak, and so let language perish from the earth. For, if it be
ordinarily understood as mere lying, it would seem the best way to extirpate it
by this means.

2. And I have also the consent and experience of the world on my side, of the
Credibility of the words even of common men in general. 1. All Societies are
established on the credit of men's words. Princes and people enter their
Covenants upon the credit and confidence in each others words. 2. All affairs
are managed on this Supposition. The freest men in England do hold all their
Estates and Lives upon the credit of the words, and common fidelity, that it is
even in unregenerate men. They are sufficient Witnesses at any Bar. Two of
these by a false oath, might put a man to death; and yet how seldom are such
things done?

Moreover, how much does all History depend upon the word of of man? Yea, how
much of humane credit do we make use of, to assure us, that these which we now
have are the same Scriptures that the Apostles writ; and that they are
uncorrupted? and how far? and that these only are Cannonical, etc.

Argum. 5. It is most suitable to the End of Baptism, that the Adult should be
Baptized upon a bare Profession. For Baptism is to be the Sign and means of
their solemn Entrance into the Church, and reception of a Sealed pardon of sin,
etc. Now, if you would stay till men prove their sincerity by their holy lives,
you will have them grow before they are well planted; and give you full
Evidence of Church membership, before they are rightly entered Members: And sure
this is not like to be a regular course.

Argum. 6. My last Argument is, from the continued Custom of the Church of God
(which with Paul was somewhat.) I confess, the Churches after the Apostles
days did for diverse ages prepare men long before they baptized them: True,
they were Catechumeni before they were fideles, or baptized, But 1. That was
not that they might have experience of the sanctity of their lives, as the
necessary qualification of the persons to be baptized, but it was that they
might instruct them in the Christian Faith, that they might know what they did,
and be fit to make an acceptable Profession: and then, when they were prepared
for such a Profession, they took the bare Profession it self as the evidence of
the truth of the thing professed; still supposing, that it was such a
Profession as is before described, and were not invalidate by contradiction, or
the like: and therefore they did indeed expect, that those that lived in
notorious scandalous sins should stop their course, and forbear the committing
of them, as well as profess Repentance for them: because that it would have
nullified their Profession, if they had committed the sin, even when they
professed to repent of it. Therefore Austin in his Tractate de fide and
operibus, on that subject, would have none baptized that were guilty of living
with Concubines in fornication, unless they would actually put them away: and
then promise to forsake them for the time to come: but he did not advise, that
they should after all this, delay yet longer, to see whether they would make
good that promise by their performance. I conclude therefore, that the
Apostles, and all the Church having so long accepted of a bare verbal
Profession, we must do so too.

Objection 1. If we shall believe the Professions of all or most men, we shall
believe that to be true which is not true; and we shall believe more Lies than
Truths; for there are more that make false Profession then a true and moreover,
we shall administer the Ordinances of God upon the credit of a Lie, which
seems a profaning them.

Answ. 1. A known Lie you may not, you cannot believe: and should you
administer the Ordinances upon a Profession which is notorious false, you
should profane them 2. But if I believe a Liar when I cannot prove him such,
that is none of my sin, nay its m^ duty. God made men's tongues to show their
minds: and so I am to take their words: but if they will abuse them to lying,
that is their own sin, and not mine. 3. If you would believe no man, till you
are sure that he says true, then you must believe no man in the world: For
though you may know the thing to be true by other Evidence, yet bel^eving him
can give you no certainly of the truth: for belief depends on the credit of
the speaker. Your Argument therefore tends to the destroying of all humane
faith, which is not to be endured. 4. It is but with a humane faith that we
believe them: and therefore, we believe them but as deceitful fallible men who
may possibly deceive us. It is not with such a faith as we owe to God, wherein
we conclude the thing revealed to be so unquestionably true, as that it cannot
possibly be false, because God cannot Lie: yea it is with a diverse degree of
Faith, that we believe diverse persons, who are to us of diverse degrees of
Credibility. And if after all this, we be deceived in the most, the sin is only
in the deceiver. And as for us; 1. We proceeded upon that evidence which Nature
it self directs us to take: even a man's words, as the sign of his mind. 2.
And upon that Evidence which the holy Examples of the Apostles of Christ have
directed us to take; who were not rashly venturous nor prophaners of Gods
Ordinances. 3. And if we be indeed deceived in the most, or in many, its rather
a sign that we are in Gods way, than out of it; for as Charity believes all
things (credible) so Christ has told us, that the tares and wheat must grow
together, and that many are called and few chosen: and that in the end he will
take out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that work Iniquity:
therefore such there will be.

Object. 2. But it is now the custom of the Country, and a matter of credit,
to be Christians in Name; and therefore all will be so; and if you ask them
whether they Repent or Believe, they will say, Yea: Therefore this is no
credible Profession; though theirs was in the days of the Apostles, when it
hazarded their lives.

Answ. 1. The hazard that attends a man's words is not necessary to make them
simply credible, though, as to the Degrees, it makes them more credible: else
we must believe no man but he that speaks to the hazard of his life. 2. The
Prosperity of the Gospel will not warrant us to alter the Rule of Nature and
Scripture; else the Church must Incur greater difficulties in prosperity than
in Adversity, if prosperity forfeit all men's credit: and so men should be kept
out in prosperity who may be admi^ted in adversity: when the Church had peace
and were edified, Act 9 31. the Apostles altered not their practice. 3. We have
great cause to rejoice when Christianity is in so good credit, as that all
profess it; and so, respectively, we may be glad when there are so many
Hypocrites; that is, when persecutors befriend the truth which they persecuted,
and when the Gospel is in so much honor. And though I am not of their mind
that think it the first prescribed End of the Institution, that Sacraments and
Church State should be the means of Conversion; yet I doubt not but God,
foreknowing that many hypocrites would unjustly Intrude, has so fitted his
Ordinances as to be advantageous to their Conversion when they have Intruded.
He calls not any to come into his Church without saving Faith and Repentance,
nor is he consenting to any man's lying Profession, nor unworthy approach to
Baptism or the Lords Supper; but yet they that do come unworthily and
unwarrantably, do find that there, which tends to their Conversion, and
frequently effects it: and this, I think, is the true mean between their
Doctrine who maintain, that the Sacrament is prescribed as a converting
Ordinance, and the unconverted are called to it; and theirs that say simply, it
is not a converting Ordinance.

Object. 3. This is the way to fill the Church with hypocrites, and ungodly
ones; and that breeds all our stir, while they scandadalize their Profession,
and will not be ruled.

Answ. 1. It is Gods way, and then no Inconvenience will disgrace it. 2. We are
foretold (as is said) that many are called, and few chosen, and the Church will
have many unfound Professors to the end of the world. 3. When they are in the
Church, they are under teaching, and Discipline to inform them: or if they be
o^stinate in gross evil, to reject them. 4. God will have a wide difference
between the Church in heaven, and on earth.

Object. 4. Then we must admit a drunkard or whoremonger that still lies in
his sin, if a bare Verbal Profession will serve the turn.

Answ. No. You must see, that with his Profession of Repentance, he do forsake
the sin repented of: or else he contradicts and invalidateth his Profession.
If a man in his drunkenness come to be baptized, and profess to hate
drunkenness, he actually gives his tongue the Lie. If a man swear that he
hates swearing, he contradicts himself; and we have no reason to believe
him. If a Whoremonger keep his Concubine while he professes to repent, he does
one thing, and says another: so that this does not follow.

Object. 5. It was believing with all the heart that Philip required of the
Eunuch; and such a believing a^ had the Promise of Salvation, as Paul and Silas
required of the Jailer.

Answ. True: and its such that we require. But Philip and Paul took a bare
present Profession as the Evidence of that faith which they must accept: and so
must we.

Object. 6. But then we shall apply the Seal to a Blank.

Answ. By a Blank, if you mean, One that you ought not to apply it to, and that
has no right in foro Ecclesiae, I deny it: but, if you mean, one that is not
actually the subject of Gods promise, and to whom God is not actually obliged,
(but conditionally, as he is to Heathens,) and one that has no proper right
coram Deo, or Deo judice, as shall justify his claim and receiving before God,
so I grant that we set the seal to a Blank. But that's not our sin, but his.

And here I desire the Objectors carefully to note, that it is Gods design in
the Gospel, so to order things, that the actual Application shall first be the
act of the sinner himself. God by his Ministers indeed will be the first
offerer; and the Spirit in the Elect shall be the first Exciter: But the first
actual apprehender must be the sinner, and then the Ministers application, by
the seals, is in order to come after men's own application. For man is to be the
chooser or refuser of his own salvation, (which Clemens Alexandrinus gives as
a reason, why in those times of the Church, [ When some, as the custom is, have
divided the Eucharist, they permit every one of the people to take his own
part: For every man's own conscience is best fitted to the act of choosing or
refusing.] Stromat. lib, 1. page 2.) so that we are but to follow them with the
seal; and therefore the applying or refusing act must be first theirs: and
theirs as professed, is the Director of ours. And therefore as it is their sin,
and not ours, if they reject Christ; and their faith, and not ours, by which he
is chosen to be theirs; so it is their sin, and not ours, if a misapplication
be made of the External Ordinance by them; and so we take not an invalid
profession, we are bound to follow their profession; for God never appointed
heart searchers to administer his seals.

Object. 7. But wicked men know not their own hearts, and therefore are
incapable of making a credible profession.

Answ. They may know them better them I can. The Intellect has naturally a
power of knowing it self and the will: though its true that the wicked have
many difficulties in the way. 2. They profess now that they are not wicked, but
converted: therefore you must not take it for granted that they are wicked,
because they were so unless you can prove it; and if you prove them wicked,
when they profess the contrary, then indeed you invalidate their profession,
but not by proving that they were formerly wicked.

Object. 8. But though all this hold of Heathens or Infidels newly pretending
to be converted, and so coming for Baptism, yet it will not hold of professing
Parents that bring their children to Baptism, or of such as come to the Lords
Supper. For such have been long in the Church already, and therefore must
follow the truth of their Profession by a holy conversation.

Answ. I grant this: and withal that the Pastor should be as diligent as he
can to know the conversations of his people. But withal I still say, 1. That,
as it was sufficient at his first admittance that he made a verbal Profession;
so the same Obligation lies on the Minister and people to believe his word
still, till he forfeit his Credit, as it did at the first. A Verbal profession
is still as Obligatory to us for belief, though more be required in him to
second it. 2. And therefore I say, that if a Minister through the numero usness
of his flock, or want of ability, or opportunity, or other causes (yea culpable
in himself) shall be ignorant of the lives of his people, he is to credit their
Profession, and not on that account to deny them Gods Ordinances. 3. They
therefore that will exclude any, for want of a holy life, must bring a certain
Proof of his unholiness of life; for they can require no more Proof from him of
his holiness, but that he professes it: And so I grant that as he professed
Repentance and Faith at first entrance, so he is now to profess that he
continues therein, and walks holy before God. And if he do but say that he
does this, no man can reject him till he first disprove him, supposing him to
be a member of his pastoral charge, or otherwise obliged to administer it to
him, if fit. Those therefore that will have any man's children kept from
baptism, for their parents unholiness, or persons kept from the Supper, must
not expect that men bring proof to them of their holiness beyond their
profession of it, but must deal by them as by other notorious offenders, even
admonish them of their unholy Carriages; and if he hear not, take witness, and
then call the Church; and if he hear not the Church, then he must he rejected;
and not denied the Communion of the Church upon every man's uncharitable
presumptions, or so heavily punished before he be judged or heard. 4. And they
must know that it is heinous evils indeed that will prove a Professor certainly
ungodly; and therefore they must look well to the validity of their proof.

Obj. 9. But they have forfeited the Credit of their words, by their
Covenant Breaking and wicked lives.

Answ. It must be a breach of the Covenant as owned by themselves at age, that
must be sufficient to prove that. 2. And that more then once. For once failing
does not forfeit the Credit of a man's word. 3. And these violations must be
proved, and not barely affirmed. 4. Yea it must be proved that he does at the
present, or has of late lived in violation of former covenants. Otherwise
Repentance manifested by Reformation repaireth his Reputation.

Obj. 10. The text cited in the following Disputation proves that the Apostles
took all the members of the Church to be Saints, Adopted, Justified, etc. But
we cannot think thus of all that now Profess themselves Christians, without
being unreasonable.

Answ. Sometimes the Apostles denominate the whole Church from the better part,
as we call that a corn-field which has many tares. And sometimes, being not
heart-searchers, nor knowing the falsehood of Particular men's Professions, they
speak of them according to their Profession, which the Law of nature and of
Christ commands us to believe, though only with such a humane faith, as may
be mixed with much jealousy and fear of the contrary, concerning many of them,
which the same Apostles also frequently manifested. But yet as they must
believe charitably, so must they speak charitably, of the Professors of true
Christianity.

Besides those Objections, many particular Texts are urged by some to prove
that it is only the Regenerate and such as shall be saved, that are to be added
to the Church; which I shall not now stand to answer particularly; but only
give this general answer to them all: If they mean only such as are Really
sanctified and sincere, or elect, then we must admit none, because we know not
one man to be such; but if they mean only those that seem to be such I have
proved already, that their own Profession of what is in their hearts, out of
our sight, is to be taken for such a seeming, and does qualify them to be
visible members of the Church For as the Matter of the Church as Invisible, is
true Beleivers and Saints; so the Matter of the Church as visible, is the
Professors of that faith and holiness and their seed.

Besides what has been said in general Arguments to prove the Proposition, I
had thought to have gone over many particular Arguments from several Texts of
Scripture, partly giving us examples of such as by Gods approbation have taken
Professions as credible Evidences of the things Professed; and partly in
precepts requiring a charitable credulity toward our brethren; but because I
conceive the last so plan as to need no more, I w^ll forbear this till I hear
that it seems necessary.

But yet there is one other Objection to be met with. Those that feel this
Proposition pull down the Principles of schism or unjust separation, which they
are engaged in, or inclined to, do Object, that if a bare Profession may admit
to baptism, then it may admit to the Lords Supper, and to the Privileges of
^hurch-members; and so Church-Ordinances, and Privileges shall be dispensed
upon bare words and formalities, and so made nothing of. To which I answer; Are
you able to search and know the heart? can you discern sincerity by an
infall^ble judgment? I know none but Mr. Trask that pretended to it. And if you
cannot, and know you cannot, then you must be found to take up with fallible
signs your selves. And those signs you may as well call mere formalities, as
you do this in question. 2. And if we must needs take up with fallible signs,
is it not better to follow the Scripture examples proposed to our imitation*
then to frame a new way of our own: especially when the Law of nature and
nations does consent with Scripture, and the contrary opinion proceeds from a
dividing principle, and tends to division. 3. Make as diligent search as you
can after the sincerity of your flock, as to their more profitable use of
Ordinances, but make no other conditions of their Right, then God has made. 4.
It is only a Profession that is serious, voluntrary, not contradicted
prevalently by word or life, which you must take, as is before described. And
do you take it to be so unreasonable a matter to believe a man fide humana, who
speak's of his own heart which another cannot see, when you can bring no
evidence to disprove his words? If you know any thing by his life that
certainly proves his Profession false, admonish him of it in the order that
Christ has directed you to, till he either hear the Church, or be rejected by
the Church, or at least, by not hearing the Church, do give you cause to take
him as a Heathen or Publican: but be not so much against the Scripture, and 2.
All discipline that ever the Church has used. And against common justice and
reason as to do this by men on your own private judgment, without evidence,
and a just trial, and once hearing them speak for themselves, and many do that
will unchurch a whole Parish, and gather a new one, on supposition of the
invalidity of a bare Profession, and on supposition that most are ignorant and
ungodly, before they have ever once accused them particularly, or dealt with,
or excluded any of them in the way that Christ appoints. If I certainly knew
that in this Parish there were 4000 unregenerate Persons, and not 400 or 100
truly regenerate, and yet knew not particularly which the unregenerate Persons
were, I ought not to cast out one man from the Church upon any such account.

Object. But with what comfort can the Godly have communion with the societies
that are so mixed with multitudes of the ungodly?

Answ. If they do not their duty in admoishing the offenders, and laboring to
heal the diseased members, and to reform the Church in Christ's appointed way,
Mat. 18.17. Then you may well ask [With what comfort can such Professors live
in the sinful neglect of their own duty?] But if they faithfully do their own
part, how should the sins of others ^e their burden, unless by way of common
compassion? And how have Gods servant in all ages of the Church to this day
received comfort in such mixed Communion? These Objectors show that they seek
more of their comfort in men then is meet; or that they discomfort themselves
with their own fancies, when they have no cause of discomfort given them from
without, but what must be born to the end of the world by all that will walk in
the ways of Christ.

Object. But it is the Communion of Saints, that we believe and must endeavor.

Answ. True internal spiritual Communion with hearty Saints; and External
communion with professed Saints For real Saints in heart are unknown to us.

Ob. But the greater part do not so much as Profess to be Saints.

Answ. They that profess to believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and
to renounce the world, the Flesh and the Devil, do profess to be Saints: so do
they that profess to repent of all sin, and to be willing to live according to
the word of God: But I meet but with very few that will not profess all this.

Object. They will say these words indeed, but in the mean time they will scorn
at godliness, or disclaim it by their lives.

Answ. Those that do so, must be dealt with in Christ's way as Church Members,
till either they hear the Church, or be rejected for their impenitency; but you
must not dare upon this account to unchurch whole Parishes, nor ordinarily any
one Person that has not been dealt with in the order that Christ has
appointed.

To conclude this Disputation: I find that the two things before mentioned, are
great occasions of the proneness of many godly people to schism.

The one is, because they do not understand that Christ has so contrived in it
the Gospel, that every man shall be either the Introducter of himself by
Profession, or the Excluder of himself by the rejection of Christianity. And so
that all Church admissions or rejections shall be but the consequents of his
own choice that the chief comfort, or the blame may be upon himself: And this
is partly from the admirable freedom and extensiveness of Gospel Grace, which
the sons of Grace should glorify and rejoice in, and not murmur at, and
dishonor; and partly from the wise dispensations of our Legislator, that he
may deal with men on clear grounds in their absolution, or condemnation, before
all the world.

2. The other cause of the schismatical inclination of some godly people, is,
the great mistake of too many in confining all the fruits of Christ's death, and
the mercies or graces of God to the Elect; and so not considering the
difference that there ever was and will be between the visible Church of
Professors, and the invisible Church of true Believers. Alas Brethren, (in the
name of Christ let me speak it to your hearts) do you grudge a few common
Privileges, to common Professors, when you have the best and choysest part
your selves! you have Christ himself, and do you grudg them the name of
Christians, or the bare symbol or signs of his body and blood? You have
sincerity of faith and Repentance, and answerably you have true Remission and
Reconciliation: They have the profession of Faith and Repentance, and do you
grudg them the empty signs of a Remission which they have lost by their
hypocrisy and Unbelief? You have Inward communion with Christ in the Spirit,
as you have Inward faith: Do you grudg an Extern^l communion with the Church to
them that have the External profession of Faith? O Remember that the Net of the
Gospel brings good and bad to the shore, and the tares must grow with the
wheat till harvest, and then is the time that you shall have your desire.

The second Disputation. Quest. Whether Ministers must or may Baptize the
Children of those that Profess not saving faith, upon the Profession of any
other faith that comes short of it?
IT may seem strange that after 1625. years use of Christian Baptism, the
Ministers of the Gospel should be yet unresolved to whom it does belong; yet so
it is. And I observe that it is a Question that they are now very solicitous
about. And I cannot blame them; it being not only about a matter of Divine
appointment: but a practical of such concernment to the Church. I shall upon
this present occasion, give you my thoughts of it, as briefly as I can; which
contain nothing that I know of which is new or singular, but the Explication
and Vindication of the commonly received truth.

We here suppose that Baptism is still a needful Ordinance of Christ, and that
Infants are to be Baptized, and that Ministers are the persons that should
Baptize them: so that it is none of our work at this time either to defend the
Ordinance it self against the Seekers, nor the subjects [as to their age]
against the Anabaptists: nor the Agents against the Papists or others. Nor are
we now to enquire who are those Ministers that are authorized hereto, or what
is necessary to their calling and authority. But supposing these matters
already determined, our present business is to enquire what that faith is that
qualifieth persons to be the just subjects of Baptism, or to be such, whose
Children may receive it upon the account of their faith or Profession? I shall
not needlessly spend time in seeking to make plain those terms that are already
as plain as I can make them.

1. What Professing is, I have showed in another Determination of the like
nature, and I think all understand that it is as much as palam vel public
fateor.

2. By [Faith] we mean not the Object of faith, the doctrine believed only or
primarily, but the persons own Belief of the doctrine, and reception o^ Christ.

3. By [saving] faith, we mean not to intimate that any faith of its own nature
can procure our salvation: nor that it does of its own nature ( in specie) as
the nearest reason, justify a sinner, nor is any way a proper efficient cause,
natural, or political, instrumental, or meritorious, or any other, of a sinners
justification, but that it is that which the Donor of Christ and Life, has
made the condition of our participation of his free-Gift, and so does morally
qualify the subject to be an apt recipient.

4. Because there are many other Competitors: we comprehend them all under the
next words [upon the Profession of any other faith that comes short of it].

5. We enquire whether we either [ must] or [ may] Baptize such, and suppose
that the [ licet] and the [ oportet] do here go together, so that what we may
do, we must do, supposing our own call: as no doubt what we must do, we may do.

But yet that I be not mistaken (which is a danger not easily escaped when I
have done the best I can to be understood) I shall further tell you what I mean
by saving faith, that is, what I take it to be. 2. What I mean by profession,
and what I take that to be. 3. What are those other sorts that stand up in
Competition with this, as a sufficient qualification. 4. And then I shall
adjoyn some necessary distinctions. 5. And so lay down my thoughts in some
propositions. 6. And then prove that which determines the question. 7. And
lastly I shall answer the Arguments that are brought against it, and for the
contrary Claim.

And note through the whole, that if I do at any time call this profession a
Ttile, it is in compliance with other men's language, it being my own sense,
that neither the ^aith nor the profession is properly a Title, which is
fundamentum juris, and so an efficient cause, but only a condition of a Title.
2. That if I say it [ giveth] Right or Title, I mean not efficiently, as if we
could give a Right to our selves, but only that it is the condition which
performed by us, does morally qualify us to receive it as freely given.

1. By saving Faith, I mean, an unfeigned Belief of the truth of the Gospel,
with an unfeigned acceptance of Christ, who is there of^ered to be our
sufficient and only Savior, from the guilt of sin by his blood and merits, and
from the power of it by his spirit also, and to bring us to glory in the
fruition of God. Or it is a sinners assent to the truth of the Gospel in the
essentials, and a sincere consent that God be immediately our only God, and
Christ our only Savior, and the Holy Ghost our only Sanctifier, and we his
people in these Relations. I say immediately, that is, at present because if it
be only a consent to be such hereafter, it is not saving. Or as the Assembly
say, it is the embracing of Jesus Christ freely offered to us in the Gospel; Or
it is a saving grace, whereby we receive and rest upon Jesus Christ alone for
salvation, as he is offered to us in the Gospel. It is in those respects that
are essential to the Office o the Redeemer and Savior.

2. By Profession I mean in the proper sense that which has something present
for its Object or subject professed; and difference it from a Promise which is
only of something future For it is a present Assent and consent that is to be
professed though withal the object of this professed consent must be both the
present and future relation to Christ; viz, that he be our Savior and we his
saved people from this time forth and for ever. So that a certain Promise de
futuro (in the strength of grace) may be said to be made, in that a man must
profess his consent both de present et de futuro. But still though it be to a
future Relation to Christ as well as a present, yet is it ever to a preesent as
well as a future: It is a present consent, that Christ be presently my only
Savior, or a present acceptance of him to be presently my only Savior that I
must Profess.

Note also that it is not a Profession that this faith of mine is indeed
sincere justifying or saving faith, that I speak of: but it is a Profession of
such a faith as indeed is justifying: For many a thousand Profess that faith
which is justifying, and yet know it not to be justifying while they Profess
it, nor know not that they do with a saving sincerity believe. Not one Godly
person I think of ten thousand, would deny consent that Christ shall be
presently their Savior, and yet most of them know not that this consent is
saving. If you ask them, [Are you heartily willing to have Christ to save you
both from the guilt and reign of sin, and to glorify you?] and they will say
yea withal their hearts? or at least, [yea, if I know my own heart.] And yet at
the same time may doubt whether they be true believers. But as it is the having
of saving faith that is necessary to salvation, and not the knowledge that we
have it; so a man may Profess that faith which is saving, and yet not Profess
that he knows it to be saving: and it is not the latter, but the former that
the Minister must expect from people in Baptism.

3. We are next to consider, what are the Competitors which we now exclude?
There are diverse qualifications that are pleadded as necessary to those that
must be Baptized: and our question is, which of all these is it indeed that may
warrant a claim, or warrant our Practice? 1. The condition that some require in
all that must be baptized, is Assurance or firm persuasion that they are true
Believers, or have their sins pardoned by Christ, by his promise, which they
now come to have sealed. 2. Another condition pretended as necessary is not
such Assurance it self, because we know it not, but a Profession of such
Assurance to the Church. These are both so groundlesly pleaded, and by so few
(that are near us) that I think it not meet to trouble you with them any more.

3. A condition pretended to be necessary, is, A true Justifying faith. This
also is a mistake: but yet how far it is necessary to a true Right, I shall
open anon; none of these three are meant by us in the question: for these are
not short of saving faith, though we exclude the necessity of these, as is said.

4. Another qualification pleaded necessary and sufficient to the ends
expressed in the question, is, [ A Profession of a saving Faith] which is it
that we are to defend.

5. A fifth claim is laid upon the pretended sufficiency of a Faith short of
Justifying. But you will perhaps say, what faith is that? Those words tell us
what Faith it is not, viz. It is not justifying faith, but they tell us not what
faith ^t is.] To which I must say, I know not my self, nor can I learn of all
the writings of those that go that way, so perplexed and confounded, or
uncertain are they, saying sometime one thing, and sometime another. But I
shall have a fitter opportunity to enquire further into their mind or words
anon.

6. Another claim is laid upon the pretended sufficiency of the Profession of a
faith short of that by which we are ju^^ified. I say, the Profession as
distinct from that faith it self, which the former claim made mention of. Some
other there are, that yet go lower, and think we may Baptize any that consent
to be Baptized, though they profess no faith at all, nor their Parents, nor
pro-Parents neither. And there have been so some foolish as to think that it is
a work of charity to catch them and Bap^ize them, whether they will or not. But
it is not our present business to deal with these.

The great adversary that we have here to deal with, is the Papists: And I
shall in few words show you part of their doctrine which we are now to oppose.

Their great Fundamental error on which they build their tottering Babel and
tyrannical usurpation, is this: that the Catholic church is one Political
society, united in one visible head, and governed by those that hold their
power from him, or at least are ruled by him, and are conjoined under these
overseers in one Profession of faith and use of Sacraments. Bellarmines words
are these (De Eccles. lib. 3.) Nostra autem sententia est ecclesiam unam tantum
esse, non duas; et illam unam et veram esse coetum hominum ejusdem Christianae
fidei Professione, et eorundem sacramentorum communione colligatum, sub
regimine legitimorum Pastorum, ao praecipue unius Christi in terris vicarii,
Romani Pontificis. And he adds afterward [ Hoc interest inter sententiam
nostram et alias omnes, quod omnes aliae requirunt internas virtutes ad
constituendum aliquem in ecclesia, et propterea ecclesiam veram invisibilem
faciunt: nos autem et credimus in ecclesia inv^niri omnes virtutes, fidem,
spem, charitatem, et caeteras: tamen ut aliquis aliquo modo dicipossit pars
verae ecclesiae, de qua scripturae loquuntur, non putamus requiri ullam
internam virtutem, sed tantum externam professionem fidei et sacramentoru^
communionem, quae sensu ipso percipitur. Ecclesia enim est coetus hominum ita
visibilis, palpabilis, ut est coetus populi Romani, vel Regnum Galliae, aut
respublica Venetorum.] Yet other Papists be not so strict with us, but that
they will distinguish between the professing Church and the true believing
Church. And Bellarmine in the next words cites a passage as Austins, which he
commends; which makes Faith, Hope and Charity to be the soul of the Church;
and the external profession of faith and use of sacraments to be the Body of
it; and some persons to be in it in one respect only, some in the other only,
and some in both. They confess indeed that of duty, men should be found
Believers at the first; but ordinarily they say, that is not to be expected and
therefore they are first to be entered into the Church (this visible Church) by
Baptism, that this may be a means to bring them higher: and by this entrance
they are put under right guides, and into the true body, and so are fed with
true ordinances, yea, with Christ's body and blood; and so are in the way to a
true spiritual state. The terms on which they must be admitted they say, into
this Political Church (which is not the holiest of all) is a Profession of
faith, and a consent to be a member of the society, and to be under those
Pastors, and use those ordinances in order to further growth: so that these
they suppose to have a true faith, and to be such as have right to this Church
state; but yet to be but in the way to a special saving faith. for theirs is
but fides informis, or mere faith, which is only Assent (say they) joined with
the foresaid consent to live in a Church state: but when Love is added, then it
is fides charitate formata; and then they are become of the true spiritual
society, and have part in the soul as well as in the body of the Church, so
that though they desire fidem formatam in all, yet it is not to be expected
that so much as a Profession of it be exacted of those that enter into the
first order by Baptism; but when they enter into a retired monastical life,
then it must be expected; and it is found in all that are fully justified. For,
say they, Baptism which enters men into the visible Church, does put away
their original sin, and justify them (that is, change them) in tantum, viz.
from Heathenism, or infidelity, if they lay in it before; but it does not
justify them from their more spiritual latent sins, such as lie in the heart,
and keep out the power of Grace, but it is the work of special Grace (which is
given upon the good use of their Church state and Ordinances) that does this by
giving them fidem formatam, with charity and hope. Among all this there is some
truth and some error: we confess that the Church is one Political society or
Republ^ck; but not headed by men, but only by Christ, the several particular
Churches being as so many distinct corporations that all make up this one
Republic; and are conjoined internally by faith, love and obedience to the
same Lord and laws, and externally by the use of the same confession, worship.
etc. and holding correspondency and brotherly communion as far as occasion and
natural capacity shall enable them: but not united in one visible frame of
policy, so as to be under the same Governors, some as subordinate, and one
person or a General council being the supreme. No more then all the schools in
England or in the world must have such a Political constitution, and Government
by combinations of schoolmasters. We confess also that the Church is but one as
well as they, and that they are to make the same profession and use the same
worship, in regard of which they are called visible members, and the Church a
visible Church; as by reason of their faith and the spirit within them, it is
called invisible: as if we should distinguish a man into visible and invisible
in respect to his body and soul; which make not two men: we confess also that
there is an ineffectual faith of assent that goes without a hearty consent:
and that many are to be admitted by us into the visible Church by Baptism (by
solemnization) upon a bare Profession, who have not faith either of one sort or
other. And we confess that such as so remain in the Church, do live under those
benefits and means which have a special tendence to their true conversion. But
yet we very much d^ffer in this. The Papists make the Primary sense of the word
Church, to be of the visible Church as the samosius significatum, and therefore
they say that to be entered by Baptism, 1. Into a Profession of assent, 2. Into
communion in Ordinances, and 3. Under one and the same Government, or external
policy, is all that is requisite to make a Churchmember. But we say that the
first and famosius significatum is the whole multitude of true Believers that
have the spirit of God, and his saving Grace; and that it is one and the same
Church that is called first mystical, as being called out of the world to
Christ by true faith: and then visible, because of their Profession of that
same faith: and therefore if any Profess that faith who are without it, these
are members but secundum quid, or equivocally, as the hair and the nails are
members of the body, which indeed are no members in the proper and first sense:
or as a wooden leg is a member, or as a body without a soul is a man: or as the
peace or chaff and straw are corn: The body may be said to be part of the man,
when it is animated: but a corpse or body that never was animated is not
properly a part: the straw and chaff are called part of the corn-field (though
indeed but appurtenances to the corn) but if there were no corn, they should
have no such title, and when they are separable they shall lose it. Moreover,
it is not a Profession of the same faith that the Papists and we maintain to be
necessary to Church entrance. For they require as necessary, only a Profession
of the Dogmatical or Historical faith of Assent aforesaid, with a consent to
subjection and use of Ordinances: But we require a Profession of that faith
which has the promise of pardon and salvation: They take their Church-entrance
to be a step toward saving conversion, and formed faith: we take it quoad
primam intention^m Christi ordinantis, to be an entrance among the number of
the converted true Believers: and that it is accidental through their failing
and hypocrisy, that any ungodly are in the Church and so enjoy it is external
privileges: and that if we could know them to be such, they should not be
there, it being the work of the Gathering Ministry to bring men to true faith
and repentance, and of the Edifying perfecting ministry to build them up and
bring them on. And the Papists themselves having received by Tradition a form
of words to be used in Baptism which are sounder then their doctrine, and which
in the true sense do hold forth all that we say, are put to their shifts by
palpable mis-interpretation to deprave their own form. They do themselves
require of the Baptized a Profession that he believe in the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: and when we prove that this is justifying faith and that to [
believe in] does signify Affiance; the Papists say it is but a naked Assent or
Historical faith: and when themselves require the ^aptized to ^enounce the
Devil, the world and the flesh, they say that this sign^fieth no more but that
at present they profess so far to renounce them as to enter into the visible
Church, as the way to a future saving ab^enunciation. And when themselves do
dedicate the person to Christ, they say it is but directly to his Church (that
is, to leave the world of Infidels, and be numbered with the visible Church) as
the means to a saving sanctification. And these notions they have filed and
formed more exactly of late than heretofore, to make the snare more apt to
catch the simple; still magnifying to the uttermost the visible Church State as
the only way to a state of justification and salvation. But yet as our Divines
have observed against him, Bellarmine himself, when he has superficially
pleaded his own cause, does frequently, in the pleading it, let fall such words
at unawares that do destroy it, and grant what we say. As lib, 3. de Eccles.
cap. 10. he says [ Verissime etiam dici potuisse ecclesiam fidelium, id est,
eorum qui veram fidem habent in cord, unam esse: ecclesia enim praecipue and
ex intention sideles tantum colligit; cum autem adm^scentur aliqui ficti, and
qui vere non credunt, id accidit praeter intentionem ecclesiae. Si enim eos
nosse posset, nunquam admitteret, aut casu admissos continuo excluderet.] yet I
confess it is but his nudus ascensus or fides informis that he seems here too
mean. I pray you read over especially his 9. Chap. ibid. There ( page 227) he
answers one of our Objections thus [ Ad ultimum dico, malos non esse membra
viva Corporis Christi; and hoc significari illis scripturis. Ad id quod
addebatur igitur sunt aequivoce membra etc.] a multis solet concedi, malos non
esse membra vera, nec simpliciter corporis ecclesiae sed tantum secundum quid
and aequivoce. Ita Johan. Turrecremata, l. 1.57. ubi id probat ex Alex. de
Ales, Hugone, and D. Thoma: idem etiam docent Petrus a Soto, Melchior Canus,
and alii^qui tamen etsi dicant malos non esse me^bra vera, dicu^t nihilominus
vere esse in eeclesia, sive in corpore ecclesiae, and esse simpliciter sideles
sen Christianos: neque enim solae me^bra sunt in corpore sed etiam humores,
dentes, pili, and alia quae non sunt membra. Neque sideles aut Christiani
dicuntur tales a charitate, sed a side sive u fidei profes^ione.] It appears
then that the Papists are put of late to refine this fundamental doctrine of
theirs, from the soundness that it formerly had among themselves and to fit it
more to their own turns. And I blame them not, because their whole kingdom
lies on it; and would be subverted utterly, if the foresaid exposition hold
(which is so much like to ours.) Its a cutting objection which turned
Bellarmine out of his rode. [ At si ita est, sequitur pontificem malum non esse
c^put ecclesiae; and alios episcopos, si m^li sunt, non esse capita suarum
ecclesiarum: Caput enim non est humor, aut pilus, sed membrum and quidem
praecipuum.] This put him on distinguishing: and yet at last he could bring it
but to this, [ Dico episcopum malum, presbyterum malum, Doctorem malum, esse
me^bra mortua, and perinde non vera corporis Christi, quantu^ attinet ad
rationem me^bri, ut est pars quaedam vivi corporis, tamen esse verissima membra
in ratione instrumenti, id est, pap^m and episcopos esse vera capita, etc. and
ratio est, quia membra viva constituuntur per charitate^; qua imp^i carent: at
instrumenta operativa constituuntur per potestatem sive ordinis sive
jurisdictionis.] And what is this more then the wooden leg, or silver teeth,
which our Divines compare them to? But the new Papists, since Bellarmine, do
see a necessity of a further distinguishing the Church as a visible political
society, from the Church as truly sanctified: But that which we and all the
ancients do make to be but the Profession distinct from the thing professed,
the body distinct from the soul; the chaff distinct from the wheat; the shell
distinct from the kernel; they make to be as the lower order which is the way
to a higher, as the Alphabet or lower Rudiments, which are the way to Grammar;
as an apprentiship to a trade; I mean as a state of preparation, to a state of
infallible salvation. And because it favors their main design, they seem to
draw near to the same conceit which they were wont falsely to fasten on the
Protestants, viz. that there are two ^hurches, one Political and visible, the
other regenerate and Invisible. And Bellarmine confesses that some of them
were of this mind in his time. And all this stir is, that they may advance
their visible Church in the estimation of men, and thereby the more easily keep
the rule in their own hands, and exalt themselves above Scripture, and draw as
many as may be into their society: and therefore they drive the poor ignorant
Americans by hundreds to be baptized, as we drive our beasts to watering, or
our sheep to be washed; and in stead of staying till they make Profession of a
saving faith with any seeming seriousness, they make Baptism an entrance into
the state of the Catechumeni, which was wont to be the passage thence into the
state of Christians: that per fas aut nefas they may engage people to
themselves under pretense of engaging them to Christ; therefore it is that they
so over extol the visible Political state of the Church, as Dr. Prideaux
says, Lect. de visibil. eccles. page 128. [ Experti demum perciperunt,
externam ecclesiae pompam, and speciosos titulos apud instabiles, plus lucrari,
quam non lectam, vel saltem non intellectam scripturae (...). Hinc ecclesiam ad
ravint usque crepant Catholicam; quam admissam, statim restringunt ad Romae
synagogam, suco quidem veteratorio, sed conspicuo satis, and ridiculo, ut ex
conficta ecclesia formeiur doctrina, and non ex veritate doctrinae reformetur
and firmetur ecclesia]

The chief adversaries therefore we have here to deal with, are the Papists,
who over-magnifie the visible face of the Church, and make the faith of men
unjustified, to be true faith, though not formatacharitate, and make
Hypocrites, and and wicked Professors, to be truly and properly fideles and
members of the Church, whom the Protestants affirm to be but secundum quid,
materially, analogically, yea equivocally called members or fideles; and
therefore they make Baptism to be an appointed means to admit men into this
visible Political Church, as into the ordinary way and passage to the state of
saving grace, or justification; but not ordinarily into the present possession
of it: And therefore in conformity to all this they maintain that we must admit
persons to Baptism, upon the bare Profession of faith, that is, Assent, with
consent to be under the Government of the Church and the use of ordinances in
order to be a better state. For says Bellarmine, it is not Charity but Faith
which makes a Christian: which our divines admit as true in our sense of the
word Faith which includes the will, and is proper to the truly regenerate; but
they deny it in his sense of it, who makes faith to be the only Assent of the
intellect. Against this adversary therefore I shall principally bend the force
of my Arguments, though to my great trouble, I must be forced to deal also with
a Reverend Brother of our own; especially in answering his many fallacious
arguments which he has lately heaped up for that part which I must oppose.

4. Before I can positively answer the question in hand, I must premise these
few necessary Distinctions. 1. We must distinguish between a Profession of
faith according to the Ministers sense of the words; and a Profession according
to the speakers sense. 2. Between the Children of those that profess not saving
faith, as theirs, and claiming Baptism on the account of some lower Profession;
and the same Children as owned by some other that do profess saving faith. 3.
Between the unlawfulness of Baptizing, and the Nullity of the Baptism. Those
distinctions that are necessary for the answering of the objections, will come
in their places. Upon these few I answer the question negatively, explained in
the following Propositions.

1. It is not a Profession of saving Faith in the real intention of the
Professor that we affi^m necessary; but in the Apprehension of the Minister
judging of the words according to their common use and acception: For we know
not the heart of the Professor, and therefore know not certainly whether he
intend those words as a Profession or not. I do not mean, whether he be sincere
in his Profession, and intend the thing Professed* for that's no part of the
Profession it self: but I mean whether he use the words which he speaks in the
sense which they seem to us to import, and which they are used in by those that
best understand their common signification. For example: a Papist presents a
Child to be Baptized, Professing to believe in God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost: I know that these words according to the Scripture use of them* signify
a true saving faith; but I am not sure whether the speaker do understand any
more by them then a lower faith of mere Assent. If I knew he meant no more, I
would require him to express a saving faith, before I would Baptize his Child,
on his account: but if I know it not, nor have just reason to question it, I
must take the words as they are commonly used, and seem to be intended by him
and so if it appear to me to be a Profession of saving faith, though I err and
my error be innocent, it is my duty to Baptize the Child. I have known a man
of eighty years of age that took God the Son, to be the sun in the firmament:
If, before I had understood him, this man had professed to believe in God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and presented his child to baptism with this
profession (and I had no ground before to suspect his error, or to examine him
about his faith) it had been my duty to baptize his child. For though in the
intended sense of the speaker, here was not so much as the Profession of an
Historical faith, much less of a saving faith, yet I know not his heart, and
the common use of those words as to another signification than he intended; and
therefore I was Innocent in being deceived.

2. I meddle not here with the claim that is laid upon the account of the
Ancestors, Adopters, or undertakers that profess saving faith; but only with
the claim laid on the account of Parents, or any others that profess not saving
faith.

3. When I assert the unlawfulness, I do not intend thereby to assert the
Nullity of all such baptism, when performed, though unlawfully: For though it
may be Null or vain as to the special uses and benefits, yet it follows not
that therefore it is Null as to the true form and being of the External
Ordinance; nor that this is to be re-iterated. And with these explications I
affirm that Ministers may not Baptize the children of those that Profess not
saving faith, upon the Profession of any other faith that comes short of it.
And here you must remember that our question supposes the determination of the
controversy [ whether the same faith that is necessary in the aged themselves
if they were to be baptized, be necessary to their childrens baptism on their
account] For it seems strange to me, that any should imagine that a lower
belief in the Parent will help his child to a Title, than that which is
necessary to his own baptism. But if any will insist on such a conceit, because
we will not now make more controversies, then that in hand, let such all along
suppose our dispute to be about the aged themselves, whether we might baptize
the aged upon the Profession of any faith short of saving. And I thus prove the
contrary.

Argum. 1. If we must not baptize any who profess not true Repentance, then
must we not baptize any that profess not saving faith. But the Antecedent is
true (speaking of the Adult. Concerning whom as the more noble subject we shall
carry on the Argumentation for brevity: still implying the l^ke necessity of
their professing saving faith, for their childrens baptism as for their own)
therefore etc.

The Consequence of the Major, I prove thus. 1. True repentance and saving
faith are inseparable; therefore if one be of necessity, so is the other, and
the profession of true Repentance cannot be separated from the profession of
saving faith; therefore if one be necessary, so is the other. Some learned
Divines take repentance and faith to be all one; some take repentance to be
part of faith: but all take it to be as inseparable from it. It were easy by
describing the requisite Professions of both to show that they are so
interwoven, that no man can profess the one without the other: but I think it
is needless, because few will deny it. By Repentance here I mean that true
Evangelical Repentance which is a special grace of God accompanying salvation;
and not any common preparatory Repentance.

The Antecedent is easily proved from Scripture: and I know not whether any
Protestant deny it: many Papists indeed distinguish of Repentance and Faith,
and say, that it is only a profession of a preparatory Repentance and sides
informis, a faith without love, that is necessarily to be expected from them.
(before Baptism). But I prove the contrary. 1. That Repentance. 2. And such as
is proper to the effectually called, is necessary to be professed by all that
we may Baptize. I will join the proof of both together. Argum. 1. If John
Baptist required the Profession of true Repentance in men before he would
baptize them, then so must we. But John did so: therefore.

the Consequence is clear. 1. For either John's Baptism and Christ's were the
same, as most of our Divines against the Papists do maintain; (though Zanchy
and some few more follow the Judgment of the ancient Doctors in this) or as
Calvin Institut. says, the difference seems to be but this, that John baptized
them into the Messiah to come, and the Apostles into the name of the Messiah
already come. 2. Or if the difference be greater, we may argue a fortiori; If
John's Baptism required a Profession of Repentance, then much more Christ's: for
certainly Christ required not less then John, nor did he take the impenitent
into his Kingdom whom John excluded.

The Antecedent I prove. 1. From Mark 1, 34. He preached (...)] And doubtless
that Repentance which is in Remissionem peccatorum, is true special Repentance.
One of our Divines, and many of the Papists have found out another evasion:
that is, that John did engage them to repent, but not requiring a Profession or
Repentance as foregoing baptism. But 1. this is against the whole current of
expositors, ancient and modern, and 2. against the plain scope of the text. The
words in Mat. 3.6. are, [They were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their
sins] This confession was with, yea before their baptism: and this Confession
was the Profession of the Repentance that John required. Maldonate on the text,
having first railed at Calvin and slandered him, as turning baptism into
preaching (as if he had expounded John's baptizing, not of water baptism but
preaching, when he only shows that both should go together) does tell the
Protestants that they cannot prove by this text that confession went before
baptism, because it is named after: but that he might not seem utterly
impudent, he confesses that the thing is true, and that it is the sense of the
text and that this he confesses because he must rather be a faithful
expositor, then a subtle adversary. And if any should say that it is only
confession that is required, which is no certain sign of true Repentance: I
answer: when John says [ If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins] he took that confession to be a sign of true Repentance.
And our Expositors and the Ancients before them agree; that it was such a
confession as was conjunct with a detestation and renouncing of the sin. And it
is expounded by that of Acts 19.18. as Grotius notes, to have a special
detestation of the sin accompaneing it, where to the word (...) is added (...).
And it may sufficy that the baptism to which this Confession was required, is
the baptism of Repentance. But it is objected that in the 11. verse. of Mat. 3.
it is said by John [ I Baptize you with water to Repentance] therefore it is
but an engagement of them to it for the future. Answ. Our expositors have fully
showed that this signifies no more, but [I baptize you upon your present
Profession of Repentance, to newness of life.] For that this Profession did go
before, is proved already, and then the rest can be no more then the
continuance of Repentance and exercise of it in newness of life, which they are
engaged to for the future. Only if any falsely profess it at present, his own
confession is an engagement to it as a duty. Grotiu^ says that [(...) potest
non incommode exponi hoc modo, B^ptizo vos super professione poenitentiae quam
facitis] The plain meaning it is in a word [I do by baptism initiate you into
the state of Repentance, or of Penitents; but Christ shall give the Holy Ghost
(as it was poured forth.) And so (as Pelargus speaks on Mat. 3. against
Salmeron) we maintain John's baptism to be ^ffectual, being the baptism of
Repentance to Remission of sin. And that it was true Repentance that he
required, appears further by the fruits of it tha^ he calle^h for from the
Pharisees, Mat. 3.6, 7, 8, 9 Lastly, I shall prove anon that God has not
appointed us to baptize any upon a promise of Repentance or faith, before they
profess actual faith and Repentance, nor are they fit for such a covenant.

Argum. 2, For the proof of the necessity of a Profession of Repentance before
baptism, is this: If Jesus Christ has by Scripture precept and example
directed us to baptize those that profess true Repentance, and no other; then
we must baptize them, and no other: But the Antecedent it true: therefore so is
the consequent.

All that requires proof is the Antecedent; which I prove from an enumeration
of those texts that do afford us this direction (besides the forementioned.)

1. Jesus Christ himself did by preaching Repentance prepare men for baptism,
and for his kingdom, as John before began to do, Matthew. 4.17. so Mar. 1.15. The
Kingdom of God is at hand; Repent ye and believe the Gospel. And to that end he
sent his Apostles and other preachers, Mar. 6.12. Acts 17, 30. Luke 24.47.
Repentance and Remission is to be preached to all Nations in his name: And
baptism which is for the obsignation of Remission of sin according to the
appointed order, comes after Repentance.

And when it is said by John [I baptize you with water to Repentance, but he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost] Mat. 3.11. Mar. 1.8. Luke 3.16. It
implies that Christ's baptism comprehended John's and somewhat more in Act.
2.37, 38. when the Jews were pricked in their heart (which was a preparatory
Repentance) and said to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, [men and brethren
what shall we do?] Peter says to them, Repent and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins] so that we must require
and expect true Evangelical Repentance to be professed before baptism; for ver.
41. its added, [ then they that gladly received his word were baptized] so that
he baptized none that to outward appearance did not gladly receive that word
which could not be without a profession of that Repentance. And he that here
persuades them to repent and be baptized for remission, does in the next
chapter, ver. 19. require them to repent, and be converted, that their sins may
be blotted out, showing what kind of Repentance it is that he means. And as
the work of General Preachers to the unbelieving world is sometime called a
discipling of Nations, which goes before baptizing them, Mat. 28.19, 20. So is
it in other places called a Preaching of Repentance, and commanding all men
everywhere to Repent, Acts 17.30. An opening of men's eyes and turning them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
Remission (obsigned in baptism) Act. 26.18. to repent and turn to God, ver. 20.
And it was the sum of Paul's preaching to the unbaptized [ Repentance toward
God, and faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ] Act. 20.21. So that it is
apparent that they took the profession or appearance of both Faith and
Repentance, as pre-requisite to baptism. And still this same repentance is it
that has the remission of sin connexed, Act. 5.31. Luke 24 47. Its repentance
unto life. Act. 11.18. And when the Apostles compare John's baptism with
Christ's, they still acknowledge John's to be the baptism of Repentance, Act.
13.24 and 19.4. and when the Apostle does purposely recite the principles of
our religion, he does it in this order, Heb. 6.1, 2. [ The foundation of
repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God, the doctrine of Baptism etc.

Argum. 3. They that before they are baptized must renounce the world, the
flesh and the devil, must profess true Evangelical Repentance (I mean still
such as has a promise of pardon and salvation) but all that are baptized, must
(by themselves or others) renounce the world, flesh and devil, of which we
shall have occasion to say more anon.

Argum. 4. They that profess to be buried with Christ in baptism and to rise
again, do profess true Repentance: but all that are baptized, must profess to
be buried with him, and rise again; therefore etc. The Major is proved, in that
to be buried and risen with Christ, signifies. A being dead to sin, and alive
to God and newness of life: and it is not only (as is feigned by the Opposers)
an engagment to th^s for the future, but a profession of it also at the
present. This with the rest we thus prove, Col. 2.11, 12.13. In whom ye are
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in
baptism, wherein also you are risen with him through the faith of the operation
of God, who has raised him from the dead, and you being dead in your sins and
the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him, having
forgiven you all trespasses,] where note 1. that this is spoken to all the
Church of the Colossians; and therefore they are presumed to be what they
profess and appear to be. 2. that the putting of the body under the water did
signify our burial with Christ, and the death or putting off of our sins: And
although we now use a less quantity of water, yet it is to signify the same
thing, or else we should destroy the being of the Sacrament: so also our rising
out of the water, signifies our rising and being quickened together with him.
3. Note also that it is not only an engagement to this hereafter, but a thing
presently done. They were in baptism buried with Christ; and put off the body
of sin, and were quickened with him: and this does also suppose their own
present Profession to put off the body of sin, and their consent to be baptized
on these terms.

The like we have in Romans 6. chap. 4.5. Know ye not that so many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? therefore we are
buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the Glory of the father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life: for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall be also into the likeness of his resurrection. Here also it is evident,
1. That all the members of the visible Church are supposed to be baptized into
Christ and into his Death, and so to be buried with him by baptism into death,
and planted together into the likeness of his death. 2. And that this is not
supposed to be only an Engagement for the future, but a present entrance into
the state of Mortification and Vivification, wherein they were to proceed by
newness of life: And therefore ver. 5.6, 7, 8, 11. They are supposed to have
the old man crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed; And
that henceforth they should not serve sin: And that they are so dead as to be
freed from sin, as to the servitude thereof: And that they must reckon
themselves dead to sin, but alive to God; He that Reads the whole Chapter
with judgment and Impartiality, will soon discern that true Repentance and
Abrenunciation of the service of sin, was to be professed by all that would be
Baptized; And that hereupon they Sealed their own Profession and Covenant by
the reception of Baptism, as Christ Sealed his part by the actual baptizing
them; and that hereupon they are by the Apostle all called and supposed such as
they professed themselves to be.

Argum. 5. If it be the very nature and use of baptism to signify and Seal
both the present putting off the body of sin, and present putting on Christ,
then the profession of true Repentance must needs precede or concur with
baptism: but the former is certain: of which more anon.

I conclude then that both Scripture, and the very signs themselves, and the
common consent of the Church (of which more after) do show that true
Repentance, and present Repentance must be professed by all those that we may
baptize, or whose children we may baptize on their account: And consequently
that true saving faith which is Inseparable from it (and some think is the same
thing) must needs be Professed too; and not only Promised.

We should before we leave this Argument hear what the Opposers say against it:
but they are all in pieces (the Papists I mean) among themselves about it, some
of them confessing what we plead for, and others of them (Especially the New
ones) contradicting it, but by such reasons as I think not worth the while now
to discuss.

There are two Reverend men of our own, whose unhappy owning the cause that we
argue against, does call us to a more respectful Consideration of their
Answers; viz. Dr. Sam* Ward, and Mr. Thomas Blake. The former says, Concedo
neminem Adultorum ad Baptismum admitti debere absque Professione fidei and
Poenitentiae: Concedo iterum solidam poenitentiam conjunctam cum vera and viva
fide in mediatorem obtinere praesentaneam peccatorum remissionem apud Deum (You
see how much of my Argument is here yielded. Sed nego poenitentiam aut fidem
Initialem, qua judicio Apostolorum sufficiebat ad dandum Baptisma
desiderantibus semper eorum judicio aut praesumptione suffecisse ad tales
ponendos in statu adeptae reconciliationis, remissionis peccatorum,
regenerationis, aut Salutis, etc. The sum is, that there are two sorts of
Repentance and Faith; one Initial, which the Apostles thought a sufficient
Title to Baptism; and the other saving or connexed to Justification; And this
they did not expect a Profession of, or suppose, but put them in the way to it.

Answ. To this I shall return Mr. Gatakers answer, Contra Wardum, page 71. [
Ego quaenam sit sides illa ac poenitentia Initialis, non intelligo, qua
prae^itum quis ausit ad Baptismum admittere, quem tamen vera vivaque in
Mediatorem fide imbu^um nondum credat. Philippus certe Aethiopi baptismum
poscenti] Si credas, inquit, ex toto cord, licet, Act. 8.38. Quasi non
baptizaturus, nisi id ille profiteretur, ipseque Charitatis saltem judicio, ita
credere credat. [Non vult ^um baptizare nifi credat] Inquit Lutherus in Genesis
48. Nec fidem tantum Initialem illam volebat, qui ex toto cord poscit ut
credat. Et de An^nia Calvinus ad. Act. 22.16 [ Verae fidei expertem non
baptizasset] ea nempe imbutum praesumpsisse vult: Et ex Christo ipso id
didicisse videtur, Act. 9.11. See the rest. I add only the saying of Peter
Martyr which be concludes with, (in Romans 3. Vnam esse verae poenitentiae
rationem, quae a baptizandis adultis exigatur] It is (mil^i Impress. TIGUR.
1559. page 148. Where he reprehendeth some Papists, quod sibi singunt in
Baptismo poenitentiam non requiri, and confuteth them: so he does also in c.
11.864. and the repentance that he requires is described p. 143. sed quicquid
illi (Colonienses) dicunt, una est ratio verae poenitentiae, ut ex animo
doleamus admissa peccatae, quae Deum a nobis abalienaverunt: Cui dolori
adjungitur desiderium condonationis, and preces, ut eam obtineamus, cum certo
proposito non amplius incurrendi in eadem peccata, and voluntate mortificandi
veterem, and induendi novum; quae omnia fide niti oportet, quae sine illa
constare non possunt; Much out of this Author we shall produce anon.

But I have spoke to this of Dr. Wards already in the Appendix to my Treatise
of Baptism. 1. To which of mine Mr. Blake taking exceptions, and publishing
them, I published my Defense, and among many more used this Argument from the
Necessity of Repentance: but Mr. Blake found it easier to say that of almost
forty Arguments few were to the question, and so to pass them by, than to give
us a satisfactory answer to them. But yet I find him upon the Point against
another Page 107, 108. And there I find this Question, Did they (the Apostles)
so require it (Repentance) as in reality to precede Baptism, Or were Satisfied
with a Profession of it? I answer; If that you yield the last, it is enough to
the main Point of difference. Page 108. He says [ Faith takes Christ to give
Repentance] Answ. Only saving faith is properly called a Taking Christ: And
that takes Christ to give more Repentance, but not to give the first
Repentance: For Christ gives the first Faith and Repentance, (ut Amesius in
medulla. l^b. 1. de Vocat.) before faith take him. But if it were otherwise,
yet both are to go before baptism according to the Intention of the Institutor,
or the Profession of both.

To that Mat. 3. [ They confessed their sins, 1. He says, some will have it to
imply no verbal Confession but virtual, etc. which gloss carries a strong
Probability, etc.] Answ. 1. Such presumptuous glossing contradicting the Text
upon such inconsiderable reasons (as is the multitude of the baptized) deserves
no answer.

2. It is so much the stronger against him, if Baptism be in the very reception
a virtual Confession: then no man can be Baptized without it. 2. He adds, [ I
require more, an Engagement to leave sin, which their taking on them the name
of Christ does Imply] Answ. If the Engagement be only for some distance of
time, it is such as God accepts not, nor must we: If it be an Engagement to
forsake sin from that present time forward, it is withal a plain Profession of
present true Repentance or conversion, and consent to leave it, yea
renunciation of it, and resolution to take it up no more. More to this purpose
follows, which I think contains nothing that requires any more than what is
said already to disable it.

Argum. 2. My first Argument was from the Necessity of a Profession of true
Repentance. the second shall be from the Equipollent terms, or Description to
the thing Described: Thus.

We must baptize no man that first professes not to believe in God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost: To believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is
saving Faith (if sincerely done) therefore we must Baptize no man that first
professes not saving faith.

The Major is proved from Mat. 28.19. Where this is made the form of the words
in baptism, or at least the End, and that which we must insist on. Calvin on
the words yields the Anabaptists that faith is put justly before baptism, Nam
alioqui Mendax esset, figuraque remissionem peccatorum and Spiritus donum
offeret incredulis, qui nondum essent Christi membra. And that non abs re
patris, filii and spiritus expressa hic fit mentio, quia aliter baptismi vis
apprehendi non potest quam si a gratuita Patris misericordia initium fiat, qui
nos per filium sibi reconciliat, deinde in medium prodeat Christus ipse cum
mortis suae sacrificio: Et tandem accedat etia^ spiritus sanctus, per quem nos
abluit and regenerat; Denique suoru^ omnium bonorum consortes faciat. It
appears by comparing Mat. 28.19. with Romans 6 3. and 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15 and
10.2. that to be baptized into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is
not only to be baptized by their Authority, but also to be thus Initiated into
the Relation which the Church stands in to them, and to be consecrated to the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as Musculus, Diodate, the Assembly of Divines
Annotations, and the generality of Expositors do express. See Dr. Hammond
Pract. Catech. l. 6.. 2. And especially on Mat. 28.19. Grotius at large; and
that it comprehends or presupposes a Profession of believing in the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost. For no man can devote himself solemnly by our Ministry to
the holy Trinity that does not first Profess to believe in them. Therefore the
Church ever taught the C^techu^^eni the Creed first in which they profess to
believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And before they actually
baptized them, they asked them whether they believed in God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost? To which they must answer affirmatively, or not be baptized.

And for the Minor, that this believing in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is
saving faith, if sincerity done as it is professed, is proved, 1. In that to
believe in God, in Christ, in the Holy Ghost, signifies not only the act of
the understanding barely assenting, but also the consent and Assiance of the
Will. 2. True saving faith is so expressed in Scripture: and the promise of
eternal life is added to it, Joh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
Joh. 1.12. To as many as received him, he gave power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe in his name: where believing in his name is made
equivalent with Receiving him, and has Adoption immediately annexed to it: And
all that are baptized must first Profess to believe in his name, and so receive
him, and not only promise to do it hereafter, Joh. 3.14 15, 16. Whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have eternal life. But all that are
Baptized, must Profess to believe in him, Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the
son has everlasting life; and he that believes not the son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him. He that will distinguish now, and
say, that it is not this believing on the Son here mentioned which must be
Professed by all that will be baptized, but another believing on him, which
leaves him among those that shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him, must prove and explain his distinction better then those that have
undertaken it have done. Joh. 5.24. [ Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
hears my words, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life.] If any
words of Christ can put us out of doubt, that believing in the Father and Son
is saving faith, these asseverations and plain expressions may do it,
especially, being a thing so often rehearsed. So Joh 6.35. He that comes to me
shall never hunger; and he that believes on me shall never thirst, Verse 40.
And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the Son and
believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. Ver. 17. Verily verily I say unto you, He that believes on me has
everlasting life. So John 7.38. and 11.25, 26. and 12.44, 46, and 14.12. Acts
10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins, Romans 3.20. That he might be
just, and the Justifier of him that believes on Jesus, [Rom. 45. To him that
work^th not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness.] Romans 9 33. Whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed. So 10, 11. 1 Pet. 2.6. 1 John 5.10. Tit. 3.8 with many the like. From
all which it is evident, that Believing on or in God, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, is saving faith, having more frequent and as express promises of life,
as anything whatsoever. And it is believing in God, the Father* Son and holy
Ghost: that we must profess in baptism.

To this I suppose it will be answered (for I know not what else can), that
there are two sorts of believing in or on God the Father, Son and holy Ghost:
and the Texts mentioned speak of one sort, which is saving, and that which we
must necessarily profess in Baptism is another sort, that is, a faith not
joined with Charity, or a mere dogmatical faith. To which I answer, 1. Let them
that thus distinguish, first clearly explain to us the branches of the
distinction, and show us the difference between the two faiths, and prove it
from Scripture, and then prove that it is the last only that must needs be
professed in Baptism; and then they have done somewhat. 2. It will be found no
ordinary thing for Scripture, to call any common faith, a believing on or in
Christ. 3. That faith which is said to be in the ungodly, though in respect of
sides in genere, it be really faith, yet in respect of sides evangelica in
Christum Mediatorem, in specie, required in the Gospel, it is but Equivocally
called faith, or because that term to Mr. Blake is so abominable, let it be
Analogically a while, till I come to the proof, that it is but equivocally
such. The faith that God requires and makes his promises on, is only the
Faith called Justifying, or Saving; and the other is as a Mole to a Child, or a
Monster to a Man, which is so far defective ex errore naturae, non ex
intention generantis, that it does differ tota specie from a true man: and so
does this Faith differ in sp^cie morali from Evangelical Faith. 4. When Faith
is mentioned in a preceptive or promising way, the nature of the thing and the
course of Scripture shows, that we must understand it of that faith which God
owneth by precept or promise, and not of that which is but Analogically called
faith, and ex errore credentis is so monstrous that God never owned such by
precept or promise: I can find where this Monster is ascribed to many, as to
Simon Magus, and others; but let any show us where it is in hac specie
commanded by God, or has any Promise made to it, in his word. 5. However, it
will not I hope be denied, but that saving faith is the famosius analogatum vel
significatum, and therefore the Analogum per se positum, must be understood of
it, and not of the Analogical Monstrous faith. And therefore when in baptism we
must profess ^o Believe in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost it must be understood
of saving belief, till we have a limiting Exposition proved. 6. Yea further,
the nature of the Ordinance commands us this exposition: For when God has so
frequently promised pardon to believers in or on Christ, and then ordained
baptism to be the seal of this promise, and required that the person to be
baptized, profess to believe in Christ, it plainly follows, that we must
understand him to speak of the same faith in the promise, and about the seal,
and not of diverse sorts, unless he had so declared himself, which he no where
has done.

2. For the further proof of the Minor, I add that the same faith that is
mentioned in the ordinary Creed of the Church, i^ meant in the baptismal
profession, and to be required before baptism: this will be confessed, 1.
because the Creed it self has been this 1300 years at least professed before
baptism. 2. because the Creed it self is but the 3. fundamental baptismal
Articles mentioned Mat. 28.19. enlarged and explained on subsequent occasions
(as Sandford and Parker de descenju, have learnedly and largely proved, and
Grotius in Mat. 28.19. proves out of Tertullian, etc. that the creed was not
then in the form of words as now, though the same doctrine was used in other
words to the same uses. But (I assume) it is saving faith that is meant in the
common Creed by the phrases of believing in God the Father and in Jesus Christ,
and in the holy Ghost. This our divines do so copiously prove against the
Papists, that with most Protestants I may take it for granted.

Says Mr. Perkins on the Creed, Page 128. [ To believe is one thing, and to
believe in this or that, is another thing, and is contains in it three Points
or Actions of a Believer. 1. To know a thing. 2. to acknowledge the same. 3. To
put trust and confidence in it. And in this order must these three actions of
faith be applied to every Article following, which concerns any of the persons
in the Trinity. And this must be marked as a matter of speceal moment. For
always by adding them to the words following, we do apply the Article to our
selves, in a very comfortable manner. As, I believe in the Father; and do
believe that he is my father, and therefore I put my whole trust in him: and so
of the rest.] So far Perkins.

And it is worthy to be observed which Peter Martyr says Loc. Commun. Chapter 2. in
expofit. Symboli, page 421.] Age, sigillatim videamus, quid proprie hoc sibi
velit, Credo in Deu^ -- eu^ esse agnoscendum uti Deu^ i. e. Deum esse aeternu^
-- bonu^ ex quo bonu^ aliud quodvis oritur: Vnde, patet eum, qui quippiam tanti
aut pluris faciat quam Deum ipsum, dicere vere non posse, Credo in Deum. Si
enim eum ut summum bonu^ agnoscat, nihil ei unquam anteposueris. Neque etiam is
hoc recte credat, qui usquam alibi spem suam collocet: quum spes non sit nisi
boni cujusdam; si ergo Deus sit bonum unde quodvis bonum defluat, quicunque
aliunde boni quidp^am expectarit, in eum vere non crediderit. Praeterea qui
bona quibus fruuntur, suae justitiae, industriae, factis* sibi denique ipsis
accepta ferunt, sensum verumque (ut sic dicam) gustum hujus primae nostrae
sidei capitis non habent -- proculdubio ejusmodi homines non Deum proprie, sed
Dei loco phantasmata and sui cerebri inventa colunt. Res (mihi creed) maximi
momenti est verum Deum modo suo habere.]

Ursine ( and Paraeus) Chatech. Q. ^6. p. 140, 141. [ Diff^runt Credo Deum, and
Credo in Deum: Illud declarat fidem historiae, hoc fiduciam. Nam credo Deum est
credo quod sit Deus, and quod sit talis, quale^ se in verbo patefecit, viz etc.
Credo in deu^, est credo quod mihi sit Deus; hoc est, quod quicquid est and
habet, sit and habeat ad meam salutem. Et p. 360. Credere in Deu^, non est
tantu^ Deum agnoscere, sed etiam in Deo fiduciam habere. Alinqui etiam Diabolus
habet Notitiam Dei and promissionum ejus: sed non habet fiduciam: Ideo Notitia
ejus non est fides Justificans, sed Historica. And p. 191. Quid est Credo in
Jesum silium Dei unigenitum? Resp. Credo Jesus esse silium Dei -- sed hoc non
est satis, nam etiam Di^boli hoc credunt -- Itaque addendu^. 2. Credo mihi, hoc
est, in meam salute^ eum esse filiu^ Dei. p. 213 Credere in Christu^ Dominu^
nostru^; hoc est ita creed Christu^ Dominu^ nostrum, ut in eo fiduciam
collocemus. Cum igitur dicimus nos credere in Dominum nostrum, credimus --
Filium Dei mihi quoque esse Dominum, and me quoque esse ejus subditum h. e. me
quoque ejus sanguine esse redemptum and servari perpetuo, ac proinde me
obligatum ei esse ad gratitudinem; Dominium ejus mihi esse salutare; me servari
ab eo tanquam possessionem charissimam -- Page 229. Quid est credere in
Christum crucifixum? est credere Christum pro me factum esse maledictioni
obnoxium, ut me ab ea liberaret. So Page 240. to the Question, Quid est credere
in Christum mortuum^ he gives more largely the like Answer. And Page 268. he
gives the like answer to the Question, Quid est credere in Jesum Cristum, qui
ascendit in coelum?] I am loath to weary my self and others with citing
Testimonies in a known case. Its well known that this or to this purpose is the
common Exposition of the Protestants of the Creed and Baptismal Profession, and
that they maintain it against the Papists, to be true saving faith that is
meant in the words, (I believe in God the Father, in Jesus Christ, in the holy
Ghost) I doubt not to cite forty and forty more to prove this* when any shall
show me that it will be worth the labor. Yet I must say, that I approve not
fully of some of their descriptions of justifying or saving faith which they
hereupon give in: but yet they truly maintain that it means saving faith I
believe; and if they had but put the Wills Consent to the several Articles and
Relations and works of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and our Affiance
instead of a persuasion that they are ours etc. I should have yielded to their
descriptions. I conclude then, that believing in or on God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, is an Act of the Will, as well as of the Understanding, and is
saving faith: And therefore all that profess this, profess saving faith: But
all that will be baptized, must profess this, therefore.

3. It is agreed by all Divines that I know, Protestants and Papists, that to
believe in the Trinity, is not only to believe in Gods Essence, or the three
Persons, but also the Relations and great operations of each person for us: As
to believe in God the Father, is to believe in him as our Creator and Sovereign
Lord and chief Good. To believe in Jesus Christ, Is to believe in him as
Redeemer and Savior. To believe in the Holy Ghost, is to believe in him as a
Sanctifier (and as the great Witness and Agent of Christ.) Now it is most
certain, that to Profess, Assent and consent that God be my God, Christ my
Savior, the Holy Ghost my Sanctifier, is to profess Saving Faith. And bare
Assent is not meant in the words [believing in or on God] as is proved by our
Divines at large. And if present consent be expressed, saving Faith is expressed;
for no wicked man can truly consent that God shall be his God and chief good,
and Christ his Savior to save him from sin it self, as well as from
punishment, and the Holy Ghost his Sanctifier. I may truly say (according to
that of Peter Martyr, before cited) that never any but a true believer that had
Justifying Faith, did truly say, I believe in God; but speak falsely in so
saying. To take God for his God, is a thing that no man can truly do, but those
that are called effectually by his Saving Grace.

Argum. 3. The foregoing Argument was taken from the prerequisite Profession;
the next shall be taken from the very work it self, viz. the Presenting and
offering our selves to be baptized, and willingly receiving baptism: Thus,

If it be the very Nature or appointed Use of the external part of Baptism it
self (yea, essential to it) to signify and profes^ (among other things) the
saving faith and Repentance of the Baptized (being at age;) then true Baptism
cannot go without such a Profession. But the former is true: Ergo, so is the
later.

The Antecedent (which only requires proof) I prove thus: 1. It is of the
Instituted Nature of Baptism to be in general, a Professing sign, as well as an
Engaging sign de futuro: this I promise, as granted by all Christians that I
know of, that have written of Baptism. And then let us consider of the several
parts of the sign or external Ordinance, with the signification of each. That
it is essential to it to be significant, and Obligatory on our part, as well as
on Gods part, is commonly confessed. And 1. The Minister does baptize him into
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and the party does (by himself or
Parent) consent thereto; 1. Voluntarily offering himself to be so baptized; and
then 2. Voluntarily Receiving that Baptism. And his offer of himself hereto,
goes before the Ministers baptizing him; and his Reception of that Baptism is
Essential to it: so that Baptism essentially contains on his part a Signal
Profession of consent to that which is meant in the form used by the Minister [
I baptize thee into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:] And that is,
that God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be mine, and I be theirs, in the
Relations in which they are offered in the Gospel to Mankind: For all confess
that it is a Covenant that is here Sealed, and so a mutual consent which the
Signs are Instituted by Christ to signify. Christ offers himself to be
Related to me, as my Jesus Christ; and by offering my self to Baptism. and by
voluntarily receiving it, I do actually profess my Acceptance of his Offer,
that is, of himself so offered. God the Father offers himself to be my God
reconciled in Christ, and so my chief good; and by voluntary receiving Baptism,
I do signally profess my Acceptance of him so offered. The Holy Ghost is
offered to be my Sanctifier and Guide; and by voluntary Reception of baptism
into his Name, I do signally profess my Acceptance of him so offered (Of all
which I shall say more anon:) And if this be not the Faith which is Justifying
and saving, then I know not what is; yea, I may boldly say, then there is none
such: so that it it a most clear case, that baptism as baptism, according to
its Instituted Nature and use, does contain the Persons actual signal
Profession of present Assent to the truth of the Gospel, and Acceptance of God
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost as therein offered. And it contains (as our
Divines commonly maintain) an actual signal Profession that we there presently
consecrate, or Devote, or Dedicate our selves to God, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, in the foresaid Relations.

2. Another part of Baptism, is, the Ministers washing the Person, and the
Person first offering himself to be washed, and after actually receiving it,
does thereby signally profess his consent. Now this washing does essentially
signify our washing from our former filth of sin, together with the guilt; our
putting off the old man which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts of
the flesh. He that signally professes his present Consent to be washed by the
blood of Christ from his former filthiness and guilt, and to lay by the
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, does eo nomine profess saving faith and
Repentance; But all that are baptized with the baptism of Christ's Institution,
do by the very voluntary Reception of Baptism, so profess; therefore they do
thereby profess saving Faith and Repentance.

3. Quo ad modum; Its commonly confessed by us to the Anabaptists (as our
Commentators declare) that in the Apostles times the Baptized were dipped over
head in the water, and that this signified their Profession, both of believing
the Burial and Resurrection of Christ; and of their own present renouncing the
World and Flesh, or dying to sin and living to Christ, or rising again to
newness of Life, or being buried and risen again with Christ, as the Apostle
expounds in the forecited Texts, of Col. 3. and Romans 6. And though (as is
before said) we have thought it lawful to disuse the manner of Dipping, and to
use less water, yet we presume not to change the use and signification of it;
so then, He that signally professes to dye and rise again in baptism with
Christ, does signally profess Saving Faith and Repentance. But this do all that
are baptized according to the Apostolical practice: therefore, etc.

Object. about Nullity. But it will be objected, that this Argument goes so
high, that it will prove that all men's baptism is a Nullity, who do not profess
Saving Faith and Repentance, and so that they must be baptized again.

Answ. 1. This concerns the Opponents to answer, more than me.

2. There are no such persons, that I know of, and therefore they are not to be
rebaptized. We distinguish between the secret Intention of Professing and the
signal Interpretative Professing, which the Church is bound to take as really
intended: And so I say, that when Christ has Instituted baptism for such a
signification, if any man seek and receive that baptism, he does thereby
Interpretatively profess to seek and receive it as such, to the use and Ends to
which it was Instituted: seeing then all the baptized do apparently (as far as
the Church can judge) profess Saving Faith and Repentance, even by receiving
baptism, there is no room for the conclusion of this Objection. When they bring
us forth one baptized Person, who did not make such a signal Profession then we
shall give them a further answer.

3. If they did by word of mouth say, that they believe with a saving Faith,
these words are but signs of their minds; and whether counterfeit or not, the
Church cannot tell. And the same may be said of the Baptismal Action and
Reception.

4. Therefore the Church must not take the external Sacrament for a Nullity,
every time a man's secret Intentions agree not with his signal Profession; for
then we should not know whether ever we baptize any one. But when it is
discovered after, that he had other Intentions, that which was wanting must be
yet done, ( viz. his sincere Intentions, or saving faith) and not that which
was not wanting be done again, viz. The external Administration and Reception
of Baptism.

5. It is confessed to be essential to the Sacrament, that the Receiving of the
washing by Water, does signify the receiving of the souls washing by the Blood
of Christ. Now suppose I can prove it of abundance of Parents, that when they
presented their Children to Baptism, they did not understand that the water
signified the blood of Christ, or the washing our cleansing by it from sin, and
therefore had no such Intention in Baptism; would the Opponents baptize all
these again? Let them answer this for themselves, and they shall answer for us?
Or if the Case of Infant Baptism be quarrelled at, let them suppose that it
were the Person himself that had been so baptized; though I am satisfied, that
its all one.

Argum. 4. If we must baptize none that profess not their Consent to enter
themselves presently into the Covenant of Grace, with God in Christ, then we
must baptize none that profess not saving faith. But the former is true;
therefore etc.

Also, if the very Reception of Baptism be a Profession of present entering
into the Gospel Covenant with Christ, then is it a Profession of saving faith.
But so it is; therefore, etc.

This Argument was employed in the former: but the Medium that I now use, is,
the Identity of this covenanting and the profession of saving Faith, supposing
the Identity of Heart-covenanting and saving faith it self.

The Antecedent I think will be granted by many of the Papists, and it is the
common doctrine of the Protestants; and therefore, as to them, I need not prove
it; I confess, some of the Anabaptists, and some few others, do question
whether Baptism be a Seal of the covenant of Grace: But the quarrel is mostly,
if not only, about the bare word [ Seal]; for they confess that in sense, which
we mean by sealing, and particularly, they confess that we do in Baptism enter
into the covenant of God, and that it is a professing and engaging sign on our
part, as well as an exhibiting, notifying, confirming sign on Gods part.

The consequence is thus proved: He that does ore tenus, or by profession,
enter into the covenant of God, does profess saving faith; therefore if we must
not baptize them without a professed entering into covenant, then nether must
we baptize them without a profession of saving Faith. Only the Antecedent
requires proof: And if I prove either the Identity of professed covenanting and
professed true believing, or else the inseparableness of them, I prove the
Antecedent. But I shall prove the Identity or the inseparability; yea, I doubt
not of the first, which is the most full proof. And here we must first consider
what the Covenant is we are to enter. 1. And it is confessed it is the covenant
of Grace, and that there is but one covenant of Grace: This Mr. Blake
aknowledgeth, for all the mention of an outward covenant. 2. It is also a
confessed thing on all hands, that it is God that is the first Author and
Offerer of the covenant; that it is he that redeemed us, who made the promise
or covenant of Grace upon the ground of Redemption: and that this is frequently
called a covenant in Scripture, as it is a divine Law or constitution, without
respect to man's consent, (as Grotius has proved in the preface to his
Annotations on the Evangelists). Much more (out of doubt) it is, that it is
called a covenant before man consents, as it is a covenant offered, and not
yet mutually entered. In the former sense the word is taken properly, but in
another sense, and for another thing then in the later. But in the later it is
taken Tropically, viz. Synecdochically, it being but a covenant drawn up and
consented to by God conditionally, and offered to us for our consent. 3. It is
this same Covenant that is offered to us, and not another, that we are called
to consent to or enter in. And we cannot be truly said to enter into the
covenant of God, if we make a new one of our own, and lay by his; for that's
none of the Covenant of God: he never offered it, nor will he ever enter it. 4.
It is confessed by all, that there is an internal covenanting with God by the
heart, and an External covenanting, or engaging our selves by words or other
outward signs; and that this last is the Profession of the former. 5. And it is
confessed by all the world, that internal Covenanting is an Act of the Will,
and never of the understanding only or chiefly. 6. And this Act of the Will is
commonly by the custom of Nations called [ consent]: so that consenting to Gods
offered Covenant, is the very formal Act or our Internal covenanting with him;
and professing this consent, is the Signal or External Covenanting with him. 7.
We are I hope agreed what the Covenant of Grace is, as offered on Gods part (or
else its great pity) viz. that on the Title of Creation first, and Redemption
after, we being absolutely his own, it is offered to us, that God will be our
God (our chief Good and Reconciled Father in Christ,) that Christ will be our
Savior, (by Propitiation, Teaching and Ruling us,) even from the guilt and
filth or power of sin; that the Holy Ghost will be our indwelling Sanctifier;
if we heartily, or sincerely accept the Gift and Offer, That God will consent
to be our God, Christ to be our Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost to be our
indwelling Sanctifier, if we will but consent. This is no doubt, the Gift or
Covenant as offered.

These things being premised, I come to prove not only the inseparability,
(which is enough to my purpose) but even the Identity of Heart-covenanting and
saving faith, and of signal external covenanting, and the Profession of saving
faith.

To enter the Covenant of God unfeignedly in heart, is to accept God for my
God, Jesus Christ for my Savior, and the Holy Ghost for my Sanctifier, upon
the Gospel offer: To believe savingly, is to accept of God for my God, Jesus
Christ for my Savior, and the Holy Ghost for my sanctifier upon the Gospel
offer: therefore to enter the Covenant of God heartily, and to believe
savingly, are the same.

Moreover, to Covenant with God Externally, is to profess our Consent, that God
be our God, Christ our Savior, and the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier, on the
Gospel offer. To profess saving faith is to profess the same consent: therefore
external entering into the Covenant, and profession of saving faith, are the
same thing.

That this is the only true Covenant-entrance with God, is proved thus. It is
only this Covenant of Grace that God calls us to consent to, and offers
himself to enter with us: therefore it is only this covenant of Grace, whose
acceptance or consent to it, is our entrance into the Covenant of God. There
can be no covenanting in the present sense, but by two parties: But God does
not offer himself to us in any other Covenant but this, nor offer his consent
to any other. And its confessed, that God is the leading Party, prescribing to
man and imposing on him the terms of the Covenant, or Conditions which he must
perform. There is no possibility therefore of our entering into Gods covenant,
when it is none of his Covenant, or when it is against his Will, or without his
consent.

And that this is the nature of saving faith, is manifest: For 1. It is not a
mere act of the Intellect. Though Assent be the Initial Act (from which it has
often its name) yet it is not the whole, nor the perfecting Act: Our Divines most
commonly consent (except Camero and some few more) that faith is in the Will as
well as the Understanding: And its first Act in the Will must needs be velle
Christum oblatum or a consent to the Gospel-offer of God, Christ, and the Holy
Ghost: or an Acceptance of the Redeeming Trinity in the Relation as they are
offered to to be ours in the Gospel: After which follows Affiance, as Assent
precedes it. Our Assembly of Divines in their Catechisms say, That Faith in
Jesus Christ is a saving Grace, whereby we receive and rest upon him alone for
salvation, as he is offered to us in the Gospel. Or, as elsewhere [ to embrace
Jesus Christ freely offered to us in the Gospel] And the Wills receiving is by
Accepting or Consenting. Dr. Preston has at large showed in many of his
writings (as I have elsewhere showed) that Faith and Heart-covenanting with
Christ is all one. The Scripture calls Saving faith A receiving Christ Jesus
the Lord, John 1.12. Col. 2.5, 6 This therefore with almost all Protestant
Writers is past controversy. But if any will yet be stiff in it, that Faith is
only in the Intellect, (upon that common poor reason, that one Grace cannot be
in two faculties) it may suffice to them, that I prove the Inseparability of
saving faith and sincere Heart-covenanting, and so of the profession of each,
though I had not proved the Identity. And these same men do most earnestly
plead for the Inseparability themselves, maintaining at large, that Assent
(which only they call Faith) if true, is Inseparable from true consent, which
is the Heart-covenanting. Of which you may see Dr. Downame in his Treatise of
Justification, and in his Appendix against Mr. Pemble, at large.

But here we are quite off with the Papists; for they stiffly maintain, that
Faith is only the Understandings Assent; only the Schoolmen and others of them
confess, that it is a willing Assent: but it is one thing to will the Assent,
and another thing to will or Accept the Good that is contained in the promise
which we Assent to. This last is the thing in Question: And they tell us, that
this is not Faith, but Love. To which Maccovius and Chamier answer them, that
Faith and Love to Christ are all one; though Faith and Love to a distinct
object, be not so.

2. Hereupon we proceed to a further difference, which is, that the Papists
say, that Faith may be separated from Love; that Faith without Love does not
Justify; but only that Faith which is informed by Love. How far this supposed
great disagreement is merely Verbal, or Real, I leave to the judicious Reader
to judge, when he has considered, that what we call Faith simply, they call
Fides formata Charitate: That the Act of Faith which is in the Will, the
Papists call by the name of Love, and not of Faith, yet both agree de re ipsa,
that this is the thing which is necessary to Justification; and we confess as
well as they, that mere Assent (of some sort) is separable from Love. But then
the mischief is, that the Papists by false wording or naming these Graces, are
carried to the misinterpreting of many Scriptures, if not to many erroneous
Doctrines also. And when they read of Faith simply, they commonly take it for
mere Assent. And so they are led into error in the present controversy. For
when they find that he that Believes must be Baptized; they conclude presently
with Bellarmine, that sides, non charitas facit Christianum: he that assenteth
is a Believer, and therefore may be baptized. But our Divines have so
frequently and so voluminously confuted this conceit, and proved against them
that faith is in the Will as well as the understanding, and that [ to Believe
in] signifies to Accept, or rest upon, or have Affiance in, and that Faith and
Love are inseparable, (yea true and through Assent,) that I shall not needlessly
stand to do again a work so often and fully done. And themselves confess, that
when Faith is mentioned as Justifying, it includes the act of the Will, (which
they call Charity:) And sure we have often proved against them, that this is the
faith that is meant in Gods Covenant, and in our Baptismal Profession and
Covenant with him, and in the Creed.

In a word, that Faith which is meant by God in the Covenant offered, must be
meant by us in our profession of Accepting this offer. But it is a true saving
Faith, which has a promise of Remission, which is meant by God in the Covenant
offered; therefore this must be meant by us, etc. The Major is clear; because
else we do but Equivocate with God, and we do not Accept the same thing that he
offers. The Minor is clear: in that the Covenant of Grace is but one, and
that one Covenant offers Christ and Life to all that will accept him: so that
the Acceptance puts us into a participation of Christ and Life, The Covenant
offers pardon of sin to all that Believe or Receive Christ; therefore it is a
saving faith that it means, because it annexeth saving special Benefits.

To these I add another Argument: which is this:

The hearty Acceptance of the Gift, is the first and principal part of our
Heart-covenanting with God: The hearty Acceptance of that same Gift, is saving
faith; therefore the first and principal part of our Heart-covenanting with
God, is the same thing as saving Faith. The like I say of the Professions of
each. Or thus: Our Heart-covenanting is the principal condition of the Promise
(or Gods part of the Covenant:) Our saving Faith is the principal condition of
the Promise; Therefore our Heart-covenanting and our saving faith are the same.
The Major I prove by the Medium of the foregoing Argument. Our hearty
Acceptance of the Gift, is the Principal condition of the Promise. But this
hearty Acceptance of the Gift, is the first and principal part of our
Heart-covenanting: therefore our Heart-covenanting is the principal condition
of the Promise (or the first and chief part of that covenating at least). The
Major is proved, 1. In that it is a free Gift: And our Divines, against the
Doctrine of Justification by Works, or Merit, have fully proved, that its so
free, that Acceptance is the condition of our Interest. 2. And the free Offers
of the Gospel fully confirm it, Isa. 55 1, 2.3. Rev. 22.17. etc. The main point
that is necessary for me to insist on, is the proof of the Minor, which yet is
so plain from what is said, and the very nature of the Gospel offer, that one
would think it should need no more to be said to it: But that I perceive some
few do misapprehend the nature of our covenanting with God, as if it were only
an Agreement or Covenant to do somewhat for the future, that God may do
somewhat for us for the future: And this gross mistake (gross indeed, in the
very point of the Gospel promise, which is our only tenure of our Title to
Life), does animate abundance of dark confused quarrelsom contradictions and
oppositions, which I have had on this point. It is a matter of very sad
consideration, that any Preacher of the Gospel had need to be persuaded, that
the first and great part of the Covenant of Grace offered by God, and accepted
by us, does consist in present Giving and Receiving, not only in mutual
Promises for hereafter. The Gospel is a most free Deed of Gift: some of its
benefits it actually gives, on condition of mere Acceptance to be presently
possessed; and some of them, on condition too, but in a waiting obediential way,
to be hereafter possessed. In respect to the presently given benefi^s, the Gospel
is a Deed of Gift presently entitling us to them, and our present acceptance is
the condition. But in regard of the future Benefits, the Gospel is also a Deed
of Gift, but gives not present Title, or at least not so full, and therefore
requires future conditions, as it gives future Benefits. At the present in the
New Covenant, God gives himself to be our God, Christ to be our Savior, Head
and Husband, the Holy Ghost to be our Sanctifier; and also the present actual
pardon of our sins; the Justification of our Persons; the Adoption of Sons; the
indwelling Spirit; a Right to a beneficial use of the Creature; and a Right to
the Inheritance of Everlasting life, so far, that if we should die that hour,
we should be saved. All these God offered us at the present on condition of our
Accptance, or consent. This consent is our Heart-covenanting; so that this
first and great part of the Covenant consists but in the present Giving and
taking of all these Benefits: which in a word the Apostle expresses 1 John
5.11, 12, by the words [ Christ and eternal Life] God has given us eternal
life, and this life is in his Son: He that has the Son has life, and he that
has not the Son has not life]. The remaining part of the Benefits are our
future helps of Grace, Pardons, Protections, final Absolution at Judgment, and
eternal Glory. All these we have a right to at our first Justification, but it
is a right to be continued only on some future conditions, that is, on the
condition of our continuance in the Faith which we begun, and of our renewed
faith and Repentance, and sincere Gospel-Obedience, which is to be performed in
a receiving way. Now its true, that as to these future conditions, we do not
actually perform them in our covenating, but promise them: as God does not then
actually give us the very Blessings now mentioned, but promise them. But as to
all the first expressed great Benefits, as God did before our Consents but
promise and offer them, but in our covenanting or consent does actually give
them; so we do by our covenanting in heart (which is nothing but our consenting
or accepting) perform the conditions of Gods promise; and thus our very
covenanting with God is the same thing as our fulfiling the conditions of the
Covenant, that is, of Gods conditional Deed of Gift, which before gave us
Christ and Life if we would accept them, and now gives them actually upon our
acceptance. And I should hope that few Protestants think that our actual
Justification and Adoption, our Interest in God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost,
are suspended upon any future condition, which in our covenanting with God we
must promise to perform. I think I have made it plain now that our Heart
covenanting with God is principally our present consent that Christ and Life
shall be ours; God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost ours; and that this is nothing
else but Justifying faith; and therefore that they are all one; and therefore
the Profession of each of them is all one: and so that where one is required,
the other is so, being indeed not another.

Argum. 5. We must not baptize any without the profession of that faith and
Repentance which are made the condition of Remission of sins. But only the
faith called justifying or saving, and the concomitant true Repentance, are
made the condition of Remission of sins: therefore we must baptize none without
the profession of that justifying faith, etc.

The Minor needs no proof. And the Major I prove thus. If we must not baptize
any but intentionally for present Remission of sin, then must we not baptize
any without a profession of that faith and Repentance which is the condition of
Remission. But the former is true: therefore so is the later.

The consequence is past all doubt: for else we should Imagine that men may
have present Actual pardon without that Faith and Repentance which are the
condition of it; which subverteth much of the Gospel. The Antecedent I prove
thus; If God has Instituted no Baptism but what is Intentionally for the
present Remission of sin, then we must not baptize any but Intentionally for
the present Remission of sin: But the former is true; therefore so is the
later. I say [intentionally] in contradistinction from [Eventually, or
certainly and Infallibly attaining that end.] Where further note, That I speak
not of Gods absolute Decrees, as if his Intention in that sense could be
frustrate; but of his ends as Legislator, speaking of him after the manner of
men. but principally of the Instituted ends of his Ordinances; that is, the
Ends which he requires the Minister and people to use them for; and so it is
Our Intention principally that I mention. As the Gospel it self is said to be
Intentionally to save men; and though it condemn most, that is besides the
first Intention, and but by Accident. And though this be principally to be
spoken of the prescribed, imposed Intentions of their Conversion and Salvation;
yet Christ is pleased in the Word to ascribe such Intentions to himself as
attain not their ends: as professing that he came not into the world to condemn
the world, but that the world through him might be saved: that is, To condemn
them is not his direct principal Intent, but only on supposition of their
wilful final rejecting of him: And this he speaks partly in the habit of a
Rector or Promiser, and partly as man, or after the manner of men: And of the
intention imposed on us, there is no doubt.

Now I shall prove the Antecedent (for the consequence is past doubt) And first
we are confirmed in this truth, because the Opponent (whom it concerns) has
not proved any other Baptism instituted by God, but what is for present
Remission of sins. If they can show us one Text of Scripture that speaks of
any other, we shall give up all the Cause; but yet they have not done it that I
know of. In the mean time we shall prove the contrary. God has instituted but
One Baptism: that one Baptism is for the present Remission of sins; therefore
God has instituted no Baptism but what is for present Remission. The Major is
proved from Ephesians. 4.5. There is one Baptism. In the Minor we take the words [
for Remission] not to speak of somewhat accidental, or to be intended only by
the Administrator, uncertainly, or but sometime. And I prove it from Scripture,
Acts 2.38. Repent and be Baptized every one of you in in the name of Jesus
Christ for the Remission of sins, and ye shall Receive the Gift of the Holy
Ghost.] As Remission is here made the end of Baptism, so it is present
Remission: For. 1. It is such as is the consequent of the Repentance which
Peter exhorts them to; but that was present Remission. 2. It was to precede
the giving of the Holy Ghost, in the sense there mentioned; therefore it was
present Remission. The great Reasons that are brought to the contrary I shall
answer afterward, and more fully then prove the vanity and foul consequents of
their opinion, that make a future Remission to be the intended end of our
Administration of Baptism: and therefore I must desire the Reader to suspend
his expectations of my further Reasons a Natura rei, till their due place. Beza
in loc. says [ in nomen Christi] id est, dans Christo nomen, cujus mortis,
sepulturae ac resurrectionis simus in Baptismo participes, cum peccatorum
Remissione. Nec enim hoc declarat formulam Baptismi, sed finem and scopum:] So
Deodate, [ In the name] viz. Not only for a Mark of our Profession of the
Gospel, but also to participate of his spiritual virtue in the washing away of
your sins, with which he accompanies and ratifyeth the external Ceremony in
those who are his:] Bullinger in loc. says, [ Baptizari in nomine Domini Jesu
Christi, est Baptismatis signo testari se Christo credere ad Remissionem
peccatorum. 1. Mark, it is not only an engagement to Believe hereafter, but the
Profession of a present Faith. 2. And that not a common faith, but that which
has Remission of sin. 3. And this was not an accidental separable use of
Baptism: but he makes this the very exposition of Baptizari in nomine Jesu
Christi. And next adds, [ Vel est in Baptismo per Christum recipi in
gratiam.] Mark then, that even Baptism into the name of Christ it self does
signify that we are received into Gods favor by Christ: And thus he expounds
the Covenant in the next words: [ Est enim Baptismus pactum seu foedus gratiae,
quod init inter baptizandum nobiscum Christus.] And that it is a Professing
sign of our true Repentance, he shows before [ Et rectissime conjungitur
Poenitentia and Baptismus, quia Baptismus Poenitentiae signum est:]

Marlorate in loc. goes further, and shows that Remission does in order go
before Baptism, and multitudes of our Divines say the like, as may be seen in
the abundant citations of them by Mr. Gataker against Doctor Ward and Bishop
Davenant [Tametsi in contexu verborum Baptismus Remissionem hic praecedit,
ordine tamen sequitur: quia nihil aliud est (Mark nihil aliud) quam bonorum
quae per Christum consequimur obsignatio, ut in conscientiis nostris data
sint.] The words are Calvin's in loc. owned by Marlorate.

The same Call. in loc. to show that Remission of sin goes before baptism,
adds Caeterum longa expositione non indiget, quod baptizari jubet in
remissionem ^eccatorum: Tametsi enim semel homines sibi reconciliav^t Deus in
Christo, non imputando illis peccata, 2 Cor. 5 19. and nunc hujus
reconciliationis fide^ cordibus nostris per spiritu^ suum imprimit; quia tamen
Baptismus sigillu^ est, quo hoc benefic^u^ nobis confirmat, adeoque arrka and
pignus adoptionis nost^ae, merito dari nobis in remissionem peccatorum dicitur.
Nam quia fide percipimus Christi dona, fidei autem confirmandae and augendae
Baptismus adminiculum est, illi tanqua inferiori medio remissio pecc^t^^u^,
quae fidei est effectus, annectitur.] I hope I need not stand to show what
Calvin here supposes the use of Christ's Baptism to be or what faith it
presupposes. And that you may see what he takes to enter the very Definition
of Baptism he adds, [ Porro non est sumenda ex hoc loco Definitio Baptismi,
quia ejus partem duntaxat Petrus attingit. Per Baptismum (ut Paulus docet)
crucifigitur vetus homo noster, ut in vitae novitatem resurgamus, Rom 6.4, 8.
Item induimus Christum ipsum, Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor. 12. and passim docet Scriptura
esse Poenitentiae quoque symbolum.] Indeed Calvin does often fall upon the
Papists, that make baptism to have no force against any sin but those before
Baptism: But 1. He makes actual Baptism ever to be first for washing away our
past and present sin and not then to pardon future sin, but to put the person
into an estate wherein he has a remedy for future sin, at hand, and certain:
2. And he intends, that Baptism (as reviewed by faith) afterward may be
useful to confirm our Belief of Forgiveness of renewed sin: which made
Bellarmine fall upon him and other Protestants, as holding that the very
remembrance of Baptism is effectual for pardon of sin.

Also, on the same 38. verse Calvin takes special notice of the order of Peter's
words, and gives it us as the sum of Christianity [ Primo hortatus fuerit
Judaeos ad poenitentiam: Deinde eroxerit eos veniae fiducia: nam peccatorum
remissionem illis remisit. 3. Quia non reconciliamur Deo, nisi intercedente
Christi morte, nec aliter quam ejus sanguine peccata nostra expiantur and
delentur, ideo neminatim Petrus ad ipsum nos revocat. Quarto loco, baptismum
ponit tanquam figillum quo gratiae promissio confirmatur. Quare in his paucis
verbis totam fere habemus Christianismi summam. Nempe, ut homo sibi renuncians
and mundo, totum se Deo addicat: Deinde ut gratuita peccatorum remissione a
reatu mortis liberetur, adeoque adoptetur inter filios Dei.

Piscator in loc. says, [(...)] Id est in Testimonium Remissionis peccatorum:
ut habentes scilicet Testimonium Divinum quod Deus vobis remiserit peccata
vestra propter Jesum Christum in que^ creditis: Non autem ad consequendam
Remissione^ peccatorum per hoc medium sive instrumentu^. [Baptismus est medium
sen instrumentu^ quo Spiritus sanctus utitur, ad fidem confimandu^.] Vid. ultr.

The next Text we shall cite is Act. 22.16: [ Arise and be baptized, and wash
away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.] Though the Papists vainly
would hence gather, that Baptism does wash away sin ex opere operato; yet we
may well gather, 1. That it washes it away by Confirmation and Obsignation. 2.
And this is the instituted use of Baptism, and not to signify what may or will
be done hereafter. Calvin on this Text says, [ non dubium est, quin fideliter
rudimentis Pietatis Paulum imbuerit Ananias: neque enim verae fidei expertem
baptizasset.] After he shows, that it was a confirmation of the pardon that
Paul had before.

Joh. 3.5 Exce^t a man be born of water and of the spirit, he shall not enter
into the kingdom of God. Though we are agreed against the Papists, that Christ
intends not here to place the same necessity in Baptism, as there is in or of
the New birth by the spirit; yet it is by most acknowledged, that Christ does
here speak of the New Birth, as signified by Baptism; and so has respect to
Baptism as the ordinary confirming sign. And so the text fully shows us, that
Baptism is instituted to be the sign of our present Regeneration; Or else it
could not be said, that we must be born [ of water and the spirit.] And that
Remission of sin is here included, I have said somewhat to prove in a Treat.
against infidelity, Part. 4. initio. Calvin says, most are of Chrysostoms
mind, who took it to be meant of Baptism. (And so did the generality of ancient
Expositors) And though himself and some more think otherwise; yet as long as
they take it to be a Metonymical expression, the sign being put for the thing
Signified, it does as well acquant us with the use of Baptism, as if it were a
proper speech.

Bullinger in loc. says [ H^nc Christi sententiam omnes pene de Baptismo
interpretantur.] Beza believes, that the Text speaks of Baptism, either
Christ's, or some other, but rather Christ's. Piscator on the text has these
words. [ Nam ipsa Baptismi perceptione salute^ consequimur: quu^ non sit
institutus nisi ad Remissionem peccatorum sanguine Christi partam, itemque
Regenerationem spiritus testandam. -- Baptismus additur fidei, non quod parem
rationem ac vim hab^at, sed quod ad fidem testandam and confirmandam
adhibeatur. Ita hic Baptismus additur spiritui, quod fores testetur id quod
spiritus intus peragit] though he rather interpret the Text as Calvin.

I have showed before from Mar. 1.4. and other places, that John's Baptism was
for Remission of sins; that is, (says Gataker) to seal us the pardon which we
have received. And if the very Scripture description of it was [The Baptism of
Repentance for Remission of sins] then it was not an accidental or separable
use, as to the Intention which the Administrator and Receiver are bound to. And
justly does Beza in Mat. 1.4. fall upon Erasmus sharply, for saying [(...). [
In Praepositio Praeparationem significat non effectum; because Repentance and
Remission (says Beza) cannot be separated; so that he took it not to be a
common preparatory Repentance, or Baptism.

Piscator on Mar. 1.4. says, its called the Baptism of Repentance for
Remission of sin, because John preached Remission of sin to the penitent and
believers; praecipiebatque ut in hujus rei testimonium atque professionem
baptizarentur. And that its called (...), id est, Qui resipiscentiae
testificandae atque profitendae adhibebatur. Neque enim baptizabat nisi eos qui
confessione pecatorum edita, resipiscentiam suam testatam reddebant:] Caeterum
nomine Resipiscentiae per Synecdoche membri simul intelligenda est fides in
Christum;] And he expounds the words [(...)] thus, Id est, praed cabat baptisma
resipiscentiae quod ad Remissionem peccatorum pertinet, seu destinatum est, ut
Act. 2.38. sed hoc est recte intelligendu^: viz ad Remissionem peccatoru^
testificandam sive obsignandam: non autem ad illam consequendam hoc opere. [And
on Mal. 3.11. Observe he shows that Christ's Baptism and John's are the same, in
that both have the same end and use, viz. Obsignatio Remissionis peccatorum and
Resipiscentiae, that is, as already extant, as his Judgment is often delivered.
As in his Schol. on ver. 11. he expressly says [ In resipiscenti^m, id est, in
testimonium Resipiscentiae, ut nimirum susceptione baptismi testatum faciatis
vos resipuisse, and indies magis ac magis resipiscere velle: sed simul hic
intelligendum, Joannem baptizasse quoque in remissionem peccatorum, hoc est, in
remissionem peccatorum, ut nimirum nomine Dei testatum faceret resipiscentibus
and in Christum credentibus peccata ipsis remissa esse propter Christum agnum
Dei. -- ]

And I pray mark his observation on Mat. 3.6, 8, 10. concluding our present
Question: [ Baptismus nulli adulto conferendus est, nisi prius ediderit
confessionem peccatoru^ and fidei in Christu^, ac praeterea promissionem
sanctae vitae;] which he proves. And as he shows that it is Saving Faith and
Repentance that he means, which has the promise of remission; so the promise
of a holy Life cannot be sincerely made by any till he have a Regenerate heart.
See Doctor Hammond on Mark 1.4.

Calvin on Mat. 3.6. says, ergo ut se rite ad Baptismum offerant homines,
peccatorum [Confessio ab illis requiritur; alioqui enim quam inane esset
ludicrum tota actio!] If I had charged the guilty so, of making the whole work
of Baptism ludicrous, they would have been highly offended: Calvin shows his
judgment, that it is a true special Repentance which he would require this
Confession to manifest: And he adds, [ Notandum est de adultis hic verba
fieri, quos scimus non promiscue in Ecclesiam esse admittendos, nec Baptismo
initiandos esse in corpus Christi nisi examine prius habito,] viz. about the
said Repentance and Faith.

Paraeus on Mat. 3.5. shows that the order was that Confession as a testimony
of true Repentance go first, and then Baptism for Remission of sins [ confessio
post ponitur; sed (...) constructionis -- Confesii baptizabantur: pro, Cum
confessi essent peccata, baptismum accipiebant Sacramentum remissionis
peccatorum. Non prius baptizabantur, postea confitebantur -- Auditores igitur
primo in testimonium Resip^scentiae confitebantur sua peccata, deinde
baptizaba^tur: tertio, fide Baptismi fructum suscipiebant Remissione^
peccatorum. Docet hic locus varia. 1. Quod Baptismus sit sacramentu^
Remissionis peccatorum, ex part Dei; spondet enim Deus ceu jurejurando,
baptizatis remissionem gratuitam peccatorum propter Christum. 2. Quod sit etiam
sacramentum Resipiscentiae, ex part nostra. Restipulamur enim Deo fidem and
poenitentiam pro tanto beneficio. (That is, both profess it at present, and
engage to continue in it; answering the interrogation Credis? with a Credo, and
not only a Credam.) 3. Ad Sacramenta non esse admittendos Impoenitentes; (He
speaks of the Repentance which had the promise of Remission) -- Hoc enim damus
(Anabaptistis) in Ecclesiam suscipiendos and baptizandos non esse, nisi praevia
confessione Fidei and Poenitentiae (by the adult:) quem morem and vetus
servavit Ecclesia and nostrae hodie observant, si vel Judaeus vel Turca adultus
baptismo sit ini^i indus.

And on verse 7. he says (which will be harsh to our Opponents) Ex concione
ipsa datur intelligi, multos illerum simulata poenitentia etiam baptismu^
petivisse: Horum hypocrisin cum non ignoraret, non passus eos latere in turba,
nec ad baptismum indignos admisit sed acri objurgatione, hortatione, and
comminatione ad seriam resipiscentiam extimulat and ad baptismum praeparat.
(where he goes three steps beyond our Opposers; who 1. will not have us
require as necessary so much as a show of this Repentance. 2. Much less the
sincerity of it; 3. nor to deny them Baptism as unworthy till they are
prepared.) After he shows, that Hypocrites will creep in among the good: partly
such as we cannot discern, and those are to be left to the judgment of God;
partim manifesti, quos Pastores admittere non debent sine examine, ne
Sacramenta prost^tuant, sibi and Ecclesiae reatum attrahant, (How little do our
confident opposers fear this!) -- Facite fructus dignos Poenitentiae. Pro,
Cavete, mihi, vel Deo hypocrisi illudere, sed videte ut veram poenitentiam
agatis, ab erroribus and peccatis vestris, and si^ baptismum Novae Ecclesiae
sacramentum suscipiatis. Fructus poenitentiae vocat, ut palam erroribus, sectis
and vitiis suis renuncient, and emendatione vitae se novos homines deinceps
testentur. Non enim satis est foris poenite^tia^ simulare, quod etia^
hypocritae solent, etc. [And p. 56. against Maldonate, he proves the Baptism
of Christ and John all one; and when Maldonate says that John baptized [ in
poenitentium baptismus praecedebat, and poenitentia sequebatur] (confessing,
that in Christ's Baptism Repentance precedes,) he answers, [that it is false;
[ Non] is put for [ Nam] in that exceeding false printed Cople.
Nam etiam in Joannis baptismo praecedebat poenitentia, sequebatur baptismus.]

If then it be certain that John's Baptism was for present Remission of sins,
even the obsignation of a Remission already conferred by the promise, it will
be at least as evident that Christ's Baptism is so to, and accordingly to be
administered.

Hence it is, that the Faith which the Apostles before they baptized men did
persuade them to, was still a Justifying Faith, (as Act. 13.38, 39. and passim)
as that which they were to annex the Seal of Baptism to, (or to Gods promise on
men's believing.)

2 Pet. 1.9 It is said of the barren ungodly Professor, [ that he has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins;] where I take it for a clear
case that it is the Baptismal Washing which the Apostle there intends,
wherein all profess to put off the Old Man, and to be washed from their former
filthiness. For I suppose we shall be loath to yield that it was an actual
cleansing, either of Remission or Mortification, which the Apostle means,
left we grant that men may fall from such a state: And therefore it must be a
Sacramental washing or Cleansing, wherein the matter was appearingly and
sacramentally transacted. From whence it is plain, that the Apostle took it for
granted, that as all the Baptized were visibly Church Members, so were they all
visibly washed from their old sins; which shows both what was their own
Profession, and what was the stated end and use of the Ordinance. The Apostle
says not that [he has forgotten that he promised or engaged to be purged from
his old sins,] but that [he was purged] from them. Pareus in loc. says, [ A
veteribus peccatis purgatum, h. e. se esse baptizatum: seu se accepisse in
Baptismo purgationis signaculum. Omnes enim baptizati debent purgari a
peccatis, sicut dicuntur induere Christum, Gal. 3. mori cum Christo, Romans 6.
sensus est: Qui se volutant in sceleribus, non recordantur se baptizatos esse:
Abnegant ergo Baptismum suum.] 1 Cor. 6 11. The Apostle says of the visible
Church of Corinth, [ such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, etc.] where it is evident, that all the
visible members of the Church are visibly washed, sanctified, justified, (of
which Text I shall speak more anon.) And I thik it is clear, that by Washing
here he has some respect to their Baptism.

I shall not stand now to add any more texts, because we shall have occasion
anon to do it; but may hence conclude, that till one text of Scripture be
produced from whence it may be proved, that Christ did institute such a thing
as Baptism, which was not for the present signal Remission of sin, we must take
the contrary for granted, because we have so many texts that tell us that his
Baptism was for Remission of sin.

I shall only here add, that the very sign it self which is the washing of the
body by water, does plainly show that the washing of the soul by the blood of
Christ, is the thing signified; and the present actual use of the sign is to
signify the presence and actuality of the thing signified. So that I conclude,
that there is no Baptism to be administered without a Profession of saving faith
and Repentance foregoing, because there is no Baptism that ever Christ
appointed but what is for the obsignation of Remission of sin which is the
consequent.

Mr. Blake page 171. recites some words of mine containing this Argument,
thus: that faith to which the promise of Remission and justification is made,
must also be sealed to: Or that faith which is the condition of the promise, is
the condition in foro Dei of the Title to the seal: But it is only solid true
faith that is the condition of the promise of Remission: therefore it is that
which gives Right in foro Dei to the seal] Who would think now but Mr. Blake
had given some substantial answer to this and other Arguments, when himself and
some others are so confident of the sufficiency of them? His answer is this [
To this I have answered, faith is not sealed to but Remis^ion of sins or
salvation upon condition of faith; and when I come to speak of the sealing of
Sacraments, I shall God willing make this more evident, that the sacrament, qua
seal, immediately respects our privileges not duties] Reply. 1. Is here one
word of answer to any real part of the Argument? Is not this answer as little
to the matter as if he had talked of another subject. I think it my Duty to say
that Ministers of the Gospel do but proclaim to the Church the matter of our
common lamentation, and the enemies joy, when some confidently publish such
kind of Disputations, and others are satisfied with them. And I must say, if
all were such, they should never more be angered with one word of mine, in
opposition to their assertions, though they would maintain that the Crow is
white.

2. To that useless touch that he has on a word (whose following explication
might have spared him his labor) I may say that our Divines have ordinarily
maintained hitherto that there is a mutual covenanting between God and us (and
no man more then Mr. Blake) and that in the Sacrament there is a mutual
sealing; the receiving being our seal, as the Act is Gods.

Arg 6. If Baptism be instituted to be a seal of the Righteousness of that
faith which we have being yet unbaptized, then must we Baptize none that
profess not a justifying faith (and their seed) But the Antecedent is true;
therefore so is the consequent.

The reason of the consequence is evident in that we must use Baptism only
according to its nature, and to its instituted ends.

The Antecedent is proved thus: Circumcision was instituted to be a seal of the
righteousness of that faith which they had being yet uncircumcised: therefore
Baptism is instituted to be a seal of the righteousness of that faith which we
have yet unbaptized; the consequence will not be denied by them whom we now
deal with: Because they confess that Baptism succeeds Circumcision. The
Antecedent is evident in Romans 4.11. It being so expressly said of Abraham, to
whom circumcision was first given. I cannot imagine what they will say, unless
it be by recourse to the Anabaptists shift, to say, that Circumcision was
instituted to this end indeed, to Abraham himself, and others that were
sincere, but not to all that had right to it. But God here tells us, the
established use and end of his Ordinance; and in such Relations, the end is
inseparable. And as God has not made many sorts of Baptisms or Circumcisions,
so neither many nearer inconsistent ends, (or separable.) And we are likest to
know the true end of the institution, where the institution and first example
are reported to us.

Calvin in loc says [ Hic porro habemus insignem locum de commum sacramentorum
usu: sunt enim (test Paulo) sigilla, quibus and Dei promissiones cordibus
nostris quodammodo imprimuntur, and sancitur gratiae certitudo, -- Quare maneat
hoc fixum, sacra symbola esse ^l est monia quibus gratiam suam Deus cordibus
nostris -- obsignat. Gratuita Reconciliatio in Deo in signo illo inclusa fuit
-- Duae deniq^e ut Baptismi hodie sunt, ita olim Circumcisionis erant parts;
nempe tam vitae novitatem quam peccatorum Remissionem testari:] But he shows
next, that all the circumcised had not Justice; (that is actual faith and
sanctity) first giving instance in Isaac an Infant.

Says Aritius in loc. Hanc Justitiam obsignavit hoc est, illu^ certum reddidit
de faedere inito and acceptatione gratuita.

Says Piscator in loc. Sicut olim Circumcisio signum fuit federis gratiae, and
sigillum quo credentibus obsignata fuit Justitia fidei, hoc est quo illi
certiores sunt redditi, sibi rem^ss^ esse peccata prepter futuram
satisfactionem Christi, ac proinde se habere Deu^ prepitu^ ac saventee^; it^
^ctera quoque sacrame^ta, etc. similiter and finis seu scopus omnium
sacramentorum unus idemque est, viz. Obsignatio justitiae Fidei, quae vulgo
dicitur fidei confirmatio.]

Paraeus in loc. says, [ Ita signum fuit dantis and accipientis respectu,
etc.] Et [ justitia fid^i est Remissio peccatorum fide accepta propter
redemptionem Christi] Et [ sic sacramenta non sunt instituta justificandis, sed
justificatis, h. e. non infidelibus, sed conversis. Non igitur nisi conversione
and fide sumi debent; secus sigilla justitiae esse cessant. Quid enim non
hathentibus fidem and justitiam obsignarem?] Yet following Calvin, he next
shows, that sometime Righteousness does follow after and not precede,
instancing in Isaac, which none denies. For Infants are baptized on the
account of their Parents faith, and not their own; and the adult often profess
the faith which they have not.

Note also here, besides Paraeus his express decision of the main controversy,
how he takes the converted justified and believers for the same; and the
unconverted, unjustified, and Infidels, for the same. Ragerus a little quarrels
with Paraeus, and (as many Lutherans do) would make Abraham's example no
standing Rule; that the Sacrament begets not the first Grace; [ sed non
sequitur, in hoc subjecto Circumcisio non habuit virtutem operativam gratiae
primitus conferendae: ergo in nullo habuit: imo vero aliis gratiae divinae
adhuc destitutis medium esse potuit gratiae primitus conferendae.] so others of
that way. But as we distinguish between what God may do by Baptism, and what he
has Instituted it to do; so the very judgment of these Lutherans and many
Papists, who will have Sacraments to confer Grace where it is not, is against
the opinion that we now resist. For it is not any lower effect only, but saving
Justification or Remission, which these make to be the present effect of it.

Dr. Willet in loc. says [ Circumcision then did not confer upon him that
Grace which he had not, but did confirm and stablish him in the grace and faith
received, the Sacraments then non Instituta sunt justificandis, sed
justificatis, are not Instituted for those which are to be justified, but for
them which are already justified. Parae.]

Peter Martyr is larger, and makes these words of Paul to be the definition of
a Sacrament, to be a Seal of the Righteousness of faith. Much out of them might
be cited for the cause in hand, but that I must avoid prolixity. So much shall
serve for that Argument.

Argum. 7. We must Baptize none but those that are first professed Disciples of
Christ (and their children, who are also Disciples) but none are professed
Disciples of Christ that profess not saving faith in Christ; therefore we may
not Baptize any that profess not saving faith in Christ.

The Major is proved from Matthew 38.19. Go Disciple me all Nations, batizing
them.] As for those that say, they are Discipled by baptizing, and not before
baptizing. 1. They speak not the sense of that Text. 2. Nor that which is true
or rational, if they mean it absolutely as so spoken; else why should one be
baptized more then another. 3. But if they mean that by heart-covenant, or Gods
Accep^ance and promise they are Disciples before, but not so completely till
the covenant be sealed and solemnized, as a soldier is not so signally a
soldier till he be listed, nor a King till he be crowned so fully a King, or a
man or woman so fully married till it be solemnized in the Congregation; in
this sense they say the same that I am proving: Men must be first Disciples by
the professed consent, before they are declared such by the Seals or public
sacramental solemnization.

And that only the professors of saving Faith and their Infants are Disciples,
may appear by a perusal of the Texts of Scripture that use this word; and it
w^ll not only be found that this which I maintain is the ordinary use of the
Word (which should make it so also with us) but that no Text can be cited where
any others are called the Disciples of Christ. For the Major and Minor both
observe Piscators Definition of Baptism (on Mat. 28.19.) Baptismus est
sacramentum novi Testamenti, quo homines ad Ecclesiam pertinentes ex mandato
Christi cultui very Dei, qui est Pater, Filius and Spiritus Sanctus, per
ministros verbi consecrantur, and in fide Remissionis peccatorum, and spe vitae
aeternae confirmantur.] And he proves this Description per parts: 1. That its
a Sacrament. 2. That it belongs to those that pertain to that Church, and
that they only must be baptized qui ecclesiam fuerint ingressi, ac fidem
evangelii professi, which he proves from Mark 16.16. he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved. Vult Ergo (says he) ut prius constet de alicuius fide
quam baptizetur] Vnde Acts 8. Philippus Evangelista non prius baptizare voluit
Eunuchum illum Aethiopem quam is professus esset fidem Christi] And by the
proof from Mar. 16.16. It is apparent that he speaks of saving faith. Then he
proves the last part of his description [ Postremo per Baptismum homines in
fide and spe confirmari liquet ex verbis, Qui crediderit and baptizatus fuerit
salvabitur; and sic Petrus, Act 2.38. resipiscentes Judaeos jubet baptizari in
remissionem pe^catorum, hoc est, ad confirmandam fidem remissionie peccatorum.
Item, Act. 22.16. Ananias dicit Paulo recens converso, Baptizare and ablue
peccata tua, hoc est, Baptizare ad confirmandam fidem remissionis peccatorum,
quod abluta sint peccata tua sanguine Christi.]

Calvin in loc. says [ Baptizari jubet Christus eos qui nomen evangelio
dederint, seque professi fuerint Discipulos, p^rtim ut illis Baptismus sit
vitae aeternae tessera coram Deo; partim apud homines externum fidei signum.
Scimus enim Deum nobis testari Adoptionis suae gratiam hoc signo; quia nos
inserit in corpus filii sui, ut nos in grege suo censeat: Ideo and spirituale
nostrum lavacrum, quo nos sibi reconciliat, ut nova justitia illic
representatur. Sed quemadmodum gratiam suam Deus hoc sigillo nobis confirmat,
ita quicunque se ad Baptismum offerunt, vicissim, quasi data syngrapha,
obstringunt suam fidem.] And after [ verum quia docere prius jubet Christus
quam baptizare, and tantum credentes ad Baptismum vult recipi, videtur non rite
administrari baptismus, nisi fides precesserit.] On this pretense he shows that
the Anabaptists oppose Infant Baptism; To which he answers, not by receding
from what is said before but by showing that [ eos qui fide in ecclesiam Dei
ingressi sunt, videmus cum sua sobole censeri in Christi membris, and in
salutis haereditatem simul vocari. Nec vero separatur hoc modo Baptismus a fide
vel doctrina; quia licet pueri infantes nondam per aetatem side percipiant Dei
gratiam, Deus tamen eorum parents compellans ipsus etiam complectitur.] So
that it is Calvin's judgment, that this very Text which is the most notable
Copy of the Apostolical commission for the Baptizing of the discipled Nations,
does appoint that saving faith be professed, before men be baptized; and lie
makes these to be the Disciples with their Infants; and that it is
Reconciliation, Adoption, and the Inheritance of salvation that are sealed up
to Parents and children by Baptism.

Paraeus in loc. says [ Cum Baptismus sit signum faederis testificans
baptizatos recipi a Deo in gratiam, haud dubie Pater, filius and spiritus
sanctus sunt unus verus Deus, baptizatos in gratiam and foedus recipiens.] And
he expounds this from Mar. 16.16. showing that as the order is credere and
baptizari; so that this is a true saving faith. [ l^st autem credere Evangelio
non solum assentiri doctrinae quod vera sit, sed fiducia certa sibi applicare
promissionem gratiae; nos recipi in gratiam: nobis remissa esse peccata propter
Christum. Commendat vero nobis fidem and baptismum duabus rationibus: una ab
utili: salvabitur, h. e. vitam aeternam consequetur.] For my own part, I have
before entered my dissent to such descriptions of justifying faith as make it
to be a Believing that our sins are pardoned; but yet I agree with him and the
rest in the main that it must be an Act of the will (embracing or accepting an
offered Christ) as well as of the understanding, and that the Profession of it
must go before Baptism.

But I shall further prove the Minor from some other Texts of Scripture, viz.
that they are not Christ's Disciples that Profess not saving faith (or are not
the Infants of such.)

Luke 14.26, 27, 33. If any man come to me and hate not his Father and Mother,
and Wife and Children, and Brothers and Sisters, yea and his own life also, he
cannot be my Disciple: and whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after me,
cannot be my Disciple: whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he
has, cannot be my Disciple. This is spoken of true Disciples in heart (the
first significatum) by him that knew the heart: From whence I argue thus, (If
none are Christ's Disciples in heart, nor can be, but those that value him above
all, and will forsake all for him if he require it: then none can be his
Disciples by external Profession, but those that Profess to esteem him above
all, and to be willing to forsake all rather then forsake him: But the former
is proved by the Text: The consequence is clear, in that the world has
hitherto been acquainted but with two sorts of Christians, or Disciples of
Christ: the one such sincerely in heart; and the other such by Profession: and
the latter are so called because they profess to be what the other are indeed,
and what themselves are if they sincerely so profess. And it is the same thing
Professed which makes a man a Professed Christian, which being found in the
heart does make a man a hearty Christian. Of these two sorts of Disciples and
people of God, I spoke as plain as I could speak, page 4. of the Saints Rest:
But Mr. Blake never sticks when he meets with such passages to persuade the
world that they are my self-contradictions, and that they make for him: as if
it were all one to Profess a saving faith, even the Acceptance of Christ, and
to Profess a faith short of saving. But I perceive by this how he is like to
use other Authors that cannot speak for themselves, that would persuade men
that I speak for him, even where I expressly speak for the same cause which I
now maintain against him.

John 13.35. [ By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love
one another.] Here Christ gives a certain badg by which his true Disciples may
be known. If only those that love one another, are true Disciples in heart;
then only those that Profess to love one another, are Disciples by Profession:
But, etc. And that this Love is a special Grace, and Inseparable concomitant of
saving faith, is manifest in that [ By this we know that we are translated from
death to life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3.14. Joh. 8.31. If ye
continue in my word, then are ye (that is, you will approve your selves) my
Disciples indeed] If only those are Christ's Disciples indeed, as to the heart,
that have the Resolution of perseverance (and those only his Practical
conquering Disciples who actually persevere) then only those are his Professed
Disciples that Profess a Resolution to persevere. But; etc. Ergo, etc.

All this that I have said, is no more then we have ever practiced, when in
Baptism we renounced the World, Flesh, and Devil, and promised to fight under
Christ's Banner, to our lives end. Says Piscator on John 13.35. Si pro
Christianis, id est, Christ's discipulis haberi volumus, oportet ut nos mutuo
quam ardentissime diligamus, etc.

Object. Joh. 6.^0, 61, 66. Those are called his Disciples that were offended
at his word and went back. Answ. 1. That Is none of our question, whether
Professed Disciples may not forsake Christ: we easily acknowledge it: But let
it be proved that these did not before Profess a saving faith. 2. This makes as
much against the Opponent as me: for it was the very want of a Dogmatical faith
that they here manifested; being offended that Christ should tell them that
they must eat his flesh.

Object. Act. 19.1. They are called Disciples that had not heard whether there
be a Holy Ghost or not. Answ. If they had not heard, then it was not an article
of necessity to their Justification. They had been baptized, and professed that
faith which was saving when John baptized. 2. This is spoken only of that
extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. Any one is a Disciple that is willing to learn of Christ. Answ. No such
matter: In an improper sense you may so call them, but not in Scripture sense;
where 1. A Disciple and a Christian are all one, Acts 11.26. But every one that
is willing to learn of Christ is not a Christian; therefore not a disciple. 2.
A Disciple of Christ is one that will take him for the great Prophet of the
Church ( which whosoever hears not shall be cut off from Gods people) and
will learn of him as of the Christ. But so will not all that will learn of him:
for a man that takes Christ but for a common wise man as Socrates or Plato,
may be willing to learn of him: and so may be his Disciple in another sense,
but not in the Christian sense, as a Christian. 3. He that is sincerely a
Disciple of Christ in heart, does take him for one that by redemption also has
Propitiated the offended Majesty, and as King has authority to rule him; and
submits to him in his whole office as he is the Christ: For he cannot be
truly a Christian that takes not Christ as Christ, and believes not in him in
all that is essential to his office, and so to the object of our faith. As he
that believes that Christ is God only, or Man only, is no Christian, so he
that believes in him as a Teacher only; for that is no more then to believe in
him as in Moses or Elias: 4. He that is sincerely a Disciple in heart, must
take Christ for his only Teacher in the way to everlasting life, renouncing all
other except as they stand under him; and must be willing to be taught and
guided by him in all things: therefore he that is a professed Disciple, must
profess all this: And that is to profess saving Faith. For without saving faith
no man can so believe in him, or be heartily willing to be taught by him.

The lessons that they are to learn of him are self-denial, and the contempt of
this world, and the love of one another, and to be meek and lowly in heart that
they may find rest to their souls, Mat. 11.27, 28. And these he proclaims
when he inviteth men to his school. But no ungodly man is willing to learn any
of these: and therefore unwilling are they to be his Disciples.

Argum. 8. We ought not to baptize those persons (or their Infants as theirs)
who are visible members of the Kingdom of the Devil (and his children) or that
do not so much as profess their forsaking of the childhood and Kingdom of the
devil, But such are all that profess not a saving faith; Ergo.

The Major is proved thus. If we must Baptize none but for present admission
into the Kingdom of Christ, then we must baptize none but those that profess a
present departure from the Kingdom of the devil. But the former is true:
therefore so is the latter. The Antecedent is granted by those that I have to
do with. The reason of the consequence is evident, in that all the world is
divided into these two Kingdoms, and they are so opposite that there is no
passing into one but from the other.

The Minor of the first Argument I prove thus. All they are visibly in the
Kingdom of the Devil, or not so much as by Profession removed out of it who
Profess not a removal from that condition^ in which the wrath of God abides on
them, and they are excluded by the Gospel from everlasting life. But such are
all that profess not a justifying faith. Therefore I express the Major two
ways disjunctively, lest any should run to instances of men that are converted
and have not yet had a call or opportunity to profess it. If such are not
visibly in the Kingdom of the Devil, at least they are not visibly out of it.
The Major is proved, in that it is the condition of the covenant of grace
performed that differenceth the members of Christ's Kingdom from Satan's: and so
it is that condition professed to be performed that visibly differenceth them
before men. It is the promise of grace that brings them out of Satan's
Kingdom: therefore it is only done invisibly to those that profess the
performance of the condition. Moreover to be out of Satan's Kingdom visibly, is
to be visibly from under his Government; but those that profess not saving
faith, are not visibly from under his Government. Lastly to be visibly out of
Satan's Kingdom, is to be visibly freed from his power as the Executioner of
Gods eternal vengeance: But so are none that profess not saving faith.

The Minor is proved from John 3.36. He that believes on the Son, has
everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son, (or obeys not) shall not
see life; but the wrath of God abides on him; where it is plain. 1. That the
unbelief spoken of, is that which is opposed to saving faith, even to that
faith which has here the promise of everlasting life. 2. And that this leaves
them visibly under the wrath of God.

So in Mar. 16.16. compared with Mat. 28.19. In the later Christ bids them make
him Disciples; and in the former he describes those that are such, and those
that remain still in the Kingdom of Satan [ He that blieveth and is Baptized
shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned] Here it is evident
that the unbelief threatened is that which is contrary to (and even the
privation of) the faith that Salvation is expressly promised to: and that all
that profess not this saving faith, are not so much as professedly escaped a
state of Damnation: and that this is the differencing Character of Christ's
Disciples to be baptized (of which yet more afterward), so Acts 26.18. It is
the opening of men's eyes and the turning them from darkness to light, and the
power of Satan to God, that they may receive Remission of sins, etc. which is
the true state of them that are Christians in heart: and the Profession of this
that proves them professed Christians: and they that do not profess to be thus
enlightened and converted, do not profess to be brought from under the power of
Satan; for that is here made the terminus a quo.

So Col. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated
us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.] Here the passing into the Kingdom of
Christ is by passing from the Kingdom of darkness, so that he is not Cordially
in one that is Cordially in the other; and consequently he is not by Profession
in the one, who is not by Profession past from the other: He that professes
not such a faith as proves men in Christ's Kingdom, professes not so much as
may prove him out of Satan's. And expressly it is said, 1 John 3.8 10. He that
commits sin, is of the Devil. In this the Children of God are manifest and
the Children of the Devil; he that does not righteousness is not of God, etc.]
These passages will be further touched when we come to the Argument from the
true visible Church.

Argum. 9. If it be the appointed use of all Christian Baptism to solemnize our
marriage with Christ, or to seal or confirm our union with him, or ingraffing
into him then must we baptize none that profess not justifying faith. (Because
this is necessarily prerequisite, and no others can protend to union, marriage
or ingraffing into Christ) But the Antecedent is true. Both Antecedent and
consequence are evident in Gal. 3.27, 28, 29. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ -- Ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And
if ye be Chr^sts, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs acccoding to promise.]
Here 1 We see that it is not an accidental or separable thing for baptism to be
our visible entrance into Christ our putting him on, our admittance (by
solemnization) into the state of Gods Children, and heirs acording to promise]
For this is affirmed of all he baptized with true Christian Baptism; If we be
truly baptized, we are baptized into Christ. If we we are baptized into
Christ, then are we Christ's and have put on Christ, and are all one in Christ,
and are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. If any object that the
Apostle speaks this but of some of them, even of the Regenerate, because he
says [as many of you] I answer, it is manifest that he speaks of all, 1
Because it was all of them that were baptized into Christ. 2. He expressly says
as much in the next foregoing words [ verse. 26. For ye are all the Children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus.] To which the words following are annexed as the
proof. [ For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ.] The assumption is implied [But you have all bin baptized into Christ]
therefore ye have all put on Christ, and so in him are all the Children of God.
2. Note that they are the special gifts of saving grace that are here ascribed
to all the Baptized. 3. Note also that all this is said and proved to be by
faith. 4. Note also that it is expressly said to be a ^ustifying faith: before
verse 24. [ That we we might be justified by faith.]

Indeed this Text affords us diverse Arguments. 1. The Apostle supposes all
the Baptized to profess a justifying faith, among the Galathians: therefore so
must we suppose of others, and expect that they do it. The Antecedent is proved
from verse. 24, 25. and 27. compared.

2. All the Baptized are said to have put on Christ, therefore they are
supposed to profess that faith by which Christ is put on: But that is only
justifying faith. 3. All that are duly Baptized are baptized into Christ:
therefore they are supposed to profess that faith by which men are united or
ingraffed into Christ; but that is only justifying faith. But the rest of the
Arguments here will be further touched on anon.

Mr. Blake says p. 152. [ Whether all union with Christ imply Regeneration,
let John 15.2. be consulted, where an union with Christ is clearly held out:
Yet Mr. Baxter brings that text among, others to prove that there are some
saints that shall never be saved] Answ. 1. But I told you that by Saints I
meant only those that profess an Acceptance of Christ, and not your Saints that
only profess a lower faith. In this you do by me as you use. 1. Union with
Christ in the primary and proper sense is proper to the sound believer; or else
no Title or benefit on earth is proper to him. But as those are believers in
profession that are not so in heart, so those are united to or ingraffed into
the Church, and so to Christ, by an outward Profession, who are not so in
heart. And this is called a Union, because they profess that inward Union which
they have not, which is the famosius significatum. Whether these be only
equivocally said to be united to Christ, we shall enquire in season. But tell
me where any man was ever said in scripture to be united to Christ without
saving faith, or the Profession of it? 3. I suppose you know how many of our
Divines do expound John 15, of a saving Union, and take the cautions about
unfruitfulness and Apostasy to be de rebus nunquam futuris, purposely given
that they might not be future: But this I stick not on.

Next he cites Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Hudson, and Mr. Ames, to show that Mr.
Rutheford says if Sc^ipture ^n where callet Christ the ^ead of the visible
Chur^^ as such, as after cited.
Christ is the head of the visible Church, and has many unfruitful members,
etc. Answ. As pertinent as most Citations that I there have met with, that is,
utterly impertinent. It Is yielded that as they have a Profession of saving
faith, so by profession they are members of the visible Church. But prove if
you can that ever any are such visible members, but the professors of a saving
faith, and their Children.

I conclude then* that Christ has appointed no Baptism but what is for a
visible marriage of the soul to himself (as the Protestants ordinarily confess)
therefore he has appointed no Baptism but for those that profess to take Jesus
Christ for their Husband, and to give up themselves to him as his Espouse. But
this is a Profession of Justifying faith. For heartily to take Christ for our
Head and Husband, is true saving faith, and proper to his own Regenerate
people, if any thing in the world be so. And no man can profess to be married
to Christ that does no^ profess to take him for a Husband. Therefore for my
part, I never intend to baptize any without profession of saving faith. As for
Mr. Blakes answer that [ we are oftener said here to be espoused to Christ,
then married] I think that this and many hundred such passages, do need no
answer: But yet I shall say, 1. Either will serve my turn. No unregenerate man
is truly espoused to Christ. 2. Though the whole Church in one, be solemnly to
be married to Christ at judgment, that is, presented perfect, justified and
glorified; yet that particular believers are married to Christ here, I am
resolved by Gods assistance to believe while I believe Isa. 54.5. Ephesians. 5. and
many other Texts of scripture.

Arg. 10. If Paul account all the Baptized, Saints, or sanctified men, dead
with Christ and risen with him, such as have put on Christ, sons of God by
Adoption, Abraham seed, Heirs according to promise, and justified, then did
they all profess a true justifying faith. But the Antecedent is certain, ergo
so is the consequent.

The Antecedent Mr. Blake confesses. And I shall prove it by parts. The
consequence is that which lies chiefly on me to prove; and I shall do both
together.

The Apostle in the beginning of his Epistle to the Corinthians and in may
other places calls the whole Church Saints, 1 Cor 6.11. He says to them, [ But
ye are washed, ye are sanctified, etc,] That part of the Antecedent then is
certain. The consequence I prove thus. There are none called Saints in all the
new Testament, but only such as where in heart Devoted to Christ by a saving
faith; or Professed so much: therefore the word Saints in this case must
signify only such. If any will prove a third sort of Saints, viz. such as
profess a faith not saving, they must do that which I never yet saw done.

2. The first and most famous signification of the word Saints or Sanctified in
the new Testament, is only of them that are in heart devoted to Christ by true
faith: therefore the borrowed or Analogical, or less proper signification (call
it what you list) must be of that which has the likeness or appearance of
this; and that is only the profession of it, and not the profession of another
thing.

3. Let us peruse the texts, and see whether it be not a special Saint-ship
which Paul ascribes to these, and therefore as to appearance and Profession,
they had! 1 Cor. 6.11. [ such were some of you; but ye are washed, ye are
sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the spirit of
our God] and that sanctification which is joined with justification, which is
wrought by the spirit of God cleansing men from their former reigning sins,
which else would have kept them out of the Kingdom of God, and which was in
them that must judge Angels. ver. 3. was a special saving sanctification. But
such did this seem to Paul which he speaks of, as is expressed in the Text:
therefore there must needs be at least a Profession of this.

And because Mr. Blake tells me page 14^. how well I know that he has proved
his assertion, I shall peruse all those Texts which he cites to that end, in
his Book of the Covenants, p^g. 207 208. And first we must observe, that the
persons that he there himself speaks of, are [ Visible Professors] as
distinct from the [ Elect and Regenerate,] yea from those that [ are really
Saints, and shall be for heaven:] And he calls them [ men separate for God
and Dedicated to him.] But this is unedifying slippery dealing to confound two
distinct causes to^^ther. He that is professedly Dedicated to God, is a
Professor of saving Faith. He that is really and heartily Dedicated to ^od,
shall certainly be saved. Here Mr. Blake pleads the cause that I do maintain,
and not that which he has undertaken against me and the common truth. I
confess as well as he, that Profession makes Saints visible, or by profession,
as hearty Dedication to God by faith makes real or heart-Saints. But how angry
is he himself afterward at this distinction of [ Real and Professed Saints] as
if that none but the justified were real Saints. But what is all this to a
Saint-ship consisting in the Profession of a faith short of that which is
Justifying? I shall take these last to be Mr. Blake's Saints, and no Scripture
Saints, (I mean Saints of his denomination.) till he have better proved that
ever Scripture so calls them. The Texts cited by him are these: Frst, Psalm.
16.3. [ Saints on earth.] And I yield to him that there are Saints on earth.
Then 1 Cor. 16.1. and Heb. 16.10. where we read of [ Collections for the
Saints,] and [ Administration to the Saints] By these (I doubt not) but he may
prove that more than the heart-Saints are called Saints* but that is because
they profess and seem to be heart-Saints. These Texts are far from proving that
there are any Saints that profess not saving sanctity. I shall anon tell Mr.
Blake who they were that Calvin and other Protestants do expound the word [
Saints] of, in such Passages as these; though he has already told us, that he
[ abhorreth] the Doctrine which they maintain.

But this is a Practical case that Mr. Blake has here put us upon; the
Communion of Saints does not only consist in Conjunction in God's Worship, but
also in mutual relief, and free communication of outward things, as the Text
which he here cites does declare. Those therefore that are of his mind must
communicate as well to the Professors of a common Faith, as of a saving Faith.
But hear who they be that Pareus supposes Paul to mean [in loc. Docemur vero
ad (...) sanctorum quam credimus, etiam huc pertinere, ut necessitatibus
fratrum mutuo tangamur, and pro virili succurramus prompte and fideliter; sumus
enim unius Corporis membra, etc. Nam Fidei and charitatis unitas omnes in
Christo Capite conjungit] It is then the Members of Christ united in him and
joined in Faith and Love: And those that Profess to be such, are so to us.

Acts 26.10. Acts 9.2. [ When Paul shut up many of the Saints in prison, and
did much evil against them, he knew no other way of distinction than an outward
Profession, etc.] says Mr Blake.

Answ. Nor do we know means hearts; nor think that Paul knew them. But the
Question is, What they professed? Whether saving Sanctity or a common Sanctity
and Faith short of it?

He adds, [ We read of Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. and they were
taken in to be Church Members as soon as they made profession, as they ceased
to be Jews or Pagans, and took them to the way of Christianity, as we see Act.
2. Act. 8.12, 13, 38.] Ans. 1. They renounced the way of ungodliness and
wickedness in general by a Profession of repentance, as well as the way of
Paganism and Judaiism, in particular. There were no Christians that Professed
not Repentance toward God; from dead works. 2. We believe that there were
Churches of the Saints; and therefore that none should be of the Church that
Profess not to be true Saints. But prove if you can that there was ever either
Church or Churchmember called Saints in Scripture, that had no either special
Sanctity or a Profession of it. You say nothing to prove that any were called
Saints upon the Profession of a Faith short of saving Faith.

Emphaticum est (says Calvin in loc.) quod exprimit sanctorum acsi Ecclesias
rite compositas a sinistra nota subduceret.] Of which see him fully on 1 Cor.
1.2. And as for those Acts 8. you cannot prove that any of them were either
called Saints or Baptized without a Profession of a Justifying faith: as shall
further be showed afterward.

M. Blake adds [ The Epistles wrote to particular visible Churches are
inscribed to Saints; among which, what some are, read both the Epistles to the
Corinthians; yea, what almost all are in some Churches, read the Epistle to the
Church of Sardis. Answ. 1. No man in any of these Churches is called a Saint
upon the Profession of any lower kind of faith, but only on the presence or
profession of saving faith. 2. I have not heard a proof that the worst of these
Church^s had many members, (if any) that were impenitent and obstin^te in any
error or sin after admonition, and so that were visibly destitute of the saving
Sanctity which they did Profess. 3. If such there were, the Churches are
commanded to cast them out, and then they will be no longer numbered with the
Saints. 4. The Apostles may well call the whole Society Saints when part are
really so in heart, and the rest Profess it. We commonly tell both Papists and
Separatists, that the Scripture thus denominateth the whole from the better
part; as a field is called a Corn-field, though theree be more Tares then Corn;
and yet you will not call the Tares Corn: No more will I call the ungodly
Saints, when I know them though I will call the Church Saints where they are,
and them, while they Profess themselves Saints, and I know not but they are so.
5. If you can with patience but read what Clavin says on 1 Cor. 1.2. and Peter
Martyr (to name no more now) you will see that Doctrine which you abhor
maintained by the Protestants, and in what current it is that your opinion
flows.

Mr. Blake adds [ The Apostle tells us of the faith once delivered to the
Saints: Jude 3. the doctrine of Faith as is agreed on all hands, all that
profess that Doctrine are Saints.] Answ. All that cordially entertain that
Doctrine are Saints in Heart; All that profess so to entertain it are Saints by
Profession. (while that Profession has any validity.) But all that barely
profess to assent to the truth of that Doctrine, and no mo^e, (unless as that
Assent may imply the Consent of the Will) are not Saints.

But let us peruse some other Texts besides these that Mr. Blake cites. The
Congregations of the Saints are mentioned in the Old Testament, as Psalm. 89 5,
7. and 149 1. But what Saints these were, may appear by the Promises made to
them. Ps. 149.5, 9, 4 and 16.3. and 37.28. and 97.10 and 132.9, 16. and 145 10.
The Children of Israel, a people near unto him are called Saints, Psalm. 148.14.
but it is because they are a part of them, his people in heart, and the rest
profess themselves to be his People in a saving sense. And if there were any
that did not so, he was not an Israelite by Religion, nor to be of that
Commonwealth, but to be cut off from his People.

Acts 9.13. The Saints at Jerusalem that Paul persecuted, were such as not only
professed saving Faith, but also had the witness of Martyrdom and Persecutions
to testify their Sincerity. They that continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking bread, and prayers, having all things
common, selling their possessions and goods, and parting them to all men as
every man had need, praising God etc. did profess more then a Faith and
Repentance short of that by which we are saved: But so did the Church at
Jerusalem, Act. 2.41, 42. to the end; yea, the multitude of them that Believed
were of one heart, and one soul, and great grace was upon them all, etc. Acts
4.32. to 36. so that we may see what Saints the Church at Jerusalem were. And
if all were not such, we see evidently that the whole was denominated from such.

The Church of Rome were all called Saints, Romans 1.7. True: But what was meant
by that word, and what Saints did they appear to Paul by their Profession to
be? Even such as were [ beloved of God, whose Faith was spoken of throughout
the world, that were dead to sin, but alive to God, that had obeyed from the
heart that form of Doctrine delivered to them, and being made free from sin
became the servants of Righteousness and of God, having their fruit to
holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 1.7, 8. and 6 11, 14, 17, 18, 21.
whose obedience was come abroad to all men. Romans 16.19. Here is more then the
Profession of a common Faith.

The Corinthians are called Saints; True: But what is meant by Saints? such as
[ called on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, having much of his grace,
enriched by him in all things, coming behind in no Gift, waiting for the coming
^f our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall confirm them to the end, that they may be
blameless at his coming, 1 Cor. 1.2. to ver. 10. all was theirs, 1. Cor. 3.22,
23. They were such Saints as were washed, and sanctified, and justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God; and such as were to judge the
World, and the Angels, Chap. 6.3, 11. delivered from that unrighteousness that
would have kept from Heaven, ver. 9.10, 11. such as had no temptation but what
was common to man, whom the faithful God would not suffer to be tempted above
their strength, etc. Chap. 10.13. such as were not so much as to eat with the
notoriously wicked, Chap. 5 11. and therefore doubtless Professed Godliness
themselves; in whom godly sorrow had wrought carefulness, clearing of
themselves, zeal, etc. 2 Cor. 7.11. in whom the Apostle had confidence in all
things, ver. 16.

Object. But Paul says, they were carnal, and taxes them with some gross
Errors and Sins.

Answ. 1. So are all the Regenerate carnal in part, and guilty of too many
sins: And it is not Impenitency after admonition that he charge them with.
Their sin was no worse to our eye than David's or Solomon's.

2. If any were so bad as to be notoriously ungodly, those are not of that
number whom he calls Saints, as they are not of them that have the following
Descriptions of Saints which I have cited; but only were among them, but not of
them.

The Galathians I find not called Saints; but to call them a Church of Christ,
or Believers, is Equipollent. And what Saints were they? Why they were [ all
the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, having been baptized into Christ, and
put him on, and were all one in him, and were Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to the Promise.] Gal. 3.26, 27, 29. And [ because they were sons, God
sent the Spirit of his Son into their hearts, by which they cried Abba Father,
and therefore were no more servants but sons, and if sons, then heirs of God
through Christ.]

Object. But Paul was afraid of them, lest he bestowed upon them labor in vain.

Answ. 1. It appears by what is said, that it was not such a fear as made him
take them for ungodly.

2. This confirms what I maintain; that the Apostles judgment of them
proceeded according to the Evidences of probability: He took himself bound to
believe their Profession so far as they contradicted it not; and according to
the prevalency of their Errors which were against it, he was jealous of their
condition: and if they had proceeded so far as to have declared themselves
certainly ungodly, Paul would have denominated them a Church no more.

The Church of Ephesus are called Saints, Ephesians. 1.1. But what Saints? such as
were [ blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ,
chosen before the foundation of the world to be holy and without blemish before
him in love, p^edestinated to the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ,
according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
Grace, wherein he made them accepted in the beloved, in whom they had
redemption through his blood, the remission of sins, and have obtained an
Inheritance, being predestined, etc. Who trusted in Christ, and were sealed
with the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of their Inheritance:
they were such as believed in the Lord Jesus, and loved all the saints, and
were quickened, who had been dead in trespasses and sins, and were raised up
together, and made to sit in heavenly places.] If Mr. Blake, while he abhors
the name of a Saint or Church equivocally so called, would not make all words
equivocal that in Scripture are used to denominate or describe a Church or
Saint, we might easily be resolved by such passages as these, what Paul means
by a Church or Saint.

See further Ephesians. 3.18. All Saints comprehend what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height; and Christ dwells in their hearts by faith, and they
rooted and grounded in love] Ephesians. 3.17, 18. But Mr. Blakes Saints do none of
this; therefore they are no Saints in Scripture sense. With this text compare
Ephesians. 2.19. and see what a Church is and what it is to be fellow-Citizens with
the Saints, and of the household of God: and Ephesians. 4.12. what Saints they were
that were to be perfected: and 5 3. what Saints they were that must not so much
as name Coveteousness, filthiness, etc. And 3.8. Paul professes himself less
then the least of all Saints: But Paul never did nor would profess himself less
then the least of Mr. Blakes Saints, who are not as much as by profession in a
state of salvation, nor from under the curse and wrath of God. He that
pronounces them accursed with Anathema Maranatha, that loved not the Lord
Jesus, and bids grace be with them that love him in sincerity, (1 Cor. 16.22.
Ephesians. 6.24.) would not have pronounced himself less than the least of these
excommunicate accursed ones. And were I worthy to be heard, I would advise my
Reverend Brother to better consideration before he make such accursed Saints,
or Churches, or Believers, at least that are visibly so: and that he would be
cautelous of Canonizing those on whom Paul pronounces Anathema Maranatha.

To proceed, the Church of Philippi are called Saints; True, but what Saints?
such on whom Paul was [ confident that he which had begun a good work in them,
would perform it till the day of Jesus Christ: to whom it was given on behalf
of Christ not only to believe but to suffer for his sake: who always obeyed in
presence and absence: for God wrought in them to will and to do: they only
communicated to Paul in giving and receiving: and they were such as bad cause
always to rejoice, Phil. 1.6, 29. and 2.12, 13. and 4.15, 4.

The Church of the Colossians are called Saints: But what Saints? such as [ had
faith in Christ Jesus, and love to all Saints, and had hope laid up for them in
heaven, who were made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light, being delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the
Kingdom of his dear Son (that is the Church) in whom they had redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, being reconciled by the body
of his flesh through death to be presented holy, and unblameable, and
unreprovable in his sight, if they continued in the faith, grounded and settled,
and were not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whose ardor and
stedfastness of faith in Christ, Paul beheld in the Spirit with joy: who were
buried with Christ in baptism, and risen with him through faith; and being
before dead, were quickened with him, and had the forgiveness of all
trespasses, having put off the body of the sins of the flesh; who were dead,
and their life was hid with Christ in God, and who shall appear with Christ in
Glory when he appears.] Col. 1. and 2. and 3.

If it shall be replied, that Paul spoke all this of them in the Judgment of
Charity, or denominated the whole from the better part, and the Profession of
the rest; I say even so also it is that he calls them all Saints: the
denomination is on the same ground as the description is. I cannot imagine what
reasonable evasion can be made from this evidence.

The Thessalonians are consequentially called Saints, in being called a Church
of Christ. And what a Church? and what Saints? such as [ had the work of Faith,
Labor of Love, and patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, whose Election
Paul knew, who turned to God from Idols, to serve the true and living God, and
to wait for his Son from heaven, who delivered them from the wrath to come, and
they received the word as the word of God, which effectually worked in them
that believed, who followed the Churches in suffering; who were Paul's joy and
glory in the presence of Christ at his coming, whose faith and Charity was so
reported to Paul, that he tells them be lives, if they stand fast: for God had
not appointed them to wrath, but to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ.] 1 Thessalonians.
1 and 2. and 3. and 5. They were such Saints whom Christ would come at last to
be glorified in, and such Believers in whom he will then be admired, even
because the Gospel was believed among them.] (therefore say not, To believe the
Gospel is a common thing, short of saving Faith.) 2 Thessalonians. 1. We see then what
the Church and Saints at Thessalonica was.

The Hebrews (to whom the Apostle wrote) are called Saints, Heb. 13.24. And he
does not groundlesly call them Saints; for they were such as [ were made a
gazing-stock by reproaches and afflictions, and became companions of them that
were so used, and took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves that they have in heaven a better and more enduring substance.] vid.
ult. Heb. 10.33, 34, 35. They were such indeed as he saw cause to exhort to
perseverance, and warn of the danger of Apostacy (and the best have need of
that) But yet [ though he so spoke, he was persuaded better things of them, and
such as accompany salvation.] and he gives his reason of it, Heb. 6.9, 10, 11.

And having said so much of the several Churches under the name of Saints, I
shall proceed and show you what they are as Churches, though this will after
fall in, in another Argument, because it will be fittes^ for all to lie
together, and then I shall refer you hither, when this afterward falls in. You
may see by what is said, what Churches all these were that are already
mentioned; and consequently what a Church is in Scripture-sense; not a society
of men professing a faith short of justifying; but a society of men professing
true saving faith; yea, so far professing it, as to induce the Apostles to
denominate them such, as supposing them such indeed: For as they knew some were
such, so did they not know the contrary by any particulars, except those whom
they commanded them to cast out, as none of them.

The Apostle Peter writes to the scattered Jews that professed Christianity:
And what kind of Christians or Believers did he take them for? Why, for such as
were [ Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit, unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ.] And Mr. Blake cannot say that this was a common Election, or
common Sanctification, and Obedience, and Sprinkling of Christ's blood: For it
is added, that [ God of his abundant mercy had begotten them again to a lively
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
them, and that they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
ready to be revealed in the last times, wherein they greatly re^oyced,
suffering the trial of their precious faith: and [ having not seen Christ loved
him, and believeing in him rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory,
receiving the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls.] If all these
people had not, or professed and seemed not to have a saving faith, I know not
what words can express a saving faith, nor what persons have such a thing.

The like testimonies the Apostle John gives of them, as may quickly be seen.

But all the doubt is, Whether the seven reproved Churches in Rev. 2. and 3.
were such or not? To which I say, 1. All of them professed the foresaid saving
Faith. 2. There is no sin charged on them that was visible and inconsistent
with true saving Faith. 1. For the Church of Ephesus, we heard what they were
esteemed by Paul a little before; and here their grace is mentioned; and the
faults expressed are consistent with true grace. 2. The same I say of the
Churches of Pergamus and Thyatyra. And for the Nicolaitans and other Heretics,
whom they are blamed for suffering (as the former is commended for hating them)
they are such as were to be cut off from the Church; and while they were in it
were not of it: Nor are they any where called Believers, Saints, Disciples, or
Church Members.

But it is the Church of Sardis that Mr. Blake takes special notice of. And it
is said of her indeed, that she had a Name to live and was dead. But, 1. in
that they had a name to live, it seems it was a living faith which they
Professed, and not only one short of it. 2. Their death was not a death in
reigning sin, such as is the death of the unsanctified: But a declining
condition, comparatively called death, as the children of God do often complain
of deadness. And therefore its next said, [ Be watchful and strengthen the
things that remain, that are ready to dye.] And its expressed, that their
deadness was in that their works were not found perfect before God; that is,
that many or most of them had defiled their garments, (with some Heresy or
vice) which the rest had not done. 3. How far this was notorious to others, is
of further enquiry. 4. If they had gone on so far, as by obstinate impenitency
after admonition to show themselves void of saving faith, they had been
unchurched, as appears by the threatening.

The Church of Philadelphia is so far commended, as that the case is put out of
doubt. And the Church of Laodicea, though discommended, has nothing visible
charged upon it inconsistent with sincerity; and the luke-warmness which is
charged on them, they are threatened to be spewed out for, and so to be
unchurched. And thus we see what a Church was, and what Saints were, and what
Believers and Disciples were supposed to be by the Apostles, and what is the
signification of these words in Scripture: for they are all of the same extent.

Mr. Blake says [ He is a believer in Scripture, Of the Covenant, page 205.206.
that is a visible Professor, that puts himself in the number of those that
expect salvation by Jesus Christ.] Answ. 1. A Professor of what? Of true saving
faith. 2. Not that puts himself among them locally only, for so may an Infidel;
but that becomes one of them as far as to a Profession of it. And if they
expect salvation by Christ, either they profess that faith which salvation is
annexed to, or else they give God the lie, and contradict both Scripture and
themselves even in their very Profession: As if they should say, [ I look to be
saved by Christ, but I will not take him for my Savior, nor be saved from sin
by him] And sure such a Profession makes no m^n a Saint, Believer or
Churchmember.

Thus much I have said to prove that all the Baptized are accounted Saints; and
therefore Professed a saving Sanctity.

The second Title which I mentioned follows, (of which I shall be more brief.)
All the Baptized are accounted to be dead and risen with Christ, even dead to
sin, and risen to newness of life; therefore they all profess a saving faith.
The proof of this is full in the two Texts already cited, Romans 6. and Col.
2.11, 12.

Romans 6.33 etc. [ How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein?
Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, so we also should walk in newness of Life. For if we have been planted
together into the likeness of his Death, we shall be also in the likeness of
his Resurrection. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that hence forth we should not serve sin;
for he that is dead is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him. -- Likewise, reckon ye also your
selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Here is a full Report of the use of Baptism and the Profession of all that are
Baptized, and the state that they are supposed to be in: so that I cannot speak
it plainlier than the words themselves do. Calv. on the Text says, [ Extra
Controversiam est induere nos Christum in Baptismo, and hac lege nos baptizari,
ut unum cum ipso simus. -- Imo docet hanc mortis societatem praecipue in
Baptismo spectandam esse. Neque enim ablutio sola illic, sed mortificatio
quoque and veteris hominis interitus proponitur: Vnde palam fit, ex quo
recipimur in Christi gratiam, mortis ejus efficaciam statim emergere. Porro
quid valeat hae^ cum morte Christi societas, continuo sequitur; -- ut scilicet
nobis emortui si amus novi homines: Nam a mortis societate transitum merito
facit ad vitae participationem: quia haec duo inter se individuo nexu
cohaerent, veterem hominem Christi morte aboleri, ut ejus resurrectio justitiam
instauret, nosque efficiat novas creaturas. -- Haec autem est Doctrina; Quod
Mors Christi efficax est ad nequitiam carnis nostrae extinguendam ac
prostigandam: Resurrectio vero ad suscitandam melioris naturae novitatem:
quodque per Baptismum in istius gratiae participationem cooptamur. -- In summa;
Qualis sit Baptismi rite suscepti veritas docet.

So Col. 2.11, 12. which I shall not stay to recite, because it is to the same
purpose and before cited.

The third Title mentioned in the Argument, is this: All that are Baptized have
Professedly put on Christ: therefore they have professed saving Faith. The
Antecedent is expressed, Gal. 3.27. [ For as many as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ.] The Consequence is proved, in that, to put on
Christ heartily, is, to be made true partakers of him, and living members of
him: therefore to Profess this is inseparable from the Profession of saving
Faith; yea, by that faith is he truly put on. Putting on Christ is the same
with [Putting on the New man, which after God is created in Righteousness and
true holiness, being renewed in the spirit of our minds Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22,
23, 24. Col. 3.10. It is putting on the New man which is renewed in knowledge
according to the Image of him that created him.] So that this is no common
work, if any be proper to the saved. And putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, is
put for the state of Sanctity, in opposition to a fleshly Life, Romans 13.13, 14.
says Calvin on this Text [ Induere Christum hic significat virtute Spiritus
ejus undique nos muniri, qua idonei ad omnes Sanctitatis parts reddamur: sic
enim instauratur in nobis imago Dei quae unicum est animae ornamentum. Respicit
enim Paulus ad vocationis nostrae sinem, quia Deus nos adoptans, in corpus
unigeniti silii sui inserit, and quidem hac lege, ut nos abdicantes priore
vita, siamus in ipso novi homines. Quare etiam alibi fideles dicit Christum
in^uere in baptismum, Gal. 3.27.] and upon Galat. 3.27. he says [ Quum dicit,
Christum induisse, intelligit Christo sic esse insitos, ut coram Deo nomen ac
personam Christi gerant, ac in ipso magis quam in seipsis censeantur.] And he
comes to the objection, How all that are baptized can be said to put on Christ,
when Baptism is not effectual with all? And he answers in sum, That to
Hypocrites it is uneffectual, qui nudis signis superbiunt. But then he says,
that the Apostle speaking of these [ non respicit Dei institutionem, sed
impiorum corruptelam. (But doubtless it is Gods institution that we must look
to for direction in our administration.) Quum autem fideles alloquitur, qui
rite utuntur, illa tunc conjungit cum sua veritate, quam figurant. Quare? neque
enim fallacem Pompam ostentat in Sacramentis, sed quae externa Ceremonia
figurat, exhibit simul reipsa. Hinc sit, ut veritas, secundum Dei institutum,
conjuncta sit cum signis.] To the same purpose say other Protestants.

The next Title mentioned in the Argument was, Sons of God. All that are
Baptized are the visible or esteemed Sons of God by faith in Christ: therefore
they all profess that justifying faith to which the real or special Sonship is
promised.

The Antecedent is experssed in Gal. 3.16, 17. [ For ye are all the Sons of God
by Faith in Christ Jesus;] which he proves in the next words, [ For as many as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.] What Sons of God are in
Scripture sense, may be seen Joh. 1.12. Rom 8.14, 19. Phil. 2.15. 1 John 3.1,
2. Gal. 4 1, 2, 5, 7. and Romans 8.17. [ If sons, then heirs, heirs of God, and
joint heirs with Christ] was a good consequence in Paul's judgment. [ In this
(says John) the children of God are manifest from the children of the devil:
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
brother, 1 John 3.10. therefore Mr Blake's Saints are not the children of God,
but of the Devil. See also John 11.52. Romans 8, 16.21.

But Mr. Blake objecteth Rom 9.4. To them pertained the Adoption] and Gomarus
his Comment. Answ. 1. Gomarus says not, that any were in either sense sons of
God, without a Profession of saving Faith. 2. It was not after their
unchurching for unbelief, that the Adoption is said to pertain to them, but
before: and then let Mr. Blake prove if he can, that any Israelites were
adopted without profession of that Faith which was then saving. I doubt not to
prove the contrary anon. And 3. If he could prove that such there were among
the Israelites, yet he will never prove that they are called Sons though the
Nation were, because the denomination was principally from the true Sons, and
next from the professed ones, but never from or to them that professed only a
common faith. None are visibly Sons, that be not visibly true Believers.

The next Title mentioned in the Argument is [ Abraham's Seed] All that are
baptized, are called Abraham's Seed. Gal. 3.17, 18, 19. therefore they all
profess a justifying Faith. The Consequence is proved, in that none are
Abraham's Seed in Scripture Gospel sense, but those cordially that are true
Believers, and those appearingly that profess true Faith. This is proved Romans
9.4, 6, 7, 8. Romans 4.11. [ that he might be the Father of all them that
believe, that Righteousness might be imputed to them also.] This therefore is a
justifying faith, and the privilege of the Justified that is here mentioned.
Its added ver. 12, 13. [ And the Father of Circumcision to them who are not of
the Circumcision, but also walk in the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham
yet uncircmucised: for the promise that he should be heir of the world was not
to Abraham or his seed by the law, but by the righteousness of faith. --
Therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace, to the end the prom^se
might be sure to all the seed -- even to that also which is of the faith of
Abraham, the Father of us all.]

So Gal. 3.6.7, 8, 9. [ Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to
him for righteousness: Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same
are the children of Abraham: and the Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the heathen by faith preached before the Gospel to Abraham: in thee
shall all N^tions be blessed. So then, they which be of Faith are blessed with
faithful Abraham.] So ver. 14.16. [ That the blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the Promise of the
Spirit through faith. Now to Abraham and his seed were the Promises made: he
says not, and to seeds, as of many, but as of one; And to thy seed, which is
Christ: and so to those that are in him.

It is hence most undeniable, That all Abraham's true Seed are Justified and
have a Justifying faith; and all his Professing seed do Profess this faith.

The next Title mentioned in the Argument is, [ Heirs according to the
Promise.] All the Baptized were Heirs according to the Promise: None that
Profess not a Justifying faith are Heirs according to the Promise (either
really or appearingly;) therefore none that Profess not a Justifying faith (or
their children) should be baptized.

The Major is expressed in Gal. 3.17, 18, 19.

The Minor (of which is all the doubt) is proved from Romans 8 17. where there is
an express concatenation of [ children, heirs of God, coheirs with Christ,
that suffering with him shall be glorified with him] Gal. 4.1, 6, 7. The heir
is Lord of all, and a Son, and therefore has the spirit of the Son, by which
they cry Abba Father.

So Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. [ According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us, etc. that
being justified by his Grace, we should he made heirs according to the hope of
eternal Life.] The heirs then are Regenerate, Justified, and have the hope of
eternal Life. So Ephesians. 3.6. The Gentiles being made fellow-heirs, and of the
same body, are partakers of the Promise in Christ by the Gospel, even the
unsearchable riches of Christ.

Heb. 6.17. The heirs of Promise have their salvation confirmed by Gods Oath.
And Heb. 1.14. They are all called the Heirs of salvation. And Heb. 11.6, 9. It
is true Justified Believers that have that Title. And Jam. 25. [they are called
Heirs of the Promised Kingdoms.] And 1 Pet. 3.7. they are called [ Coheirs of
the same Grace of Life.] So that to be Heirs in the first and proper notion. is
to be Sons that have Title to the Inheritance of Glory: and therefore to be
Heirs in the second Analogical notion, (for I will not yet anger Mr. Blake with
the term Equivocal) is to be such as seem such, by Profession of that faith
which has the promise of that Glory: But the Professors of any other faith are
none of them.

The last Title that I mentioned in the Argument was [ Justified] Paul calls
all the Baptized Church of Corinth Justified: None that profess not a
Justifying faith are called Justified; therefore none such should be Baptized.

The Major I proved to Mr. Blake out of 1 Cor. 6.11. [ Ye are washed, ye are
sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God.] Mr. Blake does not at all deny the Major or the sense of the Text
alleged to prove it. But darkly in generals Intimates a denial of the Minor,
silently passing over that particular Title [ Justified,] as if he durst not be
seen to take notice of it. I confess, its sad that good men should be so
unfaithful to the Truth, which is so precious and is not their own, and which
they should do nothing against, but all they can for it. But in general he
says, page 152. Of Sacrament, [Other phrases are there brought, or Titles as
proper to the Regenerate, which are well known in Scripture, to be applied to
such as have Apostatized, and are brought by Arminians to prove falling away,
and are censured by their Adversaries.] Answ. Those other Titles which I proved
to be given to the generality of the Baptized, were no other than what we
ascribe to them, [ to be Heirs, and Justified, quickened and have all
trespasses forgiven them, and to be saved.] And if indeed these Titles be so
promiscuously used, it will be harder to understand Scripture, than
Interpreters have hitherto thought. Why did not Mr. Blake show but one Text
(for this one in hand) where any are said to be Justified upon a faith short of
Justifying? I think he was loath to name this Title, lest he should have seemed
to contradict himself in the terms, or be put to the searching out for a
distinction of Justification, which we have not yet heard of* that he may tell
us in what sense the unregenerate are Justified. If he should say, it is a
conditional Justification, so Infidels are justified without any faith at all:
but that is no Justification, because not actual. Mr. Hudsons words and Ames
(which he annexeth) mention not Justification, much less that any not
Professing Justifying faith are Justified.

And here I must needs again say, I know no man that has made Scripture terms
so Equivoc^l as Mr. Blake has done, while he pretends to abhor it. Two
senses of the word [ sanctified, Believers, Disciples, etc.] we yield him, viz.
as they signify those that are such in Heart, and those that Profess to be
such in heart. But these will not serve his turn, but he must moreover have a
third sort, even such as only Profess another faith short of Justifying? yea
and a faith which is specificially distinct from Justifying faith, yea and that
by a Physical specification (if he will be understood, for he falls upon me for
making but a Gradual difference, who yet ever affirmed a Moral Specific
difference.) So that we have not only many sorts of Sanctification, Faith,
etc. but also of Justification too. Whether we shall have as many Salvations,
and as many Heavens or not, in his sense, I yet find him not express.

But I would know why he does so usually say that [ a faith short of justifying
entitleth to B^^tism: and Disciples, Saints, etc. are titles that belong to
more then the justified. If indeed he take his own short faith to be really
justifying, and his own new made Saints to be really justified; Does not his
own ordinary appropriating the Titles of Regenerate and justified to (I know
not how to call them; for he has left me no one proper name for them that I
can remember,) -- to those that are the Heirs of Glory, show plainly that in
the primary signification they speak only of such, even in h^s own
apprehension: and that therefore the words simply expressed signify no other;
bare Professors of justifying faith being but seemingly, Analogically, secundum
quid, -- such; and his Professors of another kind of faith, being not such in
either sense.

Having gone thus far about Titles, let me add another, because I find Mr.
Blake so often apply it to the -- justified (I shall crave leave to use that term
as proper to them, or else I confess I shall be at some loss for a name for
them because he has taken them all out of my hand that I can think off.) And
this is the Title [ Regenerate] Christ has instituted no Baptism, but what is
to be a sign of present Regeneration (at least to men at age.) But to men that
Profess not a justifying faith it cannot be adminstired as a sign of present
Regeneration: therefore he has Instituted no Baptism to be administered to such.

The Major I have proved already in the first Argument. And its plain in Joh.
3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.] and so in Tit. ^.5. Where it is called the Laver of
Regeneration.] In both which though I am of their mind that think that the sign
is put for the thing signified; yet it may thence plainly appear what is the
thing signified; even Regeneration, or the new birth! yea so commonly was this
acknowledged by all the Church of Christ that there is nothing more common in
the writings of the Fathers, than to take the terms Regenerate, Illuminate etc.
and B^ptized] as signifying the same thing or at least spoken of the same
person: which occasioned one of our late Antiquaries so stiffly to plead that
Regeneration in Scripture signifies mere Baptism, and that all the Baptized
are Regenerate.

I grant that it often falls out that Baptism being misapplyed seals not
Regeneration at present, and that the sam^ person may afterward be Regenerate,
and his remembered Baptism may then be of use to him for the confirmation of his
faith. But this is not the Institutors commanded use of it, to be so
administered at first, if the party profess not saving Faith, though this review
of it is a Duty, where it was so abused at first (of which none afterward.)

The Minor I shall take for granted, while Regeneration stands in Scripture so
connexed to salvation; I know no Regenerate ones but the justified, or those
that profess to have a justifying faith: Nor has he proved any more.

Argum. 11. All that are meet subjects for Baptism, are (after their Baptism,
without any further inward qualification, at least without another species of
faith) meet subjects for the Lords Supper (having natural capacity by age) But
no one that professes only a faith short of justifying is meet to receive the
Lords Supper, therefore no such a one is a meet subject for Baptism.

Or thus: Those at age whom we may baptize, we may also admit to the Lords
Supper (without any other species of faith) But the Professors of a mere common
faith short of justifying, we may not admit to the Lords Supper, Ergo, etc.

The duty of a particular examination before the Lords Supper is nothing to our
purpose, because 1. that makes a man fitter than he was, but the want of it is
not in the cognizance of the Minister always, nor will not justify our
refusal of a godly man excepting some apparent gross evils. 2. And it is the
necessity of another faith and state that we are enquiring after, which will
not be proved by the necessity of an actual examination or excitation of our
present grace.

The Major Mr. Blake will easily grant me; and if any other deny it, I prove it
thus. 1. It is the same Covenant that both Sacraments Seal; one for initiation,
the other for confirmation and growth in grace: therefore the same faith that
qualifieth for the one, does sufficiently qualify for the other. For the same
covenant has the some condition.

2. They are the same heresies that are conferred in baptism and the Lords
Supper to the worthy Receiver. Therefore the same qualification (for kind) is
necessary for the reception. The Antecedent is commonly granted. Baptism
uniteth to Christ and gives us himself first, and with himself the pardon of
all past sins, etc. The Lords Supper by confirmation gives us the same things:
It is the giving of Christ himself, who faith by his Minister, take, eat,
dr^nk; offering himself to us under the signs, and commanding us to take
himself by faith, as we take the signs by the outward parts. He gives us the
pardon of sin, sealed, as procured by his body broken, and blood shed.

3. A member of Christ's Church, against whom no Accusation must be brought from
some contradiction of his first profession, must be admitted to the Lords
Supper: but the new baptized may be ordinarily such (at age); therefore if he
can but say, I am a baptized person, he has a sufficient principal title to
Baptism coram ecclesia (I mean such as we must admit) though some actual
preparation be necessary) unless he be proved to have disabled his claim on
that account either by nulling and reversing that profession, or by giving just
cause of questioning it.

4. The Church has ever from the Apostles days till now, without question,
admitted the new baptized, at age, to the Lords Supper, without requiring any
new species of faith to entitle them to it. I take the Major therefore as past
denial.

All the controversy between Mr. Blake and me is like to be about the Minor,
whether the profession of his common faith short of justifying, make people fit
for, or capable of the Lords supper. 1. No man should be admitted to the signal
profession of Receiving Christ as he is offered, who will not orally profess to
receive him as he is offered. But all that are admitted to the Lords supper,
are admitted to the signal profession of receiving Christ as he is offered.
Therefore no man that will not orally so profess to receive Christ should be
admitted to the Lords Supper. The Major is plain, because 1. Else we cannot
know who is fit, if he will not make profession of it. 2. His refusal shows
that he either understands not what he does in the Sacrament, or is wilfully
incapable, by infidelity, or impenitency. 3. The Minor is evident in the nature
of the Sacrament. The offer of the bread and wine with the command, Tade, eat,
drink, is signally the o^fer of the Lord Jesus himself, with a command to take
him. He that pu^s forth his hand to take the bread, professes thereby to
Accept of Christ as offered. If it be said, that Mr. Blakes professor of a
lower sort of faith, does profess to take Christ as offered, I say, No: This
proposition I here suppose as evident in it self, that no man but the sound
Believer does take Christ as offered, no not as Christ. He is offered as a
Savior from the Guilt and Reign of sin; and so Mr. Blakes professor does not
so much as profess to accept him. For I hope we are agreed, that so to accept
him heartily is saving faith. 2. No man should be admitted to receive a sealed
pardon of sin (or have it delivered to him) that does not profess that faith
which is of necessity to make him capable of a sealed pardon: but he that only
professes a faith short of justifying, professes not that faith which is of
necessity to make him capable of a sealed pardon. Therefore he is not to be
admitted to the Lords supper. It is a present sealed pardon that they profess
there to receive by the very actual receiving: God presently offers; and they
presently profess to accept it signally, and therefore must do so verbally.

3. No man is to be admitted to the Lords supper that professes not true
Repentance for sin. But Mr. Blake's Professor does not so: for that is
inseparable from saving faith. Therefore Mr. Blake must deny the Major, or say
nothing that I can imagine, but what is to no purpose. And if he do deny it,

1. I would desire him once to give us a just Description of that Repentance,
short of saving, which he will be satisfied with the Profession of, in his
Communicants. 2. I must confess as much as I am against separation, I never
intend to have communion with Mr. Blakes Congregation, if they profess not
saving Repentance and faith. And if he exact not such a Profession, I say still
he makes soul work in the Church. And when such soul work shall be voluntarily
maintained, and the Word of God abused for the defilement of the Church, and
Ordinances of God, it is a greater scandal to the weak, and to the
Schismatics, and a greater reproach to the Church, and sadder case to
considerate men, than the too common pollutions of others, which are merely
through negligence, but not justified and defended. And if Mr. Blake be angry
at my speaking these things, I cannot help it. I am bound to tell him of it as
a faithful Brother, that I doubt not but God is angry at his Doctrine, and the
great wrong that he does the Church of God, while he is so angry at his Brother
for resisting it. For my part, I would not have done his work, no nor justified
it as some of his near Learned Friends have done, for more than I will speak
of. Its like he will hardly exact a Profession of saving Repentance from the
lapsed for their Restoration to the communion of the Church, if he will not do
it of the Church themselves in their Sacramental communion.

Argum. 4. Furthermore they that will not profess true Love to Christ as a
Redeemer, are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper. But no man can Profess
true Love that will not Profess true faith: Ergo, etc.

The Major is proved, in that it is a Sacrament of communion in Love: We
receive the highest expressions of Christ's love, and are to receive them with
gratitude, which has always love in it.

Argum. 5. They that profess not true Pope of Christ's coming in Glory are not
to be admitted to the Lords Supper. But none can do that but the Professors of
a saving faith. Therefore the Major is proved, because it is the very end and
use of the Sacrament to exercise Hope of Christ's coming [ Do this in
remembrance of me till I come] which Implies Expectation, or Hope.

Argum. 6. No man is to be admitted to the Lords Supper that Professes not a
sincere love to the Saints as Saints: But so can none do that Profess not a
saving faith (without contradicting himself) Ergo.

The Major is proved in that the very business of that Church there, next their
communion with Christ, is to have communion with the Saints in Love: and if
they be at variance but with one, they must leave their gift at the Altar, and
go first and be reconciled to their Brother, and then come and offer their
gift. But Mr. Blake is so far from excluding the ungodly, that he would not
have us so much as dissuade them from coming. Page 196. he says to that [1. It
is as I suppose, without all Scripture Precedent to warn men upon account of
want of a new life by the Spirit, wholly to keep off from this or any other
Ordinances of Christ -- that we should warn men upon this account, upon this
very ground, to hold off from all address to Ordinances, I have not learnt.]
Answ. That we should dissuade them to come till they have that Faith and
Repentance and Love to the Brethren which is the fruit of a new life, I have
proved, and more have done it than you will ever well answer. And it will not
follow, as you pretend, that then none must come that have not the certainty of
their sincerity in the Faith, as I shall further show when I come purposely to
your Objections. And where you talk of unregenerate men's being incapable of
examining themselves, its a great mistake; else no wicked man could despair, if
he be not able to find himself to be wicked; And then it would be a sufficient
Evidence of Grace for a man to find himself graceless, which is a contradiction.

And its an unhappy confusion that Mr. Blake is guilty of almost all along,
while he pleads against the Interest of the Regenerate only in the
Sacraments, that he confounds most commonly the Professors of Justifying
Faith and holiness, with his Professors of a faith short of Justifying; and
thus in his arguing against Mr. Hooker and Galaspie, and others, carries on
the matter in the dark; as if these were all one, or the arguments will serve
for the one that will serve for the other; which is merely to lose his own and
his Readers labor, or leave him deceived, which is worse: How many leaves of
that volumn, and his former of the covenants, are guilty of this dark
misleading work?

I could willingly here answer his Arguments for unregenerate men's right to
this Sacrament; but 1. I shall meet with much more about their pretended right
to baptism anon, and the answer of those will serve for both. 2. And he has so
mixed the two Cases (of Professors of saving faith and of not saving) together,
that if I deal with him on the later, he may say, he speaks of the former.

The first Argument of Galaspies 201, which he answers, Mr. Galaspi^'s
Arguments defended against Mr. Blakes answ. Argum. 1.
is from [the Nature of Sacraments, which are to signify that we have already
Faith in Christ, Remission of sin by him, and Union with him] The sense of the
Argument is, That seeing Sacraments (according to Christ's institution) are
confirming signs, presupposing the thing signified both on our part and on
Gods; therefore none should use them that have not first the thing signified by
them (at least those at age) To this Master Blake answers, This to me is as
strange as new, that Sacramental signs declare and show that we have Faith and
remission of sins. The Sacrament now in question is a sign of the body and
blood of Christ, in whom by faith remission of sins may be obtained I know; but
that it is a sign either that we do believe, or that we have remission of sin
otherwise than upon believing (to which this engages, but not presupposes) I
know not, Repl. Though I undertake not to defend all the Arguments that other
men use in this Case; yet this does so much concern the cause of baptism which
I am now debating, that I shall give you this reply to it: 1. The sacramental
Actions are signs as well as the substance of bread and wine. The Offer with
Take, eat, signifies the offer of Christ to us, to be received and applied:
the Taking, and Eating, and Drinking signifies our Acceptance, and Application
of him. With himself is offered the pardon of sin, and given to all that Accept
him, which by Taking, Eating and Drinking we profess to do. It is my duty to
tell you, that it is sad that a Treatise of Sacraments should profess not to
know, that our believing and Remission is here signified. Its pity but this had
been known before you had written of them, at least Controversally. What
Divines are there that deny the Sacraments to be mutual signs and seals,
signifying and sealing our part as well as Gods? and how ill do you to wrong
the Church of God by seeking to make men believe that these things are new and
strange? If it be so to you, its pity that it is so: But sure you have seen Mr.
Gatakers Books against Doct. Word and Davenant wherein you have multitudes of
sentences recited of our Protestant Divines, that affirm this which you call
new. It is indeed their most common doctrine, that the Sacrament does
pre-suppose Remission of sin, and our faith, and that they are instituted to
signify these as in being; (though through infancy or error some may not have
some benefits of them till after,) it is the common Protestant Doctrine, that
Sacraments do solemnize and publicly own and confirm the mutual Covenant
already entered in heart; as a King is crowned, a Soldier listed, a Man and
Woman married, after professed consent: so that the sign is Causal as to the
Consummation and Delivery (as a Key, a Twig and Turff in giving possession),
but consequential to the Contract as privately made, and the Right given
thereby: So that the soul is supposed to consent to have Christ as offered
first (which is saving faith) and then by receiving him Sacramentally delivered
to make public profession of that consent, and publicly to receive his sealed
Remission. Mr. Corbet (cited by you) might well say, that primarily the
Sacrament is Gods Seal; but did he say that it is only his, and not secondarily
ours? And in the next words, you do in effect own part of the doctrine your
self, which you have thus wondered at as new and strange, saying [ I confess it
is a symbol of our Profession of Faith; but this is not the Faith spoken to,
neither is Remission of sins annexed unto it.] Answ. If you put ( Profession)
for the thing professed, you speak obscurely, when you might have spoken
plainly: But if you mean as you speak, (taking Profession properly) then 1. You
yield that the Sacarment is our symbol, and so declares or signifies our
Action as well as Gods. 2. And it is not only a sign of our Profession, but a
Professing sign and therefore a sign of the thing professed: For the external
sign is to declare the Internal acts of the mind, which without signs others
cannot know: And therefore the Actions of Taking, Eating, Drinking, do signify
the same Internal Acts which a verbal Profession does signify. As therefore
the Words, and outward Actions are two distinct signs of the same Internal
Acts, so are they two ways of Profession. My signal Actions do not signify my
words, (which are plainer signs themselves, and therefore need not darker to
express them) but they both express my mind: so that they are not only Symbols
of our Profession, as you speak, but Professing Symbols. 3. And if so, then
they must be signs and Professions of those Internal Acts which correspond with
them; which is the Inward Taking Christ, and Eating his Flesh, and Drinking his
Blood by Faith, which (no doubt) are the proper acts of saving faith. 4. And
therefore this is the faith spoken of, and Remission of sins is annexed unto it,
(which you deny) though it seems you will speak of the Profession of a common
faith, to which Remission is not annexed.

The second Argument was from some Scriptures, Galaspie's Argum. 2. defended.
proving that the Sacrament necessarily supposes Conversion and says, and
therefore is not to work it. To this Mr. Blake Answers; 1. By referring to what
he has said in another book about some of these Texts; and thither I shall
follow him: 1. About Mark. 16.16. he speaks, Treat. of Cov. page 243. Because
he confesses that these Texts are spoken of Baptism (and so are more to my
principal end, and will hold as to the Lords Supper only:) I shall here peruse
his Answers, having used the same Texts my self before. But (now I peruse the
place) I find that his words of Mark 16.16. are those that I have already
answered in my former Reply to him: and you may peruse his Rejoinder, if worth
the labor. The same I say of his words on Act. 8.36, 37. on Act. 2.^8. in page
392. I find nothing to our purpose worth a Reply; but his Contest with Mr.
Tombs, let Mr. I -- regard. To Act. 2 41. he now answers, [ It speaks no more
than ready Acceptance of the tender of the Gospel; and whether this
necessarily imply saving faith, let Ezekiel. 33.31. Mat 13.20, 21. Gal. 4.15. be
consulted.] To which I reply, 1. If by [ the tender of the Gospel] you mean [
the Gospel tendred], then either it is [ the Gospel as the Gospel], declaring
the work of Redemption, and offering us a Savior to deliver us from sin and
wrath: and this no unregenerate man did ever gladly or heartily ^ccept. Or else
it is [ the Gospel as a Novel doctrine; or only that part of it which offers
them pardon without the other part which offers salvation from sin it self.
And this is mentioned in the Texts (or some of them) that you refer us to: But
that this is not meant in the Text, Act. 2.41. is plain; because it was the
doctrine of Redemption, Faith and Repentance which they gladly received, and in
prosecution of it sold all, and lived in the Communion of Saints in the Praises
of God. 2. Or else by [ the tender of the Gospel] you mean, that which the
Gospel tendereth: And that is, Christ as Christ with his full salvation, which
no unregenerate man does heartily Accept though pardon alone they would
willingly have: but that's not the tender of the Gospel. If [the glad
Acceptance of the tender of the Gospel] that is, of Christ as Christ, and his
full salvation, be not justifying or saving Faith, I despair of ever knowing
what it is: and if this Acceptance or Faith be common, all is common. I still
believe that Justifying faith [is the Assent to the Truth of the Gospel, and
hearty Acceptance of Christ as he is there offered, or of Christ as Christ]

And having distinguished of the Object, so must we of the Act. Its one thing
to accept indeed by hearty Consent, and another thing to accept ore tenus, or
to say I accept it. The former only the Godly have, as to [ Christ as Christ]:
the Unregenerate may ore tenus, verbally Accept Christ as Christ, and heartily
be willing to have pardon by him, and submit to some common Reformation, least
they should miss of that pardon: but Christ as Christ, they will not accept.

Now to the Texts: And its hard that you should allege Ezekiel. 33.31. for [
ready Accepting the tender of the Gospel,] when the Text says plainly, that
their hearts went after their coveteousness, and they hear the word and would
not do it, though they took pleasure to hear the Prophet, as a minstrel to
tickle their ears and not as a Minister to save them from sin: when as these in
Acts 2. sold all and lived in Community with the Saints. Those Mat. 13.20, 21.
received the external Message, and Christ himself ore tenus, by verbal
Acceptance, and Internally they would have had Christ ad hoc for their own
ends, as a subject or servant to their worldly Interests; but they never
received Christ as Christ, to save them from the world, and self, and sin; for
these were still preferred before him; nor did they ever accept of God as their
God, that is, their chief good and chief Lord. I am bold therefore (by your
Patience) to say, that as to the Acceptance of Christ as Christ, or God as
their God, or the Holy Ghost as their Sanctifier, they cannot be said to have
done it, but equivocally: and no otherwise did they receive the tender of the
Gospel. As for the Galathians, chap. 4.15. 1. All were not in Love with Paul on
the same account: and all love to the Preacher signifies not an Acceptance of
the tender of the Gospel. 2. And you cannot prove but that these Galathians did
it sincerely, and were sincere when this was spoken, for all their yielding so
far to the temptation of false Teachers. (Of which I have spoken before.) Of
Acts 10.47. hereafter.

The sense of the third Argument, Galaspie's Argum. 3. defended.
is, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper gives us New food, viz. the Flesh
and Blood of Christ. Therefore it supposes the new Birth and Life.]

To this Mr. Blake says [1. Metaphors are ill Materials, to make up into
Syllogisms.] Repl. 1. They are such as Christ used John 6. and frequently in
Reasoning; and therefore I am resolved to believe they are good Materials. 2.
We must use Metaphors, or no words in some of the greatest Points in Divinity
(about God) 3. We cannot easily find fitter terms here then [ New B^rth, Life
and Food.] And if you had rather have many words then one, change [ Food into
special means of continuing or increasing our New Life.] But this is a long
term for a Syllogism.

[2. Says Mr. Blake, A difference may be put between ordinary and quickening
food] Repl. You should have told us your difference, and how it concerns our
case, if you would have had us taken notice of it. [3. He says, The word gives
new Food, and yet supposes not new life, 1 Pet. 1.^.] Rep. The clean contrary
is the scope of the Text you cite. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the word, that ye may grow thereby. The Word therefore as Food, does suppose
new Birth, and Life. Christ as our first life is given in the Word to those
that had not life before; but Christ as our Food is given after both in the
Word and Sacrament.

But you say, [ There is a Sacramental work preceding our eating, and there
Christ is set forth to the aggravation of sin, to carry on the work of
Contrition and Compunction.] Rep. Its a sorry arguing, that because there is
that in the Sacrament which may benefit an ungodly man to see, that therefore
he has right to receive it, yea or is like to have benefit by it. He that will
not consent that Christ shall be his full Savior, may be moved to consent by
seeing a Sacrament True, though it is not appointed to such ends, yet its
possible. But how should he be moved to consent by receiving it, and so
signa^ly Professing to consent when he does not? that is, by lying?

The fourth Argument is from Rom 4.11. Galaspie's Argum. 4. denfeded.
Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith therefore so is Baptism;
therefore so is the Lords Supper; therefore it belongs only to justified
Believers. To this Mr. Blake answers, 1. Then Ismael and each male were
justified. Rep. 1. He whom you answer spoke only of the Adult: and then you
should have said only then Ismael and all the males that had true right to
Circumcision, were either justified believers, or the children of such, or (as
to Church right) of those that Professed themselves such. And that is true. 2
And it is lis sub judice yet, whether the Synod of Dort, Davenant, etc. or Mr.
Gataker were in the right, and so whether all the seed of justified persons
have an Infant justification with them, or not?

You add that, [ Abraham's Circumcision there is not made a proof of h^s
justification.] Repl. He that makes it the Instituted Nature or use of
Circumcision to be a Seal of a Righteousness of Faith which the person had
before, does make his Circumcision a proof of his foregoing Righteousness of
faith. But so did Paul concerning Abraham: therefore, etc. 2. Paul may give us
a full proof of it, though he spoke those words to another intent.

The fif^h Argument is to the same purpose with the former, as Mr. Blake
recites it, and therefore I shall say no more to it, his answer requiring no
more. The sixth Argument he passes by himself. Galaspie's Argum. 5. and 6.
defended.


The 7. Argument is from the Necessity of a wedding garment: Argum. 7. defended.
I confess I do not think that it is the Sacrament only that is meant by tha^
feast: but it is Christ as offered in the Gospel with his benefits, which in
the Sacrament is spec^ally represented: and coming in, is their coming into the
visible Church by Profession; and the scope of the Parable is to show these two
things. 1. That he tha^ invited them to come in, did intend that they must come
in that case, and with that preparation as is answerable to the nature of the
feast, and is for the Honor of the Bridgegroom or Master of the Feast: and
therefore they should so have come. 2. That because they so came not, they
shall only suffer as those that came not, but also be cast out into a greater
degree of misery, that is, because they come not with an upright, penitent,
true believing heart, disposed to Obedience. Now the thing that Mr Blake should
answer, is, whether it be not hence proved that men should have the Wedding
garment of sincere faith before they come into the visible Church (they or
their Parents) and much more before the Lords Supper? God says, Friend, how
came thou in hither not having on a Wedding garment? But of this more anon.

Where Mr. Blake says [ The world may lay as fair a claim to this wedding
Fe^st as the Supper. I reply. Neither one nor the other is it, simply
considered in it self, but as a Church privilege or a sign of our
Church Membership. And so the word of promise claimed, or other parts and uses
of it proper to Church Members, are included with the Sacraments; but not the
word as preparing, and common to those without. The Lord of that Feast says
not, [ Friend, why wast thou invited h^ther?] for it was done by his own
appointment: but [ Friend how came thou in hither?] that is, I Invited thee
not to come without the wedding garment to disgrace my house, but to bring it
with thee? This therefore of Mr. Blakes is no answer.

The 8^h. Argument is [That ordinance which is not appointed to work Faith,
Argum. 8. defended.
is no coverting ordinance: but etc.] Faith comes by hearing,] etc. To which
Mr. Blake answers that reading and seeing Miracles may also convert, and so may
Sacraments as not being opposite but subordinate.] I reply. Hearing as the
chiefest way of Reception, is put for all the rest: It is the word heard or
read, or some way received, that is the appointed means of Conversion. Its
possible the Sacrament may be a means too: but give us as good proof that it
was appointed to that use, or may be used to that end purposely by the
unconverted, as we shall prove the same of the Word, and you shall carry the
Cause.

The ninth Argument is, Argum. 9. defended.
[That Ordinance which has neither the promise of the grace of Conversion
annexed to it, or any example in the Word of God of any converted by it, is no
converting Ordinance: But etc. Ergo.]

To this 1. Mr. Blake answers ad homine^, which is not worth repeating ( that
examples will not satisfy his Adversary). 2. That we have as many examples of
men's conversion by the sacrament, at we have of their receiving strength and
nourishment.] Repl. A wonderful confidence! If Mr. Blake will bring as good
proof of any converted by it, as we can, that the eleven Apostles, that the
Church at Jerusalem, Acts 2. and 4. and the rest of the Churches were
strengthened by it, he will make good that Assertion. 3. What he says of our (
not having precedents by name) is nothing to the purpose. If he can prove it of
any named or unnamed, specially of Societies, it will suffice. 4. He tells us
that [ The examples of Conversion by the word perhaps well examined would prove
short of such Conversion as is here intended. The Conversion in
Gospel-Narratives is to a Christian profession.] Repl. 1. This is too unkind
dealing for any Preacher of the Gospel to use with that Word which converted
him, and has brought in so many thousands to Christ, and which he himself
preaches for the conversion of others. I should offend the patience of the
Reader to stand to confute this, by proving that the Word has been a means of
true saving Conversion, yea the ordinary means. I refer Mr. Blake to what I
have said before of the state of the Churches that Paul wrote to: Was there not
one sort of Ground that received the seed in depth of earth and brought forth
fruit? Was not Paul sent by preaching to open men's eyes and turn them from the
power of Satan to God? Act. 26 v. 18. Does not Paul in all his Epistles speak
of the Saints, as converted savingly by the word of the Gospel? What heaps of
clear Testimonies might we bring out of his Epistles? How contrary is this new
Doctrine to the Word, and all the ancient Churches, and all approved
Protestants Judgments? I would we had such Evidence of true Conversion now
among our Professors as the multitude of Converts gave, Act. 2. and 4. and as
the Jailer gave, Act. 1.6. and the Eunuch, Act. 8. and as Lydia, and many other.

2. But what if the Word had not truly converted them? its somewhat to be
brought to an outward Profession of true faith, which the rest were that were
then Church Members: But the Profession of your faith of another species, is
not [ the Profession of a Christian Faith,] though you call it so. If you will
give me but as good proof of any one baptized person that was brought but to
the Profession of this lower Faith, as I will give you of multitudes that were
brought to true saving Faith by the Word, and more to the Profession of it, I
will say that you have done that which never man did before you. I pray make
trial for the proof of some one.

Well! But the main strength of the Argument which you had to answer, was
concerning the Promise. To which you say, [1. When the adversary shall bring a
Promise made to the Sacrament for spiritual strength it will happily be found
of equal force to the giving of a new life.] Repl. You next say, Implicit
Promises may serve: Show but one such. You say, [ Every Promise made to the
Word is made to the Sacrament.] Repl. Prove that, and take all. Though we have
no Promise particularly of converting this or that man by the Word, yet we have
that it shall convert many in general. Show where is a word of Promise that the
Sacraments shall convert any one? Sure, if Paul had but had such a Promise of
converting men by Baptizing them as he had of converting them by Preaching,
Act. 26.17, 18. and elsewhere, he would never have said, I thank God that I
baptized none of you, but Crispus, etc. for I am not sent to baptize but to
Preach the Gospel. 2. We find where in that Sacrament, men have Communion of
the Blood of Christ, and of his Body, and are partakers of the one Bread, and
have communion with one another, and are helped by it, in calling to
Remembrance Christ death (in hope of that coming:) all which are undoubtedly
strengthening, 1 Cor. 10, 16, 17. and 11.25, 26. Act. 2, etc. But you cannot
show where ever any was either united first to Christ, or his mystical Body by
the Lords Supper, or where it was appointed to be used to any such end, or
where ever any generaral or Implicit Promise of such a thing is made.

The tenth Argument was from the express danger of unworthy receiving, Argum.
10. defended.
1 Cor. 11.17. The sum of the answer is, That [ This Argument would take off
every Ordinance from the honor of Conversion.] Repl. But I conceive that the
strength of the Argument (or that which ought to be its strength) is wholly
overlookt; which is not from the Necessity of a Preparation in general, but of
a special Preparation, or Worthiness, which is not so pre-requisite to the
fruitful use of converting Ordinances. There is a saying by the superfluity of
naughtiness, malice, etc. requisite, before a man can in reason expect that the
Word should convert him: and yet it may convert thousands that are not so far
prepared, by doing that and the rest. But the Worthiness of a Partaker of the
Lords Supper must be more than this. For 1. That which the Church is Judge of,
must be that the Receiver be a Churchmember, professing true Faith, and not
contradicting that Profession by a scandalous life. 2. Himself is required to
examine himself for more, that is, whether he be sincerely what he Professes,
and Christ be in him (or else he is a Reprobate, and not to take the childrens
bread,) 2 Cor. 13.5. and also that he have a Particular Preparation, according
to the nature of the Ordinance. Its expressly Necessary, 1. That he discern the
Lords Body. 2. That he do this in remembrance of Christ's death, and with a hope
of his coming: and 3. For communion with Christ, and his Church, and to be
partakers of the one bread: 4. And with a Heart to take Christ and Eat; that
is, to feed on him by Faith, when he takes the bread. But all this cannot be
done by the unregenerate; nor is this prerequisite before a man come to the
Word, that it may convert him That Preparation which is pre-requisite in a meet
receiver of the Lords Supper, it was not instituted to effect (unless as it may
do it when God sees good, in an unworthy or prohibited use:) But true Faith and
Repentance are Preparations pre-requisite: Ergo etc.

You cannot say, that to the hearing of the Word as a means of conversion, true
faith and Repentance is so requisite. The text you mention 1 Pet. 2.1.2. I say
again, speaks of the confirming and edifying use of the word, and not of the
converting use. The converted must bring true says to the Word if they will
expect increase of it: but the unconverted must not needs bring true faith, if
they will be brought to believe by it.

3. Yet remember that we say not that men ought to forbear coming that are
unconverted; but that they ought to come; but how? To believe and repent, and
so to come, and to do it in this order and no other, and they ever lie under
all this Obligation.

You next instance in Prayer, and conclude that [ As for Prayer there is no
more ground or color to make it a converting Ordinance than the Supper, etc.]
Repl. 1. A man that has but common desires may be persuaded to ask for what he
so desires: Though he have no Promise of Acceptance, you do not find him
threatened with judgment for such a Prayer (so it be not grosl^ hypocritical or
wicked) as he is for unworthy receiving the Supper, without a discerning the
Lords Body. 2. When we exhort any man to pray for Christ's pardon, the Spirit,
etc. we therein exhort him to desire them; for desire is the soul of Prayer,
and the chief part of its essence: Now the first of these desires which we
exhort them to, is conversion it self, even that they would turn to God by a
change of their wills, and express them in Prayer. 3. I can show you where the
wicked are commanded to seek the Lord, that is, by Prayer to express their
returning hearts, which implies their returning it self; but you cannot show
where ever they are commanded to communicate with the Church in the Sacrament,
but in this order, first to be converted and repent, and so baptized, and so
communicate: or if Baptized already* to be Penitents first, and Communicants
next.

But if you would have all exhorted to the Lords Supper for conversion, whom we
are bound to exhort to Prayer for conversion, you would do that which I confess
I dare not do.

The 11. Argument was, Argum 11. defended.
that Ordinance which is Eucharistical and consolatory, supposes such as
partake of it to have part and portion in that thing for which thanks is given,
etc. but etc. To this its answered, that [ the assumption might as well have
bin of the Word and Prayer, which are Eucharistical and Consolatory.] Repl. 1.
To hear a Sermon is not to give thanks. 2. The Application of the Word must be
according to men's various states. An unregenerate man may take this for
consolation, If I be converted and repent and believe, I shall be saved.] A
true believer may apply it to another measure of consolation, [ because I am a
believer, this Promise is mine, that is, secureth me of the benefit.] Now if
the Impenitent and unbeliever shall do the later, he sins such another sin as
if he received the Sacrament, which is an Ordinance Instituted for personal
assumption and application of the general Promise.

2. As for Prayer. 1. To petition is not to give thanks. 2. And for
Thanksgiving it self, an Impenitent man may not give thanks for true saving
faith, Repentance, part in Christ, and hope of Glory, though he may for the
mercy that he has, because he may not lie. Now in the Lords Supper we must
give thanks for our part in Christ, and pardon, and life through him: or at
least, for the present Gift of Christ to us which we consent to accept.

Its added, [ This Ordinance is not wholly Eucharistical, etc. It is for
humbling as well as for comforting.] Repl. But if the other use be common to it
with other Ordinances, and here Inseparable from the Eucharistical, then other
Ordinances may be used to that end; but this may not by him that may not do
both; because if he receive the Sacrament; he signally Professes both.

The substance of the twelfth Argument, with its answer, is spoke to before:
Argum. 12. defended.
where Mr. Blake says, that [ The unregenerate may so far be suitably worthy
for this work, that he may know himself called to it, and that it would be his
sin to hold back from it, and he may hopefully expect a blessing in it.] I
reply: 1. That he is called to it remotely: that is, first to repent and
believe, and to communicate, we yield; and that it is every man's sin that keeps
off, that is, that comes not in this order. But that he may lawfully come
before this Repentance, you never proved, nor shall do, I think. 2. I would you
could show us on what ground he may hopefully expect a blessing in it. True
hope goes not beyond the promise: but the unregenerate have no promise (unless
the Arminians be in the right) of a blessing on any Ordinance; much less on
that which they cannot prove that they may use till they are converted. Yet
Hope in a larger sense they may have, where they can prove that God has set
them a work though they have no promise. But that's not here.

The 13th. Argument is, Argum 13. defended.
That Ordinance which was instituted for Communion of Saints, is intended only
for Saints, etc. Its answered by distinguishing of Sants as ( such by calling
and separation for God (or regeneration: and that the Lords supper is the
privilege of the Church as visible.) Repl. Its one thing to ask, Who may
demand it and come there? and another to ask, To whom may we give it? We may
give it to all professedly separated for God. None may ask or take it but those
that are heartily separated to God. But your Professor of a lower faith is
neither of these, and therefore may neither seek it, nor may we give it him, if
he do seek it. Whoever professes himself separated for God, does profess
saving sanctification, which consists therein. Self and Earth is highest in
all the unregenerate: therefore they are not separated heartily to God.

The 14th. Argument was, Argum. 14. defended.
[If Baptism it self (to the adult) is not regenerating or converting, then not
the Lords supper: but etc.] This Argument Mr. Blake has no more to say to, but
that this seems to suppose an opinion of Conversion by the very work done,
which he disclaimeth. But here is no such supposition at all intimated; and he
should have dealt with it as he found it, and not so have bawkt it, especially
when Mr. Gilaspie had so explained and confirmed it. And because Mr. Blake
thought best to silence Mr. Gilaspie's proof of his Assumption; and I think it
worthy the Readers observation, at least, that he may see how far Mr. Blake is
from truth in his affirmations of the singularity of my opinion, I shall here
transcribe them.

[Aaron 's Rod blossoming, page 514.515. The assumption) (that baptism it self
is not a Regenerating Ordinance) I prove thus: 1. Because we read of no persons
of age baptized by the Apostles, except such as did profess faith in Christ
gladly received the Word, and in whom some begun work of the Spirit of Grace
did appear (I say not that it really was in all, but somewhat of it did appear
in all). 2. If the baptism of those who are of age be a regerating Ordinance,
then you suppose the person to be baptized to be an unregenerate person (even
as when a Minister first preaches the Gospel to Pagans, he cannot but suppose
them to be unregenerate) But I believe no Conscientious Minister (N. B.) would
adventure to Baptize one who has manifest and Infallible signs of
unregeneration. Sure we cannot be answerable to God if we should minister
Baptism to a man whose works and words do manifestly declare him to be an
unregenerated unconverted person. And if we may not initiate such a one, how
shall we bring him to the Lords Table?]

The fifteenth Argument is [If Baptism even of the aged must Necessarily
precede the Lords Supper* then this is not a converting Ordinance: Argum 15.
defended.
But etc.] The reason of the consequence is, because true Repentance and faith
are professed, and Remission of sin sealed in Baptism. Mr. Blake denies the
consequence, because all the Baptized are not Regenerate. Rep. But all the
Adult Baptized according to Christ's Institution are Regenerate: (of Infants its
yet under debate) And if any be not so, it is they that erroneously seek that
which they should not have sought.

Argum. 16. defended.
The last Argument there mentioned by Mr. Blake, is from the Parable of the
Prodigal, who returned before he had the Robe, Ring, Shoos Fatted-calf, etc.
Mr. Blake answers that [ All Ordinances are to bring a Prodigal to such a
returning posture] which is a mere begging the question, and not answering the
Text, which Interpreters usually thus expound.

The next Argument is page 245. recited [ From the Directory, where the
Ignorant, Argum. 17. defended.
scandalous, and profane, that live in any sin or offense against their
conscience, are warned not to presume to come nigh that holy table. He answers
[ it is meant of those that purposely resolve to hold their sin; and doubtless
that purpose standing, here is no comfort to be put into their hands. As Mat.
5.23, 24. Sacraments will not be accepted from that hand where malice is seated
in the heart, and implacably continued: but it follows not, but that where the
soul is startled and such resolutions for sin do not appear, this may be a
means, etc.] Repl. 1. You add your own corrupting gloss to the Directory: They
say [ warn them to forbear that live in sin against conscience,] You add, [ the
meaning is, if they resolve to continue in it,] And I pray you why will you
turn us to men's resolutions, which is a secret of their hearts for a discovery
of those whom we must refuse?

Is there the vilest Murderer, or Adulterer, that is not purposed to leave it
before he dies? 2. But what if he resolve not to continue it? Is it not bad
enough if he will not resolve to leave it? Doubtless this shows Impenitency, and
the other can do no more. 3 But yet you have here destroyed all your Cause in a
word. For you have here excluded all unregenerate men: for all the unregenerate
are habitually resolved in most heinous sin, and that against conscience. They
all will confess that God is better then the world, and yet they all esteem the
world before God, and love it better than God; they are a habitually resolved
to please their Flesh before God, and look to their worldly felicity before his
Glory. I have your consent therefore on this ground to conclude, that [ a
Sacrament will not be accepted at their hands.] 4. But do you not contradict
this, when you add [ yet if such Resolutions do not appear etc.] What if they
appear not? I hats something to the Minister, but that's nothing to prove Gods
acceptance, or the man's Title to claim the Sacrament. Should not secret sin
deterr as well as open? God and himself know them, though we do not.

The 18th Argument [Mr. Blake overpassing, answers the 19th which is, It is not
communicable to any but the penitent: Argum. 19. defended.
therefore not a converting Ordinance] or, [ That Ordinance that is not
communicable to any but the penitent, is not converting: But, etc. Mr. Blake
denies the Major to be true, unless limited, and gives an instance; Reproof
is for Conversion: yet not to all: all converting Ordinances are not
promiscuously to be applied to all.] Repl. An unanswerable Argument, and a mere
impertinent Answer. Is it not a wonder how the Major could be denied? without
distinguishing of Penitence, and saying that the Sacrament is communicable to
the impenitent as to saving Repentance, but not as to common Repentance, and
therefore may convert to saving Repentance. But he answer as if the Major had
been this. [ That Ord^nance which is for conversion, is for all]: when it is
contrarily, [ That which is for the converted only is not to convert] Mr.
Gilespies 20th. Argument, which Mr. Blake passes by, is that the contrary
Doctrine as it joineth with the Papists, so it contradicts the Protestants
and the Ancient Churches and Writers.
So that Mr. Blake says nothing at all to the Argument, when he pretends to
deny the Major, which taken of sound Repentance is as undeniable as that [ The
Medicine that is only for the living, is not to make the dead alive]: so ( the
Ordinance which is only for the Penitents is not to convert men to repentance.]
To which he answers, by saying that [ Converting ordinances are not to be
promiscuously applied.] What Is that to the Major, or Argument? The Pope dwells
not at Rome, because the Turk dwells at Constantinople. So much for these
Arguments and their Answers: the rest I shall pass over which Mr. Blake has
about Sacraments being converting Ordinances; Only telling him, that I
confidently deny his great Assertion, page 241. [the unconverted have a
fundamental proper right to the Lords Supper] and yet do not find my self in
any [ inext^icable snares:] nor will by difficulties be frighted to that
opniion.

I shall only here add in a word, what I yield about the Sacrament being a
converting Ordinance; viz. 1. Some that have no Right to partake of it, may
possibly be converted by looking on and hearing the adjoined word. 2. Its not
impossible that he that sinfully and without title comes to receive it, may
occasionally receive good by it. There is that there declared that has a
tendency to do good. 3. But whatever it may be a means of beyond Divine
Appointment through his mere good pleasure, yet it is not Appointed to be
demanded or taken by any Impenitent unconverted man for his Conversion. 4, Yet
if a Minister know them not to be impenitent, but yet suspecteth it, as he must
give it them upon their profession, so he may desire in the managing of the
work, that it may be converting to them if they are not converted; that is,
that God will bring that truth to the heart which the signs represent to the
eyes; and make it an occasion of good to them that are out of their way in
demanding it. 5. Yet it is rather the Hearing and Seeing, than the Taking,
Eating and Drinking, that we may with any encouragement pray for this Blessing
on. 6. I never know or heard of any converted by the Receiving of the
Sacrament: but diverse I have know converted by the occasion of it. As some that
(by other kind of Doctrine than Mr. Blakes) having been brought to apprehend
the danger of unworthy receiving, have been awakened so in their preparations
for fear of eating damnation to themselves, that it was a means of their
conversion; And some that by after-fears, least then did eat unworthily; And
perhaps some by the serious speeches of the Minister in Prayer and Instruction
before and after: but none by receiving it self.

It is therefore little to his main purpose or cause, that Mr. Blake sect. 13.
Prop. 11. page 200. attempts to prove that ( the Lords Supper with the word as
appendant to it, may be serviceable to bring up those of Covenant Interest to
the terms and Propositions of the Covenant, may serve to work a man of
Profession of faith unto faith saving and Justifying: a man in the Name the
Lord's, to turn unfeignedly and sincerely to the Lord.) For x. his half
Professor is not in the mutual Covenant (which its like he means by
Covenant Interest.) 2. The distinction between a Nominal Christian and a
Sincere; a Profession of Justifying faith, and that faith it self, leaves out
the persons that he has to defend; that is, The Professors of another species
of Faith. 3. Its one thing to prove that the Sacrament may convert the
unconverted, that is, that its possible, and that it is a thing that eventually
has come to pass; and another thing to prove, that it is commanded to the
unconverted or allowed them to be used to that end. The later is the thing that
should be proved by him, and not the former only.

But because his Proposition is somewhat more bashful than some of the
Arguments brought as to prove it. (which have the face to look further) I shall
briefly examine them.

Page 200.201. Argum. 1. Mr. Blake's Arguments answered. Read Galespie's Chap.
14. l. 3. and there you will see more Arguments answered, and Mr. Blake's cause
overthrown.
Men of that interest (says he) that Baptism receives, as the intention of
the work in order to salvation, these the Lords Supper serves to carry on by
sanctification to salvation: But Baptism receives men of visible Profession
only, etc.] Answ. 1. I distinguish between the secret Intention of God de
eventu when he Instituted his Ordinances. 2. and the Appointed end or use of
them, and the Intention which he commands men. And as to the last, I
distinguish between the Appointed end and use of them as to the Minister and as
to the Receiver: And so here are three distinct Questions before us. Quest. 1.
Whether God, who appointed this Sacrament, did intend that it should eventually
be used to the Conversion of any souls? To this I answer. No man can tell but
by the Event. But I will not deny it, that which a man sinfully does, may be
the means of his Conversion. If a professed Pagan may be admitted to the Lords
Supper, no man can be sure that this (with the annexed word) may not be the
occasion or means of his Conversion. The same I say of the Excommunicate: yet
must we not therefore admit such. What God decrees to do by his Ordinances, is
one thing; and how and to what Ends we must use them, is another.

The second Question is, Whether the Minister may or must deliver the Sacrament
to the unconverted, with this Intention that he may be converted by it? To this
I answer, that the unconverted are of two sorts: 1. Such as profess not to be
converted, or savingly to repent and believe; and to these he may not
Administer it at all, and therefore not to such Ends. 2 Such as do profess
saving faith and Repentance; and to these he may administer it, with this
disjunctive end; that if the person be truly converted, it may confirm him; if
not, that if God so please, it may be a means of his Conversion.

The third Question is, Whether the unconverted may Demand and receive that
Sacrament as a means of Conversion? To which I answer flatly, No: whether it be
a saving Faith or another sort of faith which he Professes, if he have not
saving Faith it self, he may not Demand or Receive the Sacrament at all, and
therefore not to any such ends.

Now to come closer to Mr. Blake's Argument; 1. I grant the Major, (as far as
through the Lanthorn of his dark ambiguous phrases I can discern the sense of
it,) viz that we may admit those to the Lords Supper, that are justly admitted
to Baptism, if naturally capable, and have not since given cause to suspend
them. And here Mr. Blake shows, that it is the lower species of Faith that
entitles men (in his judgment) to the Lords Supper, because he maintains
that this lower species entitleth them to Baptism.

His Minor I grant of the Professors of saving Faith; and deny it of all others
that Profess only another faith: nor has he proved that such have a visible
Interest, or Profession, it being not Christianity, but only part of its
essence, which they Profess.

His 2. Argument is ( It is the mind of God they be admitted: therefore to this
end.] Answ. 1. It is not the mind of God that they should Demand and Receive
it: therefore not to this end. 2. It may not be the admitters principal end,
but a secondary, only on supposition that the Receiver be not what he seems to
be, and so be not a lawful demander of it. 3. It is not the will of God that
your Professor of another kind of faith only be admitted.

In the end he sums up his Argument thus [ Ministers must give the Sacrament so
as it may be to edification, and not certainly to destruction: But they must
give it to some not yet thoroughly sanctified: therefore some not thoroughly
sanctified may receive it to edification, and not to destruction.] Answ. 1.
Plus est in conclusione, quam in praemissis. You should only have concluded, [
therefore Ministers may give it. etc.) and not [ therefore some may Receive
it.) For 2. The word ( certainly) which you put in the Major (and leave out in
the conclusion) refers either to the Certainty of the Object. or Gods
subjective Certainty: or the receivers subjective Certainty; and in all these
respects its false. For if God or the Receiver were certain that it would prove
destructive, yet the Minister may give it, if demanded; but not if he be
certain of it himself. But 3. No Minister is required to be certain of the
Demanders state, or whether the Sacrament will prove to his edification or
destruction, nor whether the person intend rightly in it, but he is bound to
give it to a Professor of saving Faith that Demands it, and to intend his
good in it, which yet he cannot effect, if the Receiver be unmeet.

To the Minor I say, its true: but not of those that profess not true
sanctification. The conclusion as is said, is aliene: For though there can be
no Giving without Receiving, yet may there be lawful Giving when it is
unlawfully Demanded and Received: therefore from lawful giving upon an unlawful
Demand, to a lawful Receiving, is no just consequence.

Ad hominem, I would frame the like Argument on Mr. Blake's principles thus [We
must give the Sacrament to edification, and not certainly to destruction. But
we must give it to some that have not a Dogmatical faith: therefore some that
have not a Dogmatical faith, must receive it to edification, etc.] The Major is
his own: The Minor he dare not deny on his grounds: for we must give it to men
that Profess a Dogmatical faith, whether they have it or not: or else we must
give it to no man, because we know not the heart. The conclusion therefore is
unavoidable, that according to Mr. Blake's Principles, it is the end of the
Lords Supper to convert Heathens to Christ by receiving it, so they will but
lie, and say they are Christians first. I profess I see no way of Mr. Blake's
avoiding this, but by renouncing his dangerous Doctrine.

The 3. Argument is, [ The Law and the Gospel in their joint strength may
convert, etc. But in the Lords Supper there is Law and Gospel, etc. Ergo.]
Answ. 1. What may possibly fall out is nothing to the Question of Lawful
Demanding or Giving. 2. There Is neither Law nor Gospel in a wicked man's unjust
Demand and Reception, and Lying signal professing to take Christ when he does
not: but Law and Gospel is against it. 3. The Law and Gospel which you mention
as annexed to the reception are separable: and all you can thence prove, is,
that a wicked man may be converted by seeing and hearing, and therefore may see
and hear: but that's nothing to receiving. 4. Nor will it prove that he may see
and hear, because its possible he may be converted by it, because the same
Gospel is in its season with due application to himself to be preached to that
end; and Christ has not appointed his beholding the Application to another to
be the commanded means for such ends.

The 4. Argument is from the Heart breaking use of the Sacrament by aggravating
sin, etc. Where the London Ministers are cited, etc.) Answ. The same answer as
to the last may serve. And 1. A wicked man's Demand and reception has no
humbling use, (but as any Lie or other sin has) though his Beholding may. 2.
Its an exalting use that this humbling use prepares for, to the Receiver:
seeing therefore the wicked are incapable at present of the exalting use, they
must have that humbling word delivered by it self which they are capable of,
and not conjunct with that which they are incapable of. 3. The London Ministers
speak not of the first humiliation in the passage of the New Birth, but of
subsequential, at least, as to the first Intention of the work; and if of
conversion, it is but upon supposition that unjust Demanders do intrude. 4. By
the like Argument from the signification of the signs connext with the word,
(which declare Christ crucified and risen again) you might prove as well that
it is for converting heathens.

The 5 Argument is [ That which is annexed to the word to second it in that
very thing which works the soul to conversion to God, may bring etc.] Answ. 1.
To the Major, if it may convert, it follows not that it may be demanded to
that end. 2. To be added [ in that very thing] is not to be added [ to that
very use.] For the same word which confirms does convert; but the Sacrament
is not added to it for the converting use (as commanded) but for the confirming
use. To the Minor I answer by denying it as to the end. The Sacrament is not
annexed to that use or end, though to that thing: because this is a use which
the word has without the Sacrament, and the Sacrament added to the same word
is added for higher in^eparable uses which the unconverted are incapable of.
Its added to be a professing sign on our part that we take Christ and Remission
of sin by him; and a seal applicatory on ^hrists part: And because the wicked
are incapable of these special uses, they are incapable of a lawful receiving
of the Sacrament 2. You may as well by this Argument too, prove that it is for
conversion of Infidels Jews, Turks: For the Sacrament is annexed to the word in
those very things that are for their conversion.

The 6. Argument is from experience: To which I answer; All the experiences
which Mr. Blake mentions, are not only nothing for his cause, but abundantly
destructive to it. Many have been unwakened by fears of receiving unworthily to
their condemnation, as wicked men do: will it follow, that therefore they may
receive it who are wicked and unworthy? or that there is no such danger to them
if they do: Or rather that they should not receive while they are such, and
that there is danger if they do; sure it is some danger that is the matter of
their fear, and some threatening which is the ground: if it be their du^y to
receive it even while they know themselves to be wicked, because it is an
appointed means to their conversion, what need they so to fear it, unless they
fear the means of their own good? If they say, it is the unworthy receiving
which they fear; Its true, but that is to receive it in state of wickedness,
Impenitence and unbelief, as all the unregenerate do: surely it is the wrath of
God and eternal damnation which they fear, therefore they fear least it should
fix them in that state. But your worthy communicant is in state of damnation,
when only our unworthy communicant is such. Moreover will it follow, that
because other men's doctrine which are against you does put men into these fears
which occasion their conversion, that therefore your doctrine which abateth
such fears is sound? 2. Or will it follow that Receiving converteth, because
the fears of unworthy Receiving do convert or conduce thereto? surely
preparations and fears of unworthy Receiving are one thing, and the wicked man's
unworthy Receiving it self is another thing: The former may do much good, when
the later is like to do much hurt. The thing that such fear, is, least they
should have no saving part in Christ, or pardon, or eternal life, which you
confess your pretended worthy Receiver has not at all.

The 7. Argument is from the Confession of eminent Divines of an opposite
judgment, who will have all admitted present at the consecration, to see the
bread broken and divided.] Ans 1. Had you named those Divines, you had been the
more capable of an answer. I know some that have told men of your judgment,
that all their reasonings do prove no more than thus, that the seeing and
hearing, and not the taking may be fit to convert.] But I never knew any that
said they [ will have all admitted present to see etc.] 2. But what if they had
or did say so? What Is your consequence. How prove you that therefore they should
be admitted to receive? or that receiving is a means ordained and enjoined for
conversion, Bed^ In 1 Cor. 13. inquit Charitatem esse vestem nuptiaem.
because seeing and hearing is? so much for that Argument.

My 12. Argument is from Mat 22.12. [ Friend, how came thou in hither not
having on a wedding garment, and he was speechless.] To [ come in hither] is
[To come into the Church of Christ.] By the wedding garment is undoubtedly
meant, sincerity of true faith and repentance; so that I may hence argue; If
God will accuse and condemn men for coming into his Church or the communion of
Saints, without sincere faith and repentance, then it is not the appointed use
of Baptism to initiate those that profess not sincere faith and repentance. But
the former is plain in the text; Ergo, etc.

The 13th. Argument is this: We must Baptize none at age that profess not
themselves Christians; (nor any Infants but on such a Profession of the Parents
or Pro-parents) but they that profess only a species of faith short of
Justifying faith, profess not themselves Christians. Ergo. etc.

The Major is certain; because it is the use of Baptism to be our solemn
Listing sign into Christ's Army; our Initiating sign, and the solemnization of
our Marriage to Christ, and Professing sign that we are Christians, and we do
in it dedicate and deliver up our selves to him in this relation as his own. So
that in Baptism we do not only promise to be Christians, but profess that we
are so already in heart, and now would be solemnly admitted among the number of
Christians.

The Minor I prove thus: 1. No man is truly a Christian that is not truly a
Disciple of Christ (that is plain, Acts 11.26.) No man is truly a Disciple of
Christ that does not profess a saving Faith and Repentance (save the children
of such): therefore no man that does not so profess is truly a Christian. The
Minor I prove thus. No man is truly a Disciple of Christ that does not profess
to forsake all contrary Masters or Teachers, and to take Christ for his chief
Teacher, consenting to learn of him the way to salvation. But no man makes
this Profession that professes not saving Faith and Repentance: therefore no
man that professes not saving Faith and Repentance is truly a Disciple of
Christ. The Major is evident, in the nature of the Relation. The Minor is as
evident, in that it is an Act of saving Faith and Repentance, to forsake other
Teachers, and take Christ for our sole or chief Teacher in order to salvation.

2. No man is truly a Christian that professes not to take Christ for his
Lord and King, forsaking his Enemies: but no man does this but the Professors
of a saving faith: Ergo. etc.

3. No man is a true Christian that professes not to Take Christ for his
Redeemer, who has made propitiation for sin by his Blood, and to esteem his
blood as the ransom for sinners, and to trust therein: But none do this but the
Professors of saving Faith: therefore none else are Christians.

The Major of all these three Arguments is further proved, thus: No man is
professedly a Christian that professes not to Accept of Christ as Christ (or
to believe in Christ as Christ) But no man does profess to take Christ as
Christ that professes not to take or accept him as a Priest, Teacher and King:
Ergo. etc.

The Major is plain in it self, The Minor is as plain, it being essential to
Christ to be the Priest, Prophet and King. And from these essentials related to
us and accepted by us, does our own denomination of Christians arise. And that
a bare Assent without Acceptance does not make any one a Christian, is past
doubt, and shall be further spoke to anon. If Baptism then be commonly called
our Christening and so be our entrance solemnly into the Christian state, then
it is not to be given to them that are not Christians so much as by Profession:
but that Mr. Blake's Professor of another species of Faith is no Christian so
much as by Profession, I doubt not is here proved.

And furthermore, If a Faith defective in the Assenting part, about the
Essentials of its Object, serve not to denominate a man justly a Christian;
then a faith defective in the Consenting or Accepting part about the Essentials
of the Object, serves not to denominate a man a Christian: But the Antecedent
is true: therefore so is the Consequent. By [ Defective] I mean not only in the
matter of perfection of degree, but that wants the very Act it self.

The Antecedent is proved, because else the Turks are Christians; because they
believe so many and great things of Christ; and else a man might be a Christian
that denied Christ's death, or resurrection, or other Essentials of Christianity.

The Consequence is good: For Christianity is as truly and necessarily in the
will as in the understanding; consent is as essential an Act of covenanting as
any. So that I may conclude, that as he is no Christian that professes not to
believe that Christ is the Priest, Prophet and King; so he is no Christian that
professes not to consent and accept him for his Priest, Prophet and King: But
so does not Mr. Blake's Professor of another faith: therefore he is no
Christian, nor to be baptized.

The 14th. Argument is this: If we must baptize men that profess not saving
faith and repentance, then is it no aggravation of such men's sins, that they
either played the hypocrites in such Professions, or fell from them, or walked
contrary to them. (For no man can walk contrary to a Profession which was never
made:) But the Consequent is false, therefore so is the Antecedent.

Our Divines ordinarily charge wicked men with contradicting of Profession
which they made with God, either in Baptism or the Lords Supper. And they
expound many places of Scripture which the Arminians take as favoring their
Cause, to be meant according to the Profession of wicked men. Now it seems to
me, that Mr. Blake by his Doctrine does undertake to justify all these wicked
men, from this aggravation of their sin, and to take them off from repentance
and humiliation for it: For if they made no such Profession in baptism (if at
age) or in the Lords Supper, then it can be no aggravation of their sin that
they walk contrary to it: But I dare not undertake to secure them from the
punishment.

Argum. 15. If all (at age) that are baptized (and all that receive the Lords
Supper) must engage themselves to believe presently (in the next instant) yea
or at any time hereafter, with a saving faith, then must they Profess at
present a saving faith. Or, if we must baptize none that will not engage to
believe savingly, then must we baptize none that will not Profess a saving
faith. But the Antecedent is true: therefore so is the Consequent.

The Antecedent is Mr. Blake's Doctrine, who affirms that it is not necessary
that they that come to baptism or the Lords Supper, do Profess a present saving
faith, but its sufficient that they engage themselves to believe by such a
faith. The Consequence is proved thus.

1. It is not the Beginning of saving faith which we are to engage our selves
to in the Sacraments, but the Continuance: therefore the Beginning is
presupposed in that Engagement: and so we must no more baptize without a
Profession of Faith in present, than without an Engagement to believe
hereafter. The Antecedent is proved thus: There is no one word in Scripture,
either of Precept or example, where any person in baptism or the Lords Supper
does engage, or is required to engage* to begin to believe with a saving faith,
or to believe with a faith which at the present he has not: Show but one word
of Scripture to prove this, if you can; if you cannot, I may conclude that
therefore we must not require that which we have no Scripture ground to require.

2. This Engagement to believe savingly, is either for a remote distant time,
or for the next instant: ^ut no unbeliever (as to that faith) is called to
promise in Baptism such a saving faith, either at a distant time, or the next
instant: therefore not at all.

1. Not at a distant time: For first, that were to resolve to serve the Devil,
and be an unbeliever till that time. 2. And no man is sure to live any longer
time.

2. Not at the next instant: For first, that instant comes as soon as the word
of Promise is out of his mouth, even before Baptism; and therefore by that Rule
he must believe savingly before. 2. We may as well stay one minute or instant
to see whether he will perform his Promise, as to baptize him upon that bare
Promise of believing the next minute. 3. It is a ridiculous unreasonable
conceit, that any man should say, [I believe not savingly yet, but within a
minute of an hour I will;] and that this should be required in baptism and the
Lords Supper.

3. God makes it not the condition or qualification of them that are to be
admitted to Baptism or the Lords Supper, that they should Promise to do that
which they have no Moral Power to do, (I mean, such as the seed or habit of
Grace contains, as to the act:) But the unregenerate have no Moral Power to
believe with a saving faith: Ergo, etc.

The Major is proved thus: 1. To promise to believe savingly, is to Profess
that they are truly willing to believe savingly; but no wicked men are truly
willing so to believe: therefore they are not called to promise it; for that
were to be called to profess an untruth, and so to lie; Unless as they are
called to be really willing and promise both; and that is but to be sincerely
faithful and to promise to continue so. 2. It is not found any where in
Scripture that I know of, that God does call any wicked man to promise to be a
godly man or true believer before he is so; but only commands him to be so.
And if God never call such men to such a promise at all, then is it not the
condition or qualification of persons to be admitted to the Sacraments. (We
still speak of the aged.)

The Minor is proved from many Scriptures, and is the common Doctrine of all
Antipelagians, at least; We are dead in trespasses and sins: and must we
baptize and give the Lords Supper to such dead men upon a Promise that they
will be alive? Out of Christ we can do nothing: Without faith it is impossible
to please God. It is God that gives to will and to do of his good pleasure.
And no wicked man can tell whether God will give him the grace of saving faith:
therefore he cannot promise to have it. But I shall speak more to this under
the last Argument.

Argum. 16. If there can be no example given in Scripture of any one that was
baptized without the Profession of a saving faith, nor any Precept for so
doing, then must not we baptize any without it. But the Antecedent is true:
therefore so is the Consequent.

What is pretended this way we shall examine anon among the Objections. In the
mean time let us review the Scripture examples of Baptism, which might afford
us so many several Arguments, but that I shall put them together for brevity.
1. I have already showed that John required the Profession of true Repentance,
and that his Baptism was for Remission of sin. 2. When Christ lays down, in
the Apostolical Commission, the Nature and Order of his Apostles work, it is
first to make Disciples, and then to Baptize them into the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; And as it is a making D^sciples, which is first expressed
in Matthew, so Mark expounds who these Disciples are (as to the aged) by
pu^ting Believing before Baptism: and that we may know that it is Justifying
faith that he means, he annexeth first Baptism, and then the Promise of
salvation, Matthew. 28.19. Mar. 16.16. [ He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved.] This is not like some occasional Historical mention of Baptism, but
its the very Commission of Christ to his Apostles for Preaching and Baptism,
and purposely expresses their several works in their several places and Order.
Their first task is by teaching to make Disciples, which are by Mark called
Believers. The second work is to Baptize them, whereto is annexed the Promise
of their Salvation. The third work is to teach them all other things which are
afterward to be learnt in the School of Christ. To contemn this Order, is to
renounce all Rules of Order. For where can we expect to find it, if not here? I
profess my conscience is fully satisfied from this Text, that it is one sort of
faith, even saving, that must go before Baptism, and the Profession whereof the
Minister must expect. Of which see what is before cited out of Calvin and
Piscator.

That it was saving faith that was required of the Jews, and professed by them,
Acts 2.38, 41, 42. is showed already, and is plain in the Text.

Acts 8. The Samaritans believed, and had great joy, and were baptized into the
name of Jesus Christ ver. 8, 12. Whereby it appears that it was both the
understanding and will that were changed, and that it was not a mere Dogmatical
faith: and that they had the Profession of a saving faith (even Simon himself)
we shall show anon when we answer their objections.

Acts 8.37. The condition on which the Eunuch must be baptized was [ if he
believe with all his heart;] which he Professed to do; and that was the
Evidence that Philip did expect.

Paul was baptized after true conversion, Act. 9.18.

The Holy Ghost fell on the Gentiles, Acts 10.44. before they were baptized,
and they magnified God. And this Holy Ghost was the like gift as was given to
the Apostles who believed on the Lord Jesus, and it was accompanied with
Repentance unto life, Act. 11.17, 18.

Acts 16.14.15. Lydia's heart was opened before she was baptized, and she was
one that the Apostles [judged faithful to the Lord] and offered to them the
evidence of her faith.

Acts 16.30, 31, 33, 34. The example of the Jailer is very full to the
resolution of the question in hand. He first asks what he should do to be
saved. The Apostle answers him, [ believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall
be saved and thy house:] so that it was a saving faith that here is mentioned:
He rejoiced and believed with all his house, and was baptized that same hour of
the night or straight way. It is here evident that he professed the same faith
which Paul required, or else the equivocation would make the text not
intelligible. And that which was required was a saving faith.

Acts 18 8. [Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagouge, believed on the Lord
with all his house, and many of the Corinthians hearing, believed and were
baptized.] Here we have two proofs that it is saving faith that is mentioned.
One, in that it is called [ a believing on the Lord,] which expresses saving
faith. Another, in that it is the faith which related to the doctrine preached
to them, as is expressed in the word [ Hearing] that which they heard they
believed: but they heard the promise as well as the History of the Gospel; and
they heard of the Goodness as well as the Truth; and they heard Christ offered
to them as their only Savior; for Paul never preached Christ but in this
manner, and to these ends, even as might tend to their Justification, and
Salvation; and it was a saving faith that he still exhorted men to.

Those in Acts 19.5. were baptized as [ Believers in Jesus Christ] which is
saving faith; whether it were by John's Baptism, or by Paul, or others, I now
enquire not.

And what all the Churches were supposed to be to whom the Apostles wrote, I
have showed before. In a word, I know of no one word in Scripture that gives
us the least intimation that ever man was baptized without the Profession of a
saving faith, or that gives the least encouragement to baptize any upon
another faith.

But before we proceed, Mr. Blake's exceptions against some of these ^rguments
from the forecited texts must come under consideration, how little soever they
deserve it, page 166.

To what I said from Mat. 28.29. Mat. 28.29. vindicated.
[ I am very sorry to hear the constitution of visible Churches to suffer the
brand of making of counterfeit and half Christians] Answ. For all that I will
not be moved with pity to err because you are sorry to hear the truth. 1.
Church constitutions make not Christians, of one sort or other but contain them
when made. 2. And my arguing was to prove that every faithful Pastor must
intend the making of sincere Christians, and not only counterfeit or
half-Christians. This is a truth that so good a man should not have been sorry
to hear. 3. If you mean that visible Churches contain not counterfeit and
half-Christians, you might have been sorry long before this to hear both
Protestants and Papists say the contrary.

You add [ Its well known whose language it is, that all charging duty on
unregenerate persons is only to bring them to hypocrisy.] Answ. And if the end
of that duty were no higher than to bring men to be counterfeit Christians,
they had not said amiss. When we hear that charge, it is for persuading men to
hear, pray, etc. for sincere faith: But if I persuade men to become Christians,
and mean only the Professors of faith without the thing professed, or the
believing with another sort of faith, then I might well be charged with
persuading some to hypocrisy, and the other to be half-Christians. 2. You have
not yet proved that Baptizing the Professors of a lower faith, is the appointed
means to bring them to saving faith.

You say [ In order to make men sincere Disciples they must be made visible
professing Disciples] Answ. If there be not a palpable equivocation, you must
mean, that it is the same Discipleship which some have sincerely, and others
but visibly by profession: and then it must be the same faith. And then you say
to this effect that [ in order to make men sincere, they must profess and seem
to be so before, they are so, that is, a lie is the appointed means to make the
thing spoken become true] But if according to the current of your doctrine you
mean in the later branch of your distinction, those only that profess another
sort of faith, and so equivocate in the word Disciples, then I answ. 1. Your
Disciples are no Disciples, nor so called once in Scripture. 2. Nor is that any
thing to baptism, till you have proved that baptism also annexed to your
Discipleship, is a means appointed to bring them to a higher saving faith.

You tell us that [ men may be half Christians in order to be whole Christians]
Answ. But not baptized to that end, nor must the Preacher intend the making of
any half-Christians and no more.

What you mention out of Ames of taking stones out of the quarry, to polish,
etc. is nothing to the purpose. Baptizing them is not polishing them, that is,
preparing them for conversion, according to the Institution; but its the
placing polished stones in the building: To polish them for the building, is to
make them true Disciples, and not Professors of another kind of faith. P^g 168.
When I say that to be Christ's Disciples is to be one that unfeignedly takes him
for his Master, etc. You answer, that [ This is true as to the inheritance of
Heaven, but not as to the ininheritance of Ordinances: The Jew outwardly was
not thus qualified.] Repl. 1. Our question is, what is a Disciple? and what is
your answer to that, unless you distinguish of two sorts, and mean that another
sort there are that inherit Ordinances? 2. And then I say further, some
Ordinances are without the Church, and those may have them that are no
Disciples; and f^r those proper to the Church, none have right to them but who
at least profess the foresaid Discipleship I wonder what your three sorts of
Disciples will prove, that do not profess to take Christ for their Master.

Next, where Mr. Blake would have proved the Text not to be meant of sound
Believers, because they are such Disciples as a whole Nation is capable to be;
I answered, that whole Nations are capable of saving faith, and proved it: to
which he mentions the capacity of stones to be made Children; As if men had
no more then stones; And as if God could not make all in a Nation believers, by
the same means us he makes some such. He turns to the question, what a Nation
is capable of to [ what may be expected] and argues as if they were capable of
no more than we may eventually expect, and says [ this that is a doctrine so
clear that proof needs not; Where there never shall be any futurity, we may well
and safely speak of an incapacity] Ans. As if omne possib^le esset futurum: and
men should have every thing good or bad which they are capable of. A sad world!
when among learned Divines such sayings are: Truths that need no proofs, as if
the contradictories of our Principles were become Principles. Its added [
Capacity is vain, when it is known, and co^fest that existence shall never
follow.] Answ. Has such an assertion bin usually heard among the worshippers
of the Creator and the admirers of his works? If one of those that are
suspected of Heresy had said such words, what should we make of them! Does all
Passive or Objective power, Natural, Violent or Neutral, come into act?
Doubtless no man that has one thought of these things will say so; if he do,
he must say that God can do no more then he does: nor any creature do more then
it does! But if there be such a power or Capacity of a thing that shall not
exist, then it is sad to hear God charged with making all such powers or
Capacities in vain. He knows why he does many things which he tells us not the
reason of; but here there is reason enough apparent, to cause us to give God
better words.

I ask't whether Preachers be not bound to endeavor the saving conversion of
whole Nations? He answers [ I think they are to bring them, if Heathen, to a
visible Profession, and as many as they can to thorow-conversion.] Repl. 1.
This is no answer to my question; unless it import a concession of what was
denied. Must men endeavor to convert a whole Nation, or not? 2. If we must
endeavor to convert no more than we can convert, then we must know the success
before we endeavor which cannot be; and must endeavor to convert no more then
will be converted, which is worse then false 3. I will not endeavor to
persuade any man to Profess to be what he is not, or to have what he has not,
or to do what he does not.

He next notes it as a remarkable contradiction in adjecto, that I say,
(Vocation uneffectual is common to Pagans) saying, that [ Calling in Scripture
Phrase is not a bar^ tender, but accompanied with a professed answer.] Repl.
This is like much of the rest. Let these Texts be judge, Prove. 1.24. (Because I
have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded,
but ye have set at naught all my counsel, etc.) so Isa. 65.12 When I called ye
did not answer, when I spoke ye did not hear, etc. so Isa. 50 2. and 66.4. and
Jer. 7.13. and 35.17. Mat. 22.3, 5. He sent forth his servants to call them
that were bidden, etc. But they made light of it, etc.] I shall recite no more.
It has not been thought a contradiction by Protestants or Papists that I know
of, till now, to talk of [ uneffectual calling] So much of Mat. 28.19.

To what I said from Mar. 16.16. Mar. 16.16. vindicated.
little that needs a Reply is answered. He says [ If I will contend for an
exact order, then he must say that faith always preceds and never follows after
Baptism] Repl. In reason we must distinguish between a precedence of prescribed
duty, and of event, and not seek to blind the Reader (as you speak) by
confusion. There is constantly this order in the prescribed duty that no man
should seek Baptism but a true believer, for himself and his seed; and no man
should baptize any but those that profess this true belief, and their seed.
This is the fixed order of duty. But what then? will it follow that eventually
faith never follows baptism, nor baptism never goes before faith? Yes, when
you can prove that man never sins, by omitting his duty, and that God never
recovereth a sinner by his Grace.

You add [ And then he may preach in England to build up converts, but not to
convert] Repl. True, if there be none in England that neglected that faith
which God commanded before, nor received baptism in a case which is unmeet for
it, nor any that were baptized in infancy when they were incapable of
believing. As to your frequent objection of the Nullity of such baptism, I
shall Null it anon, in its proper place.

His concession in terms from 1 Pet. 3.21. he retracteth by an exposition of
his words as spoken Rhetorically, and thinks that any one that ever read
Rhetoric may know his sense; when there is such a Wood of Tropes and Schems
that such Novices may sooner be lost in them, then hunt ont the sense of every
Rhetorician. The proper sense, he takes to be [ an egregious piece of affected
non-sense] for then it were true that [ justifying faith is a promise] Repl. It
only follows that justifying faith is not only an Assent, but the wills consent
to the covenant of grace, or that Christ be ours and we his; and this is
heart-covenanting; and that the external verbal promising or covenanting with
God, is the profession of this faith. And it is not my fault if I be put to
tell you, that as long as you are such a stranger to the nature of justifying
faith, as many such dark, though confident passages in your books do import,
your Arguings will want salt, if not sense. I know this is like to displease:
But what remedy?

To the Text. Act. 8.37. Act. 8.37. vindicated.
he answers page 176 [that indeed he never met with any thing either in
Scripture or Reason produced, that carries with him so much as any color for
it, this excepted.] Repl. This is not my first Observation, that confidence is
not always a sign of a true judgment; and the seeing of no difficulties
before us, proves us not to know more than other men. His particular answers
are, [1. Philip. may call for that de been esse when the Eunuch was to be
admitted, which was not yet essential to his admittance.] Repl. 1. Its strange
that when we are disputing what is of a necessity to a just admittance, that we
must turn to dispute of the Essentials of an admittance. I never thought that
any thing but admittance was essential to admittance: but there are many things
si^c quibus non licet. 2. Philip is determining a question, and gives this in
as the decision, [ If thou believe with all thy heart thou may.] And to say
that this is but de been esse, meaning that it includes not the Negative, [
otherwise thou may not,] is to make Philip to have deluded and not decided
or resolved. Use the like liberty in expounding all other Scripture, and you will
make it what you please. The second Answer is, that [ Dogmatical faith is truly
a Divine faith.] Repl. But not the Christian Faith, nor anywhere alone
denominateth men Believers in Scripture: I remember but one Text, John 12.42.
where it is called Believing on Christ; and but few more where it is simply
called Believing: but none where such are called Believers, Disciples, or
Christians, or any thing that intimates them admitted into the visible Church,
without the Profession of saving faith added to this Assent. The rest which he
here adds, we shall take in, when we come purposely to speak of that subject.

I conclude, That all examples of baptism in Scripture do mention only the
administration of it to the Professors of saving faith: and the precepts give
us no other direction. And I provoke Mr. Blake (as far as is seemly for me to
do) to name one precept or example for baptizing any other, and make it good,
if he can.

Argum. 17. is from 1. Pet. 3.21. [ I be like figure whereto even Baptism does
also now save us: not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer
of a good conscience toward God. [Whence I thus argue; If Baptism be appointed
for out solemn admission into a state of salvation, as Noah's Ark received men
into a state of safety from the deluge, then none should be baptized but those
that profess that says which enters them into a state of salvation. But the
former is true: therefore so is the later.

1. Here it is employed plainly that this is quoad finem Instituentis, the
common appointed use of Baptism, which the Text mentions, though eventually
it prove not the common effect, through the error of the Receivers. And this
appears, 1. In that it was spoken plainly in the Text of the very Nature and
appointed use of Baptism, and so of Baptism as Baptism, without any Exception,
Limitation or Distinction. Therefore it is not spoken of any d^fferent use that
it is appointed for, to the Elect, as distinct from its common use to others.
Its spoken of that signification and common use to which Baptism is appointed;
viz. to save: Else we shall never be able to understand the use of it or any
Ordinance from Scripture, if we shall take liberty to say, [It is this to one,
but not to another;] when the Scripture says no such thing, but speaks of the
nature and use of it without distinction. Else when it says, [ C^rcumcision is
a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith.] we may lay with the Anabaptists, It was
so to Abraham, but not to all others.] And when the Lords supper is said to be
appointed for the remembrance of Christ,] we may say, That Is but to some, and
not to others, when as the Text plainly speaks of the stated use of the
Ordinances to all. 2. And in the type its clear: for it was not some only but
all that entered Noah's Ark that entered into a state of salvation from the
deluge: therefore so it is here, as to the commanded use.

2. When Baptism is said to save us, its plainly meant of the state of
salvation that Baptism enters us into; and not of Baptism ex ^pere operato,
effecting our salvation: And so Baptism comprehends the state into which we
are solemnly by it initiated. As a woman that is married to an honorable man,
or a Sou^dier listed under an honorable Commander, is said to be honored, the
one by marriage the other by listing: Where antecedent consent is the great
foundation on both sides of the honorable relations, and the subsequent state
is the condition or state it self which is honorable: but the solemn
signification is but the expression of the former, and passage to the latter.

3. Hereby its apparent, that though the answer of a Good conscience be the
principal thing intended and that saves, yet the external Baptism is here
included as the sign and solemnization; so that when the Apostle says, ( Not
the putting away the filth of the flesh,) he means (not the bare outward act of
washing alone or as such,) but baptism as it is entire, having the thing
professed on our part, together with the professing sign.

4. It is therefore but by way of signification, obsignation, and complemental
exhibition, that Baptism saves, it being neither the first or principal
efficient or condition of it; But is valid as it is conjunct with the principal
causes and condition, for the attainment of these ends.

5. It is not a mere remote means leading toward a state of salvation, that
Baptism is here affirmed to be: but an entrance, or means of entrance into
that state of salvation it self. As the heart covenant or Faith does it
principally, so Baptism signally and complementally. This is plain; 1. Because
it is not said to help us toward a state of salvation, but expressly to save.
2. Because the Type which is here mentioned, viz. The Ark, was such a means,
that all that entered into it for preservation from the Flood, were actually
saved from it. All this laid together, does confirm both the Antecedent and
Consequence of my Argument.

Calvin on the Text says, [ Hoc in baptismo liquido apparet, ubi Christo
consepelimur, ut mundo and carni mortui, Deo vivamus; -- ergo sicut Noe vitam
adeptus est per mortem quum in Arca non secus atque in sepulcro inclusus fuit,
and toto mundo pereunte, servatus fuit cum exigua familia: sic hodic
Mortificatio quae in Baptismo figuratur nobis ingressus est in vitam; nec salus
speranda est, nisi a mundo simus segregati. -- Poterat quispiam objicere,
baptismo Noe nostrum esse long dissimilem, quia plerosque hodie baptizari
contingat. Respondet autem, Non sussicere externum symbolum, nisi vere and
efficaciter baptismum suscipiant.] (mark vere) Atqui ejus veritas in paucis
reperietur. -- And least you should think that Calvin takes it for a means
toward a state of salvation, and not the solemn entrance into it, mark what
follows, [ Nec hic docere voluit Petrus inane and inefficax esse Christi
institutum, (that is, as to salvation) sed tantum excludere hypocritas a spe
salutis, qui Baptismum quantum in se est dep^avant ac corrumpunt.] Mark here,
that no Baptized men are excluded from salvation but Hypocrites. 2. That they
that are excluded from salvation for all their Baptism, are such as did deprave
and corrupt it, and not justly use it. I conclude my sentence in his following
words; [ Quid ergo agendum est? Ne separemus quae a Domino conjuncta sunt.
Debemus in baptismo agnoscere spirituale lavacrum: debemus illic testimonium
remissi^nis peccatorum and renovationis nostrae pignus amplecti: sic tamen
relinquere and Christo and Spiritui sancto suum honorem, etc. -- His verbis
docet Baptismum praecipua sui part spiritualem esse: deinde peccatorum
remissionem and reformationem veteris hominis in se complecti.]

Beza in loc. [Hoc loco B^ptismus dicitur (...) ejus liberationis qua contigit
ecclesiae in diluvio. Nam and haec liberatio and Baeptismus adumbrant ecclesiae
sanct sicationem and emerfionem a peccati and mortis gurgite.]

Yet another Argument may hence be raised thus:

Argum. 2. If according to the Institution the Answer of a good Conscience must
be joined with Baptism for the attaining of its end, then must we admit none
that profess not that answer of a good conscience. But the former is certain
from the Text: For Baptism is said to save; that is its appointed use: yet not
the external washing, but the answer of a good conscience does it therefore
this is of necessary conjunction; and without it Baptism cannot attain its end:
But it is to be administered and received only in order to the attainment of its
end, and therefore never in a way by which the end is apparently not attainable.

What this answer of a good conscience is, we shall further enquire anon. Both
the common expositions fully confirm the point which I maintain. The Assemblies
Annot. recite both thus; [ Hence by the answer of a good conscience we may
understand that unfeigned faith, whereof they made confession at their Baptism,
and whereby their consciences were purified, and whereby they received the
remission of their sins etc. Some understand by the Answer of a good
Conscience, that Covenant whereinto they entered at their Baptism, the
embracing whereof they testified by their unfeigned confession of their Faith]
viz. such a Faith as is aforesaid: so that I conclude that this Tex^ does
plainly show that Baptm is for the saving of the Baptized as to the instituted
use, and may not be used merely to any lower ends then to put them into a
present state of Salvation.

A^gum. 18. No one may be admitted to Baptism, who may not be admitted a Member
of the Church of Christ. No one may be admitted to be a Member of the Church of
Christ without the profession of a saving faith (by himself or Parents, or
Proparents) therefore no one may be admitted to Baptism without the profession
of a saving faith.

I speak of such admission to Church Membership as is in the power of the
Ministers of Christ, who have the Keys of his Kingdom to open and let in, as
well as to cast out.

The Major is past question, because Baptism is our solemn entrance into the
Church, who were before entered by private consent, and Accepted by the Covenant
of God.

All the question is of the Minor, which I shall therefore prove.

1. It is before proved that all the Members of the Church must be such as are
visibly, solemnly, or by profession, sanctified from former sin, cleansed,
justified persons of God, the Heirs of the Promise, etc. But this cannot be
without the profession of a saving faith, Ergo, etc.

2. This also is before proved, where it was showed that no others are
Christians, or Disciples.

3. In Acts 2.41, 42, etc. The many thousands were added to the Church, were
such as received gladly the doctrine of saving Faith and Repentance, and
continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread and
Prayer: and so far contemned the world as to fell all, and make it common: And
doubtless no man continued in those ways, (of doctrine, fellowship, prayer,
etc.) without the profession of saving Faith and Repentance; for the very use
of these is such a profession. Of which says Calvin in Act. 2.42. [ Quaerimus
ergo veram Christi ecclesiam: Hic nobis ad vivum depictum est ejus Imago: Ac
initium quidem facit a doctrina quae veluti ecclesiae anima est) not as barely
heard, but as professed or Received) Nec quamlibet doctrinam nominat, sed
Apostolorum; hoc est quam per ipsorum manus filius Dei tradiderat: Ergo
ubicunque personat pura vox Evangelii, ubi in ejus professione manent homines,
ubi in ordinario ejus auditu ad profectum se exercent, illic indubie est
Ecclesia, etc. Quare non temere haec quatuor rece^set Lucas, quum describere
vult nobis rite constitutum ecclesiae statum. Et nos ad hunc ordinem eniti
convenit, si cupimus vere censeri Ecclesia coram Deo and Angelis, non inane
tantum ejus nomen apud homines jactare.] And ver. 47. It is said that the Lord
added daily to the Church such as should be saved.] Obj. It says not that all
shall be saved that are added to the Church. Answ. But it describes them that
were added to the Church, viz. that were such as should be saved; or as Beza
yielded to another reading (and so Grotius and many others,) such as saved
themselves from that untoward Generation, [ quisese quotidie servandos
recipiebant in Ecclesiam.]

The Church is the Body of Christ, Col. 1.18, 24. and none are members of his
Body, but such as either are united to him, and live by him, or at least seem
to do so. The Church is subject to Christ, and beloved of Christ, and cherished
by him; we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephe. 5.24
25, 30. And those that are against the General Redemption, me thinks should be
moved with the consideration, that it is the Church that Christ gave himself
for; even the visible Church which he purchased with his own blood, Act. 20.28.
Ephe. 5.25. and he is the Savior of his body, ver. 23. But so he is not
effectively the Savior of the Professors of a Faith that does not justify:
(...) he is the effective Savior of those that profess a Justifying faith, and
(...) of the sincere: but of others, neither way. Hitherto Divines have
gathered from the plain texts of Scripture, that there is but One Church, One
Faith, and One Baptism: and that those that had this Faith really, were to be
baptized, and were real members of the Church; and that those that professed
this faith, and so seemed to have it when they have it not, are visible members
of the Church, and are so taken because their Profession is sensible to us, and
by that they seem to have the thing professed. But the Opponents are fallen
into a new conceit in all these.

1. They feign a New Christian faith to themselves, viz. A faith that is short
of Justifying; which Scripture and the Church of God have taken to be but a
preparatory to the Christian faith subjectively, or but a common part of it
objectively considered: so that before there was but one Christian faith, and
now they have made two. 2. And so before, there was but one sort of real
serious or sincere Christians, consisting of such as had that real Christian
faith: and now they have found out another sort of them, that hold another sort
of faith. 3. So have they feigned a new Baptism; for the Old Baptism was for
Remission of sin, and Burial and Resurrection wi^h Jesus Christ, and to engraff
men into the Church which is the body of Christ, upon the profession of a saving
faith: but the new feigned ends of Baptism are far different. 4. And they have
feigned also a new kind of Church: For the Church of Christ's constitution is
but one, which is called visible from men's Profession, and invisible from the
faith professed. But they have made a Church which consists of a third sort
of members: that is, of men that neither have saving faith, nor profess it, but
only have or profess to have a faith of a lower orb. 5. To this end they have
confounded the Church and the Porch, the Vineyard and the adjacent part of the
Wilderness: those that heretofore were but Catechumeni or men in preparation
for the Church, are now brought into it: and are annumerated to true
Christians, before they once profess themselves such, and that upon a lower
profession. 6 And hereby also the two sorts of Teaching are confounded, which
Christ distinguishes, Mat. 28.19, 20. That teaching which draws men to
Christ, and makes them Disciples, and that which instructs them when they
are his Disciples; that which persuades them to receive Christ Jesus the Lord,
and that which persuades them accordingly to walk in him. For they take him
for a Disciple, that is but learning to be a Disciple, merely because he
submits to learn, and has learned before some preparatory truths; though
yet he be not made a Disciple indeed, nor profess so to be.

Mr. Blake is deeply offended with me, for saying that Hypocrites that seem not
only to be found Believers, and profess a Justifying faith, when they have it
not, are only equivocally or analogically Christians or members of the Church,
etc. But I shall say somewhat more concerning those Believers that are
described by him, who do not so much as profess a saving faith, viz. that they
are no members of the Church at all (if notorious,) and are not so much as to
be named Christians, nor to be admitted into the visible Church. No man can
prove that ever one man was admitted a Churchmember in all the New Testament,
upon the Profession of any lower kind of faith, than that which is the
condition of Justification. Otherwise we should have two distinct Churches
specifically different, or two sorts of Christianity and Christians differing
tota specie: because the faith which is here made their qualification, does
specifically differ by a moral specification. When the Jailer, Act. 16 30, 31,
32, 33, 34. was admitted into the Church by Baptism, with his household, it was
upon the Professing of such a believing, by which both he and his household
might be saved, as is before showed. And so of all others in those times.

Argum. 19. If we once admit men to baptism or the Lords Supper upon the
Profession of any other than Justifying faith, we shall be utterly confounded,
and not be able to give any satisfactory Description of that Faith, and so
never be able to Practice our Doctrine, as being utterly uncertain whom to
baptize.

That I may the better manifest this, I shall examine all the considerable
Descriptions of that faith which I can meet with. The Papists themselves are
not agreed in this business: sometime they speak as if a bare Assent would
serve the turn; but commonly they add that there is a Necessity also of
consent, 1. To be subject to the Church. 2. To live under the Ordinances. And
if they take the Intention of the party or Parents; or their Godfathers and
Godmothers to be necessary, as they do the Intention of the Priest, then a bare
Profession with them will not serve, nor can they tell when any one is baptized.

Mr. Blake does speak so much, and purposely of this Point, that one would
think we may expect an exact Description of this faith from him, if from any
man: especially in his last Book, when I had so earnestly Entreated him before
to do it, because of the omission of it in his former Book: And yet even in
this has he done nothing but involve and obscure his meaning more than before:
though I had purposely urged him to a plain discovery of his sense, even
somewhat beyond the bounds of modesty, as it is esteemed of in common cases:
For I perceived that the stress of our differences did rest much in this;
because no wise man will leave his grounds till he see where he may have
better; unless he mean to be for nothing, or of no Religion: there is no reason
a man should upon every opposed difficulty relinquish that he has.

And here, that I may do Mr. Blake no wrong, I shall cite his mind in his own
words, and gather as many of his disclosures of it as I can find.

For what he has said in his Book of the Covenants, I have spoken to it
already in my Apology. And I write nor for those lazy Readers that had rather
err than be at the pains of reading what is already written: I shall therefore
suppose that, and gather what he says in his Treatise of the Sacraments:

Page 109. he says [ I confess as much of Repentance in them as was required
in any to the acceptance of Baptism: namely, A Renunciation of their false
way, and a professed Acceptance of the tender of the Gospel.] And after [to
renounce his way of Paganism, Judaism, and to profess and engage to a Christian
faith and conversation.] Here I understand not Mr. Blake's english, if he do
not plainly renounce his cause, and say the same that I do, and so make vain
his industrious opposition. The tender of the Gospel is the tender of Christ,
and pardon and life to all true Acceptors of it. If the professed Accep^a^ion
of this tender be not [ professed saving faith] beyond all common faith, I must
despair of knowing what faith is, and consequently being sure that I have it,
and that I may be saved by it. And if professing a true Christian faith and
conversation, and engaging thereto] be not a professing of that which is proper
to the sanctified. (I mean in the special sense) then Mr. Blake has made a new
Christian Faith and Conversation which Scripture never prescribed nor described.

Page 172. He gives another, but the most express answer, which is likest to be
his mind [ For a direct answer, I say, it it not profession to say we have this
faith, but a profession of our assent to the necessity of it, with engagement
to it that gives this little, so P. 173. [I say and do profess of those that
have those secret reservations wrapped up in their breasts, and not yet from
under the power of lusts, yet convinced of their duty, and acknowledging the
Necessity, that it is the mind of God that they should be Baptized and have
admission to Ordinances, in order to bring them more sincerely and unreservedly
to God. And this being the will of God, as you seem to yield when you say, we
are bound to Baptize them: I say they have right in the sight of God to
Baptism.] I shall begin my Reply with his last passage; and I must needs say
that Mr. Blake does unworthily abuse me and my words, in saying that [ I seem
to yield that we are bound to baptize them.] Them! What them? My own words
which he cites to prove this by me, are these [Vocation, which is effectual
only to bring men to an outward Profession of saving faith, is larger then
Election, that makes men such whom we are bound to baptize] Forsooth in these
words I contradict my self; I seem to give Mr. Blake the cause. I cannot but
say, that it is pity the Church should be troubled with such an undigested
undistinguishing management of controversies, for men to write so learnedly,
and industriously, before they observe what they say. Is the outward Profession
of a saving faith, (which I say makes men such as we are bound to baptize) the
same thing with [ the Profession of a common faith, short of saving, or with
that common faith it self?] What should a man say to such a confuter, but
advise him to join with us his weak Brethren, in desiring God to pardon us for
such troubling and abusing the Church?

1. As to his Description of the persons to be Baptized, I shall add, 1. That
his last Description, page 173. contains nothing but what may stand with,
First, an open refusal of God and Christ. 2. And that which is commonly taken
for the sin against the Holy Ghost. For its past doubt that men may both be
convinced of Duty, and confess the Necessity of it, and yet may openly profess,
that the world and their lusts are yet so dear to them that they will not yet
have God to be their God, and Christ to be their Savior, on the Gospel terms.
And I think a man that openly refuses Christ at the present, should not be
baptized at the present, though [ he be convinced of Duty, and acknowledge the
necessity of it].

As to his other Description, page 172. the word [ Engagement to it] either
signifies [an engagement savingly to believe from that very instant forward]
and this does Necessarily import a present Profession of consent, and so of
present saving faith: For man can so engage that does not Profess such consent
and believe: And this destroys Mr. Blakes cause. Or else it signifies such
an engagement to believe for some distant future time, which is consistent with
a non-profession of present consent to have Christ as offered. And this is the
same with that before confuted; If such may be Baptized, then they may say [we
are convinced that we must savingly believe in Christ, and we do engage our
selves to do it, as soon as we can spare the world and forsake the Flesh and
the Devil; but yet we cannot, and will not do this.] Baptize such who dare for
me.

But for a further search of Mr. Blakes mind, observe his words, page 175.
Where he answers to what I now object. And first he cites these words of mine
[Where you say that an acknowledgement of the Necessity of such faith, with
engagement to it, is sufficient for a Title to the state. I reply. Then those
that at present renounce Christ, so it be against their knowledge and
Conscience, and will engage to own him sincerely for the future have a Title to
Baptism] To which he replyeth [ How comes I pray you that [future in? you
manifest much reading in the Law: and I have heard this as a Maxim, In
obligationibus ubi nullus certus statuitur dies, quovis die debetur; There is
no day overtaken, but engagement is for present, etc.]

To this I rejoine; 1. It is the first time that ever I heard of an engagement
that was not de futuro as to the performance. We are agreed that the Engagement
is present; but the question is whether it be to a present or future
performance. And it is by Covenant or Promise that Mr. Blake supposes this
engagement made. And is there any which is not de futuro? If the Church cannot
hit the Right way of Baptizing till such elucidations as these direct them to
it -- If you Promise to believe de praesenti, either you do at that present
believe, or you do not. If you do, your Promise as to that present act which
you already perform, is vain: as if I Promise to give you that which I have
given you already, or in that instant give you; which were no promise, but a
donation or profession: If you do not then believe, then your promise (as you
call it) is a falsehood* And to tell a lie, is no such a duty as can give right
to Baptism. No man should say, he believes, when he does not. 2. But if it may
be he means not futurum remotius] but [ futurum proximum.] That cannot well be
neither, because he says [the engagement is for present.] But suppose he do
mean by [ present] the futurum proximum, either this imports a profession of
saving faith, as well as an engagement to believe the next instant, or it does
not. If it do, I have the thing I seek, and Mr. Blakes cause is given away. If
not, then Mr. Blake does feign God to require such a kind of promise or
engagement as our titile to baptism, which I believe the common vote of reason
will pronounce to be vain, ridiculous, if not impossible by most. Vain it must
needs be to make so solemn a promise of performing that in the next instant,
which he may actually perform, and save all that ado. Should I cause covenants
to be solemnly drawn up, and witnesses called, and seals affixed, that I will
give such a thing in the next Minute after the sealing; why then may I not as
well give the thing it self? The Minister may stay one minute longer before he
go to Church to baptize the person, or he may use one word or two more in
prayer and exhortation; and by that time the instant would be come. And
Ridiculous it seems to me, that any man should be admitted upon such a promise
as this [I will not yet leave my sin for God, nor renounce the world the Flesh
and the Devil for Christ, or take him for my only Lord and Savior: but I
engage my self to do it, or I will do it as soon as the word is out of my
mouth] or [I am not yet willing to have Christ as he is offered: but I will be
willing the next instant.] If any say so to me, I will hold my hand from
baptizing one minute, and ask him whether now he be willing? For certainly the
man must break his promise between the making and the sealing of it, if he be
not a sound Believer already. For there must go more then one instant between
his promise and the Act of baptizing (unless we had greater velocity of
action): If therefore Mr. Blake's professor shall say, I promise to believe
savingly the next instant [then if he do not, the promise is broke before it is
sealed: If he do; I know no reason but why I may require him to profess that
which he has.

And is it not a kind of impossibility for any unregenerate man, rationally and
soberly to promise to be regenerate the next minute or instant? Or for any that
is destitute of saving faith, to promise to believe savingly the next instant:
If he has grace of such command and can believe the next moment, why not now?
And does not that man show his heart unfound, that can believe the next moment,
and will not do it at the present? If it be so in his power, let him not stand
promising, but do it.

But perhaps some will say that Mr. Blake means not the next instant or hour,
or day, or any determinate time, but only an indeterminate time: some time
hereafter. To which I answer 1. He expresses himself by the terms [ present]
and [ quovis die debetur:] therefore it expressly includes the next instant or
day determinately. 2. And if it were otherwise, either there is some future
determinate time of the Debt and Obligation, or none. If none, its no covenant
or Promise: and then it cannot be said quovis die debetur. If any, what is it?
and when? Then a Promise to be a Christian, so long hence may give right to
Baptism: And who can tell how long it must be? If any time before death, then
thousands of Infidels, or persecutors of Christianity may say, [We will be
Christians before we die, and therefore will be baptized, though now we hate
them for crossing us in our courses.] But this cannot be Mr. Blakes meaning,
for he speaks of a determinate time de [praesenti] and [quovis die debetur.]
And it is not debitum ex praecepto that he speaks of, (for that lies upon
Infidels,) but ex promissione; and therefore if quovis die debetur, then
proximo die debetur; and if proximo die, then also proximo instanti; for none
can show a reason why its due to morrow and not to day, or the next moment: and
if proximo instanti, vel hora vel die, then the Promise was made for the next
instant, hour or day, or else the Obligation could not have arisen from that
Promise as to that time.

But faith Mr. Blake [bring me a man that in his heart is convinced that Jesus
is the Christ, with his mouth professes him, and engages for him, and in the
mean space actually renounceth him, and I will do what you would have me with
him; that is, a man that is falling headlong down a ladder, at the same instant
he is climbing up it]. To which I say, 1. If you mean an Absolute Renouncing
him, or for the same time when he determines to begin his Accepting of him, I
confess it were a contradiction: but of your own feigning, and nothing to our
business. 2. And therefore if you suppose the man to promise to believe
savingly the next minute, then I confess it will not stand with a future
Renouncing him: But then it is as true, that such a promise contains,
imports, or supposes a present profession of saving faith, or it is absurd
and vain, as is aforesaid. 3. But if it be a promise to believe only at such a
distance of futurity, then it not only may stand with a renouncing Christ till
that time come, but seems to imply that so it is, if you suppose faith to be
so far in the unregenerate man's power that he can make such promises of it. I
told you before (which made you angry) where a renouncing of Christ did stand
with your two first qualifications, Conviction, and Verbal acknowledgement,
viz. Mat. 21.38. This is the Heir; come let us kill him, and seize on the
Inheritance.] And for your lust of Engaging to him (such an Engagement as you
describe, to believe savingly) as I have said, if it be to believe at present,
it is inseparable from a profession of saving faith. If only to believe at such
a distant time, it is possible to renounce all actual union and special
communion with him till that time, and to say, I will not have Christ as
offered til such a time, or till I can better spare my lusts; can you show us
here such contradictory work as your tumbler is supposed to make.

Again, in Page 176. he recites the like, [ Our profession qualifying for
Baptism is not a profession that we have such faith (which cannot be done
without an eminence of faith to assurance;) but a profession of the necessity
of it to salvation, and an engagement to it.]

To which I say, 1. For your reason in the Parenthesis, we shall silence it
anon. 2. Again: One that openly refuses Christ at present, may profess that
necessity of Faith, and engage to it for the future at a distance, that is, to
be a Christian so long hence. But he that promises it the next instant, if
soberly, does profess it at this instant; For he professes his consent or
willingness to have Christ as offered, which is saving Faith. For no man
breathing can say (with any such credibility as a sober man should regard) I
will be willing or consent the next moment or hour; but he that is willing and
does consent or professes so to do at this present when he says so.

Again, p. 177. he says to the citation of the foresaid Text, [ I am sorry
that such things should be mentioned where enquiry after truth is contended,
and contention not studied. It is well known that I speak to a faith of
profession, which is theirs that take so that party which is for that Christ,
and not with those that professedly go in a full opposition against him, and
are in a high rode (any such conviction of spirit supposed of sin, against the
Holy Ghost.] Ans. It is your expressed opinion that I argue against, and not
your heart, nor any thing that is well known, by other means and to other men.
If the faith or profession which you make a sufficient Title to Baptism, be
consistent with such persecution or sin against the Holy Ghost (as you speak)
then it behooved me to manifest the consistency, though it make you sorry; I do
it to show the face of your doctrine and not otherwise to contend and your
sorrow is but a sorry defense. 2. What you do mean by [ a faith of Profession]?
This was not in the former descriptions which I examined or met with. Do you
put the wrong end forward, and indeed mean [ a profession of faith [or] a faith
conjunct with a profession]? If not I know not what you mean. If you do, then
what profession is it, and of what faith? Not of a saving faith; for that you
before disclaimed; and if that were it that you mean must be professed, you
yield the Cause. It is therefore the profession of some common faith; and that
is it which you call Dogmatical. And if it be indeed a profession of a mere
Dogmatical faith, or Assent, it is consistent with that renouncing Christ which
I mentioned, and is no more than theirs [ This is the Heir; come let us kill
him]. But if it be more than Dogmatical, and have the Wills consent, why will
no entreaty prevail with you to describe it, and tell us what it is that is
consented to? and so prove that to you to be the title to Baptism and the
Lord's Supper? In part or in whole; I know not whether, you tell me of their
consent in the next words, [ They take to that party which is for Christ and
not with those that professedly go in a full opposition against him.] But I
dare not say that now I have all your sense. 1. Where do you find in Scripture
that such a faith is the Title to Sacraments? or that ever man was admitted to
them upon such a profession? 2. If they may be so admitted, then let us see the
consequence. By [ taking to that party which is for Christ,] either you mean,
1. That they profess themselves to be of those that are sincerely Christians:
or 2. That they profess themselves willing to be under Church Rulers and
Ordinances (as Bellarmine speaks;) or 3. That they will take part with
Christians, in pleading, defending, etc. If the first be your meaning, then
they profess themselves true Christians, and so to have saving faith. For there
is but two sorts of Christians; Those that are really so, having saving faith:
and those that are Analogically Christians, professing saving faith, when they
have it not. 2. If you mean the second with the Papists, then consider that it
is not into the Pope, nor Church Rulers, nor Ordinances that we are baptized,
but into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And suppose that a man
truly understand on what terms Christ is offered in the Gospel, that man may
say [I am content to be in the Church under teaching, and to receive the
Sacraments, and to accompany Christians and fight for them; but yet I will not
yet be a Christian my self; For I am not willing that Christ should sanctify
me, and save me from my sins. [And who that depends on the mouth of Christ
would baptize this man? It is no more than belongs to a Seeker or a
Catechumne to be willing to hear. And God never made it a Title to Sacraments,
merely to be willing to receive them. Else all may receive them that will. At
least, I must profess that I can hardly believe, but that all that will receive
them, must profess that they receive them to the ends which they are appointed
to. And that no man can do, that does not eodem actu profess himself a true
believer. If the third be your sense, then no doubt but many Christians in the
Indies have had Moors and Indian servants, who were willing to associate with
Christians, and loved them, and would live and die with them, that yet were no
Christians themselves.

But the fullest declaration of Mr. Blake's mind I find page 147. upon my
earnest provocation of him to describe that faith which entitleth to Baptism.
The words are these: [ Seeing Mr. Baxter calls upon me to declare my self
further in this thing, I do believe and profess to hold that he that upon
hearing the Gospel preached, and the truth of it published and opened, shall
professedly abjure all other opposite ways whatsoever, and choose the
Christian way for salvation, promising to follow the Rules of it, is to be
baptized, and his seed, etc.] To which I reply: If this be not a profession of
saving faith, I despair of ever being saved. 1. No man but a sanctified man can
truly desire salvation it self, as it is indeed consisting in the blessed
fruition of God in Intuition, Love, Praise; and there is no other salvation. No
man but the Regenerate can truly renounce all opposite ways. One opposite way
is the way of the flesh and carnal reason, and the way of worldliness, etc. No
man can live out of action; nor out of moral action which tends to an end,
and that end is his own felicity. He therefore that renounceth all other ways,
must turn to Christ the only way: or else cut his own throat, or some way
murder himself that he may cease action: or else must attain to a perfect
desperation. 3. No man but the Regenerate does heartily choose the Christian
way for salvation. For what is that but to choose Christ for salvation? and
what is that but (supposing assent) the true description of saving faith? 4. No
man but the Regenerate can sincerely follow, or resolve and promise to follow
the Rules of that way. For what is that but to follow the rules of Christ and
Scripture? And what is that but sincerely to obey? So that he that professes
these four Points, or any one of them, does profess that which is proper to the
regenerate. So that if Mr. Blake do not here give up his Cause, and say as I
do, understand English that can for me. If Mr. Blake dare adjudge all those to
damnation that go not further than this faith which he here describes to be
professed, (as he must if he suppose this to be the profession of a faith short
of saving) he shall never have my vote in approbation of his censure. If those
who perform that which is here said to be professed, be not saved, I know not
who will. Therefore I doubt not but it is the profession of a saving faith.

But what need we make any further enquiry, or dispute against a man that
professedly yields the cause? Hear his foregoing words, page 147. [ His two
first Arguments drawn from authority, the first of the Assembly of Divines, and
others of a number of Fathers, are brought to prove that the profession of a
just^fying faith is required to Baptism: And what is that to me, who never
denied it, but in plain words have often affirmed it? It sufficiently employed
where I require a Dogmatical faith to Baptism. A Dogmatical faith assents to
that of Apollo's, Jesus is the Christ; and when I say that this entitles, I
cannot mean concealed or denied, but openly professed:] Reader can thou tell
what to make of this? is not here a plain concession, that a profession of
justifying faith is requisite to Baptism? and does he not averr that he never
denied it? Perhaps we have disputed all this while without an adversary; as to
Mr. Blake let it be so: and let us see the truth prevail, and I shall not be
industrious to prove to Mr. Blake that he has said the contrary. But yet me
thinks its a mavelous thing that a man should so frequently express his mind
against the necessity of the presence and profession of a justifying faith, as
to Baptism, and for the sufficiency of a faith short of justifying, and the
profession thereof, as a title to that Ordinance, And it is the Title over the
top of his leaves that a Faith short of justifying entitles to Baptism.
and now say that he never denied the Profession of a justifying faith to
Baptism, but in plain words has often affirmed it. Read the words that I before
cited out of him: read both his books and see how much of the scope of them is
this way. And let the Reader when he has done, tell us if he can, what Mr.
Blake talked for. By the words an English man would think that he had at large
argued for the sufficiency of a faith short of justifying, in re and
professione, as to entitle to Baptism. But here he seems most expressly to deny
it. I say, he seems: for I must profess that I dare not presume that I
understand him here neither. For the rest of his book which I thought I
understood, seemed as plain as this. I began once of think that a fraud lay
under these words, and that it is here necessity of Precept only which he means
when he says that [ a Profession of saving faith is necessary to Baptism] and
not a necessity to means, or that it is sine qua non. But though I know no
other way to reconcile him here to his books, yet this cannot be his sense. For
the man is not fradulent; and besides his following arguing shows the
contrary. But then I confess that arguing amazeth me again. He will prove that
he is for the necessity of the profession of a justifying faith to Baptism,
because he is for the necessity of a Dogmatical faith, and that faith must be
profess. Wonderful! Does he make a justifying and a Dogmatical faith all one?
No; he constantly distinguishes and opposes them. How then does he prove that
he asserteth the necessity of the profession of a justifying faith because he
asserteth the necessity of a professed Dogmatical faith. Reader I am at a loss:
I dare not say Mr. Blake is so; perhaps he understands himself, make thy best
on it: for I can make nothing on it, or worse then nothing. But if really he will
be of this mind that [the Reality of a dogmatical faith is necessary, and the
profession of a justifying faith] I shall not only thank him for giving quiet
profession to the truth, but I will give him some back again, and will come my
self a beg lower then he; and will affirm that we must give them the Sacraments
that profess a saving faith, though they have not so much as the Reality of a
Dogmatical faith. Yet Reader if thou think that there is any parcel of the
cause which Mr. Blake does not expressly give up, after all his labor, adjoin
his words p. 124. and rest satisfied [ so that I conceit no promise of these
Ordinances made to such a faith; but an actual investiture of every such
believer in them.]

I have made the best enquiry I can into Mr. Blake's sense, and I cannot find
any reasonable footing for a man to fix upon, if we once forsake our present
hold; and say that it is a profession of some other faith short of that which
justifyeth, which is the title to the Sacraments. For as no man can prove out
of Scripture then what faith it must be, but we shall there be at a loss; so
whatever he assert, we have evidence enough to prove it insufficient. A Real
Dogmatical faith cannot be the title; For then the Baptizer must know the
heart. The profession of a bare Dogmatical faith or assent cannot be it: For
then he that has the faith of Devils, persecutors of Christ, and such as are
supposed to sin against the Holy Ghost, should have title. Some consent
therefore of the will there must be. But to what, if not to have Christ as he
is offered, who can tell? A consent to be externally Baptized will not serve. A
consent to Baptism as Baptism comprizeth saving faith. A consent to be a named
Christian, and to live among them, may be without any profession of
Christianity. No man can tell where to fix, nor what we must consent to, to
procure a Title, if once we forsake the present ground. If any man will give us
yet a more exact Description of a faith short of justifying, entitling to
Baptism and the Lords Supper, I shall be willing to examine it. For hitherto I
cannot see where I should set my foot if I should leave the ground I stand on.

I now come to examine the Arguments that are brought for the contrary opinion.
And I shall begin with Mr. Blake's, and then proceed to some which others
insist upon.

In his Tre^t of Sacr. page 161. Mr. Blake begins some as he calls them
[Additional Arguments, that a faith short of that which justifies gives title
to Baptism.]

ARGUMENT I.
Mr. Blake They that have right in the sight of God to many and great
Privileges of his gift, have a right in his sight to the first and leading
Privileges; this I think cannot be denied: having a right to those that
follow, they have right to those that lead. If any had in the time of the Law
right to the Passover, they had right to Circumcision; and if any now have
right to the Lords Supper, they have right to Baptism. But those of a faith
that is short of that which ^ustifies, have right to many and great Privileges
in the sight of God. This is clear from the Apostle, Romans 3.1. The Jew
outwardly where Circumcision of heart was wanting, had every way much benefit
and advantage; he had therefore right to Circumcision, and those with him that
are short of a faith that justifies, have right in the sight of God to Baptism.

ANSWER I.
The question is not in the conclusion. If all be granted, its nothing for Mr.
Blake's cause or against mine. It is not all one to conclude [ those that are
short of a faith that ^ustifies have right] and [ such a faith gives right] or
is the qualification, condition, or evidence of right either. A man that is a
Burgess of such a Corporation has right to be Major. But his Burgesship gives
him not that right, but his election. A Frenchman has right to the Crown of
France, but not because he is a Frenchman. The Jew outwardly, Romans 3. had not
his right by a faith short of justifying; But he had first an actual abode
among Ordinances, and the offers of Grace and helps to salvation, by free
providentiall disposal of mercy. 2. The claim that he made to
Church Priviledges before men, must be upon his Professing of saving faith;
viz. That he took the Lord only for his God, and believed in him according to
the tenor of the Promise: and not upon the having or Professing of a faith of
another Species.

This answer suffices as to the present controversy: But because Mr. Blake
does seem also to intend these Arguments to the following controversy, I shall
briefly enervate them as to both, that I may not be put to go over them again
when I come to that controversy.

2. I deny that Baptism is [ the first and leading Privilege of Gods gifts.]
It is a great Privilege to have the Gospel preached to them, to have pardon
conditionally offered them, that is, if they will accept of Christ to be
converted, and made a true believer; to be born of Christian Parents. etc.
These and more are Privileges, and before baptism. 3. I distinguish at large
of the term ( Right) in my Apology. Here let it suffice to say: 1. Right is
properly so called, which in this case must arise from a promise or proper
gift. 2. Or it is Analogically so called, which arises 1. indirectly from Gods
command to the Parent, Priest, Pastor etc. to do this for all that require it,
upon a profession of true faith. 2. Or from bare permission or providential
disposal. 4. I distinguish also the Jews case from ours: They had some promise
of a continuance of Ordinances among them, though not for perpetuity, yet for a
long time, which no Church on earth has now. 5. And now I answer to the Minor:
1. An Analogical improper right, resulting from permission, and a command to
Ministers to Baptize all that upon such a profession require Baptism, this I
ever granted to all that profess saving faith. 2. But a proper right, from
promise or proper gift, which may warrant them to claim or require the thing
from God or man; this I deny to any but true believers and their seed. They may
not lawfully require it, though we must give it them if they do require it,
upon such a profession. 3. But without a profession of saving faith, they may
neither require it, nor we give it if they do require it, whatever other short
faith they have, or profess. 4. Thus also the Case was with the Jews, allowing
the difference made by the foresaid peculiar Promise to them.

ARGUMENT II.
Mr, Blake. Those that are a People by Gods gracious dispensation nigh to God,
comparative to others, have right in the sight of God to visible admittance to
this more near relation. This I think is clear; men have right to be admitted
to their right. But those that come short of Justifying faith, are a people by
Gods gracious dispensations nigh unto God, comparative to others; this is plain
in the whole visible Nation of the Jews, as appears, Deuteronomy. 4 7. Psalm. 147.19.
and 148.14. Those therefore that are short of Justifying faith, have right in
the sight of God to admission to this nearer relation.

ANSWER.
The Jews were nigher to God than other people. 1. In that they had the offers
of Grace which other people had not. 2. And many great Deliverances and
temporal privileges, which others had not. Both these Infidels and Heathens
may now have; and therefore they prove no Right to Baptism. 3. They were nigher
by some promises peculiar to that Nation, which is nothing to us. 4. They were
nigher by their Consent to the offers of Grace, and the Covenant of the Lord;
which was proper (in sincerity) to the sanctified. 5. And by their profession
of Consent, and external engaging themselves to the Lord (whether they had
inwardly faith or not.) Now to the Major, I grant it: but add, that the three
first sorts of Nearness give not right to Baptism: All admission to near
Relation, comparatively to others, is not by Circumcision or Baptism. But it is
only a Nearness in the two last senses that are questionable as to this. And I
have before showed, in what sense true Consent to the Covenant gives right, and
in what sense an outward profession of Consent gives right; and that your
common faith gives none in either sense. Lastly, if your conclusion were
granted, its nothing to our question: For as is said, all admission to near
relation is not by baptism: One Infidel may be nearer God and the Kingdom of
Heaven then another, and yet (...) be baptizable for all that.

ARGUMENT III.
Mr. Blake. Those that God ordinarily calls his People, and owns as his, openly
avouching himself to be their God, have right in the sight of God to the signs
and cognizance of his People, and are to have admission into the society and
Fellowship of his People. This is pla^n, if God in Covenant will own servants,
then his stewards may open the door to them; if he will own sheep, his servants
doubtless may mark them. But God owns all in visible communion, though short of
faith that is Justifying* as his People, and openly avouches himself to be
their God, as in abundant places of Scriture is evident: See Deuteronomy. 26.18. These
have therefore right to the signs and cognizances of his people, to admission
into the Society and Fellowship of his People.

ANSWER.
1. To the Major, with the forementioned distinction of Right, applied as
before, I grant it. 2. To the Minor I say, God owneth them as his people by
internal consent and covenanting, who indeed are so: and he owneth them as his
People by outward Covenanting, or Expression or Profession of consent, who are
such: But those that have neither of these, but only profess some shorter
faith, or consent to some other Covenant, or but part of this, he will not own
in either relation, nor would have them taken into the Communion of his Church.
Nor do you prove any such thing; for Deuteronomy. 26.18. is so much against you, that
I marvel you were not troubled at the citing of it: For that Text alone is
enough to confute all your pompous allegations out of the Old Testament from
the Church state of the Jews. The words are [ Thou have avouched the Lord this
day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his
Commandments and his Judgments, and to hearken to his voice: And the Lord has
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, etc.] Do you think that they
that in heart consent that the Lord be their God, and to walk in his ways,
etc. have not saving faith? Then there was no such thing then on the earth. And
if they had such faith, who sincerely consented, then they Professed such faith
that Professed such consent. And the word [ avouching shows that it was
present profession, and not only a promise for some distant futurity. This
Argument therefore is but like the rest.

ARGUMENT IV.
Mr. Blake. Those whom the Spirit of God ordinarily calls by the name of
Circumcision, they had a right in Gods sight to Circumcision; and those of like
condition have like right to baptism; This I think is clear; the Spirit of God
does not mis-name, does not nickname, nor ordinarily at least give equivocal
names. But men short of Justifying faith are called by the Spirit of God by the
name of Circumcision, as needs no proof. Christ was a Minister of the
Circumcision, Rom 15.8. And he was sent to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. Those then of a faith short of that which is Justifying, have right in
the sight of God to Baptism.

ANSWER.
1. I have no need to deny the Major; but it is not sound: for they are called
the Circumcision, i. e. the Circumcised; because they were actually
Circumcised, and not because that all that were so had right to it. 2. To the
Minor, I grant it; but with this note, that it is not because of their short
faith that they were to be circumcised, but upon the Parents or their own
profession and sincere consent to the Covenant. The Conclusion again contains
not your Thesis. There Is nothing in it about [giving title] or any thing of
necessary connection.

ARGUMENT. V.
Mr. Blake. Those that are the servant of God, whom God owns as his servants,
have right in his sight to be received into his house, and to be entitled to
the Privileges of his Church. This we think should not be denied, and that God
will take it ill if any shall deny it. But men short of that faith which
Justifies, are owned of God as his servants, as is clear, Lev. 25.41, 42. There
every Israelite that was sold to any of the Children of Israel, and his
Children are called of God his servants, and that as Israelites; of which a
great part were void of that faith which Justifies. Therefore those that are
short of faith which Justifies, have right in the sight of God to be thus
received. This Argument me thinks might be of force with Mr. Baxter. When he
had urged it for proof, that infants are servants and ought to be baptized, he
add^ page 18. [is not here direction enough to help us to judge of the mind of
God, whether infants are his Disciples and Servants or no? Does not God call
them his servants himself? What more should a man expect to warrant him to do
so? Men call for plain Scripture, and when they have it, they will not receive
it: so hard is it to inform a forestalled mind.] If God took such care upon
that account, that they should not be held in bondage under any of his People,
he takes like care that they should not be kept from the Society of his People.

ANSWER.
1. The Major is true. 1. distinguishing of Right, as before; 2. and of
Servants; and taking the word Servants in a peculiar sense, as Lev. 25.41.
does. The Minor also and the Conclusion is thus granted. But Mr. Blake's
Conclusions have a common unhappiness to be strangers to the question: Does it
follow because I must baptize those that profess sincere Covenanting or Faith,
though they have but a faith of another sort, that therefore I must baptize
them on the account of that other faith? By such an Argument. I may as well
prove that Infidelity or Heathenism gives right to Baptism, thus: Many Infidels
or Heathens have right to baptism (that is, those that in heart are such, have
such a Right as yours pleaded for, upon the account of an external Profession
of Christianity.) Therefore infidelity or Heathenism gives them right. If this
Consequence must be denied, so must yours.

ARGUMENT VI.
Mr. Blake. Those that bring forth Children to God, have a right in the sight
of God to be of his household, and to be taken into it: This is plain;
especially to those that know the Law of servants in families, that all the
Children in right were the Masters, and had their relation to him: But those
that are short of Justifying faith, bring forth Children to God, Ezekiel. 16.20,
21.

ANSWER.
This Argument is sick of the common disease of the rest; the Conclusion is a
stranger to the question. Qua tales, they bring not forth Children to God in
any Church sense.

ARGUMENT VII.
Mr. Blake. Children of the Kingdom of God, or those that are Subjects of his
Kingdom, have right in the sight of God to be received into his Kingdom. This
Proposition Mr. Baxter has proved, page 21. therefore I may save my pains. But
those that are short of faith that Justifies, are Children or Subjects of this
Kingdom, Mat. 8.12. The Children of the Kingdom shall be cast into outer
darkness. Those therefore that are short of Justifying faith, have right in the
sight of God to be thus received.

ANSWER.
This Argument also has the same distemper: Its nothing to the Que^^ion. They
are Children of the Kingdom visibly, in regard of the profession of a saving
faith, and not of any common faith tha^ is short of it. Prove that, or you say
nothing.

ARGUMENT VIII.
Mr. Blake. The Children of the Covenant have right in the sight of God to the
Seal of the Covenant. This is evident, the seal is an affix to the Covenant:
Where a Covenant is made, and a seal appointed, there it is not of right to be
denied. But those that are short of faith that Justifies, are the children of
the Covenant, Act. 3 25. The Apostle speaking to the People of the Jews says,
Ye are the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with
our Fathers.

ANSWER.
Still the Question is wanting in the conclusion. The same Answer serves to
all. Its a sad case that the Church of God should be thus used by its Friends:
to have such gross mistakes presented to the unskilful, which (to use your own
phrase to me, pa. 145.) do serve only to blind the Reader.

ARGUMENT IX.
Mr. Blake. Disciples of Christ have right in the sight of God to Baptism, as
appears in Christ's commissiion, Mat. 28.19. But many are Disciples of Christ,
that are short of a Faith that justifies: therefore those that are short of a
Faith that justifies, have right in the sight of God to Baptism. If all that I
have said, pa. 208. of the Treatise of the Covenant to prove this assumption,
be too weak, as I think it is not, Mr. Baxters proof page 21. of his Treatise
has sure strength sufficient; there he proves that Infants are Disciples,
because they are subjects of Christ's Kingdom; and what Kingdom he means, he
there explains himself. [I speak not here (says he) of his Kingdom in the
largest sense, as it contains all the world; nor yet in the strictest, as it
contains only his Elect: but in the middle sense, as it contains the Church
visible, as it is most commonly used.] And therefore by the way not equivocally
used. Those then of this middle posture, non-elect, are Disciples.

ANSWER.
Still the same Error. None are Disciples upon the account of your other faith,
but of either saving faith, or the profession of it. And as this and all the
rest do look to the Other Controversies, the foresaid distinction of Right
applied as is often done before, is all that need to be said in answer to them.

ARGUMENT X.
Mr. Blake. Christians have right in the sight of God to Baptism; This is Mr.
Baxter's Proposition in the page before quoted; and in reason is plain;
Christians must not be kept out of Christian fellowship. This is Mr. Baxter's
likewise in the place quoted; he makes Disciples Christians, and subjects of
Christ's visible Kingdom to be one and the same. Therefore those that are short
of Justifying faith have Right, etc.

ANSWER.
Still the same disease. You should have concluded that your lower faith gives
Right.] None are Christians on the account of your lower kind of faith, but
only of saving faith or the profession of it.

ARGUMENT XI.
Mr. Blake. All that ought to be admitted visible Church-m^mbers, ought to be
admitted in the sight of God to baptism. This none can question unless they
charge it as Tautological, and it is Mr. Baxter's pa. 2.3. and the medium of
that Argument which he makes the chief of all he uses. But those that are
short of Justifying faith are members of the Church visible. Therefore those
that are short of justifying faith, are to be admitted to baptism. The
assumption is his likewise, where he distinguishes the visible Kingdom from
the Elect, and no man can deny it that grants the distinction of a Church into
visible and invisible.

ANSWER.
The same disease still. None short of saving faith ought to be admitted
member, but on the Profession of it. What if I distinguish the visible Kingdom
from the Elect? Once for all I let you know, that I take saving faith to be the
constitutive or necessary qualification of a real or mystical member: and
Profession of that faith to be the qualifying condition of Visibility of
Member-ship: But your other kind of Faith to be neither.

ARGUMENT XII.
Mr. Blake. The Children of God have right in the sight of God to be admitted
to Baptism; this is clear enough: but men short of Justifying faith are
Children of God, even those that drew down judgments on the old world, as Gen
6.2. The whole body of the children of Israel. Deuteronomy. 14.1.

ANSWER.
The same Error continued, requires the same Answer.

ARGUMENT XIII.
Mr. Blake. Those whom God ingraff's by his power into the true Olive, and
makes partakers of the fatness of the Olive, they have right in the sight of
God to be admitted. This is plain: God ingraffing, right must not be denied:
but he ingraff's by his power those that are short of that faith that
justifies: even the whole body of the Church of the Gentiles, and we expect the
like of the Church of the Jews, as appears from the Apostle, Romans 11. Therefore
those that are short of a justifying faith, have right in the sight of God to
Baptism.

ANSWER.
Again the same Error: Therefore accept the same Answer.

ARGUMENT XIV.
Mr. Blake. All of those that professedly embrace a Gospel-tender, in which
there is a conditional Promise of Justification, Adoption, Glorification, have
right in the sight of God to all Ordinances, ordinarily necessary and requisite
to bring them up to these conditions, and to the fruition of these glorious
Privileges, and consequently to baptism the leading privilege. This none can
deny that know the readiness of Christ, in imparting saving ordinances to a
People. But those that are short of faith which is justifying, may embrace a
Gospel-tender, in which there is a conditional Promise of Justification,
Adoption, Glorification. Those therefore that are short of faith which is
justifying, have right in the sight of God to all such Ordinances, and
consequently to Baptism.

ANSWER.
[ Embracing] is a Metaphor, and can signify nothing here but their Wills,
Consent, and Use. The words [ Gospel tender] signify either the thing
tendered, or the act of the tenderer. To consent to, and so embrace the latter,
is no more than to be willing to hear, or to consent tha^ God and his
Messengers shall make the render. This an Hea^hen or Infidel may do. To consent
to, and embrace the thing tendered, upon the terms that it is tendered, is
saving faith. In that sense therefore I deny the Minor: and in the former the
Major, as extending to Baptism. All that consent that Christ shall be offered
to them, ought not to be baptized nor any on that account. None that consent to
have Christ offered, (Christ as Christ) can be truly said to be short of saving
faith. If by [ embracing] you mean Metonymically [ the profession of embracing
Christ] then you say as I say, and give up your Cause. Its that Profession, and
not his short faith, nay that without any faith, that will warrant us to
baptize him.

ARGUMENT XV.
Mr. Blake. If the Apostle argue for a right to Baptism from gifts that are
common to the justified and unjustified, then faith which is short of
justifying, gives right in the sight of God to Baptism. This none can deny,
unless they will call the Apostles Logic into question, and deny his
Consequence. But the Apostle thus argues for a right to Baptism, from those
gifts that are common to the justified and unjustified: This is plain Act.
10.47. Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? The Holy Ghost there, is the gift of the
Holy Ghost then poured out; the gift of tongues, as in the 45, and 46. verses
is held forth, which is a gift not only inferior to Charity, but such as may
be served from it, 1 Cor. 13.1. A gift of that kind, that men of a miraculous
faith ordinarily did as in an instant conferr. They are therefore gifts common
to the justified and unjustified. Those therefore of faith short of that which
is justifying have right to Baptism,

ANSWER.
This is the only Argument of all the seventeen that does so much as speak to
the question. A strange way of arguing* To the Major. 1. I deny the
Consequence. The Argument will not hold from one common gift, to any common
gifts, nor to this common faith. Prove this Consequence. 2. I distinguish in
the Antecedent between arguing from gifts as a Title, or the condition of a
Title, and arguing from them as satisfactory evidences of a Title, such as
profession it self is. To the proof from Acts 10.47. I say further: It
follows not [he that has received the Holy Ghost may be baptized] therefore
he that has your common faith may be baptized. For that's no evidence of
receiving the Holy Ghost. 2. The Holy Ghost was promised only to be true
Believers, Mark 16.17. and not to any others: Yet God did not hereby restrain
his own power from giving it to others. Seeing therefore God had promised it to
true believers, though he did give it to some others, it follows that it was
a probable evidence of saving faith, though not a certain: And therefore it
might warrant us to baptize them, as Profession it self might do: Especially
when it accompanied that Profession: seeing that both Evidences are more full
than one, and yet one is sufficient as to us. 3. You cannot prove that ever God
gave the holy Ghost to any that professed not saving faith: Nor yet that any
man was baptized upon any such gift of Miracles without the profession of
saving faith. Those Acts 10. confessed Christ, and professed faith before they
were baptized. 4. You cannot prove that it was only common gifts of the Spirit
that is meant in Acts 10.47. For ordinarily the Holy Ghost was given at once
for Sanctification and such extraordinary works. And anologum per se positum
stat pro significato famosiori. And their praising God does intimate their love
to God, and honor of him, and sense of his goodness; which proceed from the
sanctifying Spirit.

ARGUMENT XVI.
Mr. Blake. If the promise be to others besides Believers, then so is the seal;
for to whom God promises, to them he engages himself to perform: But the
Promise is to others; therefore the seal is to others. This will be evident, if
it be once understood that it is only the conditional Covenant, which God
seals by the Sacraments; for this promise is made to unbelievers, though the
good promised is not to be enjoyed by any but those that perform the condition.

ANSWER.
The 16th. Argument Mr. Blake fetches from my words to Mr. Tombs, that he may
prove me a self-contradicter. But I do not contradict my self every time Mr.
Blake understands me not. I confess still that the Seal is to others besides
Believers; but though the promise be conditional, we must not seal to any but
those that profess consent to the Conditions: And therefore not to any but
those that profess to be true believers.

ARGUMENT. XVII.
Mr. Blake. If God do no more in his actual sealing to Believers than he does
when the Sacrament is rightly applied to Hypocrites, then he actually seals
to Hypocrites: but God does no more in his actual sealing to Believers, than he
does when the Sacrament is rightly administered to Hypocrites. The Minor is
proved by the enumeration of the several acts. 1. God makes a promise; 2. He
commands Ministers to publish it; 3. He has instituted the Sacraments as
mutually engaging Signs or Seals; 4 He commands Ministers to deliver or apply
them to those that profess their consent and desire to enter or renew the
Covenant. Th^se two last I confess I have borrowed, and that from Mr. Baxter
page 223. of his Inf^nt B^ptism, and whether they make for him or against him,
to prove or disprove their right which he here calls Hypocrites, and
distinguishes from Believers, I leave to the censure of the Intelligent Reader.

ANSWER.
1. I mean in that Argument, that as to the natural extrinsick action,
commanded or performed, God does no more: But yet God has before the sealing
in the foregoing promise done so much more, as that he is actually thereby (as
it were) obliged to the performers of the condition, when he is not so to
others. For while it is but conditional, it is not actual: for the act is
suspended on the condition.

2. Is not Mr. Blake able to distinguish, between an Hypocrite and a Professor
of another sort of faith? I confess we may give the Seals to Hypocrites; for
they profess that saving faith which they have not: but it does not follow that
therefore we may give them to men that never so much as professed it, but only
professed another kind of faith. And why will an ingenuous sober Brother
insinuate that these are they whom I call Hypocrites, who never do so much as
profess to be sincere Christians? And now I am as content as Mr. Blake that the
Intelligent Reader do pass his censure upon my supposed Contradictions, and Mr.
Blake's Arguments.

When I had mentioned the uncertainty, and the certain vanity of the contrary
opinion, I thought meet to examine the Arguments that are brought for it,
before I come to the last of my own: I have yet some more Arguments to answer
from other hands, which I shall adjoyn before I conclude my own: and some of
the same I find scattered up and down also in Mr. Blakes.

ARGUMENT. XVIII.
The Jews Children were circumcised upon the Title of a Dogmatical faith, or of
some faith short of Justifying: therefore so may we and ours be baptized: for
Circumcision extended no futher then Baptism.

ANSWER.
1. I will not stand now upon the question, Whether such Arguments from mere
Analogy will hold; nor whether there were any special reason of a difference.
I suppose in this I shall agree with Mr. Blake. But I utterly deny their
Antecedent; and require them to prove it if they are able: yea, that ever one
person was circumcised upon the account of any faith short of that which then
was saving? We are not now upon the Question, what God looked for: or what was
necessary to warrant them before God to demand Circumcision. But our Question
is, what the Circumciser must look for? and what was necessary to warrant them
to circumcise them? And that was the Profession (by the person if at age; if
not, by his Parent or pro-Parent) of a true saving faith, and nothing lower.
They professed to take the Lord only for their God; and if they did but that
sincerely, they should be saved: For to be our God, is to be our chiefest Good,
and to take him for such, is to Love him above all and prefer before all. To
take him for our God, is to take him for the Principal Efficient of our Being
and Well-being: And so to take him, contains the chief Dependence on him. To
take him for our only God, is to take him for our only Sovereign Ruler: and so
to take him, contains resolution to obey him. And moreover, the Israelites
did engage to obedience to Gods Law, and professed their consent to obey it.

Object. But many of them were wicked in their lives. Answ. 1. But our Question
is, Whether they they did not profess a saving faith? or whether they were
admitted on the profession of another kind of faith? 2. The more impious were
to be cut off by death, according to Gods Law: And dead men cannot beget
children to be circumcised.

ARGUMENT XIX.
Then we must re-baptize those whose* Parents had not saving faith, because
their Baptism is a Nullity: And what work will that make among us?

ANSWER.
1. There Is no show of reason for the Consequence. If any such thing would
follow, it would be but this, [ That we must re-baptize them whose Parents
professed not saving faith;] and that's not one that ever I saw present a child
to Baptism, if we speak of a verbal Profession. 2. Neither will this perhaps
follow neither: but only that which was not done, should be done; that is,
Profession; and not that which was done, be done again; that is, external
Baptizing. 3. I find by sad experience to my sorrow, that a considerable part
of some Parishes, or Villages, are ignorant of the Fundamentals: I have spoken
with abundance that know not that Christ is God or Man, or either (but they
say, he is a Spirit;) nor that the Holy Ghost is God; nor why Christ dyed; nor
that any Satisfaction is made for our sins; or any thing done or necessary to
their pardon, but our own Repentance and Amendment: and with some that know not
that the Soul goes to Heaven before the Resurrection, nor that the body shall
ever rise again. Now I would know of Mr. Blake, Whether all the Children of
these Parents must be Baptized again, or not? For certainly these have not a
Dogmatical faith, which is the thing that he says entitleth to Baptism. And
then what certainty have we that any of our Ances^ors had a true Dogmatical
faith? As Mr. Blake therefore will deal with his Dissemblers that seem to have
a Dogmatical faith, and have it not, so me thinks he should allow us to do by
ours, that seem to have a saving faith and have not: and so by their Posterity.

ARGUMENT XX.
By your Rule, no man may come to the Lords Supper, nor offer his Child to
Baptism that has not assurance of the sincerity of his faith. For if it be
Gods will that they must profess saving faith, then they must know that they
have it; for no man must profess that which he is uncertain of: for he cannot
do it in faith, and so will be condemned.

ANSWER.
1. Mr. Blake will require the profession of a Dogmatical faith, and an
engagement to believe savingly, as strictly (I hope) as I will require the
profession of saving faith, and an engagement to actual obedience. And if a
Dogmatical faith and such an engagement must be professed, then it must be known
by him the professes it, as necessarily as the other. And I would fain know of
him how mere Dogmatical believers are sure that they have a Dogmaticall faith.
1. Many of them know not what that faith is, nor what the essentials of
Christianity are; nor know not those essentials themselves, as I before said
from sad experience. They might therefore be sure that they have not a true
Dogmatical faith, but not that they have it; and yet they are as confident they
have it as other men. 2. Many that believe the same truths as others, believe
them but side humana, and not divina: and therefore have no true Dogmatical
faith. 3. Many do but half believe them, and think they may be true and they
may be false, and cannot tell whether they may believe them or not, but indeed
do not; their unbelief being more predominant, and therefore from it must be
denominated. 4. Many true saving believers are sorely tempted about the Truth
of the Gospel, and troubled with doubts, and their Dogmatical or Historical
faith is but weak, and mixed with much unbelief: so that they cannot tell
whether their belief or unbelief be predominant, and consequently whether they
believe or not. And for my part I see no reason but that it should be as hard
to a true Christian to know whether he truly believe the Dogmata Christiana,
the Articles of Faith, the truth of the Gospel, as to know whether he truly
rest upon Christ, or love God above all. And I know many learned, wise, and
godly men (to all appearance) that are in doubt, and long have been, of the
truth of their assent to the Gospel, and are troubled with no other doubtings
of their sincerity (in any great measure) but only as the doubts of this does
cause them. Some of the ablest men that ever I knew have groaned out many a
complaint: O, I am afraid I am an Infidel! I cannot believe the Word of God! I
know not whether I believe it or not!] A Turk may have some thoughts or motions
that it may be true; but if he be more persuaded of the falsness than of the
Truth, he is not to be denominated a believer. Now if Mr. Blake will but tell
us plainly, how he would deal with these that doubt of their very historical
faith, and what he would have them do, then I will tell him the like by them
that doubt of their saving faith. 5. Nay see what a desperate plunge he puts
his believers to. He requires them to perform impossibilities. They must
engage to believe savingly; that is, they must profess a consent so to do. And
this they must know that they do sincerely; or else they cannot do it in faith
as the Objection says:) when as it is a thing that no unregenerate man can do
sincerely. If he engage to believe savingly, he does it not sincerely, but
ignorantly or dissemblingly. At least, few of them know that they do it
sincerely (as themselves will here confess;) what then must these do in such a
case?

6 At least, let the heart and light of a godly man and an ungodly be compared,
and I will appeal to Mr. Blakes own judgment, whether a Godly man be not as
likely to know his sincerity in saving faith, as an ungodly man to know that he
ha^h truly a Dogmatical faith, and does truly engage to believe savingly. I
could soon show such disadvantages that a wicked man has to know his own
heart, even in this point, that me thinks might easily determine this
Controversy, if it were needful to stand upon it.

7. It is the duty of the godly to give God thanks for his saving Grace; for
converting them, giving them the Holy Ghost, Justifying, Adopting them, etc.
Must none perform this duty but they that have attained Assurance of their
Conversion, Justification, Adoption, etc? Then it is not many that must perform
it. But if others may and must do this, on the same ground they may and must
perform the other. It is the duty of every child of God to pray and praise God
in the relation of a child, in a special sense, and to call God Father in a
special sense, and to plead those Promises with him that are the proper portion
of his Children. And must all omit this that have no assurance or subjective
Certainty? It it the duty of each member of the mystical body of Christ to love
the Saints, and assist them as fellow members: Must none do this, that is not
certain of his own member-ship? If I should instance in all the particulars of
Christian Duty that this case extends to, you would see that this your
principle reduced to practice would make bu^ unhappy work in the Church and
would do much to the extirpation of a very great part (if not the far greatest)
of the service of God.

8. In all such Cases our Actions must follow the smallest prevalent
persuasions of our Judgment, though far short of full Assurance. If a true
Believer do think himself to be such, he may profess himself such: When so far
as he knows his own heart, he does believe and repent, he may profess that he
does believe and repent, implying or expressing that he speaks according to
the knowledge he has of his own heart. We are so strange to our selves, that
if only Certainty must move us to Action, I think we should sleep out the most
of our lives. He speaks sincerely that speaks according to his persuasion, and
as he thinks, though he be not certain.

9. In such cases it condemns not to act in doubting, but the same man that
doubts may act in faith. Indeed if the doubting be so predominant, that a man
is more persuaded that he does not believe, than that he does (whether
dogmatically, or savingly) then he may not profess that he does believe: that
is, he may not think one thing, and speak another, and speak or do against his
Conscience: And also if it be in an indifferent thing, as about meats, or
drinks, or indifferent days, where he is certain to be innocent if he forbear,
and uncertain to be innocent if he act, then he must take the safer side, and
therefore forbear. And the Apostles words will reach no further than to these
two points. He that has unbelief, and therefore doubing, may say, Lord, I
believe, help thou mine unbelief.

10. The thing that is necessarily required to the Sacramental participation,
is not an Assurance that our faith is sincere and saving, but that it be really
that Faith which is sincere and saving, whether we know it so to be or not.
Many a man knows that he has that faith which is saving, and yet knows not
that it is saving. And many one knows that he performs the saving act, but
through vain scruples understands not whether he do it sincerely: And many
think or hope they are sincere that yet doubt of it. I have met with many that
have lived in deep distress for want of perceiving the truth of their faith;
that have cried out [I have no true faith, I cannot believe! Faith is a
persuasion of Gods love to me, or a resting on him for salvation, and I cannot
be persuaded of his love to me, nor can I rest upon him.] And when I have
convinced them that [the Gospel is 1. a Narrative of what Christ is, and what
he has done and suffered for us; and 2. an offer of Christ, and life to all
that will accept the offer: And therefore that faith is 1. an Assent to the
truth of his Report, and 2. a Consent to be Christ's, and that he shall be
ours.] And when I have asked them whether they do these two things or not:
whether they believe the Gospel to be true, and are willing that Christ and
Life be theirs, and that they be Christ's? they profess very cheerfully both
this Assent and Consent; they are w^lling to have Christ if they know their own
hearts; and yet they dare not say that they are true believers; partly through
general fears, and partly because they know not that this which they profess is
saving faith. Now in such a case we are to let them know that it is the thing,
and not their Certainty of the thing that God has m^de necessary. And
therefore we do not, nor must not ask them in Sacramental Administrations,
whether they have saving faith by mere name, without description? but whether
they believe in God the Father, Son and the Holy Ghost; and renounce the World,
Flesh, and Devil? and whether they are willing to have God for their only God,
and Christ for their only Savior, and the Holy Ghost their Sanctifier? And he
that says, yea, does profess a saving faith, though he know it not so to be.
And what would Mr. Blake do with him if he say neither Yea, nor Nay?

Having thus vindicated the Proposition against their Objections and showed the
van^ty of all other ways, and that we can have no certainty what Profession to
expect, if we expect not a Profession of saving Faith, I may well sum up all,
and still insist on the 19th Argument, that we must expect the profession of a
saving Faith, seeing if we take up with any other we are utterly at a loss: Mr.
Blake cannot agree with himself what faith to require, nor has given any
certain description of it, when he has so voluminously talked for it: and what
he or others seem to require, as a thing distinct from saving faith, we see
sufficient Reason to reject, as being wholly unproved, and by us proved
insufficient to this use.

I shall now therefore proceed to my 20th. and last Argument, for the
Proposition, which is drawn from the constant practice of the Universal Church
of Christ.

It has been the constant practice of the Catholic Church since the Apostles
days till now, to require that Profession of saving Faith and Repentance, as
necessary before they would bapt^ze, and not to baptize any upon the Profession
of any lower kind of Faith: Therefore it must be our practice also.

And here I must confess my self in as great an admiration at the words and
dealings of Mr. Blake and some godly learned Divines that go with him in this
Cause, as ever I was brought to by the groundless confidence of such men. He
must shut his eyes against the fullest Evidence of History and
Church-practice, that will deny that it has been the practice of the Universal
Church of Christ to baptize upon the profession of a saving faith, and not
otherwise: Insomuch that I must profess that I am not (for my own part) able to
prove that ever any one person since the days of the Apostles, was baptized
upon the profession of any other faith, by any save the gross Heretics, even
those whose Baptism was accounted invalid. I desire Mr. Blake, or his
Neighbors of his mind, to help me to an instance of any one approved Baptism
since Christ's time, or his Apostles upon the account of a faith that was short
of justifying, and not upon the Profession of a justifying Faith. Hitherto this
is not done by them, and the contrary is fully done by others: and yet (to my
admiration) they as confidently affirm that all the Church of Christ has gone
their way, or that it has been their constant practice, and that they should
forsake the example of the Church, if they should do otherwise: and they except
against my Opinion as novelty. I must confess that such Experience has brought
me to lower thoughts of the credit even of good men than formerly I have had,
and to resolve to try before I trust. One would think that the matter of fact
in such a point as Baptism, which we all pass through, should have been out of
question before this day.

For the proof of the Churches practice, 1. I have already said enough about
the Apostles own practice and the Church in their days. Even when they
describe the faith which they require expressly by assent alone, yet they show
that it is a saving Assent which they require; and the promise of pardon and
salvation is in the same or other Scriptures affixed to that Assent: But this I
shall not recite now.

2. The constant practice of the Church since the ^postles to this day, is
undoubtedly known. 1. by the very form of words in Baptism. and 2. be the
history of their proceedings therein.

1. It is certain that the Church did ever Baptize into the Name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost: And as I have proved before, the voluntary seeking and
reception of that Baptism contains the actual profession of a saving Faith.

2. It is certain that the persons to be baptized if at age, did profess to
believe in the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, which as is showed, is saving faith.

3. It is also certain, that they did profess to renounce the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil; which is a profession of saving Repentance.

4. And it is certain, that they promised for the future to live in new
obedience; which is the consequent of saving faith: and thus they publicly
entered the three stipulations; Credi^ Credo: Abronuncias? Abrenuncio: Spondes?
Spondeo. And no man can do this that has not saving faith; therefore the
professing of it is not without the professing of a saving faith; Nay indeed it
contains the profession of that faith.

5. Moreover it is a known case that the ancient Churches commonly took all
those that were duly baptized to be in a state of salvation. That they supposed
them to have the pardon of all their sins, I think none doubts that ever read
much of their writings. Davenant in his Epistle of Baptism gives many proofs,
and many hundred more may be given, if any be so blind as to deny it. All the
doubt is, Whether they also ascribe Regenerating, Renewing Grace to all the
rightly baptized? And though Davenant deny that they ascribe the infusing of
habits to it, as to infants; yer 1. he denies it not as to the Adult; nor 2.
that they ascribed the Gift of the Holy Ghost to it, as to Infants. And yet as
long as they put all duly baptized (both Infants and Adult) into a state of
salvation, it matters not as to our question, whether Infants had habitual
Grace. And yet Mr. Graker has brought so many proofs out of the mounments of
Antiquity, even for this also (that the Fathers uno ore took all the Baptized
to be regenerate or renewed by inherent grace) that when his Amanuensis had
transcribed them, he f^und them near four times as big as his whole Book
besides: and the very naming of the Au^hors and Books and Pages takes up near
ten or eleven Pages (St^i^tur, in Davena^^. Epist. pa. 53. to the end of 63.)
He begins with Justin ^arry, Irenaeu, etc. I will not so much as trouble the
R^ader to name the Authors, seeing he may there have them with the places
together. And lest M^ Blake should say that it is but common sanctification
which they assert, he may there see the place^ q^o^ed where ^hey a^cribe to all
the dul^ baptized [ peccatorum remissionem, mentis illumi^ationem, v^ii
sordiumque ablutionem and expurgationem animae purgationem, purificatinem,
emaculationem, totius hominis verant integram]; Circumcisionem, refectionem,
renovationem, recreatio^e^ ^nnov^tionem, anim^tionem, emundationem,
sanctificationem internam, reformatione^, ad divina^ imagine^ and
similitudine^, restitutione^, regeneratione^, ge^erationis nativae correctio^e^
ac^reparatione^, veteri^ hominis mortem and sepulturam, novi^nativitatem,
vetustatis abstersionem, exutum, despoliatio^em, d^positionem, vitii omnis
evomitionem, peccati interfectionem, criminum mortem and sepulturam, vi^tutis
vitam, Spiritus sancti infusionem, gratiae coelestis consecutionem, hominis,
mentis immutationem, and in melius transformationem. Hinc and Baptismum
appellant Vndam genitalem, aquam salutarem, rorem purificum, and sanativum,
vivificum, sanctificumq, lavacrum. Et Sacramentum hoc asserunt peccatis exuere,
peccata expurgare, spiritualem lepram auferre gratiae ac virtutum Spiritus
sancti donis atque primitiis induere, vim generativam habere, Dei siitos
generare, corpus peccuti destruere, vertutem vitalem indere gratiam spiritualem
confer atque infundere* divinam imaginem instaurare, novam facere, massam,
condere creaturam, dealbare, and nive candidiorem facere purum, justum,
sanctum, novum facere hominem; peccatum radicitus evellere, justitiam
sanctitamque tribuere animae sordes maculasque abluere, ulcera morbosque
sanare, aestus sedare, febres extinguere, putredines exuere, vitia exinanire,
oculos aperire, aures reserare, vigorem dare, vires addere, formam floremq, Deo
dignum conciliare, in vitam primordialem animam restituere, textum novum
contexere, animas reparare, viventes spiritu informatas, uti aqua olim reptilia
producere, esse baptiz^ to quod matrix Embryoni, eo modo effigiare quo infans
in utero essingitur, pari modo ex aqua resingere, reficere, quo ex terra primo
fingebatur; refundere, refingere prout statua solet: tingere ut lanum purpura,
purgare, emollire, fulgidum facere, ut ignis ferrum, charactere^ effigiemque
impr^mere^ut cerae sigillum; vitium solvere and absumere and peccata exurere,
ut ignis ceram; homine^ terreum, ut terra^ metallica^, in auru^ transmutare;
crassos and animales in coelestes and spirituales transformare; infantiam,
juventutem revocare, puritati originali restituere; vel ea etiam
praestantiorem, splendidiorem reddere. Typos baptismatis affirmant fuisse
Naaminis purgationem, Pharaonis submersionem, Cataclysum Noathicum, piscina^
Bethesdica^, aquatilium creationem, formationem protoplasti.

I have recited all these terms (Mr. Gataker tells you where to find them
all) least Mr. Blake should not be able to find any one that certainly
signifies saving Grace, if we named not all. For though he abhors to impute
equivocation to the Scripture as I do, yet he sticks not to do it much more
where it serves his turn: [Regeneration, Renovation, Adoption, Sanctification,
Disciples and I doubt Justification,] and what not, are all equivocal terms
with him in Scripture, if I can understand him; and so is the Church, the body
of Christ, and many such like. Perhaps therefore it will not move him that Mr.
Gataker nexe adds page 63. [ De baptismo denique exponunt illas sacras
Scripturea Periochas, Psalm. 34.5. ( juxta Graec. Ver.) Psalm. 103.5. Isa. 1.16.
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Psalm. 51.10. Joh. 1.13. and 3.5, 6. Romans 6.3, 6. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Gal. 3.27. Ephe. 4.22, 24. and 5.26. Col. 2.11, 13. Tit. 3.5. Heb. 6 4 and
10.22. Quae loca Illuminatione^, purificationem, renascentiam, regenerationem,
refectionem, sanctificationem, mortificationem, vivisicationem, cordis
renovationem, imaginis restaurationem, spiritus infusionem, hominem veterem
exutum, crucifixum, abolitum hominem novum, Christum ipsum indutum, loquuntur:
nec aut ad solam reatus amotionem possunt accommodari, aut de ea sola saltem,
ab ullo (opinor) unquam interpret sunt exposita. Constat itaque Patres
antiquos tam Regenerationem proprie dictam, quae in hominis renovatione interna
consistit, quam peccati sive originalis, sive actualis remissionem sacramento
isti tribuisse. Constat and ex iis quae supra indicavimus, aevi itide^
inferioris Scriptores plerosque cum in eadem sententia fuisse, tum and in
cande^ mente^ patru^ priscorum dicta cepisse: So far Gataker.

If all these terms be equivocal, and none of them signifying saving Grace, we
must even give up the use or certainty of Language.

But it may possibly be Objected, that this was the Fathers error, who ascribed
too much to Baptism. Answ. What ever they did in that, it proves the point in
hand, and shows us what persons the baptized and the visible Church were
taken for by the Fathers.

Object. But does it not rather show that saving Faith was not presupposed,
because they supposed that Baptism did give the spirit, and sanctification, and
therefore found not men sanctified before.

Answ. 1. It is undeniable that they took all that were duly baptized, to be
presently in a state of salvation, without any delay: and therefore they did
not take Baptism as a common Ordinance to lead men up to the use of other
Church Ordinances, as the Supper, etc. (which is also common to the notoriously
ungodly,) and so to saving grace.

2. And if the ^atholike Church has in all ages thus annexed saving Grace to
Baptism, and made any common faith the condition qualifying the person for this
Baptism, then it would be plain that they all affixed saving Grace to the
preparation of common Grace, and so the Catholic Church has been Pelagian:
which he that shall affirm, will do that for the Pelagian Cause which will
better please the Jesuits than any considerate Reformed Divines. It is
therefore not to be doubted o^ but that it was some Antecedent special Grace to
which they thus confidently affixed other saving Grace. Which will the more
appear, in that Austine himself, and those that followed him against the
Pelagians, and the ^ouncils that opposed them, went all the same way; which
could not be the Pelagian way.

3. It was the constant Doctrine of these Father^ and the Church, then, that
Faith and Repentance (given in (...)) did go first; and that Justification,
Adoption, and San^^i^i^a^ion followed after. (And so hold all the reformed
Divine^ that I know of, till Mr. Pemble lately contradicted it.) And so they
took this Justifying Faith and true Repentance to be prerequisite to Baptism;
and therefore note, 1. That all the forementioned terms describe only
Justification and Sanctification. 2. That they never speak a word of Justifying
Faith or Repentance infused by Baptism; for these are supposed. 3. That
therefore they ever enquired before hand whether they believed in God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and renounced the Flesh, the World, and the Devil
(as is aforesaid;) and caused them to profess this before they would baptized
them.

4. The Fathers erred not so much as many suppose in their ascribing to
Baptism. For 1. sometime by Baptism they mean not only the external Ordinance,
but the whole work therein to be done; viz. the Accepting Christ solemnly in
Covenant, and giving up our selves, as a sanctified people to him, renouncing
the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and so becoming fully Christians. This is
baptism with them, and not the outward sign alone. And what says Peter less,
when he says, [ Baptism saves us] and thus expounds himself when he has
done? And what say the Fathers more? 2. When they speak of these effects of
Baptism, they suppose a due recipient or subject, that is, A true Believer, or
the Seed of such: and therefore they often speak of the inefficacy of the outward
Baptism to Hypocrites. 3. When they speak of the outward Ordinance only, the
collation which they ascribe to it, and all the great effects, are to be
understood but by way of obsignation and solemnization, and not solely,
excluding the internal Faith and the Covenant: as actual solemnized Marriage
gives a woman right to her husband and all that he has, when yet she had a
right by secret Covenant and Contract before. Now common Reason, and the Nature
of the thing and many of the Contexts showing that the Fathers and Councils
must be thus expounded according to these Rules, I would fain know how they
deserve that heavy accusation that we commonly lay upon them for their
Judgment in this, or what ground the Papists have to plead them generally for
their efficay ex opere operato? And yet I will not excuse each particular
person of them thus.

Object. But it is the Baptism of the Adult that the Church has generally
ascribed so much to; and therefore though they took all the Adult for
Regenerate and Justified when baptized, yet they did not judge so of Infants.
Answ. I will answer this in Mr. Gatakers words. ibid. page 64. [1. Quae de
Bapt^smo in genere enunciantur, etiam paedobaptismo conveniant necesse est,
quod sub isto comprehendatur. 2. Baptismum unum eundemque agnoscere se
profitentur veteres, adultorum parvulorumque; nec diversum in his ab illis
effectum ejusdem. 3. Etiam parvulorum Baptismi diserte meminerunt aliquoties,
ubi baptismo ista tribuunt. 4. Axioma illud quod ab adversa part urgetur
tantopere de Sacramentorum effectis, ubi obex non ponitur, adversus ipsos cum
primis valor.]

Object. But the Fathers sly to the Parents or pro-Parents faith, when they
speak of Infants right to Baptism: therefore its plain that they supposed it
not in themselves. Answ. True: By which you may discern that Faith was
presupposed as the Evidence of their right to Baptism and its effects, that is,
to Justification and Sanctification: and therefore it was such a Faith as had
the promise of these effects, viz. Justification and Sanctification; and
therefore not another kind of faith. And this faith was supposed to be in the
Parent for himself and his seed, because the condition or qualification of the
Infant is but this, that he be the seed of a Believer. But then you must note,
that though they supposed the condition of Right; viz. faith to be in the
Parent, and not in the Infant himself, yet they always affirmed the consequent
fruits; viz. Regeneration, and Justification and Adoption to be in the Infant
himself and not in the Parent for him. I may answer this therefore in Mr
Gatakers words, ibid. page 65. [Resp. 1. Aliud est fides ipsa, aliud
Regeneratio, seu mentis internae renovatio, quae sine fidei actu ullo
consistere potest. 2. Ad fidem Patres alienam adeo confugiunt, ubi de
parvulorum salute agunt; quia fidei alienae beneficio foedere continentur, and
ab Baptismiritum suscipiendum jus obtinent. Vid. Bellarm. de Bapt. lib. 1. c.
11. Prop. 5.

Object. But is it a likely thing that the Fathers and Catholic Church should
be so blind as to take all for truly justified and regenerate that are
baptized? Then either they must take all the members of the Visible Church to
be such, and so be saved; or else they must suppose them to fall away from
saving grace.

Answ. 1. The supposition of falling away was too common with them, though a
few words on the by have fallen from some few of them that seem inconsistent
with it. 2. They did not take All Collectively to be justified that were
baptized and Church Members, but All Distributively, or each single person, 3.
And that was only by that judgment which is grounded on humane faith, because
they are bound, fide humana, to believe that he is a true believer that
professes himself so to be, as all the baptized at age did. 4. But when they
came 1. to speak of All collectively, 2. or of Hypocrites in general, 3 or of
any that did after discover themselves to have dissembled in Baptism
particularly; then they declare the uneffectualness of Baptism to those
Hypocrites, and that they took not all the Visible Church to consist of
justified Ones; but that the Hypocrites, though baptized, were but the chaff,
and the upright were the Wheat. But it is but Hypocrites that they say this of,
and not men that never (by themselves, or their Parents, or Pro-parents) did so
much as profess the Christian justifying faith, but only a faith of another
kind;

And as it is true of the Ancient Church that they never baptized any without
the Profession of saving faith and Repentance, so it is true of all the
Christian Churches in the world, that I can hear of to this day. The Papists
themselves do use the same words in Baptism, as are before expressed, and
require a Profession in the Parents or pro-Parents, or the person, if at age,
that they believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that they
renounce the Flesh, the World, and the Devil. And though their false Doctrine
force them to mis-expound their own words, yet custom hinders them from
changing them. And about the sense, they are not agreed among themselves. Some
of them, as is said, would have Baptism only (necessarily) to admit Infants
into the visible Church, and place them under Government and ordinances and
give them ex opere operato a certain preparatory grace. Some of them will have
it to imprint an indelible Character (they know not what) and to give them true
Sanctification (which they call justification) by inherent grace. Some of them
affirm, that as to Infant Baptism the Council of Trent has not defined whether
it justify or not, and therefore it is not de fide. And Accordingly, some of
them make true faith pre-requisite in the Parents; and some of them make a
certain congruous disposition (Meritum de congruo) to be pre-requisite; but
wherein that congruous Merit must consist, they know not, or are not yet
agreed: Commonly its thought to be in a fides informis, or bare Assent. (Which
Mr. Blake calls a dogmatical Faith) conjunct with a reverent esteem of the
Sacraments and a consent to become members of the Catholic Church, and to be
under their Government, and use the Ordinances: Or a consent in the Parent that
the child do these.

And for the reformed Churches, it is past all question by their constant
practice that they require the Profession of a saving Christian Faith, and take
not up with any lower. The Practice of the Church of England, till the late
change, may be seen in the Common Prayer Book, wherein all that is
forementioned is required.

The Judgment of the present Guides of our Churches (as to the most) is easy
to be known by the Conclusions of the late Assembly at Westminster. In the
larger Catechism they say [ baptism is not to be administered to any that are
out of the visible Church, and so strangers to the Covenant of promise, till
they profess their Faith in Christ, and obedience to him: but Infants
descending from Parents, either both, or but one of them, professing faith in
Christ, and obedience to him, are in that respect within the covenant, and to
be baptized.] Here you may see whom they take to be of the visible Church, and
in that respect within the covenant. 1. The words [ professing faith in Christ]
if they were alone do signify a justifying faith professed. For though [ to
believe in Christ] may sometime signify a lower kind of Faith, yet analogum
per se positum, stat pro famosiori significato. 2. But that there may be no
doubt of their meaning, they add the necessity also of a profession of
Obedience to Christ, to show that it is the working faith which must be
professed. And it is not only a Promise of Obedience for some distant futurity,
but the Profession of it, which they make necessary. And I conceive that he
that professes faith in Christ, and obedience to him, professes that which
will prove saving, if he have but what he professes.

The same they say in their confes^ion of Faith. Cap, 28. And again in the
shorter Catechism: Profession of Faith in Christ, and obedience to him, is the
thing required. In the Directory also they tell us that Baptism is a seal of
the Covenant of Grace, of our ingraffing into Christ, and of our Union with
him, of remission of sin, Regeneration, Adoption, and Eternal Life: that the
water in Baptism represents and signifies both the blood of Christ, which
takes away all guilt of sin original and actual, and the sanctifying virtue of
the spirit of Christ against the dominion of sin and corruption of our sinful
nature That baptizing, or sprinkling and washing with water signifies the
cleansing from sin, etc. That the promise is made to believers and their seed,
etc. And they mean, no doubt, the promise of the foresaid special mercies: for
even Mr. Blake himself does (once) deny any promise of baptism to be made to
the Infants that he pleads for. And the promise of Justification, Adoption,
etc. is made to no believers, but those that have justifying faith, otherwise
than as it is barely offered, and so it is to Infidels also.

They add also in the same place [that All who are bap^ized in the name of
Christ do renounce, and by their baptism are bound to fight against the Devil
the World, and the flesh.]

All this is further manifest in our daily administration of Baptism. I never
heard any man baptize an Infant but upon the Parents, or Susceptors, or
Offerers Profession of a justifying faith. Nor do I believe that Mr. Blake
himself does baptize any otherwise; though he dispute against this, and for
another Baptism. The grounds of my conjecture are, 1. Because I suppose he is
loath to be so singular as to forsake the course of the Church in all ages: And
therefore I conjecture that he requires them to profess that they believe in
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that they renounce the world, the
Flesh, and the Devil. 2. Because he so often professes that he takes the
baptized to be in covenant with God, and that this covenant is by them entered
in baptism and he says that he knows but of one Covenant, and that is the
covenant of saving grace; and that they are presently obliged ( debetur quovis
tempore) and therefore it is not only for a distant futurity that they engage
themselves. And if this be so, it is past doubt that they profess a saving
faith. For the Gospel has two parts, 1. the Narrative, or History of Christ's
person, and sufferings, resurrection etc. 2. and the offer of Christ and life
to sinners; Accordingly Faith has two parts; 1. the Assent to the History, or
to the truth of the Christian Doctrine, (and this Mr. Blake maintains to be
necessary) and 2. Consent to the offer: And this is called the Receiving of
Christ: And this is our Internal covenanting, which Mr. Blake confesses
necessary. For the covenanting of the Heart is this very consent, with a
resolution for future duty: and the covenanting of the mouth is the Expression
or Profession of this Consent, with a promise of the necessary consequent duty
So that though Mr Blake do say page 171. that [ ^ustifying Faith is with him
the thing promised] and do thrust from him the imputation [ of such an
egregious piece of aff^cted non-sense] as to say, that justifying faith is a
promise: Yet it is not only all the sense that I have of the nature of
justifying faith, (that i^ is an Assent to the Truth of the Gospel with a
consent to the offer, or heart-promise to be Christ's) but it must also be his
own sense though disaffected, or else he must palpably contradict himself:
There being no other internal entering or accepting the Covenant or Offer of
Grace, but by that consent and heart promise. 3. And I must also conjecture
this, because we even now found Mr. Blake denying that ever he denied the
necessity of the Profession of a saving faith to baptism. But if in my
conjectures I be mistaken in Mr. Blakes practice, I must say that I know not of
any man else living, esteemed a Christian Pastor, that baptizeth upon any lower
faith, without the profession of a justifying faith, and that Repentance which
is its constant concomitant.

I had gathered a great many expressions of the Ancients which I had thought to
have inserted to show their judgment: But perceiving it wholly needless
because of the forementioned Evidence, I supersede that labor.

And it seems not very necessary to mention the judgments of our reformed
Divines, as expressed in any of their particular sayings, when their public
Confessions and Practices are so satisfactory herein.

I have recited many of their Testimonies before, and more that conduce to this
end, I shall reserve to the following Disputation, and therefore shall here add
the fewer.

Calvin. 1. Calvin.
in Act. 8.37. says, [ Quod non admittitur Eunuchus ad baptismu^ nisi fidem
professus, hinc sumenda est universalis regula, Non ante recipiendos esse in
Ecclesia^ qui ab ea prius fuerant alieni quam ubi testati fuerint Christo se
credere. Est enim Baptismus quasi sidei appendix: ideoque ordine posterior est.
Deinde si datur sine fide, cujus est figillu^, and impia, and nimis crassa est
prophanatio.] Here note, 1. That Baptism (as received) is the seal of our
faith, (how much soever denied by Mr. Blake) as it is the seal of Gods Promise,
as administered. 2. that the constant order is that baptism follow faith. 3. And
that it is no better than an impious profanation of it, if it go without faith;
that is, 1. If the party seek it without the Presence of faith. 2. If the
Pastor administer it without the Profession of Faith.

And that it is no other than true Christian saving Faith that he means,
appears by his following words: [ Sed scriptura totum cor saepe accipit pro
sincero and non fucato, cui opponitur, Cor duplex. Ita non est quod perfect
credere imaginemur, qui ex toto cord credunt: quando infirma and pusilla sides
in eo esse poterit, cui tamen integer erit animus and omni fictione purus. Sic
accipere convenit quod David juctat, Se diligere Dominum ex toto cord, etc.
Fides ergo totius cordis est, quae in cord vivas radices habens, ad
quotidi^nos tamen profectus aspirat.]

The foresaid passage of Calvin is lately cited by some Ministers that put
forth [ certain propositions tending to Reformation of the Parish Congregations
in England: p^inted for the Norwich Bookseller, 1655. p. 16. who p. 17. answer
Mr. Blakes opinion.

Calvin in Act. 2.38. [ Tametsi in contextu verborum b^ptismus remissionem
peccatorum hic praece^it, ordine tamen sequitur; quia nihil aliud est quam
bonorum quae per Christum consequimur obsignatio etc.] See the rest there
before cited.

See him also at large. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 15. where he shows that Baptism
is appointed to seal up the present pardon of sin, and to show our
mortification and newness of life, etc. And so that it is to be administered to
them that believe. Yet he maintains, that the use of it is also for the
pardon of sin through all our life after; but that is only to be given as the
consolation of the truly penitent.

Beza confess. sid. cap. 4.. 46, 17. pa. (mihi) 28, 29. knows no faith but one,
2. Beza.
and that the saving faith which all must bring to the Sacrament that will have
the thing signified; and all that are without it he reckons hypocriets, and
knows no other baptized ones but elect believers and hypocrites; and says,
that upon the confession of true faith in baptism, we are to take them for
faithful, till they show themselves hypocrites. [ Affi^mamus signa exteriora
naturali modo percipitu^ a fidelibus, tu^ ab infidelibus, sed cont^a^io pro^sus
eventu. Fid^les praeter signare^ ipsas percipiunt, etc. Res ipsa baptismi est
aspersio sanguinis Christi in missionem omnium peccatorum, Mortificatio,
Regeneratio, etc. Fides antem illud unum est per quod homines rem Sacramenti
sibi applicant etc. Fides haec non oritur a nobis sed gratuito communicatur
electis, etc. Interea Charitas jubet ut pro fidelibus agnoscamus quotquot ve^ae
fi^ei Confessione^ edunt, tantis per du^ hypocritae patefiant]

Also in his Absters. Calum. Heshusiit page 333. ad 7mam Call. he is more full,
showing that Faith and Adoption go before Baptism; yet that the Church does
judge ex probabilibus conjecturis an aliquis ad Christum pertineat, puta in
infantibus, si quis ex infidelibus sit prognatus: in adultis, si quis
Christianam fidem se amplecti profiteatur, and Ecclesiae per baptismum inseri
roget.] And by the next words he shows that he means by [ being in Covenant,
and belonging to Christ, and believing] that which is proper to the elect; [
Nam potest quidem esse ex Reproborum numero qui ex fidelibus est prognatus, and
potest aliquis simulare se Christianu^; sed occulta haec Deo, etc.] Et postea:
[Merito arbitramur infantes Fideliu^ in peculio Domini censeri, and Spiritu
sancto profundi, (that is, before baptism.)

And yet more fully in his Question: and Respons. n. 106, etc. page 343. [Q.
Quid significat In Nomen? R. Sic declaratur Baptismus esse solenne jusjurandum
quo baptizandus sese totum addicit uni Deo and trino, etc. [Vid. reliq. Now it
is certain, that he that professes [ se totum Deo addicere,] professes no
less than a saving faith, 6r else there is no profession of it.

Page 345. Q. 123. [ Sed multos etiam ex sanctissimis prognatos, ad Foedus
nihil pertinere declarat Esavi exemplum and quotidiana experientia. (Mark that
he makes ad foedus pertinere proper to the elect.) R. Multi quoque ex adultis
fidem ore profitentibus hypocritae sunt; (He talks of none but sound believers
and hypocrites;) sed occulta illa particularia judicia Deo relinquenda sunt.
Been autem sperare nos in^genere de iis omnibus qui ex fidelibus noscuntur, and
foederis forma indefinita jubet, and charitas monet.] And the next Question and
Answer shows that he speaks of saving Faith. And page 346. Q. 127. [ Ergo
servantur omnes ex pio parente oriundi? R. Certe merito praesumuntur servandi,
ut qui in foedere comprehensi videantur probabili neque imaginaria duntaxat
conjectura. Sed hoc interea nihil praejudicat occultis, and particularibus Dei
judiciite: and excipiendos esse liquet, qui cum adoleverint, illam Gratiam sua
incredulitate excutiunt.

Page 347. Q. 133. [ Sed quum is qui Papista est, non sit vere Christianus, non
ejusmodi hominem adulium, nec dum baptizatum, ad Baptismum admitteres? R.
Nequaquam nisi prius Catechumenum factum, and Papismo renunciantem. Q Ejusmodi
vero parentibus natum infantem admitteres? R. Ne id quidem temere facerem. Q.
Quibus ergo Conditionibus? R. Nempe si vel ex parentibus aut cognatis aliquis,
Papismum ejurans, and infantem habens in potestate, hoc a me postularet: vel
alioqui idoneus Sponsor adesset, qui piam and rectam Infantis institutionem
polliceretur.]

See him also in (...) Anno. in Act. 8.37. and Act. 2.38. Rom 63, etc.

Pet. Martyr in Romans 3. page ( mihi) 148. 3. P. Martyr
[ Quodque isti sibi fingunt Poenitentiam non requi^i^in B^ptismo, potissimum
vero quando tinguntur adulti, and vanum est, and Scripturis palam adversatur,
etc.] And that you may see that he means saving Repentance and Faith, and
owes not Mr. Blake's lower sort, he faith before [ Sed quicquid illi dicunt,
una est ratio verae poenitentiae, ut ex animo doleamus admissa peccata, quae
Deum a nobis abalienaverunt: Cui dolori adjungitur desiderium condona ionis,
and preces ut eam obtineamus, cum certo proposi^o non amplius incurrendi in
eadem peccata, and voluntate mortificandi veterem and induendi novum homin^m
Quae omnia side niti oportet, quia sine illa constare non possunt.] Leg. and in
c. 4. page 176. and in c 5. p. 254. and in c. 6. p. 334. etc. and p. 339. etc.

Et loc. Commun. Cl. 4. c. 8 p. 821.. 3.4. and. 6. page 823. [ Non excludimus
eos (infantes) ab Ecclesia, sed ut ejus parts amplectimur, been sperantes,
quod ut sunt secundum carnem semen Sanctorum, ita etiam sint Electionis divinae
participes, and Spiritum sanctum and gratiam Christi habeant; atque hoc nomine
illos bap^izamus. Neque audiendi sunt qui hac de re movent scrupulum, ac
dicunt, Quid si Minister fallatur? Quid sirevera Puer neque est filius
Promissionis, divinae Electionis atque Misericordiae? quia idem cavillus esse
poterit de adultis. Nam de illis quoque ignoramus sicte neone accedant, an vere
credant; an sint filii Praedestinationis, an Perditionis? an Christi gratiam
habeant, an illa sint destituti, and mendaciter dicant se credere? Quid tu
illos baptizat? Scio dices, idcirco id facio quod sequor illorum externam
professionem, quam si mentiaentur, mea non refer^. Ita nos dicimus, Ecclesiam
ideo complecti nostros pueros and baptizare, quod ad nos pertineant. Idque est
illi Divinae voluntatis tale indicium, quale est in adult^s externa professio:
quia ut ibi falli potest, ita etiam hic. Non est res adeo certa, quin aliter
haberi possit, etc] Vid. and sect. 11. And of the sum of the Covenant, sect.
12. he shows that it extends to salvation, [ Ero Deus tuus, and Seminis tui:
Illi sane quibus Deus exhibetur, a morte, peccato, atque damnatione liberantur:
quandoquidem hoc proprium Deo convenit, ut suos liberet ac servet.]

Et sect. 15 page 826. [ Putant (adversarii) vi and efficacia operit Baptismi
peccatum remitti; neque agnoscunt Sacramentis potius Remissionem obsignari,
quam adulti assequuntur credendo, and parvuli fidelium qui ad electionem
pertinent, per Spiritum sanctum and Gratiam jam habent, etc. Ephesians. 5.25. Sane
hoc loco vides, Ecclesiam esse quae lavatur and baptizatur. Idcirco dum parvuli
tinguntur, constat ad Ecclesiam pertinere: and Ecclesiae parts vere esse non
possunt, nisi spiritu Christi sint ornati, Quamobrom parvuli qui vere ad
electionem Dei pertinent, antequam baptizentur, spiritu Domini sunt instructi.]
Vid. sect. 16.17. And on 1 King. 8. fol. 74. the same Peter Martyr says, [
Justificatio ex Baptismo non pendet, sed antecedit. Object. Quorsum ergo
Baptismus eis traditur, si ante rem Baptismi habuerint? Resp. 1. Quia Deo
paremus, etc. 2. Promissionem and do^um quod accepimus obsignamus. 3. Ibi a
Spiritu sancto per Verbum and externa Symbola Fides confirmatur.]

Piscator in Mat. 3.11. 4. Piscator.
[ At nullum inquam Sacramentum organum est Fidei donandae, sed Sacramenta sunt
organa Fidem jam donatam confirmandi; ad hunc enim usum a Deo sunt instituta,
etc.] Vid. reliq. where he calls Simon Magus an hypocrite, and in Acts 8.13.
expounds Simon's (...) by Professus est fidem. In ver. ^6. Adulti antequam
baptizentur, suam in Christum fidem prositeri debent. (Which I before showed,
he takes to be that Faith which is joined with true Repentance for Remission of
sins) Vid. and in Acts 2.38. Schol.

Altingius Loc. Comm. Par. 1. page 201.203. 5. Altingius.
Vid. quae habet de forma and sine B^ptismi. Et de Subjecto inquit, [Subjectum
Baptismi est Populus fidelis, sive vere sit, sive censeatur talis ob externam
fidei professionem, etc. Where he shows, that it must be true Faith or the
Profession of true Faith, and not of any other kind. Et Par. 2 page 608. [ In
adultis Resipiscentia ac Fide^, vel saltem utrusque Professio praecedere debet
Baptismum.]

Also more plainly in his Problem. Theol. part. 1. Pr. 59. page 223. [ At
quotquot adulti baptizantur secundum Institutionem Christi, ii ante Baptismum
jam habent per fidem ablutionem peccatorum: ut Abraham justitiam ante
Circumcisionem, Romans 4.10, 11. est etim Baptismus Credentium,, Mar. 16.16. Act.
2.38, 39. Act. 15.9. Ergo.] Vid. etiam Explicat. Cateche^. Par. 2. Q. 71. page
316.

Junius These. Theolog. Vol. 1. Col. 2113. 6. Iunius.
[ Fides enim, vel saltem semen fidei, praecedat necesse est, quandoquidem
quicquid absque fide peccatum est. mo tam necessaria fides, ut Sacramentum
damnet, etc.] The words before and after show that he speaks of Justifying
faith Et Col. 2117. Finis Primarius est significare and designare in cordibus
fidelium gratiam Dei Patris in filio suo, Romans 6.4. 1 Cor. 10.16 etc. [
Respectu hominis igitur necessum est ut p^aecedat Fides, vel saltem Foedus and
semen fidei (ut Infantibus, quod coram Deo idem cum actu valet;) nam sine fide
nullus Jesus, Ep. 3.17 Extra Christum, nihil nisi mors est, Joan. 3.36. Et sine
Christo nulla gratia, Ephesians. 2.5. Imo quicquid sine fide sit peccatum est, Romans
14.23. Ideoque si vivere velimus, fide opus est. Gal. 2.16. Si Justificari
propter Christum, id fit sola fide, Gal. 3.11.] It is expressly Justifying faith
that then he speaks of.

Polanus Syntagm. lib. 6. cap. 55. page 494. 7. Polanus.
thus defines Baptism [ Bapt^smus est primum Sacramentum novi Testamenti, in
quo illi, ad q^os foedus gratiae Dei pertinet, juxta mandatum Christi, aqua
persunduntur seu abluuntur in nomen Patris, Filii, and spiritus Sancti, id est,
ut illis qui baptizantur significetur and obsignetur, eos in communionem
foederis Gratiae susceptos, Christo and Corpori ejus mystico Ecclesiae
^nsertos, justificari a Deo propte^ effusum pro nobis sanguinem Christi, and
regenerari per Spiritum Christi: and vic^ssim obligentur ad colendum fide and
bona conscientia and invocandum r^ligiose solum hunc Deum, Patrem, Filium, and
Spiritum Sanctum.]

Page 495. [ Quemadmodum soli baptizandi sunt qui in foedere gratiae censentur:
ita fidelis qui baptizatur, suscipit externum baptismum aquae, ut ei
significetur and obsignetur, ipsum tam certo a peccatis sanguine and spiritu
Christi ablui, quam certa aqua corpus ipsius persunditur and abluitur.
[Baptizandi sunt non tantu^ adulti fidem in Christum prositentes, sed etiam
infantes Christianorum. Adultis, sed fidem in Christu^ professi^ Baptismum
posse and debere conferri extra controversiam est.] And he still takes Fides in
Christum for saving Faith here.

Infantes baptizandi. To. 2. Quia ad ipsos pertinet Promissio Remissionis
peccatorum per sanguinem Christi.] H^ therefore supposes Infants to have the
special benefits of the Promise.

Zanchius de Sacr. Scriptur. Tract. integ. page (mihi) 350, 351. 8. Zanchtus.
makes baptizing into the name of Christ to signify such a professed
Devotedness to him, [ ut sciamus nos non esse nostros neque Diaboli, neque
Mundi, sed Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti, sicut cum Merces ab aliquo
Mercatore emptae obsignantur illius sigillo, cujus factae sunt, ut agnoscantur
non amplius esse illius a quo emptae sunt, sed illius qui emit: sic quoniam
empti sumus sangnine Christi, cum hoc credimus, and nomen damus Christo,
professi nos omnino velle esse Christi, and Christo inservire.] And if this can
be done by a faith short of saving, heartily and truly, then I know nothing
that is proper to the Justified: To profess this therefore, is to profess true
Sanctification, and consequently a Justifying faith.

Idem Zanch. de Christiana Relig. Fid. de Bapt. c. 15. page 516. [ Baptismus
est primum novi Foederis sacramentum, quo cum omnes, qui vel poenitentiam
peccatorum professi, fidem etiam in Christum, adeoque in Deum Patrem, Filium,
and Spiritum sanctum profitentur, vel saltem propter parentum piotatem ad
foedus pertinent, Christ^, tanquam et jam per Spiritum sanctum incorporati,
obsignantur; ut non sint amplius fui juris, sedillius, per quem in foederis
societatem, eoque in unum corpus cum eo, sanctisque omnibus, and in omnium
spirituali^em coelestiumque bonorum participationem asciti esse dicuntur, etc.]
And that you may know that it is no common Repentance, which they must profess
in his sense, he adds. Vnde and Sacramentum Poenitentiae in Remissionem
peccatorum, etc. appellatur.] These. 2. Etsi vero hes omni^ de Baptismo
praedicentur, vereque illi tanquam organo Spiritus sancti ad hec efficienda
attribuantur, eoque ut omnes qui baptizantur tales fieri and esse
sacramentaliter vere dicantur, reipsa tamen non nisi in electis, spiritu
Christi donatis, impleri credimus; cum ii etiam soli vere credant, vereque ad
Christum, and ad mysticum ejus Corpus pertineant.] See also These. 4. of the
necessity of professing Repentance and Faith.

Much more to the same purpose out of Zanchius may be collected.

Ursinus ( and Paraeus) Catech. Qu. 69. p. 384.39^,3^1. 9. Ursinus and Paraeus.
shows in the very definition of Baptism, that in the lawful use there is
certain Remission of sin annexed. [ Vsus legitimus Baptismi est, quando
baptizantur Conversi^ritu and sine instituto. Q^ando baptismus confertur iis
quibus est institutus, nimirum Conversis and Ecclesiae membris, and quando ab
his vera fides accipitur, juxta illud Licet tibi baptiz iri si credis toto
cord.] And page 329 he supposes the Infants of Believers before Baptism to
have the Holy Ghost and to be Regenerate. Many other passages he has this way.

Paraeus in Romans 11. page 1179. 10. Paraeus.
[ Neque Circumcisione illis jus Foederis tam conferebatur quam obsignabatur:
Ita baptismo nobis idem jus non tam confertur demum quam obsignatur. Vid.
Tertul. Obsignatioxem fidei, Chrysostom. Signaculum fidei, Basilius. Segillum
fidei, August. Sacramentum fidei baptismum appellant; quo fidem haberi ante
baptismum testantur. At fide habetur Adoptio: ergo ante baptismum etiam haberi
adoptionem testantur.]

Item in Romans 6. p. 59^, 597. [Resp. Praemissae sunt universaliter verae de
Baptismo legitimo, qui est cum fide suscipitur Sacramentu^: and de hoc u^ul
quitur Apostolus; de baptizatis nimirum fidelibus: de his solis vera conclusio,
omnes baptizatos regenerari. De Simone Mago and Hypocritis sicte Sacramentum
sumentibus Major est falsa]

Page 597. Object. Qui non possunt promissiones oblatas fide percipere, nec
mortificationem and vivificationem profiteri, non debent baptizari, etc. Resp.
Major de Adultis vera est, quibus Baptismus conferri non debet, nisi fidem and
poenitentiam professis.] Here it is evident by the Description and the
Concomitants, that is a saving faith whose profession he makes thus necessary.

If yet there be any doubt of his Judgment, see in Romans 4. page 399, 400. [ Si
Sacramenta non sunt instituta justificandu sed justificatis, h. e. non
Infidelibus sed Conversis; non igitur nisi conversione and Fide sumi debent:
secus sigilla Justitiae esse cessant. Quid enim non habentibus Fadem and
justitiam obsignarent? [Et antea [ Justitia Fidei est Remissio peccatorum fide
accepta propter Redemptionem Christi. Ad hanc obsignandum Deus dedit, and
Abraham accepit Circumcisioni signum] I pass much of the like.

Bucanus Loc. ^ ommu^ Q. 21. 1. Bucanus.
[ Quid est b. pazari in nomine, Patris and Filii and Spiritus sancti? Resp.
Hac phrasi significatur invocto Patre^ Filio and Spiritu sancto, eum qui
baptizatur, remissis peccatis, in gratiam recipi a Deo, qui est Pater, Filius,
and Spiritus sanctus, and acceptari, obsignari, initiari, in tugurari, recipi
and consecrari in peculium, familiam, jus gratiam, religionem, fidem,
communionem, etc. Patris, filii, and Spiritus sancti, etc.]

Qu. 69. page 622. Quinamsunt baptizandi? Omnes vivi qui probabiliter u Deo in
Faeius recepti sunt, vel recepti esse perhibentur. Iique vel adulti, qui ad
Ecclesiam accedentes, doctrinae Evangeli ^ssensum praebent, sidem in Christum
profitentur, peccatorum confessionem seu poenitentia^ edunt, Mat. 3.6. and
20.19. Et Christus dixit primum qui crediderit (that's with a saving faith)
Postea and baptizatus fuerit, Marc 16.16. Sic. Simon Magus admissus est,
Eunuchus, and ali^] See more fully the Answer to Quest. 31. p ^ 624.

12. Nalaeus, Pollander. Riverus, Thysius.
Synopsis Leydensis Disput. 44. page 608. 27. Pugnat hoc cum omnibus Scr^pturae
locis, in quibus Fides and Resipiscontia, ac proinde ut Regenerationis initium
ac semen in B^pt^zandis praexigitur. Causa autem efficiens effectu suo
posterior esse non potest. Nec valet quicquam quorundam inter eos excep^io qua
baptismum adultorum ita distinguunt a baptismo Infant um, ut baptismum
adultorum signu^ and signaculum Regenerationis acceptae esse concedant, sed
infantium Baptismum instrumentum Regenerationis inchoanaae esse velint. Nam
praeterquam quod illius d^fferentiae in tota Scriptura nulium extet
fundamentum, quae Baptismum non nisi unius generis agnoscit, etc.] 39.
Efficaciam ergo Baptismi non alligamus ad momentum illud, quo aqua externa
corpus tingitur, sed in omnibus b^ptizandis Fidem and Resipiscentium cum
Scriptura praerequirimus, saltem secundum Charitatis Judicium ^idque tam in
Infantibus foederatis, in quibus ex vi divinae Benedictionis and Foederis
Evangelici, semen and spiritum Fidei ac Resip^scentiae statuendum esse
contendimus; quam in adultis, in quibus actualis ^idei and Resip^scentiae
professio est necessaria.] Leg. These. 31, 32, 33, 34.

Et 44 45 46.] Nec tamen omnes homines in mundo viventes baptismi capaces sunt,
sed illi tantum qui profoederatis and Novi Testament^ haeredibus haberi a nobis
possunt, cujus hoc Sacramentum sigillum and pignus est. 45. Tales sunt primo
omnes and soli adulti qui fidem in Christum and Resipiscentiam veram
profitentur. etc.] 46. Siquis vero, licet fidem professus, impie vivat,
baptismo initiandus non est; quia baptismus non est tantum sacramentum Fides,
sed etiam Resipiscentiae; ut nec ille, qui cum Fides in Christum and
Poenitentiae professione, errores aut haereses contra fidei verae Fundamentum
fovere, aut tueri velit: quia Resipiscentia non tantum est a vitae urpitudine
ad vitae sanctitatem, sed etiam ab erroribus ad agnitionem veritatis, 2. Tim.
2.23. Imo vero tantum abest ut hae^ etici a^t errorum talium fantores ad
Baptismum sint admittendi, ut ex praecepto Apostoli, Romans 16.17. and alibi, a
fidelibus sint vitandi, and ab Ecclesiae communione arcendi.] I hope these are
plain enough.

Wendeline Christ. Theolog. l. 1. c. 22 page 455. 12. Wendeline.
Materia circa quam Baptismus versatur, vel a qua recipitur, secundum
Institutionem sunt omne* and soli is homines qui probabiliter censentur esse in
foedere Gratiae: quales sunt 1. Adulti ex Judaismo and Ge^tilismo ad
Christian^smum conversi, doctrina Christiana imbuti, and in Ecclesia Fidem and
Poenitentiam professi etc. [Et page 461. Apostoli olim non baptizarunt, nisi
eos qui jam actu erant fideles, vel ex judicio Charitatis pio vere fideles
habebantur. Ergo baptismus ipsorum non suit organon quo Spiritus sanctus Fidem
and Regenerationem in baptizatis inchoavit. Et proi^de tale org^non nec jam
est.] This shows that he speaks of Faith and Repentance which accompany
Regeneration. The Antecedent he proves, first by the example of Lydia.
Cornelius, the Eunuch etc. and Act. 2.41. and 8 12, 37. Et post. [ Sed quoad
ipsam fidem eadem est ratio Adultorum and Infantum. Nam ut illi baptizabantur,
qui s^cundum Confessionem ipsorum credebant, and per fidem in foedere
D^t^erant: sic and hi baptizandi sunt, qui ex ^ffectus Charitatus pr^^fidelibus
and vere foederatis habentur.] Leg. Arg. 2.

Et page 484. Fuerunt enim baptizati fideles and renati.

Et page 466. [Gal. 3.27. Loquitur tantum de baptizatis fidelibus. Tum enim
Adulti ex Judaismo and Gentilismo receus conversi baptizabantur, and quidem
postquam in Christum professi, and ex Judi^io Charitatis renati erant, Acts
8.37. Plerique tum Adulti fuerunt bapt^zati, qui ante baptismum omnes induisse
Christum sunt professi: fuerunt dubio precul in iis quoque multi hypocritae,
etc.

Page 467. ad Arg. 4. B^ptizari in Rem^ssionem peccatorum, est per baptismum
confirma^ (...) Rem^ssione pecc^torum. Sic baptizabantur olimab Apostoles
Adulti in Rem^ssionem peccatorum, quam per fidem ante baptismum a^ceper^^t. Sec
and Johannes praedic^bat baptismum Resipiscent^ae, ^d Remissionem peccatorum
Marc. 1.4. Qui tamen non baptizabat nisi ilios qu^ Resi^^scentiam priu^ ^ssent
prof^ssi, and Evangelio cred^d^ssent ver. 15.] More such passages may be added.

K^ckerman, 13. Keckermin.
System Theolog. goes so far as to say, [pag. 446, 447. Qui sine fide utuntur
Sacris Signis, non precipiunt ipsum formale male Sacramentorum, sed nudum
tantum materiale; quia formaleseu relatio addita materiali requirit fidem
utentis. Materiale autem etiam fine fide percipi potest ab indignis and
hypocritis.] Et page 448. Terminus cui, hoc est, id cui est institutum
Sacramentum, sunt electi and fideles.] These may be true of false, as the word
[ Sacrament] is taken.

Festus Hommius speaks the same words as many of the rest, 15. Hommius.
in his Definition of Baptism, Dispu. 44 page 239. and his Supposition that
Infants to be baptized have faith in actu primo, in radice and semine, atque
interna Spiritus sancti virtute, These. 3. I shall forbear reciting the words.

Sam Maresius. 16. Maresius.
Colleg. Theolog. loc. ult. page 494 [ Verbum inchoat sidem; eam Sacramentum
confirmat: ideo hoc non nisi fidelibus suo sensu, corumve libe^is
administratur] See more 27, 28. and 51 page 5 11. Baptismus conferri debet, non
sacrilige etc. sed 1. Adultis omnibus qui^ Judiaesmo aut Ethnicismo transeunt
ad religionem Christianam, nec antiquam in fide fuerint instituti, and eam
profiteri queant, etc. Qui crediderit, and baptizatus fuerit, servabitur, Marc,
16.16. ubi Fides praecedit baptismum tanquam conditio praerequisita; non illum
per modum effectus consequitur. Ita Act. 8.12 36, 37. Nec Philippus voluit
confer baptismum Eunucho, nisi sub hac condition, Si credis ex toto cord,
licet. His citing (Marc 16.16. shows that he meant only saving faith.) 2. Etiam
Foederatorum seu qui probabiliter tales censentur, infantibus, etc.] See his
Exeg. Artic. 24.

Lud. Crocius speaks as the rest, 17. Crocius.
Syntagm. Theol. l. 4. cap. 13. de bap. page 1143. etc. 1149, etc.

Beumlerus Theolog. lib. 3, fol. 159. 18. Beumlerus.
Baptismi objectum, cui is administrandus, sunt soli and omnes soederati Dei.
Foederati sunt aut Adulti, aut Infantes. Adulti sunt conversi ex Judaeis and
Gentibus: quibus Baptismus non conferendus, nisi peccata and fidem in Christu^
consitentibus.] And the reasons he gives next for Infant baptism, show he means
a special faith, and his description of the Covenant. page 154. Foedius Gratiae
est, quo deus per fidem in Christum nos pro justis reputat, ac proinde pro
faciis Foederis, quod in remissione peccatorum gratuito and imputatione
Justitiae Christi consistit, agnoscit.]

Georg. Solinius Method, 19. Solinius
Theolog. makes no other of the Adult the subject of Baptism, but the
Professors of faith, page 245. and that either vere credentes, or hypocritae,
page 244.

Et in Exeges. Confess. August. page 823. [ Si a Deo instituta sunt Sacramenta,
ut generalis illa promissio gratiae de Remissione pecoatorum, and vi^ae
aeternae, singulis qui Sacramentis legitime utuntur peculialiter obsignetur,
etc.] At sacramenta in hunc sinem instituta sunt, Romans 4 Gal. 3. 1 Pet. ^.

Melancthon's Judgment is the same as the rest, 20. Melancthon.
as is apparent in his Common places; and in Sohnius, These. Theol. ex Corpore
doctr. Phil. Melancthonis. c. 19. page 59.60, 61, 92.

Trelcatius Instit. Theol l. 2. p. 198. 21. Trelcatius.
[ Materia baptismum recipiens sunt omnes and soli qui probabiliter in foedere
censentur. Censentur autem tam adulti, qui principiis fidei initiati, ad
Ecclesiam accedentes, fidem suam and poenitentiam apud homines profitentur, tam
infantes, etc. Many passages before and after show that he (as others) take to
be foederatus or in foedere to be proper to the truly Regenerate, and therefore
they truly say, qui probabiliter censentur esse in foedere.

Jo. Ger. Vossius, 22. Vossiu^.
These. de Sacram. Essicac. Th. 37. Disp. 2. p. 3.28.339 mentioning the Answers
of the Reformed Divines to an Objection, divides them into two parts, as not
agreed in the point. The first is those, [ qui dicere solent, eum qui fidem
habet praedicationi Evangelicae, virtualiter quidem salutem habere, quia and
dispositus est ad salutem consequendam, and instrumento instructus, quo gratiam
s^lutarem attingere and consequi possit, etc.] And thus they confess that Faith
goes before Baptism, (even this Justifying faith which they call the
Instrument) but they think that Justification and Sanctification follow Faith
and Baptism. The other sort are they, who think [that the Spirit by the Word
(before Baptism) does not only beget Faith, but also offer to Faith, and
conferr the spiritual Grace of Regeneration: So that both sorts agree of the
Precedence of Faith (in the Adult.)

And These. 42. [ Contrae haec objicitur a quibusdam, quod Abraham Justitiam
Fidei habuerit ante Circumcisionem, Romans 4.10. quod item Cornelius gratiam
Sanctificationis habuerit ante Baptismum, Act. 10.2. verum neque nos negamus,
Gratiam Justificationis aut Sanctificationis ab Adultis ante Sacramenti usum
Fide apprehendi: sed dicimus ordinary ante usum Sacramentoru^ tenuem tantum
Gratiae gustum haberi: extraordinary autem posse etiam tum auctiorem esse
manifestiusque sentiri.] So that ordinarily some true saving grace antecedeth.

Wollebius defines Baptism thus; 23. Wollebius.
[ Baptismus est primum novi Foederis Sacramentum; in quo, Electis in Dei
familiam receptis, externa aquae aspersione peccatorum remissio and regeneratio
per sanguinem Christi and Spiritum sanctum obsignatur.] And p. ^21. he makes it
(as others do) one difference between the Word and Sacraments, [ Quod Verbo
ordinary Fides excitetur, Sacramentis confirmetur.] And therefore Grace which
may be confirmed, must be before expected.

Luther Tom. 2. Page 439. 24. Luther.
shows that Baptism contains the Profession of saving Faith; [ In Baptismo
est Promissio Dei offerentis; and nostrum VOVERE nihil aliud est quam ACCEPTARE
CHRISTVM qui offertur nobis. Felix sane votum quod non promittit dare, sed
tantum bona accipere and acceptis adhaerere.]

Alstedius Definit. Theolog. page 137. 25. Alstedius.
[ Baptismus (...) consideratus, est sacramentum in quo homo electus tam certo
abluitur sanguine Christi, quam certo corpus ipsius aqua aspergitur, Gal. 3.27.
Baptizari in Nomen Patris, Filii and Spiritus sancti, est baptizari in cultum
sanctae Trinitatis, and quidem ita ut Pater, Filius and Spiritus sanctus nobis
promittant Remissionem peccatorum and vitam aeternam, and nos vicissins illis
promittamus obsequium.] Et Distinct. c. 27. page 129. [ Vsus baptismi est
commu^it vel singularis. Ille est respectu hypocritarum and credentium.] There
is no third sort acknowledged to have right to Baptism.

Bishop Vsh^r in his body of Divinity, page 415. 26. Bishop Usher.
[ The outward Elements are dispensed to all, who make an outward profession of
the Gospel, (for in Infants their being born in the Church, is instead of an
outward Profession;) because man is not able to distinguish Corn from Ch^ff:
but the inward grace of the Sacrament is not communicated to all, but to those
only who are heirs of those Promises whereof the Sacraments are Seals. For
without a man have his name in the Covenant, the Seal set to it confirms
nothing to him.

1. It is here apparent that it is the outward Profession of no other then a
saying faith that he means. As also he shows afterward. 1. By opposing such
Professors as Hypocrites, (when (...) have not the thing professed) to the
Elect and Justified, as here he does the (half to the Corn; and 2. by his
Description of the faith professed, [ The Church does not only baptize those
that are grown and of years, if any such being bred Pagans be brought up within
the pale of the Church, and testify their competent understanding of
Christianity; and profess their faith in the Lord Jesus, and Gods precious
Promises of Remission of sins by his blood, and their earnest desire to be
s^aled with Baptism for the strengthening of their souls in this faith.] Quest
Does the inward Grace always accompany the outward sign? Answ. No: but only when
the Profession of their faith is not outward only and counterfeit, but sincere
and hearty, etc.] Here then is no third sort that are hearty professors of a
lower kind of faith.

Amesius, 27. Amesius.
Bellarm. Enervat. De Necessit. Bapt [Gen. 17. Ero Deus tuus and Sem^nis tui^
Filii little qui participes sunt benedictionis Abrahae, sunt Filii Dei etia^
quum primo nascuntur, etc. 1. Regenerationem esse partem promissionum, and
singulari modo ad fidelium filios pertinere, forderis ipsius formula manifest
declarat. 2. Filii Christi incipimus esse per fidem ante baptismum. 3.
Baptizantur proprie homines quia pro filiis Dei habentur; non ut incipiant esse
Filii. Alioquin ratio nulla esset quare filii infidelium non aeque
baptizarentur ac filii fidelium.

Et cap. 3. page (mihi) 53. [ repugnat haec distinctio (of a faith before
Baptism which is but a disposition to Justification, that is, to
Sanctification; and a faith after Baptism, which is an essential part of
Sanctification; which was Bellarmin's distinction) 1. Scripturae, quae fidem
justificantem antecedere docet Baptismum, Acts 15.9.2. Rationi and experientiae
dictanti eadem plane fide recipi Baptismum, qua recipitur fructus Baptismi. 3.
Confessioni ipsius Bellarmini, quae extat lib. 2. de Effect. Sacr. cap. 13. [
Adulti per fidem and contritionem veram Justificantur, antequam reipsa ad
Sacramentum accedant.]

Dr. Willet on Romans 4 Contr. 6 page 224. says, 28. Dr. Willet.
[ The Sacraments then, non institut sunt Justificandis, s^d Justicatis; are
not instituted for those that are to be Justified, but are for them which are
already Justified,] as Paraeus.

Musculus Loc. Commun. de Baptis. Artic. 2 page ( mihi) 728. 29. Musculus.
[ Propter hanc, nondum debet baptizari, qui gratiam Christi praedicatam tam,
sibi per incredulitatem aversatur, tantisper dum in ea tergiversatione and
incredulitate perseverat and cor impoenitens retinet.] Hac de causa Apostoli
poenitentiam and sidei in Christum confessionem requirebant ab adultis,
priusquam eos baptizarent. Sic Petrus, Act. 2. etc. His locis patet requiri ab
adultis cor poenitens sermonem gratiae recipient, and in Christum credens: ita
ut impoenitentes sermonem gratiae recusantes, and increduli, baptismi hujus
capaces nondum esse qutant, etianisi sint de Electis, donec convertantur.

Scharpius Curs. Theolog. de Baptis. loc. 24. col. 1228. 30. Soharplus.
[ Baptismus est primum Novi Testamenti sacramentum a Deo institutum, quo and
Remissio peccatorum, Regeneratio, and initiatio in Ecclesiam significatur, and
in fidelibus obsignatur, ut and obligatio nostr^ ad obedientiam] Col.
1254.1255. [Arg. 2. Qui sunt in foedere gratiae, illi necessario servantur,
licet non habuerint signum foederis, quia foedus and ejus signum non sunt
ejusdem necessitatis, etc.] Arg. 3. Infantes sine Baptismo dicuntur sancti, 1
Cor. 7.14. quia Baptismus infantes sidelium non facit filios Dei, sed illis
obsignat foedus gratiae, illosque in foedere contineri certos reddit.]

Col. 1193. [ Quid recipient Impii in Sacramentis? R. Nuda tantum signa, idque
ad condemnationem. 1. Qua beneficia in Sacramentis oblata tantum de fide
percipiuntur: at Impii non habent fidem; ergo. 2. Nihil spirituale conserunt
aut obsignant Sacramenta, nisi iis quibus in Verbo hoc promissum extat. At in
Verbo nihil Impis promittitur, sed solis fidelibus: quia omnes promissiones
habent annexam conditionem fidei: ergo. 3. Christi beneficia tantum in legitimo
Sacramentorum usu percipiuntur: at nulli Impii legitime Sacramentis utuntur,
sed indigne participant, 1 Cor. 11.27. ergo -- ] Leg Col. 1202, 1203. Resp ad
Bellarm. Object. 5.

Cartwright against the Rhemists on Mat. 3.6. page 15 says [ So that we bring
not our children to the end that they should thereby have Remission of sins,
31. Cartwright
but because we are by the promise induced to believe, that as being the Elect
of God, they have already received it. Otherwise it were as much as to put the
Seal to a blank wherein nothing is written, nor nothing is given.

Dr. Fulk against the Rhemists on Romans 6. 5. says, 33. Fulk.
[ The Apostle by express words excludes Circumcision from being a cause of
Justification, because Abraham was justified before he was circumcised, who is
the form of Justification of all men, as St. Ambrose says, Com. on Gal. cap.
3. And Baptism succeeding in the place of Circumcision, is a seal of
Justification by faith in all Christians, as Circumcision was in Abraham; not a
cause thereof] See him on 1 Pet. 3.21.

The Divines of the Assembly that wrote the Anotat. on the Bible, 33. The
Annotations of some Divines of the Assembly at Westminster.
say on Act. 8.27. (If thou believe, etc.) With a sincere and perfect heart,
without which Ephraim cannot save; he had here to do with a man of years, and
yet an alien, and therefore might not admit him into the Church of Christ,
until he had made profession of his faith.] You see here that it is a saving
faith which they think necessary to admittance; of which also they speak on,
ver. 12. [ Faith ought to precede Baptism in men and women of years, when they
who were aliens and strangers come to be baptized: For it is necessary that
they should confess their faith, and testify their Conversion before they be
admitted by Baptism, Ambrosi. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 5.

And the Repentance that was to precede Baptism in the Jews, Act. 2.38. they
expound thus: [ This Repentance is not only in knowing, or acknowledging our
sins, or saying, God be merciful; but in the change of our minds, purposes,
and evil c^urses of our Lives; As Austin de Eccl. Dogm. cap. 58. says very
well; [ Poenitentia vera est poenitenda non admittere, and admissa destere. See
also Tertul. advers. Marc lib. 2. cap. 24.] And on Mat. 3.6. [ Confessing their
sins] In words professing their detestation of them and Repentance for them.

Deodate on Acts 8.12. 34 Deodate.
[ Were baptized: Renouncing by the same means all manner of Impiety and
Superstition etc.] Verse 13. Simon believed, (made an outward profession of
believing, or gave some assent to the doctrine, but hypocritically, and without
giving way to the inward operation of the Holy Ghost, to a true conversion and
lively Regeneration.)

On Mat. 3.6. [ Were baptized confessing, etc.] viz. to God in the person of
John his Minister; though not with a particular enumeration, but yet with a
true feeling of compunction shame, and humble acknowledgement, and with hate
and disturbance of sin, for to implore divine mercy. Act. 19.18. [So on Romans
6.3.] Namely, for a Sacrament; that we are Christian, not only by profession,
but l^kewise in spiritual truth, receiving the grace and Spirit of God, and
then cooperating thereto by faith, voluntary obedience, and newness of life]
Many other passages to the same purpose I omit.

Rob. Bodius in Ephesians. 5.25, 26 page 35. Bodlus.
[ Opus operatum (Papistarum) in alio gravissimo errore fundatum est; quo nempe
statuunt illi Baptizandos priusqua^ hoc signaculo obsignentur, Christi membra
non esse, etc. p. 756.757. [ Et sicut Abrabamo jam per fidem justificato,
impressus est Des mandato novus ille circumcisionis Character, non ad Justiti^m
primitus illi conferendam, sed ad eandem visibili illo signo obsignandam; sic
etiam in Christum credentibus adultis, jamque per eam fidem coram Deo
justificatis, confertur ex Christi mandato Baptismi sigillum; non ut per illud
tum primum Justitiam accipiant, ut absurd docent Adversarii, sed ut illa fidei
Justitia qua jam in Christo doncti sunt, hoc externo Baptismi sigillo eorum
cordibus obsignetur.] Et page 760. col. 2. [ Supponit quod falsum est, and a
nobis constanter negatum and supra refutatum, viz. Baptismum esse solum nos
Justificandi and Sanctificandi instrumentum, nec ante mentes and conscientias
nostras a peccatis ablui, quam externe baptizemur: Atque nos hucusque docuimus
non primum baptismo nos justificari and sanctificari, sed hoc sigillo,
Remissionem peccatorum, Christique Justitiam jam per sidem nobis imputatam, ut
and Sanctificationem nostra^ ^am per Spiritum sanctum in nobis inchoata^, in
cordibus credentiu^ obsignari.

Et page 762. col. 2. He expounds, 1 Cor. 7.14. sanctitatem esse [Jus illud
quod habent ad Deifoedus gratuitum and bona spiritualia in Foederis promissione
comprehensa; nempe, ut Ecclesiae membra censeantur, and remissionem peccatorum
and vitam aeternam in and per semen illud benedictu^, nempe Jesum Christum
Mediatorem, una cum-Piis parentibus, vel saltem eorum altero, consequantur. Jus
(inquam) quod ex gratuita Dei (...) dependet, qui non tanuum cum ipsis
parentibus sed and cum ipsoru^ semine, foedus suum pacisci, and bona in eo
promissa usque ad fidelium parentu^ posteros extendere dignatus est, ut norint
se non sibi tantu^ credere, and ad Deum converti, sed and instrume^ta esse
divinitus ordinata, ad eandem Foederis Gratia^ in liberos posterosque suos
derivanda^, donec ipsi in eam aetatem adoleverint qua possint actu ad Deum toto
cord converti, Christum mediatorem viva veraque, fide amplecti, eaque ipsi
praestare, quae parents and susceptores pro ipssis and eorum nomine
sposponderunt. Nec tamen Dei gratia^ erga infantes fidelium sic parentu^ fidei
alligamus, ut ullum liberae and arcanae ejus electioni praejudiciu^ faciamus,
etc. sed hoc tantum asserimus, ex Dei voluntate nobis in foe^ere suo gratiose
patefacta, nobis const^re, i^fantibus, ad hoc ut ad Baptismum admittantur, and
Ecclesiae Christi membra censcantur, donec in annos maturiores adoleverint,
idem prorsus esse ac valere (ad nostrum judicium quod attinet) e Piis
p^rentibus nosci, vel natos esse, quod adultis fideique capacibus fidem hanc
proficeri. Nam sicut ex his, Deus solus novit qui vera and salutae^i in
Christum praediti sunt side, vel non sunt, ac proinde quinam ad suam electionem
pertineant; nostrum tantum est Charitatis judicium, secundum quod eos omnes qui
Christo fidem and obedientiam profitentur, pro sidelibus and electis habere
debemus nisi sese factis and reapse alios ostenderi^t: ita etiam ex illis novit
D^minus solus quosuam elegerit; nostrum autem est ex eadem Charitatis regula
eos omnes pro Dei foederatis and Christi membris habere, quos videmus esse
pioru^ and fidelium semen and sobolem, sive baptismo fuerint obsignati, sive,
etc.] See more there.

So that he takes it to be a profession of a saving faith that is necessary in
the adult, which must give us ground in the Judgment of Charity to judge them
true believers and elect; and that we suppose the like of their Infants in the
same judgment: and therefore suppose them justified before we baptize them.

Perkins, 36. Perkins.
Order of Causes of Salv, page 71. c. 32. [ A Sacrament is that whereby Christ
and his saving Graces are by certain external rites signified exhibited, and
sealed to a Christian man.] page 72. The holy use of a Sacrament is, when such
as are truly converted do use those rites which God has prescribed to the true
ends of the Sacrament. Therefore 1. the Reprobate, though God offer the whole
Sacrament to them, yet they receive the signs alone without the things
signified by the sign; because the sign without the right use thereof is not a
Sacrament to the receiver of it, Romans 2.25.2. The Sacrament received before a
man's conversion, is afterward to the Penitent both ratified and becomes
profitable: and that use of the Sacrament, which before was utterly unlawful,
does then become very lawful Leg p 74. [ The action of the party to be baptized
is twofold: the first is. To offer himself to be baptized before the Minister,
etc. This signifies that he does consecrate himself to the Lord, and that he
utterly renounceth the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, 1 Pet. 3.21.]

And page 73. Within the Covenant are all the seed of Abraham, or the seed of
the faithful. These are either of riper years, or Infants. Those of riper years
are all such as adjoining themselves to the Visible Church, do both testify
their Repentance of their sins, and hold the foundation of Religion taught in
the Church.]

Anton. Fayus in Rom 4.11. page 239. says, 37. Fayus.
[ Fides ergo praecedit Sacramenta, quae absque side sunt tantum inania signa;
and eandem sidem Sacramenta fov^nt and augent.] And he fully shows that he
speaks of Justifying Faith.

Et in Rom 6.3. page 3^1 [ Baptismus non facit nos Christianos, Filios Dei,
peccato mortuos, sed tales nos esse indicat.]

Lud. de Dieu in Rom 4.11. says, 38. Ludovicus de Dieu.
[ Nisi Abrahami praeputio praeextitisset sides, vanum fuisset signum
Circumcisionis. Itaque vel eo quod signum ei fuit datum, colligitur jam ante
habuisse fidem.] Et in Hebr. 6. page 305. [ Add quod ablutio Baptismi,
repurgatae a tenebris peccati, adeoque illuminatae mentis sit indicium and
obsignaculum, ut reipsa illuminationem profiteatur qui baptismum suscipit:]
that is, such illumination as has mentem a tenebris peccati repurgatam.

Michael Ragerus, 39. Ragerus.
(though of that party that give too much to Sacraments) says, in Romans 4.11.
page 104. Obsignatio and confirmatio praesupponit gratiam, vel collatam jam,
vel mediante sacramento conferendam: quibus vero gratia non confertur, illis
non obsignatur per sacramentum. Ita igitur gratia Regenerationis hypocritae
adulto per baptismum neque confertur, neque obsignatur.] Et in Rom 6.3. Vide
plura.

Hemmingius in Romans 4.11. puts true faith into the Definition of a
Sacrament; 40 Hemmingius.
[ Sacramentum est visible signum mandatum and institutum a Deo, quo ut Deus
hominibus suam gratiam testatur and obsignat; ita homines vicissim suam in Deum
sidem profitentur, camque usu Sacramentorum confirmat. (The Context shows that
its Justifying faith which he means) Hinc etiam apparet quis sit principalis
finis Sacramentorum, videlicet obsignare promissam gratiam, quae fide accipitur
and possidetur.] Vide plura in Romans 6.3.4. ex Ambrosio, page 142.

Yates Model of Divin. page 330, 331. 41. Yates.
[ Christ in the Sacrament profits not except he be eaten by faith. A
Reprobate may receive bread; but the sign, seal, and thing signified are none
of his: for he has no experience of this mystery, that wants the first part
of Divinity, without which the second cannot work.] So Christ with all his
benefits being received, and the fruits thereof being truly received by faith
is our happy communion with the body and blood of Christ: Otherwise we
communicate no more with Christ in the Sacrament, than we do with the bread and
wine, whilst they stand untouched upon the Communion Table.]

C^cceius in Sacr. Script. potent. page 337. 42. Coccelus.
] Quae est validitas Baptismi nisi haec, quod baptismus tum praedicatus tum
collatus confirmat omni Credenti Remissionem peccatorum? and est (...) sive
firmamentum Interrogationis and restipulationis bonae conscientiae ad Deum: and
qui cum professione Nominis Patris, Filis and Spiritus sancti, and sine
contemptu Sacramenti ad nos venit, cum possimus secure ut fratrem and
foederatum recipere, etc. Qui baptizatur, profitetur se Christi discipulum: qui
credit a Christo didicit; qui veritatem prositetur, oftendit se a Christo
didicisse and gratiae quae baptismo obsignatur, participem factum esse. Quid
igitur illi baptismus in nomine Christi susceptus testatur minu, quam omni
Discipulo Christi? [Vid rel.

Et in Thesibus de Foedere, These. 454. [( sanctitas infantum) est, 4. Quod qui
illius seminis in infantia moriuntur, Circumcisionis foedere initiati a
parentibus foedus retinentibus, non exscinduntur ex populis suis, sed Regnum
coelorum adipiscuntur, sanctificati per spiritum promissionis sanctum.] Et
These. 457. [ Et in adultis quidem ad foedur accedentibus requirit professionem
fidei in Christum, Act 8.36, 37. in infantibus nihil nisi genitum esse a
parente saltem altero fidem professo, (Eccl^sia) in Charitate quae omnia
sperat, judicans, and illos sincere professos, and hos jam vere sanctificatos.]
These. 458. [ Et quidem consilium Gratiae patescit in omnibus fidelium liberis,
qui in infantiae moriuntur, de quibus certam consolationem habent parents, eos
non exscindi. In iis vero qui adolescunt, singulis consolationis conditio
subintelligitur si manserint in Fide, and Charitate, and sanctificatione cum
modestia, 1 Timothy 2.15.] These. 428. [ Nam primo Deus baptismum dans
considerandus venit, ut is qui per ministrum stipuletur a nobis, five nos
interroget de veritate and sinceri^ate resipiscent^ae and sidei ejus quam supra
explicavimus. These. 426. (which is a special faith.)] Et These. 492, 493, 494. [
Obsignatio Communionis praesupponit sidem exploratam communicantis, ut These.
209. quae sides se habet ad minimum ut (...), confugientis, Heb. 6.18. Inest
igitur in oblatione Symboli stipulatio Fid^i quae and verbis (Hoc facite ad
recordationem mei) innuitur. Quam stipulationem explicat Paulus, 1 Cor. 11. 26,
27, 28, 29. addita comminatione in eos qui indigne comedereni. Illis enim
incumbit is reatus quem, etc. Mal. 1.14. etc. Et sic corporis and sanguinis
Christi, sive mortis Christi, ut blasphemus, persecutor and latro sit reus.
499. Inest fidei stipulatio etiam per consequens in illis, [Accipite, edite;
Hoc est corpus meum] -- Comeditur autem -- side qua unum cum ipso fimus. --
494. Stipulatio fidei per fidei obedientiam, attestanti post explorationem bona
conscientia acceptata, parit Jus accipiendi Sacramentum sacrae Co^nae, and eo
ritu judicandi restipulationem atque interrogationem Dei ut Patris nostri de
communione filii ipsius. Ita Testamentum in vim and effectum Foederis transit.

Dr. Prideaux Fascicul. Controvers. de Sacr. Quaest. 1. p. 278. 43. Prideaux.
[3. Nulli adulti ad Sacramenta sunt admittendi sine praevia Fidei professione
pro captu and modulo, Mat. 28.19, 20. Marc. 16.16. Acts 2. and 8.37. Ergo hoc
non expectandum ex insequente Sacramentorum opere operato.] It is
unquestionable that he here speaks of saving Faith. 1. By the Texts cited to
prove it: 2. Because else it had been nothing to the Question in hand, which he
was to conclude. And page 279. speaking of Circumcision and other Sacraments of
the Old Testament, he says to the Papists, [ Symbola fuere Gratiae collatae,
non Causae conferentes;] which he repeats, page 280. sol. Q. 3.

Dr. Hammond in his Practical Catechism of Baptism, 44. Dr. Hammond.
page 308, 309. and so on through diverse pages, is so full for the point, that
I refer you to the perusal.

The Catechism appointed to be used in England, 45. English Catechism.
was then accounted the doctrine of the Church of England, and it speaks full
to the point: [Quest. What is required of persons to be baptized? Answ.
Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the Promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.] And this they say
that Infants themselves perform by their sureties; and therefore judge it
necessary.

Bullinger Decad. 5. Sermon. 7. and 8. is full upon the point, 46. Bullinger.
and too long to be transcribed. He sums up his own doctrine, fol. 453. thus: [
Veritas Catholica in Scripturis sanctis nobis tradita simpliciter pronunciat,
Omnes eos esse baptizandos quos Deus agnoscit pro suo populo, particit esque
purgatior is vel sanctificationis, remissionisve peccatorum judicat. Nam tota
hac traltatione de Sacramentis ostendi and demonstro, Baptismum esse signum
populi Dei and Symbolum purgationis nostrae per Christum.] -- [ Instituitur
quidem disputatio acuta de eo, quinam sint populus Dei and participes
Remissionis peccatorum per Christum? Dicimut populum Dei agnosci vel ex
confessione hominum, vel ex liberalis promissione Dei. Ex confessione quidem
hominum. Nam cos pro filiis Dei agnoscimus, qui jam adulti palum profitentur,
Deum verum Deum esse suum, and Jesum Christum Salvatorem esse suum. Caeterum ea
confessio vel vere, vel ficte fit: Vere, ut Petrus, Eunuchus etc. Ficte vero,
ut cum Simon Magus in Actis Apost. dicit se credere in Jesum Christum: sive
vero vere, sive sicte quis credat, quando fidem in Christum palam confitetur,
(animi penetrali^ solus Deus inspicit etc. nostrum non est recte consitentem
separare vel abjicere a populo Dei. Nam Philippus Simonem Magum non repulit,
sed pro fideli confitentem recepit, and pro fideli baptizavit; licet is re vera
and coram Deo esset hypocrita.]

Dr. Whitaker de Sacram. is so often and plain for this, 47. Whittaker.
that I need not stand to gather particular words. Mr. Gataker against Dr. Ward
has cited enough of them: As page 75. [ Requirit fidem ante baptismum in
adultis, Mar. 16.16. unde constat fidem esse quae servat, non baptismum] But I
will pass many more there cited.

Mr. Gataker himself has purposely opposed Dr. Ward in this point which Mr.
Blake defends, 48. Gataker.
And page 71. he says, [1. Ego quaenam sit fides illa ac poenitentia initialis
non intelligo, qua praeditum ausit quis ad baptismum admittere, quem tamen vera
vivaque fide in Mediatorem imbutum nondum credat. Philippus certe Aethiopi
baptismum poscenti, Si credis (inquit) ex toto cord, licet: quasi non
baptizaturus, nisi id ille porfiteretur, ipseque Charitatis saltem judicio ita
credere, credat.] Read the rest. And page 66. Ad hos sines (Sacrationem, and
Remissionem peccatorum) vel alterutrum horum, consequendos, Baptisma mihi
minime institutum videtur, quum in institutione ipsa eis primario
administrandum ordinetur, qui ex praedicatione Evangelii side in Christum
imbuti, and disciplinam Christianam jam amplexifuerunt. Mar. 16.15, 16. Matthew.
28.18. At hi and sanati ex part, and reatu omni exoluti, ad Baptismum
suscipiendum accedebaent, aut ejusmo ii saltem esse praesumebantur antequam ad
Baptismum admitterentur. Quin and Johannis baptismae ejusdem fuisse efficaciae
cum illo qui ab Apostolis ex Christi instituto administrabatur, adversus
Pontificios nostri omnes tuentur. At in Joannis Baptismo praevia exigebatur
poenitentia quam peccatorum venia necessario and inseparabiliter consequitur.]
See his Defens. of this against Dr. Ward's Answ. page 67, 68. And as to the
pretended different use to Infants, page 69. [1. Principali effecto, imo
principalibus effectis caruisse baptismum, etc. 2. Si quem in parvulis alium
effectum statuere libuerit, quam in adultis obtineat, id mirum valde S.S.
nusquam insinuasse: nec de eo certi quicquam constare poterit, quo fides nostra
nitatur, donec Verbulo sal^em Divino aliquo illud nobis innotescat.]

Steph. Tzegedinus Loc. Commun. de Sacram. Tab. 2. says, 50. Tzegedinus.
[ Sacramenta non confer gratiam; quia sancti prius Justificati receptique in
gratiam, quam initiati sint Sacramentis.]

Lamb. Danaeus Resp. ad Tom. 2. Bellarm. de Sacram. page 167. [Bellarminus
putat absurd hic oportuisse Baptismum praecedere Fidem; non autem Fidem
Baptismum. Promissio enim praecedit sigillum -- ergo est mediatum and
subsequent and fidem and verbum Sacramenti, and utroque posterius.] (He speaks
of Justifying faith.) Leg. and page 78. Many such passages he has, too long to
be cited.

Ravanellus Biblioth. de Baptism. page 184. 51. Ravanellus.
[ In nomine, vel in nomen Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti baptizari dicimur
-- quia per baptismum S.S. Trinitas nor in gratiam recipere testificatur, and
nos vicissim spondemus ac profitemur ei nos totos dicare and consecrare] Et
col. 2. Adulti ad baptismum admittendi sunt, modo fidem prositeantur, Act.
2.41. and 8.12, 13, 37, 38. and 9 18, 6, 11, 17. and 16, 15, 14, 33, 32. and
peccata public confiteantur, se agnoscentes, ex gratuita remissione salutem
consequi, Mat. 3.6 Marc. 1.5.]

Et de Sacram. page 512. Col. 2. [ Terminus vel finis Sacramenti est vel Cui,
nempe, soli foederati; Inter foederatos autem Dei censentur omnes illi qui sunt
in external Ecclesiae communione, and prositentur se in Christum, credere; and
vero cum inter hoc quidam possint esse hypocritae and impii, ideo Sacramenta in
Ecclesia communia sunt piis and impiis: Ita tamen ut impii pro Piis
probabiliter habeantur.] Thus commonly speak Protestants on this Subject.

The Church of Scotland in their Heads of Church Policy, 52. The Scottish
Church.
recited by Spotswood in his History l. 6. page 289. thus begin* [1. The Church
of God is sometime largely taken for all them that profess the Evangel of Jesus
Christ, and also it is a company not only of the Godly but also Hypocrites
professing outwardly one true Religion. 2. At other times it is taken for the
Elect only and the Godly.] So that here are none acknowledged Church Members,
but those only that are truly Godly and Elect, or seem to be so, and are
Hypocrites if they be not so.

The Helvetian Confession, 53. Helvetian. Confession.
(as in the Harmony translated, p. 287.) of Bapt. faith,] To be baptized in the
name of Christ, is to be enrolled, entered and received into the Covenant and
Family, and so into the Inheritance of the sons of God, and called the sons of
God, and purged also from the filthiness of sins, and to be endued with the
manifold Grace of God, for to lead a new and innocent life. -- We therefore by
being baptized, do confess our faith, and are bound to give unto God obedience,
mortification of the flesh, and newness of life; yea, and we are listed
soldiers for the warfare of Christ; that all our life long we should fight
against the World, Satan, and our own flesh.] (And none but sound believers
truly consent to this: and therefore none but Professors of sound belief do
profess consent to it.)

I shall pass over the Confessions of other Churches containing the same
doctrine.

The Professors of the Protestant University of Saumors in France, 54
Professores Salmurlenses.
in their excellent These. Vol. 3. are full on the point. Page 58. These. 27. [
Obsignat autem illam certe, ut quia nos profitentur habere per fidem
communionem cum Morte and Resurrectione Christi, fructum utriusque ad nos
pertinere testificetur. Fructus autem ille primum in Justificatione situs est.
At quemadmodum professio illa habet in se inclusam promissionem de per
severantia in ea fide, sic obsignatio pariter habet stipul itionem quandam
tacitam illius perseverantiae.]

These. 29. page 59. Sacramenta vero non conferuntur nisi it^ qui vel fidem
habent, vel saltem eum prae se ferunt, adeo ut nullis certis argumentis
compertam esse p^ssit eam esse ementitam.]

Page 50. These. 7. [ Est tamen inter ea notabile discrimen, quod pene in omnium
sensus incurrit, scilicet, ut jam alibi animadvertimus, sacramenta quidem
nemini tribuuntur, nisi qui censeatur implevisse conditionem quam Deus ab
hominibus foedere suo exigit? (This is the doctrine that Mr. Blake will not be
entreated to understand; viz. that the very Covenanting on our parts, is the
first and great condition imposed and required in the Covenant or promise of
God; and so when we sincerely covenant, we perform the condition of his
Promise. Heart-covenanting is by consenting, and Consent joined to Assent is
Justifing faith.) At Conditionis impletio dupliciter considera^ur; nimirum, vel
in iis momentis quibus praestatur p^imum; vel in eo tempore quo conservatur and
perseverat. Conditi nis autem Evangelicae ea natura est, ut praestari nequeat
quin illico introducat eum a quo praestatur in Christi co^munionem and
societatem Ecclesiae, atque adeo quin ei acquirat adoptionem per quam numeratur
in Dei filiis. Joan, 4.11. Cum vero conservatur atque persistit, nihil aliud
facit nisi quod easdem illas praerogativas retinet, ne iis excidamus. Baptismus
autem in eum finem comparatus est, ut ea omnia obsignet, quatenus communicantur
primum. Coena vero -- ut retineantur.] These. ^. [ Sunt enim duo certe genera
hominum, quae ad participationem foederis Evangelici a Deo admittuntur;
Adultorum scilicet and Infantium. At cuique istorum generum competit una
tantummodo ratio introeundi in communionem foederis illius, and omnium rerum
quae ex foedere pendent. Adultis scilicet fides, per quam Christi promissiones
amplectuntur. Infantibus, conditio nascendi ex parentibus fidelibus. These. 11.
page 51. [ Ad vitam spiritualem quod attinet, adulti quidem non intrumittuntur
in foederis Evangelici communionem sui nescii. Intromittuntur enim per fidem.
Fides autem est actus quidam intellectus, tanto cum acriore sui sensu
conjunctus, quanto intellectus ipse facultas est praestantissima, and cum
acerrimo sensu praeditus. -- ] These. 12. Baptismus autem proprie in eum finem
destinatus est, ut vitam nobis esse indultam testificaretur.] These. 13. [ Vno
verbo, Baptismo in nobis obsignatur Adoptio nostra.] These. 15. [ Primarius ejus
and magis proprius usus in eo consistit, ut ipsius peccati destructionem and
abolitionem a Christo factam, actu nobis communicari testetur. Page 372. These.
45. [ Ideoque neque Sacramentum, neque quodquam ejusmodi seu signum seu tessera
seu pignus aut arrhabo ulli traditur, nisi qui sese Verbo and Promissioni fidem
habere profiteretur] (which is their common description of saving Faith.)

Page 78. These 37. [ Nec vero minus ex eo constat, cur Infidelium liberi non
baptizentur. Nam Evangelicum foedus quidem quatenus conditionatum est, ad omnes
omnino homines spectat: est enim Christus omnium Redemptor, modo credant. At
quatenus absolutum est, pertinet ad solos actu fideles; est enim eorum Christus
Redemptor tantum, quia soli credidere. Quod enim foedus conditionatum
appellatur, propterea quod ex praestatione Conditionis ejus executio pendet, id
praestita condition evadit absolutum. Jam vero quamdius foedus conditionatum
est, promissiones quae foedere continentur, non pertinent actu ad eos qui
Conditionem non praestiterunt. Ideo eos aliter non alloquintur, quam dicendo, [
Si credideris, salvus eris: si non credideris, manet ira Dei super te:] Quoniam
igitur Baptismus institutus est tantum atque comparatus obsignandis Dei
promissionibus in iis ad quos pertinent, nemo ex infidelibus baptizatur, qui
non profiteatur sese actu credere and infidelitatem deposuisse.] -- Et page 79.
These. 40. [ Quemadmodum enim qui credit actu, jure baptizatur and postquam
baptizatus est, jus habet indubitatum ad salutem, Marc. 16.16. sic etiam qui
nascitur ex parentibus fidelibus itidem, jure baptismo tingitur, and postquam,
etc.] These. 38. [ Si deficiant illi ab Ecclesia, aut vero ex ea, ob vitam
turpiter actam, aut puritatem Religionis ejuratam, atque adeo in eo malo
pertinaciam invictam, ejiciantur; tum quia non censentur amplius esse fideles,
non potest quin eorum liberi ea praerogativa excidant.]

Pet. Molinaeus of Tradition (translat. Engl.) page 62. says, 55. Mollnaeus.
[ It is essential to the Sacrament to be taken for the Remission of sins, as
it was first instituted by the Lord)

Mr. Crook in his Guide to Godliness, 56. Mr. Crook.
14, 15. Page 54. and in his Direct. to Happiness, Sect. 14, 15. page 13, 14.
shows himself of the same mind.

Mr. Liford of Admission to Sacr. says, 57. Mr. Liford*
page 30. that, [ All carnal persons, that are conscious to themselves of
living in any known sin, ought to keep themselves back from the partaking of
the Sacrament: and all that have not broken their league with their lusts, nor
yet fully resolved to part with their darling sins, such persons are in the
gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity: they have no part nor lot in this
matter, because their heart is not right in the sight of God: they only cover
iniquity with an outside holy profession. [And p. 33.] All that profess
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, (should be
admitted.) All that having been baptized, and are able to examine themselves,
and discern the Lords Body, cannot be charged to live scandalously in any sin
contrary to their profession; without giving further proof of real
sanctification] and p. 43. The profession that he requires is, [ That men must
repent and lead new lives, and that themselves do so, and intend to do so. So
others commonly.

Three of the most learned Godly Divines of Scotland, 58. Three Divines of
Scotland.
I have in the following Disputations cited. The 58. Mr. Galespie, whose twenty
Arguments Mr. Blake attempts a Confutation of, and I have before vindicated
them.

The 59. Mr. Rutherford, whose words I have after cited at large.

The 60. Mr. James Wood Professor at Aberdene, who declares himself agreed
with me in the Qualification necessary to Baptism, as I have afterward cited
his words.

Any one that would have more, may peruse our English Divines that purposely
write of Preparation to the Lords Supper, such as Bradshaw, Hildersham, Pemble,
Dike, Bolton, and abundance more; and they shall soon see that it is true
Repentance and Faith that they require as necessary to a lawful Receiving, and
the Profession of these to our Lawful Administering.

But I will weary the Reader no longer with Citations; but only shall add a few
words of Mr. Blak^ himself, and leave you to find out the sense.

Mr. Blake of Sacraments, page 124. [ So that I conceit no Promise of these
Ordinances made to such a Faith, but an actual investiture of every such
believer in them.] And if no Promise, then no Right to them by Pr^mise, or any
Moral Grant. And if only actual investiture, they can make no just claim to
that investiture before hand; for the actual investiture being not yet
existent, can give no right to it self: nor does that investiture justify the
seeking, or demanding, or possessing of it: for all possession is not lawful.

Page 147. [ Seeing Mr. Baxter calls upon me to declare my self further in this
thing, I do believe and profess to hold, that he that upon hearing the Gospel
preached, and the truth of it published and opened, shall professedly abjure all
other opposite ways whatsoever, and choose the Christian way for salvation,
promising to follow the Rules of it, is to be baptized, and his seed.]

Page 157. How comes I pray you that future in? In obligationibus ubi nullus
certus statuitur dies, quovis die debetur. There is no day overtaken, but the
Engagement is, for present. And he that professes to consent to be a true
believer at present, or the next minute, does in sense profess himself a true
believer at present. Page 147. ["His two first Arguments, drawn from Authority,
the first of the Assembly of Divines, and others of a number of Fathers, are
brought to prove that the Profession of a justifying Faith is required to
Baptism: And what is that to me who never denied it, but in plain words have
often affirmed it? It is sufficiently employed where I require a Dogmatical
faith to Baptism.

Page 122. [ That therefore which he calls the great Question between him and
me, is no Question at all. It were madness to affirm that which with these
limits be thus denies.] And I have no mind to accuse Mr. Blake of madness.
Seeing therefore he must either be of my mind, or be mad, I will make no doubt
to think that he is of my mind in that: and that his insinuating and often
affirming that I deny the thing there in question, simply or without those
limits, proceeds from that great injustice which temerity often causes in
passionate men.

Page 389 [1. In this case where the soul answers not to Sacramental
Engagements, Sacraments are but as outward shadows, and bare empty signs, and
set out by the Spirit of God in Scripture with all their rites and Ceremonies
(as other Ordinances of like nature) in the most low, despicable and
undervaluing words that is possible. Baptism in the letter is no better with
the Apostle than putting away the filth of the flesh; the clensing of the
hands, the feet, or face, from dirt or filth, is the same with it: The Pharisees
washing of hands, yea their washing of Cups, Platters, (as low as it is laid by
our Savior) was as efficacious and as acceptable. Circumcision also when it
led not to, but from Christ, is called by the Apostle by the name of Concision,
Phil. 3.2. Any gash made in the flesh, or rent in the garment, as well
pleases.]

Page 390. [ Sacraments in this case are only aggravations of sin, and
heightning of judgments. In case of Uncircumcision in time of the Law, and
Non-baptism in these times, sins were no more than transgressions of the Law,
but now they are breaches of Covenant. Then they would have been merely
rebellion against Sovereignty, but now they are Apostasy and Treachery. -- ]

[4. When Conscience answers not to Sacramental Engagements, in participation
of Sacraments, men subscribe to the equity of their own condemnation, and give
assent to the sentence of death pronounced against them.] Read also his sect.
6. throughout, showing how many sorts of men do forfeit their Covenant, and the
mercies of it: And he concludes of them all [ Page 404. These are the men which
Table, subscribe the equity of their own condemnation, and justify the
sentence of death pronounced against themselves.]

These and many the like passages of Mr. Blake's do seem to me to militate
against his own opinions (some of the former Directly, and the later
Consequentially.) Yet do I not charge him with Self-contradiction; for its like
he understands himself better than I do. But even from these last me thinks I
have sufficient reason to demand, 1. Whether it be not a man's duty to forbear
Baptism or the Lords supper, while he gets a fitter capacity, rather than by
the claim of them to subscribe his own condemnation? or whether the necessary
order of his duty be not first to believe and repent, and then to claim these
ordinances? 2. Whether it be worth the while to write or preach to persuade men
to offer such a service to God as does but condemn themselves? and is no more
acceptable to God than the Pharisees washing cups, or than the cutting of their
flesh, or the rent in the garment? 3. Seeing that saving faith is of another
moral species than all other faith, and cannot be had without a supernatural
work of the spirit, even a new creation; Qu. Whether it be not cruelty in me to
comply with that man's desires that would have Baptism or the Lords Supper,
without making a profession of saving faith, or giving any sign of it himself,
and would engage himself to believe savingly the next minute, though he do not
now, when I know before hand that he is most likely within one minute to break
that engagement; and so within a minute, even before he stir out of the room to
become a perjured or treacherous man, that has plunged himself into deeper
misery, and subscribed to the justness of his condemnation? Were it not more
wisdom and mercy to stay (as was aforesaid) one hour longer, or a day, and try
whether he will believe savingly before hand, rather than engage him to do it
the next hour, who does not so much as pretend to any Ability to perform his
own promise, nor can show any promise from God that he will give him that
Ability; either Absolute, or Conditional.

And thus I should have distmist Mr. Blake and his dispute, but that having
touched on this last testimony, it minds me to clear my self from some
imputations of self-contradiction which Mr. Blake charge upon me; And I shall
briefly try whether ever I pleaded his cause, or have put my weapons into his
hand to defend it with.

Mr. Blakes Charge of self-contradiction examined, and found groundless and
abusive. The first pretended Self-contradiction which I observe (by intimation
at least) charged on me by Mr. Blake, is page 114. My words first cited defend
a Conditional Covenant made to the non-Elect; and I say that this may be said
to be sealed to some of them; that is, those that hypocritically professing
true fath, claim and receive the Sacrament.

Well! And what have I said against this? Why this, [If men be taught once that
it is a faith short of justifying and saving faith, which admits men to
baptism, as having true right in foro Dei, it will make foul work in the
Church.] But where the contradictions? Or what was it, I wonder, that
occasioned the jealousy of it? He that cannot, or is resolved he will not see
any difference, 1. between a Reprobates claiming that which he has no proper
right to claim, and a man's claiming that which he has right to claim: 2. and
between sealing to a mere conditional promise, where the condition is not
performed, (and sealing to a conditional promise, where the condition is
performed or professed so to be) as that there is an actual or absolute
obligation on the Promiser. 3. and between that sealing which is the end of the
Sacrament, and that sealing which is notoriously deficient through the
incapacity of the subject; contrary to the appointed end and use of that
Ordinance: 4. And between the profession of a saving faith, and the profession
of another kind of faith: I say he that can or will see no difference between
these, no nor any two of these, let him account me and call me a
self-contradicter, and spare not; And I shall answer him when I have nothing
else to do.

Another Confutation that I am supposed to give my self, is cited by him. p.
148. thus [No Minister can groundedly administer the Sacraments to any man but
himself, because he can be certain of no man's justification, being not certain
of the sincerity of their faith. And if he should adventure upon probabilities
or charitable conjectures, then should he be guilty of profaning the Ordinance,
and every time he mistaketh, he should set the Seal of God to a lie.] I confess
there is nothing of mine that can be so plausibly objected to me as a
Contradiction to the present assertion, as these last words: but yet there is
no just ground for that objection, if I be rightly understood. These words are
plainly bent against their opinion that make Election or saving Grace to be the
Title to Sacraments which the Church must judge of, and that not by the
Profession of the Claimer, but as distrusting his word upon other evidences of
Grace, as discoveries of the time and manner of Conversion, or the practice of
those Duties wherein a stricter profession is manifested, or the like. The men
that I oppose hold these Assertions. 1. We must give the Sacrament to none but
the godly in sincerity. 2. We must not believe a man's Verbal Profession, though
not contradicted. 3. But we must require the visible proofs of his godliness.
4. At least such as make it probable to us that he is godly. To these men I
answer, 1. That it is false that we must give the Sacraments to none but the
truly godly: though its true that none else should require them. 2. That we
must give them to those that profess saving faith, though they have it not: For
it is the Foundation of all humane Converse that we give credit to men's words,
when we have no just cause to dis-credit them, especially in matters out of our
reach and within theirs, such as are the secrets of their own hearts: We must
therefore take their Profession, unless it be contradicted by such palpable
Evidences as Nullifieth it or makes it invalid. 3. That we have no other
grounds to proceed on but this: and that on their grounds, they must profane
Gods Ordinance every time they mistake in the judgment of Charity, and apply
it to ungodly men: But not so on ours, who must apply it to Professors. And
therefore they have no warrant to make any further scrutiny into the sincerity
of a man's grace, as sine qua non to their administration of the Sacrament;
seeing that a Verbal profession not evidently contradicted and invalidated by
words or life, is the means of discovery by which we must be satisfied. But yet
I never dreamed that we must not require profession it self of saving faith,
and that as a probable sign of the thing professed, but that we must look after
another kind of faith.

And if Mr. Blake will not take up with bare profession of his dogmatical
faith, he will often profane the Ordinance too. For he knows not when it is in
sincerity in any man. And we know by their Ignorance that multitudes are
without it.

This is the passage Mr. Humphrey cites, which I desire may be rightly
understood.
He adds my Confession, [ That the Ignorance of this point hindered me long
from administering the Lords Supper.] But he tells not what point it was. Not
that the ungodly might lawfully and rightfully claim it; nor that I might
lawfully give it to the professedly ungodly, or to any that profess not saving
faith; it was no such point. But that the Sacrament sealed not as from God,
that [ This or that man is a Believer] or [ that he is actually pardoned] but
only seals the conditional promise with such application to the person as is
first to be made by his own Receiving; and therefore if there be an error and
falsehood, it is committed only by himself, and the Minister is not guilty, nor
the Ordinance wholly in vain. And what is this to the advantage of Mr. Blake's
Cause? Yet he adds [ And I confess as ingeniously, that if he can work me to
this opinion, I am resolved for present to baptize no Infant, as being unable
to know the Parents faith to justification.] Answ. 1. But if you be brought to
my opinion, this Resolution will be changed. 2. Are you resolved never to
baptize more on the grounds that the Church of Christ has always baptized on?
3. I here propound to you and the world the Reasons of my opinion. And then I
shall leave to the judgment of wiser men then my self whether your rejection
of this opinion be a greater disgrace to it or to you. 4. What if you cannot
know the Parents justifying faith? Will it follow that you may not know a
Profession of it? 5. You would do the world a courtesy to tell them, by what
means you are more certain of the sincerity of a Dogmatical Faith, than we can
be of a Justifying Faith? Or will you upon consideration resolve yet never to
baptize any more, not administer the Lords Supper, because you can never be
certain that your Receivers have a Dogmatical Faith?

The next place where I am cited against my self, is page 150. because I speak
of Saints that shall not be saved. Answ. And so I do still. But yet I still say
that Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiore significato. And therefore the
words [ Saints, Believers, etc.] must ordinarily be understood of such as are
justified, where there is no limitation, or special reason to the contrary.

The next place where I observe my self cited against my self, is, p. 158.
Because I maintain that it is an Error in Mr. Tombs to say [ That the Covenant
whereof baptism is the Seal, is only the the absolute covenant, made only to
the Elect: Therefore Mr. Blake infers [ And if men in the state of nature be in
that covenant that baptism seals, viz. the conditional Covenant; then men in
the state of nature and short of justifying faith, have right to baptism.] To
which I reply; 1. I have showed you at large how far men unsanctified are or
are not in covenant with God; and in what sense they have or have not right to
baptism: And yet must we still use the undistinguished terms, as if I simply
denied without distinction? Yea, before you confess that you tell it abroad in
your discourse, that I say none have right to baptism but they that have saving
faith, and that you can hardly gain credit to your words. The way to gain
credit were to speak truer, and specially in your discourse of other men behind
their backs. A Right by any promise or mortal grant from God to them, I denied:
but I affirmed Hypocrites to be the rightful objects of the Ministers Act, or
that we may lawfully give it them, and that thus far they have such an
(improper) right. And yet still you would make me believe that I simply deny
them right. 2. Your Consequence here is wholly groundless. It is one thing to
say as I do [ That the conditional covenant is made to the non-Elect] And
another thing to say as you term it [ that they are in the covenant] For that
word is very ambiguous. If your consequence be good from my Assertion, then you
may as well prove that Turks, Jews, and Heathen may have the Sacraments given
them. For I affirm that the conditional Covenant is made to them. 3. The thing
that I maintain against Mr. Tombs is, I have in my Apology desired Mr. Tombs
thus to understand me.
that the Sacrament seals not only the absolute Promise to the Elect; but the
conditional Promise; and this in two sorts; 1. To true Believers who perform
the condition, God seals effectually obliging himself Actually and confirming
their faith. 2. The same conditional promise he seals to intruding
Hypocrites, but not so as to oblige himself to them, but conditionally still as
the promise it self does: Because the conditional promise gives not actual
right, or enduceth not on the Promiser an actual obligation till the condition
be performed; which is with true believers and no others. I desire both Mr.
Tombs and you to know my meaning when I so plainly express it, before you
trouble your selves and others in contradicting it.

Another supposed Contradiction is page 159. recited. He argued [ That faith on
which Simon Magus was baptized, is that which admits to Baptism. But Simons
faith fell short of saving and justifying.] To this Mr. Blake says I give a
sudden answer, viz. [concedo totum, sed de sideratur conclusio] And he adds [
He is certainly much to seek both in syllogism and common reason, that could
not infer, and could not know that I left the Reader to infer that [therefore;
A Faith that is short of justifying entitles to baptism] and so I have the
whole in question yielded, and that which was once said would make foul work in
the Church if granted] To this I reply. 1. I shall not presume to say that you
are much to seek either in Syllogism or common reason. ^ut I think it meet to
say that I pity the world, and especially hasty inconsiderate Readers that must
be troubled and abused by their writtings that understand not what they speak
to. I pray peruse your Arment again, and see whether any more will follow than
this [ Therefore a faith short of saving or justifying admits to baptism.]
And this I granted, taking Simons faith to be an assent conjunct with a
profession of saving faith (as most Interpreters do that I have seen;
expounding [ he believed] by [ be professed to believe, and had some
conv^ction.]) But was the word [ entitled] in your Argument? And might I not
well say desideratur conclusio? The question which you would have concluded was
that which now you conclude [ It entitleth to Baptism] And then there is more
in your Conclusion than in your Premises. Admitting is not Entitling. I
granted you often before that we may Admit an Hypocrite (yea a stark Infidel) if
professing true faith, he require the Sacrament: But I denied that in strict or
proper sense they had Title to it, or might demand it. I may justly and
necessarily give, if required, what another unjustly requires; yet upon this
gross oversight of my obvious sense, Mr. Blake goes away as with a full
concession of his Cause: And no doubt in some men's eyes has carried it.

His two Arguments against me from my own words, p. 166. I have answered before.

The next touch of this nature I find page 167. [ Profession being a good step
in the way to sincerity, which a man would think Mr. Baxter would not dislike,
who so far speaks the mind of Christ toward men, that if they will come but
only to a visible Profession, he will not deny them admittance there, because
they intend to go no further, but will let them come as near as they will.]
Repl. And so I confidently say still: And what is this to your Cause at all?

The next that I observe are cited, page 184. and 186. In the latter, 188. he
recites a passage of mine in the Saints Rest, where I say that [ the mere
sober-professing to repent and believe in Christ, is a sufficient Evidence of
their Interest to Church Membership, (coram Ecclesia) and admittance thereto by
Baptism.]

Upon which Mr. Blake assumeth [ What have I spoke more than here is said? and
did I ever speak with more and higher Confidence? I say, that a faith which is
short of justifying gives title to Baptism:] And he says, [such gives
sufficient Interest to Church Membership, and consequently admittance to
Baptism.] Repl. I must needs say, that it is to be lamented that Passion or
Inconsiderateness should carry you to such evident untruths. Did ever I say
that [ such] a faith gives evidence? Did I there once mention such a faith? Did
I not expressly say, [ A sober Professing to repent and believe in Christ.] And
did you not set these words before your Readers eyes? And yet will you in the
next words persuade him that I talk of a faith short of justifying? Did you
think men would take no heed what they read? It is the Profession of true faith
and Repentance that I spoke of, and not your faith that is short of it, which
came not into my thoughts. This dealing is not like to edify; though with some
it may be effectual to mislead.

Yet upon this abuse you ground a triumph, adding [ So that if my doctrine
herein be loose, the Reader will hardly find his to be fast: and it hears not
well to play fast and loose.] It was loose ground that these words were built
on.

Page 184. Another Confutation of my self is thus expressed, [ I desire Mr.
Baxter to tell us how he has mended the matter, and provided for the honor and
luster of the Christian Name, or made up at all, the gap of which he speaks. He
says the Church is bound to baptize as largely, as I say men have Right to
Baptism.] Repl. Dear Brother, it is not well that your pages should contain so
many such untruths. I would we had never meddled with controversy, if it cannot
be managed without such guilt. You say that a Dogmatical faith entitles to
Baptism. I say we ought not to Baptize men without the Profession of a saving
faith. Is this the same with yours, or as large? Is it all one to baptize them
that will profess that they are willing to have Christ as he is offered in the
Gospel, and them that will profess no such willingness at all? Why do you
expect that your Readers should believe your so frequent and evident
mis-reports? Your next words also are untrue, that I [ refuse none that you
receive] if you did practice according to your doctrine; and that where [ you
say they have Right, I say we are bound to baptize them without Right.] A
double untruth. First, It is not the same persons that we speak of. Secondly, I
distinguished of Right, and told you, that if you will call that Right to
another, which results from the command to me to baptize him if he demand it,
such Right he has. You next add [ How will this make Christianity look with
any better face? how much will Worcestershire Congregations where this is
received exceed other Congregations where unanimously it is denied?] Repl.
Diverse of your flings at the Worcestershire Congregations might have been
spared, without the least dishonor to your prudence, justice, charity, or
piety. If you have a mind to be the Accuser of any Churches of Christ, you
should descend to particulars, and deal with such people and in such cases that
you know, and not print untruths of such Congregations, which the Country
knows to be such, as you have done, page 142, 143. upon the credit of your
false reporters. If I have deserved such dealing from you the Christian
Assemblies of Worcestershire have not. Restrain your indignation to me, and
abuse not your Brethren that meddle not with you.

And what is it that is denied unanimously by other Congregations? Surely not
the necessity of professing a faith that's more than Dogmatical; at least I know
no such Congregations, and I hope I shall never know such; For all your
frequent and confident intimations that yours is the common opinion of Divines,
and mine is singular: If paper could blush, abundance of such passages would
confute themselves, and prevent the delusion of your credulous reader, who will
believe you to save the labor of a trial.

Page 185. The words of mine that are cited as against my self are these [
Vocation which is effectual only to bring men to an outward profession of
faith, is larger then Election, and makes men such whom we are bound to
baptize.] true: How unhappy am I, that must contradict my opinion in the very
words which contain it! But still will you persuade men, that an outward
professing of true saving faith is all one with another kind of faith (no man I
think knows what) which you are busily promoting to be the Title to Sacraments?

I shall not stand to search Mr. Blake's book for more of my
self-contradictions, or trouble the Reader with a further vindication: For in
thus much he may see the face of the rest, and discern the judiciousness and
equity of the Charge.

But as Mr. Blake deals by me, so does he by the Authors whom he alleges
for his opinions, as page 152.153, 154, 155. and elsewhere: He sticks not to
cite them as owning his cause, who in the very words recited by him, do condemn
it. For in those words they make the Church as visible to consist of professors
as distinct from true believers, and know no members but true Christians and
Hypocrites (who therefore pretend to that Faith which they have not: or else
how are they Hypocrites?) And what is this to Mr. Blake's new visible members
that profess only some other kind of faith? or how will this warrant his new
kind of Baptism, which must be administered upon the Profession of another sort
of Faith?

The Lord illuminate us, and pardon all the wrong we have done to his Church
and Truth, through our darkness and self-conceitedness.

The third Disputation. Quest. Whether the Infants of Notoriously-ungodly
baptized Parents have Right to be Baptized.
Tertullian. Apologet. cap. 16. Sed dices; Etiam de nostris excedere quosdam a
Regula Disciplinae: Desunt tum Christiani haberi penes nos. Philosophi vero
illi cum talibus factis in nomine and honor sapientiae perseverant. These.
Salmuriens. Vol. 3. Page 59. These. 39. Sacramenta non conferuntur nisi iis qui
vel fidem habent, vel saltem eam prae se ferunt, adeo ut nullis certis
argumentis compertum esse possit eam esse ementitam. Gilespie, Aaron's Rod
Blossoming. page 514. I believe, No conscientious Minister would adventure to
baptize one who has manifest and infallible signs of Unregeneration. Sure, we
cannot be answerable to God, if we should minister Baptism to a man whose works
and words do manifestly declare him to be an unregenerated unconverted person.
And if we may not Initiate such a one, how shall we bring him to the Lords
Table? Rutherford, Due Right of Presbyteries, page 231. n. 2. But, says
Robinson, most of England are ignorant of the first Rudiments and Foundation of
Religion; and therefore cannot be a Church.

Answ. Such are materially not the visible Church, and have not a Profession;
and are to be taught; and if they wilfully remain in that darkness, are to be
cast out.


The third Disputation. Quest. Whether the Infants of Notoriously ungodly
Baptized Parents have Right to be Baptized?
THE Question is of the greater moment, because about Matter of Practice, and
that in a Point wherein the Honor of God on one side, and the Rights of men's
Souls on the other, are so much concerned. It supposes first, that Baptism is
Gods Ordinance, of continued Use, and that some are to be Baptized. Secondly,
that it is a Benefit, or else we could not, in the sense now used, be said to
have Right to it. Thirdly. It supposes that some Infants have Right to be
Baptized. This Question therefore is not to be disputed with the Anabaptists,
who deny the presupposed. And they that are so indifferent in the former, as to
take it for an inconsiderable matter. Whether Infants be baptized, or not, must
needs judge this Question of the Infants of the Ungodly, to be much more
inconsiderable. Fourthly, Yet does it not suppose that the Infants of any
ungodly persons have this Right, as if it were only the Right of Notorious ones
that were disputable: but the word [ Notorious] is added to limit our present
Dispute to that sort, for several Reasons; at this time passing by the other,
but not taking it for granted. Fifthly, Nor does the Addition of the term [
Baptized] to [ Parents] take it for granted that no children of unbaptized
Parents have such Right; But it limits the Question to that sort only, as
fitter in several respects for our Dispute.

For the explication of the terms; 1. By Infant we mean Children not yet come
to the use of Reason; so that as they are not sui Juris, but at another
dispose; so they are incapable naturally in any Contract to dispose of
themselves, being unfit to give consent, through a natural defect of that
understanding which is pre-requisite. By [ a natural Defect] I mean of nature
in it self considered, and not as corrupted by sin, nor as neglected sinfully
by our selves or others. So that I see not but that Idiots are in the same
condition as Infant children. But of that let every one think as they see
cause. In Law homo primae aetatis is an Infant, even after he can speak; though
as to the Etymology he be called an Infant, quia fari nescit, i. e. loqui non
potest, ut Isidor. lib. 11.2.

2. By Parents we mean principally Natural Parents, those who begat those
Infants; but secondarily also (as I suppose) those that have Adopted them, or
bought them, or received them as given or delivered to them, so that they any
way become Their Own, and they have the dispose of them, and are enabled to
enter them into Covenant, so as to oblige them on the highest terms; Though I
know it is not properly that these are called Parents; The word [ Parent] is
primarily applicable to the Mother only, as not being a Parendo, but a
Pariendo, and thence to the Father also, because of the Relation between Gigno
and Pario; and so (...) is sometime used for Genero. And though the word [
Parens] be not usually applied to those that Adopt, yet Pater is: And not
unfitly, if, as some suppose, the word (...) came from (...), alo, to nourish;
for so men may do by children that are any way their own. But it is only the
immediate Parents that we here mean; though Festus says, that Juris prudentes
avos and proavos, avias and proavias parentum nomine appellari dicunt. And
though the word Parens be sometime taken pro Consanguineo: And Hierom says
advers. Ruffin. lib. 2. That militari vulgarique consuetudine cognati and
assines nominantur Parents. But of this more anon.

The term [Ungodly) is it that needs the most wary and exact Explication, as
on which the greatest stress of the Controversy does depend. It is not one
only sense in which the words (...), Pius and Impius, Godly and Ungodly, are
used. Some think that Pius comes from an obsolete Greek word, now difused,
(...), to which (...) and (...) do refer; and so that the primary signification
is of one that worships God wi^h the Fat of Sacrifice, as Abel did, with the
best of his service and not the refuse or lean. Melius ad rem fuerit, says
Mertinius [Pius derivare a (...), quod Cretensibus est Deus, ex (...): quia
pius est qui Deo addictus est and devotus, eumque sequitur; ut Angli Pium
Godly, tanquam Divinum. Ita Objectum Pii indicaretur. Si ad actum respiciamus,
idonra originatio erit (...), quippe quae est vox religiosae operationis.] Vide
plura ibid. Our English word [ Godly] is the most clear for Etymology and
sense; And for the right understanding of it, we must consider, 1. What God is,
and in what Relationn to Man he stands. 2. What is required from Man toward
God.

1. As God is in himself most perfectly Good, (from whence some think in
English he is called God), so is he to Man; 1. The Principal efficient Cause of
all his Good; 2. And the chief Objective matter, and ultimate end; so that in
him alone can we be happy. He is our a and o, our very All. he stands Related
to Man as his Creator, Governor, Redeemer, and Preserver.

2. From whence Man is obliged to acknowledge God, in these Relations, Quid est
Pic. tas, nisi Dei cultus? and unde il^e colitur, nisi Charitate? Aug. Epist. 29
whether Naturally or Supernaturally made known; and to consent to them; and to
love and honor him as God, (though it be not perfectly, which is now above his
strength, yet must it be) sincerely, even comparatively and superlatively above
any Creature whatsoever. He that does thus, is a Godly man, that is, a man that
does sincerely believe in God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and is devoted
to God.

Besides this principal sense, there are some others common, both in the
defect, and in the excess; 1. Among Heathens he is called Pious, 1. who is a
devout honourer of their Gods, though Idols; 2. or who is merciful to people in
misery; 3. or who is an Honourer of Parents and Superiors, or who is
conscientious according to their insufficient light. 2. Among Christians, 1.
Some call any man Godly, that is, zealous in Religious matters, though so
unsound in the fundamentals, that he worshippeth he knows not what, or so
ignorant about Gods very nature and his relations to him, that it is not God
indeed as God that he worshippeth: and though he be actually incapable of true
Love and Devotedness to God, for want of right conceivings of him, even in
those respects that are essential to the Object of the Christian faith. 2. Some
call a man Godly that makes a sound Confession, and knows the Christian
Doctrine, and says he believes it, though he notoriously manifest that his
Will does not consent, that the God whom he confesses shall be his God, (his
Ruler and Felicity,) nor the Christ whom he confesses, shall be his Savior on
his own terms; nor the Holy Ghost his Guide and Sanctifier. 3. On the other
side, Many will call no Man Godly, that is not noted for some eminent
difference, in Parts and Zeal, from others that live about him. If they see him
neglect some Duties that he is bound to, as not to come to some private
Meetings that are used regularly and to Edification, or not to Read, or Hear so
frequently or diligently as he should, or not to Pray in his family (which in
some Cases its possible a Godly man may neglect), or if he commit some sins,
which yet its possible a Godly man may commit, they account him ungodly, though
possibly it may be otherwise in the main* so that no man is by them esteemed
Godly, unless he go beyond the weakest sort of true Christians. As for them
that call none Godly but their own parties, or sect-fellows, I will pass them,
as not worthy our further mention.

Among all these senses, it is the first in which we here take the word [
Godly] so that it is only Christian Godliness that we mean, which is a sincere
believing in God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, even with true intellectual
Assent, and hearty Consent: from which heart-Godliness, there follows that
sincere Obedience to the will of God (to first and second Table) which is the
proper fruit of it: and Repentance after disobedience known. It is therefore
such a Godliness as is proper to them that have the promise of Justification
and Salvation that we mean, comprehending Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Of the contrary to this only is the Question.

4. By ( Notoriously) ungodly, we mean such as do evidently manifest their
ungodly hearts, 1. either by verbal professing it; 2. or by their rebellious
ungodly lives, that they leave to those that converse with them, no just and
reasonable ground to judge them in probability to be Godly, but are certainly
known by those that live about them, yea, by the Church (if they are members of
any particular Church,) who have an ordinary competent ability to discern, to
be ungodly persons, that is, not to believe in God as aforesaid, but to be
indeed contemners of God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as all are that are
not Godly, though not all in a like degree. They that are notoriously known to
be thus ungodly, or unholy, or unbelievers, are those here intended.

5. By ( Baptized) Parents, we mean only such as have had the external sign
joined to a Profession of the Christian faith, and Dedication to God; and so
have covenanted ore tenus with God by themselves, or parents: and not those
that have been sincerely Dedicated to him, and so have God re-engaged unto
them: For it is a contradiction for to call such at the time of such
Devotedness [ notoriously ungodly:] and to say that they fall from it, is
contrary to the judgment of those whom we now deal with, and therefore not to
be expected. Some do so define Baptism, as to make it essentially to be Gods
actual sealing and exhibiting, of an actual pardon to the person baptized. But
we take it not thus: We speak only of those that have so formla^y performed and
received the externals of that Ordinance, as that the Church does justly take
them for her baptized Members, though yet they werr not truly united to Christ,
nor was God ever actually reconciled to them, as his People.

So much for the Subject: For the predicate, we must first explain the term
Right.

Concerning which, I must refer you mostly to what I have said to Mr. Blake,
page 5 SECT. 39. more fully than here I may stay to express my self.

1. In the properest sense, Right respects some Good which we have Right to;
and that Good is the matter of some Gift, or other civil Action, which may
confer Right: so that a man may afterward claim it as his own, or the Use or
Profession of it as his Due, according to the Nature of the thing, and of the
Grant. 2. In a more diminute and less proper sense, a man is said to have Right
which is accidentially in his Profession, without his unjust Usurpation, though
he know not whether he shall keep it a moment, nor has any civil right given
him thereto. 3. In a sense yet less proper, a man may be said to have Right to
that Action, which it is another man's Duty to perform to him, or that Good
which another man is bound to do to or for him, though properly he have no
Title to it himself. 4. In a sense, though proper, quoad relationis
fundamentum, yet Catachrestical as to the Denomination of the thing; a man is
said to have right to an Evil: as to that punishment which according to Law and
Justice in his Due, or which he is obliged to bear.

According to the first of these senses, every man has a Right to or in Gods
Benefits, to whom he has Given them by any Promise, Covenant, Grant, or other
Moral act; which may be the Foundation of Right, called a Title.

According to the second sense, all those have Right to Gods blessing that have
them in Possession, through a mere natural collation of Providence, without
their sinful seizure. As if you see a man by the way lie naked, and cast your
cloak over him, and say nothing to him: Though you may take it away again at
your pleasure, and assure him not of the use of it for a moment, yet he has
right to possess it while you permit him. Thus every Pagan has Right to his
Life and Time, and Food and Raiment, while God does providentially vouchsafe
them to him.

According to the third sense, All those have a Right to Gods mercies, to whom
we are bound as Instruments to conser them, though it be but by accident that
we are so obilged, and though God be in no Covenant-engagement to the persons,
nor give them any proper right or claim to the thing: So if God bid me Give to
him that needs: and because I know not all that need, he bids me judge upon
probable appearances: Hereupon if a rich man go in rags and pretend necessity,
it is my Duty to give to him; and so far this Rich man has a Right to my Alms,
as that he is a rightful Object of it, as to the righteousness of my action.
So if God bid me forgive him that wrongeth me, if he Repent: and then direct me
to judge whether he repent by the Evidences (there being no other way:) and
these Evidences being only probable, and not demonstrastive: here it is my duty
to forgive him that repents not, if he seem to repent, and so he may have
such an improper right to my forgiveness. So if a Heathen seem to be a true
Christian, and yet dissemble, I am bound to use him as a Christian; and and so
far he may improperly be said to have right to any Christian Ordinance, which I
am bound to dispense to him, If he claims this Ordinance of me, he sins against
God, and requires that which properly, and before God, he has no right to,
and which he ought not to claim: but yet he clams nothing but what I am bound
to give him upon such a claim. You may see then that here may be three distinct
questions according to this threefold sense [of Right] For the fourth I will
pass, as not concerning our present business.) 1. Whether such subjects have
any Right to Baptism by any gift or grant of God to themselves! 2. Whether they
have right from Gods providence putting them into possession of it. 3. Whether
it be a Ministers duty to baptize them? And I think it necessary to handle all
these, or at least the first and last distinctly, because that one depends on
the other, and we know not which is ordinarily meant when this question is put.
Only to the Explication of the last term, we must speak a word: viz. what is
meant by that Baptism, the Right whereto we are now enquiring after? It is one
question whether they have Right to the thing signified, viz. Christ and his
Benefits; the pardon of sin, and Adoption, etc. It is another question, whether
they have Right to the bare sign, and the consequential Privileges with the
Church, arising from their reputing such a man to be a true Christian. And
another question, whether they have Right to Both these? Also it is one thing
to ask, Whether men have right to performance of their own part in Baptism, in
part? or in whole? And another, Whether they have right to Gods part? We make
no question but every man has liberty given him to do his own part entirely,
yea it is his Duty: And so every Infidel is bound to bring his child to
Baptism; that is, To cease his Infidelity, and to Dedicate himself and child to
Christ, and seal it with being Baptized. But this is nothing to prove that he
has Right to Gods part in Baptism, that is, either to the Washing as Gods seal
and sign; or to the cleansing signified, and other Benefits conveyed by it. 2.
Nor is it any thing to prove that he has a Liberty to do the latter and
external part of his own duty, without the internal and former precedent; that
is, to be baptized before he consent to the terms of the Covenant. As a man
that is bound to consent in mind to any thing, and promise with the mouth, yet
may not promise before he consent; that is, Dissemble or Lie.

I shall now briefly determine the Question as to each of the three
forementioned sorts of right distinctly: And as to the first I take the
Question to lie thus (supposing it only the external Baptism that's meant.)

Whether the Infant Children, especially natural, of men externally baptized,
but now notoriously ungodly, have by any Gift of Covenant-Grant from God, a
right to external Baptism? Which I determine Negatively; They have no such
right.

And herein the justest order, it belongs to the Affirmer to prove such a
right. He that brings his claim, must show his Title. No more therefore can be
required of me but this Argument.

If such Infants can show no good Title to such Baptism, (nor any for them)
then have they no Right to it. But they can show no good Title. Ergo* etc.

The Major is undeniable; for Titulus est fundamentum Juris. For the Minor I
argue thus: If they can show any good Title, it is either some grant of God
written in his word, or seem not written. But neither written, nor not
written: therefore none at all.

Those sober persons that we have to do with, will not plead an unwritten
grant. If any do so, they must make it evident to a Minister, before he can
take it for current.

If there be any written grant, let them show it; for we know of none.

But yet we shall attempt the proof of the Negative, and then examine the
Arguments which are usually brought for the Affirmative.

If the Children of such Parents have such Right to Baptism, it is either for
their own sake ( i.e. some Title or ground in themselves.) 2. or for their
immediate parents, 3. or their Ancestors, 4. or some Undertakers, 5. or the
Church. These five grounds are pleaded by some: And though our Question
directly speaks only of the second; and therefore if any of the rest be
proved, it nothing makes against our Negative determination, because we take it
Reduplicative (of the children of such Parents as theirs:) yet we judge it most
useful to our main end, that we touch upon each of these several Claims.

And 1. If the Infants of such Parents have any such Right from any thing in
themselves, it is either from somewhat proper to themselves and some others
such as they, or somewhat common to all Infants: But neither of these; Ergo --
1. For the first Member, I know nothing said but this: [ Possibly they may have
some seed of Grace in them, we know not the contrary.] Answ. 1. As to us, its
all one, non esse, and non apparere: we must have some Evidence of such a seed
of Grace, or else we cannot discern it. 2. Else we must baptize the children of
all or any Heathen or Infidel; because for ought we know, they may have some
seed of Grace.

For the second Member, it is thus argued by some: God requires nothing but
Consent on our parts, to our entrance into Covenant with him, seeing it is a
Covenant of free Grace: but all Infants must by us be supposed to Consent:
therefore all must be supposed to have Right to Baptism.] The Major we grant.
The Minor they would thus prove: It is a Rule in the Civil Law, That it is
supp^sed that a man will be willing of his own Good; And another Rule there is,
That the Law supposes a man to be what he ought to be, till the contrary
appear; therefore Infants, who make not the contrary appear, are by us to be
judged virtual Consenters or Accepters of the Covenant; and consequently to be
Baptized. Answ. These Rules may hold in dealings between man and man, about
such things as Nature may both discern to be Good, and desire; but they cannot
hold in the Case in hand; 1. Because Nature cannot sufficiently discern the
Desirableness of the Blessings of the Covenant, compared with those things that
must be renounced. 2. Nor can it truly desire them without Grace. 3. And the
common Experience of the world tells us, that the most of men, by far, do not
truly consent, when they hear the terms of the Covenant. This therefore may not
be supposed: For Natures Inclination to our own Good, is no sufficient ground
of the supposition: Nor yet any Obligation that can lie on us to charitable
thoughts of Infant's Inclinations. For it is one of the Principles of our
Religion, that Nature is so depraved, as that every man is the great Enemy of
himself consequentially, as being inclined to the way of his own ruin; till
Christ the Physician of Nature do work a Cure. 4. And if this Argument would
hold, it would prove that all the Infants of the world have right to Baptism;
which is not to be supposed. 5. Yea it wou^d prove that they have equal right
with Christians, which is yet more evidently false. 6. Infants in such
Covenants are reputed to be as their Pa^^nt, who ^huse for them that cannot
choose for themselves. If therefore the Parents consent not, it is supposed that
the Child consen^s not; and no parent can truly consent for his child that re
uses for himself. 7. The Covenant has not only benefits on Gods part to be
conferred, but also duties on our part required; and it cannot be supposed that
all will faithfully perform such duties. So much for the first pretended Title.

The second pretended Title of such Infants to Baptism, is upon the account of
the Interest of their immediate Parents; and because this is both the proper
subject of our question, and also the great difficuly, and most insisted on, I
shall say somewhat more to it: And I prove the Negative thus.

1. If notoriously ungodly Parents have no right themselves to the Benefits of
the Covenant, nor to be Baptized if it were now to do: then cannot their
children have a right upon the account of any interest of theirs. But the
Antecedent is true: Therefore the validity of the consequence is evident; in
that no man can give that he has none to give, nor can we derive any Interest
from him that has none himself. If any say, he may have an Interest for his
child that has none for himself; I Reply. 1. Then the child has not his
interest in and with the Parent, nor as reputed a member of him. 2. That
Interest must be produced and proved. I have not yet heard what it should be
save what the next Objection intimates.

Why then may not the same be said of an Infidel, that he may have a right for
his child, though none for himself? It is objected, that being himself
baptized, he once had right to Church Membership for himself and his child; and
though he has lost this by Apostasy himself, yet there is no reason why his
child should be a loser by his fall. Answ. 1. According to this objection the
children of all Infidels, Jews, Turks, and Heathens should have right for their
Parents sake, supposing those Parents to have been once baptized, and now to be
Apostates. 2. But those children were either born before their Parents
Apostasy, or after. If before, then I grant the Parent loses not the child's
right by Apostasy, because that right was fixed upon the child himself, upon
the account of the Parents interest. And we may suppose him baptized thereupon,
and so there is no cause for a doubt: For as the case is rare for a man that
before was rightfully a Churchmember to the outward appearance, to Apostatize
between the Birth and Baptism; so I will purposely shun that Controversy,
Whether the child by such Apostasy loses his right, or whether a Baptized
Infant be supposed excommunicate in the Fathers excommunication? For my part, I
affirm no such thing: But if the child be born after the Parents Apostasy from
faith or a godly life, then no man can say the child loses any right by the
Parents sin; for how can he los^ that which he never had. If you say the Parent
had it for himself and his child; I answer, true, had he been sincere on
supposition he had children; but not for those children he had not, though if
he continue in the faith till he have them, he then has those Privileges for
himself and them; they can be no subjects of right that had no existence; I
grant he may have a grant of such right to him and his seed, as a Prince may
grant to a faithful subject to him and to his heirs: But 1. This is on
supposition that he will have heirs. 2. That he forfei^s no^ his right before
he has heirs: otherwise as he apparen^ly ^^s^th it to himself, so does he to
them: if he make an intercision, he stops the conveyance of the benefit by a
prevention, so that it never comes to the Heir: But because it is the
antecedent that requires all the proof [that notoriously ungodly Parents have
no Interest themselves to be Church Members, and to be baptized, if it were to
be done again] I shall prove it as follows.

1. Argu. They that have not that faith which is the condition of the Covenant,
and notoriously show that they have it not, have no right to Baptism. But such
are all they who are notoriously ungodly. Ergo. etc.

Or they that notoriously manifest that they consent not to the terms of the
Covenant, have no right to Baptism. But, etc. Ergo.

The Major is proved hence. 1. What else is there to hinder any Heathen from
the like Right? 2. Because that the probable Profession of such a further
consent is necessary to justify baptizing of them. 3. Because mutual consent
is necessary to a mutual Covenant; and the Covenant must be mutual: no man has
right to Gods part that refuses his own. This is all so far past question,
that I pass it over the more lightly. All the doubt then is of the Minor,
[Whether no man have the necessary condition of the baptismal Covenant on Gods
part that is notoriously ungodly] or [Whether all such ungodly men do
notoriously manifest that they consent not to the terms of the Covenant] I
speak not here of any subsequent condition which God imposes upon the
Covenanter only for the future; but only of the condition which God imposes
upon us that he may be in Covenant with us, and that it may be a bargain; and
that this is a true inconsistent with notorious ungodliness, I was going about
at large to prove it; But I remember that I have done it already in 26.
Arguments, against Mr. Blake's, and therefore I think it better for you and me
that I refer you thither, than to write them here over again, or needlessly to
add any more to the same purpose: If any say that though God require as a duty
such a Faith as is inonsistent with notorious ungodliness, yet not as
Absolutely necessary that he may be engaged to us in Covenant, or that we may
have proper right to Baptism; I answer, God has but one Covenant of Grace
which Baptism seals; our sound believing is the condition of that one
Covenant; that is, that it may be a Mutual Actual Covenant: If then there be
any other Covenant having other Conditions, we must wait till both Covenant and
Conditions be made known. Were it worth the while, or a thing necessary, I
would stand to prove the Negative, viz. that there is no Covenant sealed by
Baptism which only promises Baptism as the Benefit, or any other mere
Externals; but that the Covenant which Baptism seals is only that which
promises Remission, Salvation, and outward Mercies as appurtenances and means
so far as necessary.

Arg. 2. They that have no right to Remission of sin, have no right given them
by God to Baptism; but the Notoriously Ungodly have no right to remission of
sin. Ergo. etc. The Minor will not be denied. The Major is proved thus: God
has appointed no Baptism as his gift, but what is for remission of sin, as the
thing sealed and exhibited by it. Therefore, They that have no right to
Remission, have no right to Baptism. The Antecedent is undoubted; The
Consequent is grounded on this truth, that God has made no Covenant to any man
of the bare seals without the thing signified: show such a Promise if you
affirm it. 2. What God has joined so nearly as the exhibiting sign and thing
exhibited no man may lawfully put asunder: Its a man's sin to take the sign
without the thing signified. It is not probable therefore that God has made
any Promise of the naked sign without the thing signified: If God give right to
such an ungodly man to be baptized, then he gives him right to be Baptized for
Remission of sin (for this is his express and affixed Use and signification,)
but he does not give him right to be Baptized for the Remission of sin. Ergo.
etc.

The Minor I prove thus. If he give him Right to be baptized for the Remission
of sin, then either for actual Remission (to be sealed by Baptism) or for
Conditional future Remission; but for neither of these. Ergo.

Not for Actual Remission; for then Notoriously Ungodly persons are Actually
remitted; which is not true: Nor for Condit^onal; for then no more is given
then all the World has (at least that hear the Gospel) even persecuting
Infidels; and then all they may as well be baptized; for God pardons all upon
condition they repent and believe.

Argu. 3. If God be not at all actually obliged in Covenant to any notorious
ungodly man, then is he not obliged to give him Baptism. But God is not obliged
so to him. Ergo.

The Minor is unquestionable; The Major is granted by most of our Divines, who
make the contrary Doctrine Pelagianism, that God should be obliged to man in
the state of Nature, in such a Covenant: If God be obliged to give them
Baptism, then if he should not give it them, he breaks Promise with them; But
the Consequence is unsound; Ergo, etc. Nor does he give them power to claim it
from the Church Officers; for they can show no Title.

Argum. 4. If God have given a Covenant-Right to a notorious ungodly man to be
baptized, then either to baptism only, or other blessings with it; but neither
of these, Ergo, etc. The first will not be affirmed: What then be the other
blessings? Either they are special and spiritual, but that is not defended; or
outward and common, which is like is meant; for they call it an outward
Covenant. Bu^ as God has given outward things but conditionally to Believers;
so there is no such Covenant of outward mercies alone that can be showed in the
word which is now in force to us.

Arg. 5. According to the definition of most of our Divines, the outward
washing alone without inward Grace, is not Baptism: Therefore if God give them
right to the washing without the Grace, he gives them not right to Baptism: but
this is but ad hominem.

I do but superficially touch these things. 1. Because (as I said) the
Arguments to Mr. Blake are full. 2. Because I am informed that all this is
granted with those Divines with whom I have debated this point, and that they
confess that none but sound Believers have engaged God in actual Covenant to
them, but only in the common conditional Covenant, and consequently it is not
by Covenant grant that the notoriously ungodly have right to Baptism, but by
other ways which we are next to speak to. I am informed that this is all
granted; but then I must add, that they yield that such men have no true proper
right at all: for such proper right is of the nature of the debitum, the
dueness of the Benefit. So that a man may thence lay claim to it as his due.
And the right (between God and Man) we receive only by Gods moral Gift, which
is by some promise or grant by his word or revelation of his Will de debito
habendi; for this dueness or right is a moral thing, and must come by his moral
act, such as among men we call political or civil.

But mark how the other two sorts of right differ from this: That which follows
Gods Physical disposal by Providence, gives a man no proper right of dueness,
but only makes it non injustum, and I think not prope^l positively justum, that
he should possess it: as if I see a man ready to dye for cold, and cast a
garment on him: only these two things follow; first that is is not unjust for
him to possess it; 2. That it is unjust for any other to deprive him of it; but
this is no dueness: or if he have any proper right, it is after the possession,
and not before.

And then the third sort of right which arises from a precept to others
concerning the manner of their duty, is properly no right, as not giving a due
or title to the Benefit, but only it makes my act of application to be just,
and him to be the Object of a just Act; not just because of his Title, from a
gift of God; but from a precept to me: so that as the three Instruments differ,
Gift or Covenant, Natural disposal, and Precept, so do these three sorts of
right differ: the first only being debitum, the second non injustum, the third
justum: and the Subject of the third is but my act* and not the person who is
the Object. It is just that I obey God, and so do such an Act on him.

Having said thus much for preparation, I shall anon speak more particularly to
the two later sorts of right: but first we shall touch briefly the third
pretended title, which some insist on, of such Infants proper right to baptism.

The third was upon the account of their Ancestors true faith, though the
immediate Parents weee notoriously ungodly They that plead this title, will not
prove it good: 2. I thus disprove it.

Agrum. 1. If the Promise to the faithful and their Seed to many generations,
does necessarily suppose an uninterrupted succession of faithful Progenitors of
that seed, then that promise gives no right to the Infants of notoriously
ungodly Parents. But the Antecedent is true: therefore so is the Consequent.
The Consequent I suppose to be manifested before: the Antecedent I prove by
these following Arguments: 1. If the promise suppose not an uninterrupted
succession of faithful Progenitors, then by virtue of the Promise to Noah all
the world have Right to baptism. But the Consequent is false: therefore so is
the Antecedent. If they urge the words of the second Commandment, it is certain
that it is not a thousand generations since Noah. This Question is commonly put
to our Brethren in this case, [Where shall we stop, and on what grounds shall
we stop, if it extend not to all the world?] and they answer variously: One
reverend Brother, Mr. Blake on the Covenant, page 140. says [ He knows few
that say the Predecessor gives right without the immediate Parent. But all
concur in a joint way to communicate a Covenant Interest.] This yields the
necessity of a non-intercision. Others say, first out of Calvin and Ames, [ Vbi
non prorsus interciditur Christianismi professio, and ubi praesumuntur esse
Christiani.] to which I answer; If it be a profession of Christianity properly
so called, then the right may come by the immediate parent, and there is no
intercision. But if it be in a profession equivocally so called, that is, such
as is not a probable sign of the thing professed, then I suppose I have proved
that such a profession is indeed not a profession, gives no title, and such is
that of every notorious ungodly parent. 2. It is answered by others, that it
must be by some Ancestors alive that will undertake their education. To which I
reply; then the Ancestor gives him not a right as an Ancestor, but as an
Undertaker (of which more anon;) though he be no fitter to be an Undertaker
than another. Others say, that the children of Christians known or presumed to
be such, living or dead, may baptized. Repl. Then all the children under the
Turks, whose Ancestors were known Christians, may be baptized; and why not all
the world, when Noah and Adam were known to be in Covenant? or all this Nation,
if they had been Heathens this hundred years, because their Ancestors were
justly presumed to be Christians?

Argum. 2. In the common sense of such a Covenant amongst men, it would
necessarily suppose an uninterrupted succession of faithful Progenitors, that
make no forfeiture before any right can be conveyed to their issue: therefore
it must be so interpreted in our present case, seeing we must not go from the
known use or sense of words, without some apparent reason, whereof here is none
that I see; And the Antecedent is a known case. If a Prince do convey certain
privileges and Honors to a man and his Heirs and Posterity for ever, this word
certainly implies this supposition or condition, that neither he nor any after
him do make a forfeiture: for if they turn Traitors, the Covenant is broke, the
Grant is void, and they cannot by that convey any such right to Posterity.

Argum. 3. If the Promise aforesaid did not imply a necessary non-interruption
of faithful Progenitors, then the Promise and threatening could not be
verified: but the Consequent is not to be admitted; therefore the Consequence
is plain, in that as the Promise is to many generations of those that love God
and keep his Commandments; so the Threatening is, that he will visit the sins of
the Fathers on the children to the third and fourth generation of, etc. Exodus
20.34. where God proclaims it with his name; and doubtless both the Threatening
and the Promise is such, that it cannot be that the same persons are under both
at once: being certainly therefore under the Threatening, they are from under
the Promise.

Argum 4. The Threatening to the third and fourth generation is necessary to be
understood on supposition, that there be an uninterrupted succession of wicked
Progenitors: therefore by proportion so must the Promise be understood, as to a
necessary succession of faithful Progenitors.

Argum. 5. The natural Interest that Ancestors have in such Posterity is not
immediate, but mediante Parente proximo: therefore so is the Covenant Interest;
because it proceeds on supposition of the Natural. We receive nothing from a
Grandfather but by a Father, but what depends on his free will: an
intercision therefore preventeth our Privileges. It is here objected, that it
is harsh to affirm that the immediate Parents sin depriveth Posterity of the
Benefit, though the Ancestors were never so godly; for so the children should
suffer for the Parents sin. Ans. 1. the children never had right, therefore
never lost it. 2. Its just that they suffer for the Parents sin: when Parents
have lost their right, they cannot convey it to others. Object. Paul says of
the Jews, They are beloved for the Fathers sake. Answ. So far beloved, as that
God will reclaim them in after-ages, and now convert a remnant: but not so far
beloved, as that any child of an unbelieving Jew had right to Baptism for
Abraham or any Ancestors sake, and that Love was from a part of the Covenant
proper to Abraham's seed. Object. Th^re could not be a higher evidence of
Ap^stacy, than to gi^e their children to a false God; yet this did the children
of Israel, and yet their Posterity had right to Circumcision. Answ. I will
reserve the answer of this to the end, where we shall have further reason to
consider it, and next proceed to the fourth pretended Title of such Infants.

The fourth part of this Question is, Whether the Infants of notorious ungodly
parents may not have right to Baptism, on the account of some Undertakers?
Answ. If this be so, its nothing against our Negative determination of the main
Question, viz. Whether they have right for their Parents sake? 2. We
distinguish of Undertakers; some are such as will undertake that another man
shall bring up his child well: 2. Some will undertake to do it themselves, yet
not to educate it as their own, but as another man's, and at his disposal:
neither of these undertakings can give any right. 3. But if the child do either
by the total resignation of the Parent, or by adoption or the death of the
Parents, or by purchase, or any other just means, become his Own that
undertakes for him: so that the child is ejus juris, as his own children are,
and at his dispose, then the Question is much harder. And for my part, I
incline to judge that such a child has Right upon that man's account: 1.
Because that in a Law-sense this man is his Father. 2. Because all that God
requires in the free universal Covenant of Grace, to our participation of his
Benefits, is our consent: and children do consent bo those whose they are: For
they that owe them, or whose they are, have the disposal of them, and so of
their Wills interpretatively; and may among men make any Covenant for them
which is for their good (at least,) and oblige them to the performance of
conditions. 3. Because God so determined it with Abraham, when he called him so
solemnly to renew his Covenant, and so to the Israeliets after. Of which for
brevity, see what I have said in my book of Baptism, chap. 29. page 101, 102.
which I need not here recite. Let every man see with his own eyes: but for my
part, I resolve (till I see better reasons for the contrary) to admit no child
to baptism, upon the undertaking of any other susceptors, such as our
Godfathers and Godmothers were, without a better Title then their susception:
but if any will say, This child is mine, and at my disposal, though not mine by
natural generation, I will not dare to refuse to Baptize it, if the person that
presents it and devoteth it to God, be capable of so doing, as being himself
a Believer. And I think that it is a considerable work of Charity to get the
children of Infidels or such among us are nominal Christians and Infidels
indeed, that they may have that benefit by you which they cannot have from
their natural parents.

The 5th. Title that is commonly pleaded for the Right of the children of
notoriously ungodly Parents to baptism, is, upon the account of the Churches
faith, and the Magistrates Authority over them. For this, it is pleaded, 1.
That the Magistrate or sovereign Ruler has power to dispose of his Subjects,
and therefore to make Covenants for them, and in their names, as much as a
Parent has: for the power of a Magistrate is greater than of a Parent, in that
the Mag^strate may put children to death, and so may not a Parent.

Answ. 1. The Sovereign has a Governing power above a Parent: but it is not on
that the great contract or right is grounded. But the Parent has a greater
propriety in the child than the Governor; and so has more Right to dispose of
him in this case. The Sovereigns power is in order to the Good of the
Commonwealth; the Parents is for the Good of the Child directly. 2. Bodin (and
some others) think that the Roman Custom was good, that Parents should have
power of Life and Death as to their Children: though few approve his Judgment
or reasons. 3. I doubt not but a Sovereign may use his Authority to procure the
baptizing of Children by the Parents dedication of them to God. But still it
must be modiante parente vel proparente, by procuring their consent, who have
the nearest Interest in the child, and greater than the Magistrate can have;
though not greater ruling power. Obje. But there are some Rulers that are
Domini as well as Rectores, and the people and all that they have are theirs;
so that there is no proprietary in the Nation but themselves: and in such a
case it seems that they may dispose of the consent of their subjects. An. 1.
ye^ Its lis sub judice, whether this be not mere unlawful Tyranny, or
Usurpation, and so the Title Null because against the Law of God in nature. 2.
Or if any think that the example of Joseph, or of the Israelites buying
children, will prove the contrary, yet 1. It can be but to their Civils, as
Goods, Lands, etc. their Right wherein is adventitious and accidental; and not
to the fruit of their bodies, where their right is so natural that none can
take it by violence from them: I say therefore that here it cannot be without
the Parents voluntary Alienation and Resignation of their Children to the
Sovereign; which they cannot do but upon weighty considerations. 2. The
Sovereign in this case has the same right in Adult subjects, as in Infants,
seeing they are all Vassals to him as their Lord. And yet it is manifest in
Scripture, that God will have the personal consent of the Adult, before they
shall have any interest in his Covenant: Because when their Sovereign Lord has
all the right that is possible, he leaves them the power of their own wills:
And so as they have still naturally a nearer right in themselves (than he has)
which they cannot alienate; so it seems they have in their children. 3. At
least this is nothing to almost all the world, where the Rulers claim no such
absolute Dominion and Propriety. 4. God in Scripture requires Parents and not
Rulers to circumcise their children, and to educate them: And Joshua would
promise for no more but himself and his household to serve the Lord, and bids
the people choose whom they would serve. Yet I will not deny but that a Ruler
may use some sharp means to procure the consent of Parents, in some cases. And
I also confess that this Argument, though least insisted on, has (in my
opinion) much more plausible appearance of strength, and better deserves a
further consideration, than the great and common Argument of the Parents. Right
by such a Profession as consists with Notorious Ungodliness, upon which most
build almost all t^eir Cause. ^astly, I conceive that as a Governors Right is
in the Commonwealth and main body of the Nation, enabling him to Rule them in
the fear of God, so I will not deny but that he may call together the chief
part of them, or a Representative body, and urging and procuring their consent,
he may devote them by a National Covenant to G^d and promise himself to rule
them in his fear. And I would this duty and the Scripture Patterns for it were
better laid to heart. But still this leaves the Parent that nearer Natural
Interest in his Individual children, on which God has pleased rather to ground
his Promises and Threatenings to Infants.

The second Argument is drawn from Mat. 28.19, 20. Go and disciple me all
Nations, baptizing them: From whence it is argued, that the Infants of
notorious ungodly Parents being Members of a Discipled Nation, may therefore be
baptized as such Members. Answ. 1. If the nearer Interest of their Parents be
not supposed necessary, then this Argument makes as much for the Right of the
child of any Jew or Heathen, as of a Christian, for they may be Members of that
Nation which is Discipled. 2. But they must be Members of it qua tales, as
discipled; and that they are not till they are themselves Disciples. The
Apostles are first commanded to Disciple Nations, and then to Baptize them on
supposition that they be discipled: therefore they must baptize none but those
that are discipled. They must endeavor the discipling of each Individual; but
if they prevail but with the greater and Ruling part, it may be called a
Discipled Nation, and a Kingdom that is become the Kingdom of Christ: but yet
as it is but for the sake of the chief part that the whole is so denominated,
so it is only that part that is to be baptized; seeing a bare denomination of
the whole, gives not right to any part that has none of the ground of that
denomination. Nor did the ancient Churches so understand this Text: For when
Constantine and Theodosius and other Christian Emperors had the Rule, they did
not judge that all their Subjects should be baptized.

The 3d. Argument is drawn from the Interest of the Church: They say, Those
that are born within the Church, though of unworthy Parents, the Church may
take them and present them to baptism. Answ. How are those born within the
Church, whose Parents are no Members of the Church? (Of which more anon.) If
the Parent be utterly unworthy, and the child can have no Right upon his
account, then certainly he is not to be reckoned in the Church. And if you
mean, that all those that are born among the members of the Church, or where
they have Civil Rule, may by them be presented to Baptism; then the argument
must be the same with that before, or so vain as to need no confutation: Unless
the Church will accept the Children as their Own, according to the sense of the
fourth forementioned Title; and then any one Member may better do it than the
whole Church.

Having spoken to the five pretended Titles distinctly, and showed you how far
they are any of them allowable, and how far not; I shall proceed to the second
Question in the beginning propounded, viz. [Whether that the Eventual Disposal
of God by a Physical Act of Providence, do give any Right to the children of
notoriously ungodly Parents to be baptized?] And I need not say much to this:
1. Because I know of none that plead this Right. 2. Because it is but a
non-injustum, and I think scarcely so much as a Justum much less a Debitum,
that is here grounded. 3. But especially, because it is unquestionably evident,
that if this give any kind of Right, it is but to a Possession ad libitum
Donatoris, after the reception; and not at all to the first Reception. And
therefore it cannot with the least show of Reason be pleaded beforehand to
enable any man's claim to Baptism, nor to enable a Minister to baptize any, nor
yet ex post facto to justify the Act of the Baptizer or of the Baptized.

Yet how far it may prohibit any man to dispossess them of the state or
privileges of the baptized, till God give them a clear warrant, is worthy
consideration.

3. But it is the third Question concerning the third sort of Right that most
of all concerns us to discuss; seeing as far as I can perceive, it is this
that our Brethren of the contrary judgment do intend to insist upon, as
discerning some inconvenience in affirming, God to be any otherwise than
conditionally engaged in Covenant with any Notorious ungodly men, yea or any
that are unregenerate. To this therefore we must next speak.

The Question is [ Whether it be Gods command, that Ministers should baptize
Children of notoriously ungodly men?] Or [ Whether it be their duty?] Or [
Whether such Children be the Objects of our Just, and Justifiable Action of
Baptizing?]

And I conclude the Question Negatively, supposing that we speak both of
Parents natural and civil, and so that they come in upon no better account than
the Title of such Parents, as is before explained. Here 1. I grant, that if the
natural Parents be ungodly, we may baptize on the the Title of their civil
Parents, or Pro-parents; I mean any that truly Own them as Theirs. 2. Much more
if any one of the Parents be godly, though the other be ungodly. 3. Also, If
there be a probable profession of Godliness, though indeed there be not
Sincerity, it is our duty to baptize the children of such. Because 1. we have
no natural capacity of judging but according to evidence, and we have no
evidence for a certain judgment concerning the estate of another man's heart.
2. I have elsewhere made it appear (and more abundantly might easily do) that
when God mentions any person qualified with such a Qualification which to us
is uncertain to be the object of our Act, his meaning is that we should
rationally and charitably judge of men according to evidence whether they are
such or no, and so take them, and use them accordingly, the Apparere being here
as the Esse to us. So when he bids us, if a Brother wrong us often, and often say
It repents me, forgive him: it is all one with that other [If he repent,
forgive him.] We know not certainly whether he repent or not; but we must take
him probably to repent, that gives us the evidence of a probable profession.
So if we are to baptize those that repent and believe, or their children, how
can we judge of them but by a probable profession. 4. It is therefore granted,
that though such a degree of Ungodliness as is consistent with sincere
Godliness, be Notorious, yet that is not the subject of our Question: for that
does not denominate a man (ungodly) seeing it is from the predominant part that
he must be denominated. The Doubt remains therefore about Ungodliness in the
proper sense Notorious, as is before explained. And I shall now defend the
Negative as follow^th.

Arg. 1. We have no word of God commanding or Authorizing us to baptize the
children of the notoriously ungodly (as theirs:) Therefore is it not our duty,
or lawful.

What command or warrant is pretended from Scripture, we shall examine anon.

Arg. 2. We may not bapt^ze them who are Notoriously without true Covenant
Right to Baptism. But such are the children of notorious ungodly Parents. Ergo.

The Minor is proved before; the Major needs no proof, I think: We should give
each his Right.

Arg. 3. If it be the very reason why we must Baptize the Ungodly and the^r
Seed, who profess Godliness, because that by professing it they seem probably
to be godly; then must we not baptize them who do not seem probably to be godly
(or, if you had rather, to be true Believers:) But the Antecedent is true.
Therefore so is the Consequent.

For the Antecedent, I have said enough for it to Mr. Blake. If it were not
propter fidem significandam, that profession were required, but propter se as
the condition of the Covenant: then 1. God would not have said (He that
believes and is baptized, etc. And, if thou believe with all thy heart thou
may be baptized: and, Repent and be baptized, etc.) but rather (if thou will
but say thou believe thou may be baptized, etc.) 2. And then all that
profess should be justified: For all that be in the Mutual Covenant with God
actually, are justified. 3. And then such profession would be of flat necessity
to Salvation, as well as faith, which it is not, but on supposition of
Opportunity, a Call, etc. I think I may take it for granted, that Profession is
required sub ratione signi, as a sign of the thing professed: nor can any man,
I think, give a better reason of its necessity, though another after this may
be, because God will have the outward man to serve him, by thus signifying by
its operations what are the Elicite Acts and dispositions of the Will.

The Consequence of the foresaid Major proposition is past doubt, I suppose. If
any think otherwise, the next Argument may rectify them.

Argu. 4. He that is not to be judged a credible professed Christian or the
child of such is not the just object of our act of baptizing (Or, We ought to
baptize none but those whom we should judge true professed Christians, and
their children) But the notoriously Ungodly are not to be judged true professed
Christians, nor their Children the Children of such: therefore not to be
baptized.

As the word [Profession] signifies a pretended discovering of the mind (with
an intention to deceive) so I confess it may be called a profession Physically
or Metaphysically true: But it is not this natural Truth that we here mean: nor
yet do I stretch the word so high as to comprehend the full gradual
correspondency of the Act to the Object: but I plainly mean a [Moral Truth]
opposed to [a Lye] or Falsehood:] And being speaking about moral-Legal things,
the terms must be necessarily understood according to the Subject: So that it
were proper in this Case, If I simply maintained that such are [Not Professors
of Christianity] at all; because in a moral Law-sense they are not such. For no
man is to give credit to a notorious lie; so to speak, is equal to silence, as
to any obligation that it can lay upon another, either to believe him, or to
use him as one that is believed. My meaning therefore is, that we are not to
baptize that man or his child, upon a profession which is notoriously false; so
that our selves and the Congregation do certainly know, or have sufficient
Reasons to be confident, that the man does lie.

For the proof of the Minor (which I know will be denied) thus I prove it: If
either the Profession be evidently but Equivocally called a true Profession, or
the Christianity professed be but equivocally called Christian^ty, then the
notoriously ungodly are not to be judged true professed Christans. But the one
of these is so with all notoriously ungodly persons. Ergo.

The Major is past doubt, seeing there must be the true profession of true
Christianity, that must justly denominate a man (at age) a true Professor of
Christianity. If he notoriously want the first, he is morally no Professor: If
he want the later, he professes not ^hristianity. To prove the Minor, we will
begin with the later. We speak not now of any Accidentals that pertain not to
the Being, but tend only to the well-Being of a Christian. Now I hope it is
past controversy among us all, that it is essential to our Christianity, that
it be in the Intellect and Will, whatever we say of the outward Man: and for
the Intellect, that we believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And it
is essential to our believing in God, that we believe him to be our Creator,
Chief Ruler, and chief End and Happiness. And to believe in the Son
Essentially, contains a believing that he is Jesus Christ our Lord, that is,
that he is the Redeemer of the world, who shed his blood to save his people
from their sins by pardon and sanctification, and who will raise them from the
dead, and judge them to everlasting Blessedness: and who is their Lord and
Ruler on this ground, and to this end; to believe in the Holy Ghost
essentially, contains a believing that his Testimony of Christ was true, and
that he is the Sanctifier of those that shall be saved. It is as much essential
to Christianity, to consent that God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be such to
us as we profess them to be, as aforesaid: which is included in believing in
God, and in Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost: And therefore the sum of the
Covenant is [I will be your God (upon Redempition by Christ) and you shall be
my people] Now the Notoriously Ungodly do either profess to believe and consent
to all this, or but to part: If to All, then they lie, of which more anon: If
but to part; then 1. it is not the Christian Faith, no more then a heart, or a
l^ver is a man; it is but part of it: 2. and our Divines will say, that he that
does not believe and consent to the whole Essence of Christianity, does not
truly believe or consent to any Essential (though for that I determine it not)
But were their Faith never so firm in any one part, it is not Christianity, or
the Christian Faith, without the whole. If it be the Christian Faith to believe
in God the Father only, then those that deny Christ, are Christians. If it be
the Christian Faith to believe only in Christ, though they deny the Father, or
the Holy Ghost, then men worse then Infid^ls or most Heathens, are Christians.
Indeed there is so necessary a connection, that it is not possible truly to
believe in God the Son, without believing in the Father and the Holy Ghost, and
believing the Eternal Glory to which he has Redeemed us and will lead us. If
it be Christianity to believe all the Creed by mere Assent; then first, the
Devils are Christians; for they believe and tremble. Secondly, and then it
would be a Profession of Christianity to say, [I do believe Christ to be my
Lord, by right of Redemption, but his Laws are so strict, and cross to my
pleasures, that I am resolved he shall not rule me, and I will venture all
rather than I will take him for my Ruler on such terms.] Or to say, [I believe
the Holy Ghost is the Sanctifier of Gods Elect; but I will not consent that he
shall Sanctify me] Or to say, [I believe that Christ dyed to save his people
from their sins, but he shall not save me from mine, because I cannot spare
them.] Who dare say that any of these were a Profession of Christianity? We
must believe with the heart, if we be Christians. Christianity is not a bare
Opinion: It lies in the covenant of the soul with God, and it is the consent
of the Will that is that covenanting. It is therefore sometime expressed by
loving Christ above all. They that said, [ This is the Heir] believed in a sort
with the Assent of the brain: but when they add, [ Come, let us kill him, that
the Inheritance may be ours] I think they showed that they professed not
Christianity. He that says, [ I will not have this man to reign or rule over
me.] disclaimeth Christianity. He that disclaimeth an Essential part,
disclaimeth the whole. It is not the Being without these part.

All this laid together, shows us that Christianity, or the Christian Faith,
truly and properly so called, which denominateth a man properly a Christian, is
specifically distinct (as to a moral specification) from the faith of the
highest unregenerate man: (When Mr. K. wrote a digression against me on a
mistake that, I had denied this, I did not think that others would so call me
out to the defense of it.) And seeing that they differ by a moral
specification, it is clear that they admit not of the same Definition; and that
the term [Faith] or [Christianity] applied to both these, cannot mean the same
thing: but must here be an equivocal. Thus I have cleared it, that to profess
the belief of one part of the Christian faith only, is not to profess the
Christian faith, or to profess to be a Christian: and therefore such are not to
be baptized, seeing we must baptize them into the name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, if we will baptize them with Christian Baptism.

2. Next I shall show that if any Notorious ungodly person do say he believes
the whole, even in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, such saying is not a
true Profession, nor valid to its uses. To this end let us enquire what it is
to Profess: Profiteor is public fateor. Fateor, inquit Perottus, est a fando,
quasi vehementer loquor and affirmo; Fateri enim est sponte aliquid affirmare:
Confiteri aliquo modo coactum; Profiteri, ad Gloriam aliquid prae se far.
Martinius rather a (...) dicendus, fandus: (...) fatenda, so (...) est sermo.
Now the natural use of speech is to signify our mind to others. And the very
essence of a Profession lies in the open declaring of the mind, in the very
signifying use of the words or actions. For it contains (as other signs do)
1. The thing signifying, or the matter of the sign, and that is either words,
writings or other Actions capable of this use (of which there are diverse.) 2.
the thing signified; which is our Internal Assent and consent. 3. The party to
whom we signify it. 4. The actual signification, or Aptitudinal: that is, that
it be a sign Aptitudinal in it self, and actual, when rightly observed by
others: in which Aptitude lies the very formal nature of the sign. This being
so, it is most evident that if it have not an Aptitude to signify our mind, it
is not a sign. You may say, if he dissemble, yet he may make profession, yet
profession is no sign of his mind. I answer, it is no true sign of the thing
professed, but the end which he pretends to use it for is, to be a sign: and
as a sign we expect and receive it; and did we know the heart as God does, we
need not ask men whether they believe, but presently go to their hearts and
see, and so baptize them or refuse them (or their Children.) It being then the
very use that the Church makes of men's profession to signify men's minds, it is
clear 1. that where there is nothing that we can justly take as the
signification of a man's mind, that he believes as a Christian, there is no
moral profession of it: and where a man signifies his mind that he does not so
believe, there he professes not to believe: And if he make two contrary
professions, one that he does believe, and the other that he does not, if we
know one to be certain and undissembled, and the other to be false, the later
is Null, and the former to be received. All this being evident, it next
follows, that we show, that no Notorious ungodly man does make true
profession of Christianity: For 1. If it be evident that he uses words not
understood, as a Parrat, then is it not a profession: For Ignorantis non est
consensus: and so nec Professio: else a Parrat may be a Professor. 2. He makes
openly the contrary Profession; For he does by words or deeds, or both, profess
that he will not be ruled by Christ, that he will not be sanctified or released
from his sin: that he will not take God and Glory to come for his chief Good,
but the things of this life, and will obey the flesh before God. It it be in
plain known sins, which they can find no vain excuse for, some of them will say
words of equal force to these: but though most will not do so; yet their
Actions openly profess it.

But because this is the thing that will be denied, I add further. 1. Actions
are capable of signifying a man's mind as well as words: though not ordinarily
so soon, or easily, yet some Actions do; yea, and much more certainly. 2. God
plainly tells us of some, that profess that they know God, yet in works they
deny him: so that works can speak as plain as words, and deny God, and unsay
what a deceitful tongue has said. 3. If these persons in question do not thus
deny Christ by their works, or do not Profess, to be no Christians, then either
it is because ungodliness is consistent with Christianity, or does not
comprehend or imply Infidelity, or else because the [Notoriousness] of this
ungodliness is no Profession. The first cannot be said: For 1. As Godliness in
a Christian sense comprehends Christianity, and even the true acknowledgement
of the Godhead it self; so ungodliness contains the disowning of God and the
refusing of all true Love of him, or seeking him as our End, and it comprizeth
in it the refusal of Christ to bring us back to God, and of the Spirit to
conform our souls and lives to his Will. As therefore God is the Ultimate End,
and Christ as Mediator but the means or way; and as loving God is a more
excellent duty than believing in Christ in it self considered, so ungodliness
which is contrary to the Love of God, is a greater sin than unbelief in it
self, as to Jesus Christ the Mediator: yea and ever contains this unbelief as
its second and lower part, though it be denominated from the opposition to God,
as the greater part of the sin. 2. However no man will deny but that they are
concomitant, and that every ungodly man is an unbeliever. 3. Yea as ungodliness
is contrary to our subjection to the Lord Redeemer, it is a real part of
Infidelity it self. I may well conclude therefore that to be Notoriously
ungodly, is to be Notoriously no Christian, but an Unbeliever.

2. And that this Notoriousness is a certain profession, is evident. For 1. the
mind is declared by it: Christ himself tells us that out of the heart come
Murders, Adulteries, etc. and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. If you say, men may do such and such things against their will, I
answer, 1. Then they are not Notoriously ungodly; if they do not Notoriously
show their wilfulness. 2. The Will has the command of the outward man. 2. And
as it declares the mind, so does it certainly declare it. For first, else
still it were not notorious ungodliness. 2. Words may be easier counterfeited
than Deeds, especially the scope of a man's life. 3. And hence it is that the
Lord Jesus himself when he comes to Judgment, will try more by Deeds than
verbal Profession, and will reject such Professions when they are contradicted
by evil actions, as Mat. 7. Not every one that says unto one Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father. Mat.
25. Christ will convince those by their not feeding, clothing, etc. his
members, that they were no true Believers, who still go about to justify
themselves. And they that shall say, Lord have not we eat, drunk, etc. Cast out
Devils, and preached in thy name; shall be answered with a Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity, I know you not. Men shall all be judged according to their
works. It is clear then that Notorious ungodliness is a Profession or
signification of the very mind and will: yea and a profession most certain; for
it cannot be dissembled. He that is notoriously ungodly is most certainly no
true Christian: But the profession which this contradicts, is not so certain;
nay it is most certainly false. So that as God does, so man must take men's
works and lives for a Discovery of their mind, and judge them by it.

I have stood the larger on this, because that profession of Christianity is
the common title that is pleaded for such persons; and therefore I have showed
that they are not to be reputed for credible Professors. If it be not a
probable sign, it is not to be taken for a valid profession: But words
contradicted by the Notorious tenor of the life, are no probable sign, but
these works are a certain sign of the contrary. Ergo.

If any man yet do think that any words, though not probably signifying the
mind, are a valid profession, and to be taken for a Title; then it will follow,
that if a man should laugh in your face, and foretell you that he will come and
make a profession in scorn of Christ, or if he tell you that though he speak
such words, it is not from his heart, but through fear, or to get some honor
with men; or if when he baptized his child in the name of Christ, he tell you
that he intends not that he shall serve him; or if he say of himself he will
baptized in tht name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and renounce the world,
flesh and Devil, but he intends not to stand to it, nor to do as he
promises, etc. any of these must be taken for a Profession, and this man for a
Christian: which no wise man I think will affirm. If an affirmation presently
contradicted by words as express and certain, be not to be taken for a
profession, then much less is an affirmation more certainly contradicted by the
tenor of the life, yea and too often by professed impenitency.

The sum is this, We must not baptize him into the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost (or his children for his faith) who we are sure does not believe in
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: But such is every Notorious Ungodly man, Ergo.

Or we must not baptize him (or his child) as a Christian, that certainly
dec^areth himself to be none. But so does, etc Ergo. So much of the fourth
Argument.

Arg. 5. We must not baptize those that certainly declare to us that they
repent not (nor any for their sakes:) But all notorious ungodly men do
certain^y declare that they repent not, (unless equivocally:) Ergo.

The Major is proved, in that Repentance is a necessary condition in him that
has right to Baptism before ^od; and the Profession of it necessary to him
that we mu^^ baptize. The Apostles r^quired it. The Minor needs no proof I
think.

Arg. 6. We must not bap^ize him (or any for his sak^) that will not renounce
the world, flesh, and the D^vil; o^ that declares certainly that he will not
renounce them at that time. But such are all notorious ungodly men. Therefore
the Church has ever required this in Baptism.

Arg. 7. We may not baptize those whom we notoriously know to be at present
incapable of receiving remission of sins: (for that is the use of the Ordinance
according to Gods institution.) But such are all the notoriously ungodly.
Therefore I need not here, I suppose, with those I deal with, answ^r the
Antinomian's Objection from Romans 4. of justifying the ungodly. I have said
enough to that against Lud. Colvinus, and others.

Arg. 8. Men that be notoriously unfit for Marriage with Christ, to be
solemnized, are unfit by us to be baptized, (or any for them:) But such are all
the notoriously ungodly, Ergo, etc.

Arg. 9. We may not baptize those that we know do notoriously dissemble in
making the Baptismal Covenant. But such are all notoriously ungodly, Ergo, etc.

Arg. 10. We may not give him the Seal of the righteousness of Faith, who
notoriously declares that he has not that Righteousness. But such are all
notoriously ungodly, Ergo, etc.

Arg. 11. From Matthew. 28.19, 20. Before we baptize men, (or any for their
sakes) we must see in probability that they are made Disciple. But so are not
the notoriously ungodly. Ergo, etc.

Arg. 12. Those that we must Baptize (or any for their sakes) must seem to
believe with all their hearts, Acts 8.37. And to receive the word gladly, Acts
2.38.39, 41. And to believe with a saving faith, Mark. 16.15, 16. Acts 16.31,
^2, 33. But so do not any that are notoriously ungodly. Ergo.

These Texts and many such like are our Directory whom to Baptize.

Arg. 13. From 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean] If one of the
immediate Parents be not a Believer, their children are unclean, and
consequently not to be baptized. But notorious ungodly ones are not Believers.
Ergo.

As they must be Believers, that they may have Right, and be Holy: so must they
seem Believers, that they may seem to have Right, and so be baptized by us
warrantably. But such seem not to have Faith, who are notorio^sly Ungodly.

It is Objected that this Text determines of one way of Covenant-Right to
Infants, but does not thereby deny all other. Answ. 1. It is peremptory in the
Negative [Else were your children unclean] as well as in the Affirmative [but
now are they Holy.] 2. It therefore excludes expressly all other ways of
interest in the Covenant by Birth-Priviledge: Else how could that Negative be
true? But I confess it does not exclude all means else of an after acquisition
or reception of Covenant-Right: For he that is born unclean, may become by
purchase or contract the child of a Believer* or at age may believe himself;
And then he cease to be unclean. 3. At least it seems yielded by them, that
if both Parents be unbelievers, the child can have no Right A^ theirs or on
the^r account.

Its Objected that this was true of the Corinthians, whose Ancestors ^ere
Infidels* and themselves the first Converts, their children were unclean, if
one of them were not a believer* but it holds not of them that had pious
Ancestors. Answ. 1. This yields the point which is now in question, that is,
that On their Parents account, such children have no right. 2. It contradicts
the Apostle's express Affirmation, who says that [they are unclean:] which can
extend to no less than the denial of Holiness by B^rth-Priviledge. 3. Noah was
the Progenitor remote of those Corinthians; and he was not unclean. Yet that
makes not them Holy: Else no man shoul'd be unholy.

Arg. 14. Romans 11. The Israelites and their children with them, are broken off
because of Unbelief. Therefore Notorious Unbelievers, and their children, are
to be judged as no Church Members, nor to be baptized. And that all Notorious
Ungodly ones, are Notorious Unbelievers, I have proved, and may yet refute the
ordinary Objections to the contrary.

Arg. 15. We may not lawfully baptize those children for their Parents sake,
whose Parents are ipso jure Excommunicated from the society of Christians as
such, or are justly to be pronounced No Members of the Universal Church Visible
or Invisible. But all Notoriously Ungodly are in one of these ranks. Ergo.

To explain my meaning in this Argument, Observe 1. that I take not the common
doctrine for true, that a particular Political or Organized Church, or
incorporated Society of Christians, is a mere Homogeneal part of the universal
Visible Church: All the Universal Church does not consist of such Societies, no
more than all this Commonwealth does consist of Corporations. For a particular
Church, is as a particular Body-Corporate; and all the Members of the Universal
are not so: Though all ought to be so that can attain it, yet all cannot attain
it, and all do not what they ought: Even in an Army a Soldier may be lifted by
a General Officer into the Army in general, long before he is placed in any
Regiment or Troop; yea there are some that are Messengers, and for other
employments, that are not to be of any Regiment. So sometime a man is baptized,
as the Eunuch, before he be entered into any particular Church, perhaps long:
And some were of Churches which are dissolved, and stay long before they can
join themselves to others* And some live as Merchants, in a moveable
traveling, condition: And some are bound for the good of the Commonwealth to
be Ambassadors, or Agents, or Factors, etc. resident among Infidels, where is
no Church: And some may be called to preach up and down among Infidels for
their conversion, as the Apostles did, and fix themselves to no particular
Church: And some may be too ignorant or neglective of their duty in
incorporating with any: And some upon infirmity and scrupulosity hold off. So
that its apparent that all the Visible Church is not thus Incorporated into
particular Churches.

2. I do firmly believe that Baptism as Baptism, does list, enter, or admit us
only into the Universal Church directly, and not into any particular Church;
but yet consequentially it often does both: And as the Parent is, so is it
supposed that the Infant is. If the Parent live an itinerant life, and bring
his child to Baptism, that child is entered into the Universal Church only,
except he leave the child resident in any particular Church, and desire it may
be a member of it: But if the Parent be a member of a particular Church, when
we Baptize his child, we receive it first into the universal Church, and then
into that particular (as an imperfect member:) For we justly suppose it is the
Parents desire, which is it that determines this Case.

3. I firmly believe that the common opinion is an Error, that All that are
cast out of a particular Church, are cast out of the universal.

4. Yea, or that he that is put out of one particular incorporated Church, must
be avoided by all other such Churches.

5. Yet do I believe that it is a worse Error to say that all that are cast out
of one such Church, may be received into communion by other Churches, or single
Christians.

6. I do therefore distinguish of such Exclusion as we commonly call
Excommunication, or casting out of Churches, or suspending from communion. 1.
As to the ground and cause of the Exclusion. 2. As to the Terminus ad quem, or
the in quantum, or intended effect of the Exclusion. 1. It is one thing to be
excluded on a cause that is supposed exclusive of Christianity it self: and
another thing to be excluded on a cause that supposes him incapable of the
Privilege of all incorporated Churches: and a third thing to be excluded on a
cause that makes men incapable of Member-ship with that one Church only, or
some particulars, and not all. 2. So as to the effect, It is one thing to be
excluded from the number of Christians as such; Another thing to be excluded
from all Incorporated Churches as such: And a third thing to be excluded from
one particular Church only, or some more on the like ground that are in the
like case. Besides all this, I distinguish between an Exclusion upon the
certain Nullitie of the Title; and a suspension while the Title is under
trial, upon a just occasion of questioning it. From hence I hold as follows.

1. That there may be just reason to cast a man out of a particular Church, who
yet is not denied to join with other particular Churches. For example, if a
member of this particular Church hold me to be no true Minister, and that he
may not communicate with me, supposing him to mistake; or if he hold it his
duty to contradict the Doctrine and Practice of Infant Baptism, or the like, he
may make himself utterly incapable of communion with this Church, who yet may
be capable of communion with other Churches. The like often falls out where
Churches differ about lesser Doctrines or Ceremonies, or Ordination of Pastors;
a man that will in a troubling zeal suppose himself bound to be a continual
disquiet to that Church where the occasion is, may be cast out from that, and
incapable of joining with any of that same opinion and way, and not with others
that are of his own way and Opinion.

2. A man may be cast out of a particular incorporated Church as such, and
consequently be at present incapable of being a member of any such particular
Church on Earth, and yet not be cast out of the Universal Visible Church, or
number of Christians, much less of the Invisible. As for example: If a man hold
and maintain that there are no true Ministers in Office in any particular
Church on earth by reason of an interruption in the succession of Ordination;
that man is become incapable of being a member of any such Church: and yet
while he holds the whole Doctrine of Christianity besides, and openly
professes it, and supposes that private gifted-men may Teach and Baptize, he
may still be a vi^ible Christian, and therefore not fit to be cut off from the
Universal Church of Christians. So in any the like Case. Quer. Whether this be
not the Case of those that place all Church Power in the Major vote of the
people, so that the Church must be governed only by such Vote, and the Pastor
is but the mouth of the People, to act according to their Vote? Whether men of
this judgment, declaring and professing it, be capable of being members of any
true incorporated Church on Earth (though they may be members of such Societies
as their own, of humane invention, contrary to the Word, and to the very
Essence of a true Political Church.)

3. I also distinguish between the excluding of a man from communion as No true
Christian, and excluding him as a scandalous or infectious Christian. As it was
one thing for the Jews to remove the dead, and another to remove a Leper from
the camp. And I suppose that 1. Ordinarily we are not to exclude any from our
communion for a scandalous sin openly repented of. 2. Yet it is possible that
it may be of so heinous a nature, that for the Credit of Religion, and the
avoiding of all occasion of Reproach by those without, it is not meet to admit
such an Offender into our communion, till after some convenient time and larger
manifestation of our disowning their crime, and of their extraordinary
repentance of it. But this is but temporary. 3. It is possible also that a man
may have such an itching zeal to propagate a false opinion, though consistent
with Christianity, that we may be bound to exclude him our actual communion, to
avoid the infection of the Church: As also that his crime may so induce others
to imitation, that though it be consistent with Christianity, we must exclude
him as an infectious Leper, because a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

4. I conceive that an open Apostate needs no decisive sentential
Excommunication, but only declarative. We cut off no man from Christ, but
declare who they be that cut off themselves from that Christianity which they
seemed to have.

5. Yet I conceive that an actual Apostate, that is not totally an Infidel, but
renounceth only some parts of the essentials of Christianity, and is loath to
confess himself no Christian, and will intrude into the communion of
Christians, whether to avoid shame, or disquiet of conscience, or danger, etc.
I say, such a One is the fittest object for the sentence of highest
excommunication, even from the number of Christians, supposing him notoriously
to be such. As if a man should call himself a Christian, and thrust into their
communion, and yet maintain, that Christ is but a Prophet, such as Mahomet; or
as the Arrians, that he is not God, or that there is no Resurrection or Life to
come, or that there is no Holy Ghost; or that Christ is not to be obeyed when
the Flesh is against it; and that every man may live the life that best
pleases his flesh; or that he himself will obey his flesh before Christ, or
not let go his sin for the hopes of Glory, at the command of God. Among these I
reckon a Notorious ungodly man, who will in words call himself a Christian, but
by a more certain discovery make known that indeed he is none. Here the Church
is not only to declare him none, but to sentence him none: For a mere
Declaration supposes not a Controversy, but a Sentence or Decision does: and
his vain pretense and unjust intrusion made it a Controversy, as between him
and the Church, though to the Church the Case be notorious. This man then is
cast out as No-Christian: when I conceive that such a man as David, Solomon,
etc. (were they now with us) while they lay in that sin, should be removed from
actual communion, as Lepers, or scandalous Christians, or (at most) as such as
have given us reason to question their Godliness.

6. There is also a threefold suspension: The first is from some special act or
part of communion only, (as the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) during the time
of a man's just trial. A duty not being at all times a duty, it is meet that he
forbear while he is under such trial, who has given just occasion of suspicion
and accusation. I mean here, only the trial whether they are guilty of the
fault that they are accused of or not. This suspension is not penal, but the
orderly doing of duties. Another suspension is, when the Crime is confessed, or
proved. and the only thing in doubt is, Whether the person be penitent or
impenitent? supposing the Crime an heinous Scandal, the person may be excluded
all special communion; with this limitation, Till they manifest Repentance. And
this is the most common censure, I think, that the Church has use for. The
third sort of suspension is, that beforementioned, when though we are
satisfied of the persons Repentance, yet the heinousness of the Crime, or the
scandalousness and occasion of Reproach to the Enemy, or the Infectiousness,
may necessitate us to delay his Readmission. In these two later there is
somewhat of Excommunication* mixed with the suspension: In the former, not so.
In these two later, we judge the person to have no Right at that time to enjoy
communion, because no aptitude to possess it; but not that he has lost all
Right to future communion. But yet his Right will not be plenary for the
future, unless he repent and get an aptitude for communion. Bu^ if we cast out
a man as no true Christian, then we deny him to have any Right for the future;
that is, his chief Title is Null, and he must have a new Title, as the
foundation of his Right, before he can have any Right: whereas the scandalous
Christian has his fundamental Title still; but only has a bar put in his way
from present Possession.

I have been the larger on this, that you may fully know the meaning of the
Argument; and on what ground all Objections are to be Answered.

And now you see that I speak not of every sort of Excommunication here, but
only that which justly excludes from all Christian communion, as Christian:
and not that which excludes only from any or all particular Churches (Though
of this last I suspend my determination); And I speak not of mere suspension at
least, of the first or third sort. Indeed my opinion is this* 1. That all so
excommunicated can give their children no right to Baptism (nor be fit mediums
of the conveyance of it) 2. That all justly suspended from communion of
Christians, till they manifest Repentance, having given the Church great cause
strongly to suspect them of utterly graceless Impenitency, should have their
children, who are born while they are in that condition, suspended from Baptism
(unless they have a better Right than from them.)

Lastly note that I mention, not only actual Excommunication by sentence, but
Excommunication ipso jure: For if it be Excommunication, all is one; and the
later the most unquestionable.

I now prove the Major thus: If such Infants cannot receive union and communion
with the Universal Church, on the account of their Parents Interest, then
neither can they receive Baptism on that account. But the Antecedent is
certain; which I prove thus: Such Parents cannot be the means of conveying that
to their Children, which they have not themselves. But they have no such Union
and Communion themselves; Ergo.

I know in some cases (as in working Grace on others) a man may be a means of
effecting that in another which he has not himself. But that it is not so
here, I think will be granted; for the Parents Right is all the condition (in
Question now) of the child's Right: and it is only this kind of Conveyance that
we mean.

The Consequence needs no proof: To be baptized, is to be put into union and
communion with the visible Church. (This is one inseparable use of it:)
therefore he that cannot be a fit medium to convey one, cannot for the other.

For the Father and Mother to be put out, or judged out, and yet the child
taken into the same body as a branch of them, and on their account, is plainly
to Do and Undo, and contradict our selves.

To this it is said by some, That an Excommunicate man loses but his Jus inre,
and not adrem; and retains still his fundamental Right; and therefore as to
this, is still a Churchmember: he is but suspended from present benefit, and
not cut off from all Title. To which I answer; 1. If this be true of all
Excommunicate persons, then is it impossible so much as by a Declarative
Excommunication, to cut off any from the Universal Church: If a man maintain
that Christ is neither God, nor Redeemer, but a Prophet, second to Moses or
Mahomet, and yet will call himself a Christian, and usurp communion, if we cast
him out, he has still a Fundamental Right. Can any man have a fundamental
Righ^, that denies any Fundamental Truth? But if any will say, That this is
not Excommunication, but Declaring or Judging a man to be an Apostate: I reply,
Rather than we will differ about the Name, call it what you please, as long as
you know what we mean. He that notoriously shows that he has not Christ,
has no fundamental Right. Whether Matthew. 18. and 2 These. 3.14. 1 Cor. 5. speak
of this or that sort of Excommunication, is little to our Question.

It is further objected, [ Either the excommunicate persons sin divests the
child, or the Churches Censure. But neither; Ergo, etc. Not the former: for no
sin but that of Nature descends to Posterity: Man transmits not his personal
Vices, Fault or Guilt, no more than his Graces.]

Answ. As if the Question had been about divesting a child of a Right which he
had before, and not rather of the conveying of a Right which he had not. We
suppose the child born after the Parents are excommunicate: And had that child
a Right before he had a Being? and so before it could be any subject of Right,
you talk of uncloathing him that was born naked and never clothed. We rather
suppose that the newborn child must then receive a Right from the
excommunicate Parent, or have none: and therefore conclude it has none, unless
on some other Interest then theirs.

It is further objected as to the Censure, [ I never read that Church Censures
were like that plague laid on Gehazi, to cleave to him and his seed: See Deuteronomy.
24 16.]

Answ. Church censures deprive not the child of any Right that it had; for we
suppose it unborn: but they show the Father to be in an incapacity of conveying
it that Right which it never had. I say therefore to your Argument, The sin of
the Parent preventeth the child's Right; and the Church censure declares and
judges it so prevented And on your grounds and arguing, why may not you say
that the child of every Turk and Indian on earth has Right? for their Parents
did no more divest them of it than these; and their sins can no more be
transmitted.

But though it be not necessary to be asserted, to the upholding of the present
Cause, yet I must tell you that I believe that Parents transmit more of their
sin than of their Graces to Posterity; and I am somewhat confident that you say
what you can never prove, and deny a Guilt which it better beseemed you to
acknowledge and lament.

Next to the proof of the Minor of the main Argument, viz. [that notoriously
ungodly persons are excommunicated from the society of Christians, as such,
ipso Jure; or are to be pronounced no members of the Universal Church,] To be
excommunicate ipso Jure, is when the Law is so express, and so fully applies
it self to the case of the offending person, that there may or must be an
execution of it by the people, though there do no sentence of the Judge
intervene; when the plainness of the Law, and the notoriousness of the Case may
warrant an execution without Judgment. And that it is so here, I prove thus.

The Case is supposed Notorious, and the Law is plain, and commands all men
to execute it, whether there be any Judgment or not: Therefore such are ipso
Jure, excommunicate. 1. In a lower sort of Excommunication, the mere Law may
require our execution without a sentence: therefore much more in a grosser and
plainer case. We must not eat with the scandalous, 1. Cor. 5.11. We must avoid
them that cause Division, Romans 16.17. We must note such men as are disobedient,
and have no company with them, that they may be ashamed: yea, we are flatly
commanded in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we withdraw our selves
from every brother that walks disorderly, 2 These. 3.6, 14. All this we must
do, though no Ecclesiastical Judge do sentence them, when the case is
notorious. We must reject a known Heretic after the first and second
admonition: we must turn away from wicked Livers, though they have a form of
Godliness, 2 Timothy 3:5.

2. Concerning those that are not Christians: we are bid come out from among
them, and separate our selves, and touch no unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18 For
what communion has Light with darkness, and Christ with Belial, or a Believer
with an Infidel? ver. 14. we have the estates of Infidels, Apostates and
ungodly men described to us, and we must judge them to be as they undoubtedly
appear to be, and use them accordingly. John bids a woman, that [ If any come
to them and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither
bid him God speed: for he that bideth him God speed, is partaker of his evil
deeds.] Here is an Excommunication ipso Jure: for he does not name the persons,
but leave them to discern them, and execute according to evidence. And these
seem to be persons much in the case as now we have to do with: such as
professed themselves Christians in name, and yet denied the fundamentals, and
lived wickedly: v. 7.8, 9. of Ep. 2. [ Mary deceivers are entered into the
World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a very
Deceiver, and Antichrist; whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ has not God.] whether this was written to a Lady, or a
Church, whether of the Gnostics or other Sect, it differs not much as to our
case. Also God calls all his people, whom it did concern, to come out of
Babylon, that they partake not of her sins, and receive not of her plagues,
Rev. 18.4. But I need not prove, I hope, that we are not of the same body with
known unbelievers; and that unbelieving expresses as small, if not a smaller
evil than ungodliness, and is comprehended in it, I have already manifested:
And its known that we are to shun the company of a wicked man, that will take
on him the name of a Christian Brother, more then of an unbeliever that
pretends not to be one of us: For with the later we may eat, 1 Cor. 10 27.
though we may not communicate with him in his false worship ( ver. 16.17, 18,
20, 21.) but with the former we may not.

And whether the ungodly be any more of our Body, or fit for our communion than
Infidels that so profess themselves in words, let Scripture judge. When God
separateth his own People from others, it is not only as from unbelevers, but
he most freqently gives the reason from their Pollutions; so that it is from
them as from the unclean. Lev. 20 24. I am the Lord your God which have
separated you from other People: Ye shall therefore put difference between
clean beasts and unclean, etc. which I have separated from you as unclean: And
ye shall be holy unto me; for I the Lord am holy, and have severed you from
other People, that ye should be mine] So answerable hereunto all Gods People
under the Gospel are called Saints as well as Believers: and Paul tells all the
Corinthians, not only that they are changed from Infidelity to Faith, but [
such were some of you (that is, wicked Livers); but ye are washed, ye are
sanctified, ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God, 1 Cor. 6 11.] And he is blind that sees not how in all the
ceremonial Institutions of Moses, which were Types of Christ's cleansing his
Church, the Lord does most eminently declare his Purity, and hatred of sin, and
the necessity of Holiness and Purity in his People, as well as the necessity of
pardon by Christ: Answerable whereunto in the Gospel, Christ is as eminently
declared the sanctifier as the Pardoner of men: He saves his people from their
sins, themselves; and washes, and sanctifies, and cleanses his Church, that
he may present it spotless to God. Lev. 15.31. and 12.2, 3, 5, etc. Neh. 13.3.
and 9.2. and 10.28. Ezr. 6.21. Exodus 33.16. Lev. 5.2. and 11. throughout. and
13. and 14. Number. 19. Isa. 52.1. the Gospel Church is accordingly described: Put
on thy beautiful Garments, O Jerusalem the holy City: for henceforth then shall
no more come into thee the uncircumcised and unclean] Ezekiel. 22.26. [ Her
Priests have violated my Law, and profaned my holy things: they have put no
difference between the Holy and Profane, neither have they showed difference
between the unclean and the clean.] Ezekiel. 44.23. Jer. 15.19. [ If thou will
take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth; let them
return to thee, but return not thou to them. Ephesians. 5.5. 2 Cor. 12.21. Ezekiel.
36.29.

I think it is clear, that those whom Paul describes, 2 Timothy 3. are to be
avoided by all Christians, as not in the Christian body: and he describes them
by their unholiness, and particular vices; and says of their Teachers, that
they are [ Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith]; yet have
their Disciples a form of Godliness. And doubtless [ Reprobates concerning the
faith] if so known, are not to be numbered with Christians. Those from whom we
are to be separated here and hereafter, are styled often [ The Vngodly] Psalm. 1.
And as in some places the distinction is between Believers and Unbelievers, so
in others, between the righteous and wicked or ungodly, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. where
all these are descriptions of the same men, [ ungodly and sinners], such as are
not of the house of God [men that know not God] And it was the world of the
Ungodly that God brought the Flood upon; and to be an example to those that
after should live ungodly, was Sodom and Gomorrah destroyed, 1 Pet. 2.5, 6. And
John tell us, that in this the children of God are known from the children of
the Devil; he that does wickedness is not of God.

Note well the description of these, Jude 4. On one side they pretended to be
Christians, for they are said to be [ crept in] among them; [ to turn the Grace
of God into lasciviousness;] they were [ spots in their Feasts, clouds without
water, carried about of winds, without fruit, twice dead] verse. 12. It is
apparent then that they were Baptized ones. Yet the Apostle excludes them from
the very number of Christians, calling them [ twice dead, plucked up by the
roots, men that denied the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, ver.
4.12.] And the Desciption of them, is, that they are ungodly Heretics, that
taught and practiced ungodliness: as you may see, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
17, 18. walking after their own ungodly lusts, sensual, having not the spirit,
of whom Enoch prophesied, saying. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of
his Saints, to execute Judgment on all, and to convince all that are ungodly,
of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed.] And [ the wrath
of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men who imprison the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.] If Romans 1 and 2.
speak of Baptized persons turned Heretics, as some Expositors judge, then they
are put in as vile a character, and as distant from Christians, as Heathens
are. It is the world as distinct from the Church that, lie in wickedness* 1 Jo.
5.19. Psalm. 50.16. To the wicked says God, What have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate Instruction, and castest my word behind thee?] The Sacrifice of the
wicked is an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 21.27. so then must his false
promising in Baptism. So Prove. 15.8 9.26. whatever they may say with their
mouths for God, and Christ, and the Faith, yet [ The transgression of the
wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his e^s,] Ps.
36.1. And David could see by the life of the fool, that he says in his heart,
There is no God: even when they do evil, and not good, and hate the people of
God, and call not upon God, Psa. 14. See Mal. 3.18. Church censures are, as
Tertul. speaks, praejudiciu^ futuri judicii and therefore must go on the
grounds of Gods judgment; which is [ to sever the wicked from the just, Mat.
13.49.] and that according to works* and not mere words, as was said before,
Eccl. 3.17. Prove. 15.29. We are not to gather those into the Church, whom we
know to be far from God, and he puts away: but such are wicked. Psalm.
119.119. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross, 155. ver.
Salvation is far from the wicked; They are estranged from the womb, Psalm 58.3.
Acts 3.23. every soul that will not hear that prophet shall be destroyed from
among the people.

All these passages, with multitudes more, show that the name of a Christian
unworthily usurped, makes not a notorious ungodly man to be in any capacity of
a better esteem with God or the Church, or any good men therein, than are
openly professed Infidels, especially that want the means which they enjoy: For
all this pretense of theirs can give us no probability of any more then a
superficial Assent, less then that of the Devils, and this is but knowing their
Masters will, which prepares these Rebels to be beaten with many stripes. And
should that which makes them the greater sinners, give them right of admittance
into the Church? It is Agustines Argument. lib de fide and oper.

3. The case is yet more clear that such are excommunicated ipso jure, when we
consider that it is far more usual for Gods Law to serve without a sentence,
then man's: most of the matters of our lives are there determined to our hand,
and we must obey the Law, whether there be any judgment of man to intervene,
or not: God has not left so much to the judicial Decision of man, as humane
Laws do. It is a great doubt whether there be any power, properly
Decisive-judicial in the Church-Guides or not? but doubtless, it is more
limitedly and imperfectly Decisive than is the power of Judges in the matters
of the Commonwealth. So that if all the Rulers in the Church should forbear to
Censure Notorious Apostates, Heretics, Ungodly ones, yea if they all command
us to hold communion with them, because they call themselves Christians, we are
nevertheless bound to disobey them, and to avoid such as to Religious
communion: For else we should obey man against God, who has directed many of
these precepts to all Christians, and not only to the Governors of the Church.
If the Guides will suffer the woman Jezabel to teach and seduce, and the
Nicolaitans to abide among them, whom for their filthiness God did hate, it is
the peoples duty for all that to avoid them, if they will be Guiltless. Yea
Cyprian tells the people that it belongs to them to forsake and to reject an
unworthy Minister that is by others set over them, or does intrude. I conclude
therefore that as all Christians must (beyond dispute) use an open Infidel as
such, though it belong not to the Church to judge them that are without,
because the Law here serves turn without a judgment, the case being past
controversy: so also a Notorious ungodly man, though pretending to
Christianity, and entertained by the Church, is to be avoided by every good
Christian, as being ipso jure excommunicated by God.

Most of the Objections that I have heard against this, are from men that not
understanding this phrase of Excommunication ipso jure, through their
unacquaintedness with Law-terms, have supposed that we meant no more but de
jure, or that they merited Excommuication, or it was their due: But ipso jure
means ex vi solius Legis, sine sententia Judicis: Its common for Legislators in
several Cases, either where Judges or other Officers are needless, or cannot be
had, or may not be staid for, to enable the subject to do execution, without
any more judgment. And so we are bound to avoid such Notorious ungodly ones,
as being as Notoriously no Christians.

2. But if all this were unproved, yet still it is sufficient to our purpose in
hand, that the Church-Guides are at present bound to Excommunicate them. And
sure they cannot at one and the same time be bound to cast out him and take in
his child upon his Right into the number of Christians.

Its Objected, The Excommunicate are members under cure. Ans. Those that are
but pro tempore suspended from some particular acts or parts of communion, are
so; and those that are only cast out of an Incor^orated Church, and not the
Universal, or from among Christians as Christians. But for the rest that are so
cast out, the case is otherwise. Many different acts of the Church, and cases
of the persons, are usually confounded under this one word [ Excommunication.]

Object. Austin complains of one that had Excommunicated one Classicanus, and
with him his whole Family; which he dislikes, because the son must not suffer
for the fathers sin.

Answ. What is this to our business? We plead not for Excommunicating any child
for the Parents sin; but for not Admitting them at first into communion, when
the Parents have lost their Right, and the child is born after. 2. What if by
the Law of the Land a Traitors Estate be forfeit? if his Heir therefore receive
not that which he could not give him because he had lost it, will you say that
this is contrary to Gods Ordination, that the Son shall not suffer for the
Parents sin? The Son may yet have some privilege, from a Father, which he
could not have, were that Father an Infidel or excommunicate person; and
therefore all the world have not the same Privileges as the Church. So much of
that Argument.

Arg. 16. Those whom we may justly Baptize (supposing them of age and natural
capacity) we may justly admit to the Lords Supper while they are no worse than
they were at Baptism. But we may not admit a notorious ungodly person to the
Lords Supper: Therefore we may not justly Baptize such: And consequently, not
their children upon their account.

The Major is plain: No Churchmember ought to be kept from Church Communion in
the Lords Supper, but upon some just Accusation of a crime which he is since
guilty of, more than he was at his Admittance. But the Baptized are Church
members. Ergo, etc.

It is by one objected, that this is the Anabaptists Argument (or one to this
purpose) to keep out Infants, because they are not to be admitted to the Lords
Supper. Answ. That is for want of natural capacity to use the Ordinance; and
not for want of a Right, if they had such capacity. But for men at age, I
suppose it past doubt that you may admit them to the Supper on the same
qualifications as to state worthiness, on which you may admit them to Baptism.
Object. The Baptized are Incipientes; the Communicants Proficientes; Therefore
there must be more in all Communicants then is requisite in the Baptized. Answ.
There ought to be more, because they ought to grow in grace. But 1. it is not
requisite that they be in any other state then the Baptized: Nor 2. Is it
absolutely necessary that they have any further degree of grace. For 1. the
Lords Supper is the means of increasing grace, and does not ever suppose it
increased. 2. The Apostles admitted the new baptized into their communion, to
breaking of bread and prayer presently, Act. 3. and 4. Indeed there is
requisite in the Receiving, and before, thoughts suitable to that Ordinance,
according to its difference from other Ordinances; and so there is in each
Ordinance according to its nature: And in that sense, as to some acts, its as
true that there is somewhat more required also in Baptism, then in receiving
the Lord Supper. But that's nothing to the case.

The Minor is granted me by almost all, on supposition that we can have a
Classis to exclude the offender: And many grant that every Minister may suspend
one from the Lords Supper in this case, by forbearing his own act. I wonder how
so palpable a mistake did come to be so common with wise men, as that a single
Pastor (at least when he is the sole Governor of that Church) may not exclude
on just occasions? Doubtless they may without a Classis take in men into the
Universal Church (for a Classis was not called for every man's Baptism:)
Therefore if one man may be the sole Ruler of a particular Church (of which
there is little reason to doubt) why may he not do the Office of a Ruler? But
there is much to be said for this on a fitter occasion. See Gilesp. Aarons Rod.
l. 3. c. 15. page 541.

The last Consequence I take for granted, on what is said before, and the mere
nothing that is said against it; viz. that if the Parents be in such a state in
which they may not be admitted to baptism, were it then to do, then may not the
children be admitted on their right or Interest, because they are to come in as
Theirs.

Argu. 17. Those that are Notoriously the children of the Devil, may not be
baptized, nor their Infants on their account; But the Notoriously ungodly are
Notoriously the children of the Devil: Ergo.

I prove the Major: 1. Baptism is ordained to admit all the baptized to be
visible children of God: those that are Notoriously the children of the Devil,
cannot be admitted to be (at that time) the visible children of God. Therefore
they may not be Baptized.

For the proof of the Major, see Gal, 3.26, 27, 28 29. For ye are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: For as many of you as have been
b^ptized into Christ, have put on Christ: And if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promised. The Minor is plain.

For the Minor of the main Argument, see 1 John 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Let no man
deceive you; he that does righteousness is Righteous: He that commits sin is
of the Devil. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil. Whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God. -- ] This Text proves
also the inconsistencie of these two Estates.

Argu. 18. He that will not be Christ's servant, may not be baptized (nor others
on his account) But notorious ungodly ones, while such will not be Christ's
servants. Ergo. etc.

The Major is proved, in that it is part of Christianity in the Essence of it:
He is to be believed in, and accepted as Lord and King: All his Subjects are
his servants. The Minor is proved from Romans 6.16. Know ye not that to whom ye
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey?
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness.

Argu. 19. He that will not hear Christ as the Prophet of the Church, may not
be baptized: But notorious ungodly Ones will not hear Christ as the Prophet of
the Church: Therefore ought not to be baptized: (nor any on their account.)

The Major is proved 1, In that it is part of Christianity: And to be baptized
into his name, is to take him as our Prophet. 2. Such should be cut off, Acts,
3.23. (Mr. Gilespie and others expound Moses cutting off, of Excommunication:)
therefore not admitted in such a condition.

Argu. 20. If notoriously ungodly baptized Parents are notoriously incapable of
presenting and dedicating their children to Christ, and covenanting with him on
their behalf, then are they Notoriously incapable of Interesting their children
in the Covenant or Baptism (Or, Then may we not baptize them on their account)
But the Antecedent is true; as I prove thus. 1. A man that notoriously refuses
to accept of Christ himself, and to take him as he is offered, to covenant
truly with him, is Notoriously incapable of doing the same on the behalf of
another: For he that has no true faith for himself, cannot have it for his
child: (though perhaps he may be content that his child let go some sins for
Christ, which he cannot spare himself.) but, etc. Ergo.

2. He that is, Notoriously a perfidious Breaker of his own verbal covenant, is
while such, incapable of covenanting with Christ for another. For such a man's
word is not to be taken; he has forfeited his credit, till he repent and
return to his fidelity: But such are all the notorious Ungodly. Ergo. etc.

The Consequence of the main Argument, is clearly good, because he that brings
any child to be baptized, must covenant for it with Christ; for it is a mutual
Covenant that must be entered in Baptism. The child cannot consent or covenant
by it self, therefore it must do it by others, and that must be those that
present it, as having Right on their Account: And he that is not Willing for
himself, cannot Consent for another.

Argu. 21. From the second Commandment, with all those other Texts that express
Gods differencing the seed of the wicked and godly. If it be Gods will that
there shall be visible notes of his displeasure on the children of the
Notoriously ungodly, as theirs, in comparison of the children of the godly,
then we ought not to baptize them. But the Antecedent is true; Therefore so is
the Consequent.

Here note, 1. That we speak not of any children of ungodly men, who at age
renounce their Parents ways, and themselves fear God (of whom Ezekiel. 18.
speaks:) but only of them, while Infants, and as theirs. 2. In the Antecedent I
mean that God has so visibly noted out the children of the Notoriously
ungodly, as such, to lie under his displeasure, that he would have the Church
and all take notice of it, and esteem of them accordingly. The reason of the
Consequent is, because Baptizing puts them among those that are visibly under
Gods favor, the Church being called the Body of Christ, the House of the
Living God, etc. But those that be visibly from under his special favor,
should not be put into such a Body.

The Antecedent I prove 1. from the second Commandment: where note 1. that the
parties differenced are the Posterity of them that hate God on one side, and on
the other those that love him and keep his Commandments: Not only between
Professors of Faith, or of Infidelity, but between godly and ungodly: it being
usual in Scripture to call the ungodly Haters of God, and justly; and it is
those that love him not, and keep not his Commandments, that are called haters
of him. 2. Note, that it is a visible mark of his favor which he there puts
on the seed of the godly, from whence we may well gather their
Church Membership, as I have showed elsewhere. Therefore it is a visible note
of his disfavour which he puts on the Notoriously ungodly; from whence we
may gather that they are not to be visible Church Members. 3. Note also that
this is in the Decalogue, and a standing determination of God, and not
ceremonial or transitory.

Note also how the Scripture all along concurs. The seed of Cain are called the
children of men, though its like they acknowledged God to be their Maker, who
might have heard Adam tell them of the creation. And indeed it is ungodliness
and wickedness that God drowned the World for. Yet are these children of Cain
as an excommun^cate brood, whom the children of God might not join with. The
Infants of all the wicked of the world are drowned with their Parents in the
Flood: The Infants of Sodom and Gomorrah are destroyed with their Parents, who
are said by Jude to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, as an example (not of
original sin) but to those that after should live ungodly. The children of the
Egyptians are destroyed for their Parents sins, while Isreal's are preserved.
The children of Da^han and Abiram, and their confederates were swallowed up
with them for their Rebellion: yet did their parents confess the true God, and
were circumcised. Achans children were all stoned to death and burned for his
sin, Josh. 7.15.26. It was Gods command to Israel, that if any City were
reduced and drawn away to serve other gods, that City, infants and all should
be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13. etc. God commanded Israel to put to death all
the Infants of all the Nations that were given them for Inheritance, Deuteronomy.
20.16, 17. which was for the Parents abomination. The Amalekite's infants must
all be slain: So are all the Males among the little ones of the Midianites,
Numb. 31.17. The children of Daniels Accusers are cast into the Den of Lions,
Dan. 6.24. And Babylones little ones must be dash't against the stones, Psalm.
137.9. The wicked are cursed in the fruit of their body, yea, It is cursed,
Deuteronomy. 28.18.32.41. Christ would have gathered the children of Jerusalem great
and small, but did not, because they would not. On that Generation he brought
all the righteous blood that was shed from Abel; and takes witness from their
own mouths, that They were the children of them that killed the Prophets. Now I
think, if the children of the notoriously ungodly lie under Gods visible
displeasure thus far, they should not by Baptism (as theirs) be taken into that
society that are visibly in his favor, and distinguished from all the world as
a Peculiar people, a Holy Priesthood, a Royal Nation, the Children of God, the
Body and Spouse of Christ, and the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

Argu. 22. That Doctrine is not found which confounds the Catechumeni, as to
their description, which the rightful members of the Church. But such is the
Doctrine that we oppose; yea worse. For the Catechumeni might understand and
believe the fundamentals (which is all the Title that these men can produce by
their profession: But they were not to be admitted into the Church till they
had more, even resolutions (expressed) to obey: Nay, many such without the
Church had some willingness to learn, and waited long on teaching to that end:
But so will not many of these in question. I plead not for any Error of the
Ancients, in keeping men from Baptism that were fit for it; but only mention
such as were but in preparation to such fitness.

Argum. 23. That Doctrine is at least much to be suspected, which by
contradicting the very Natural Principles of Religion, does tend strongly to
disgrace Jesus Christ, and tempt the world to Infidelity. But such is the
Doctrine which we oppose. Ergo.

For the proof of the Minor, Note, 1. That it is a natural certain Verity, that
the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, and that he is a hater of sin in
whomsoever, and delights in that Holiness which is his very Image; and that
God is no Accepter of persons, but in every Nation, he that fears him, and
works Righteousness, is accepted of him.

2. Note, That the Doctrine which we oppose, holds, that Jesus Christ does
set so much by the bare believing that He is the Son of God, yea the verbal
profession of it, and so little by Holiness, that if men will but make that
profession, let them live how they will, let them be Adulterers, Murderers of
Fathers or Mothers, perjured to God and Man, etc. yet they lose not their Right
to this Privilege, that even the children of their bodies shall be of the
family of Christ upon their Interest or Account: yea though themselves will not
so much as soberly promise to amend, yea though they be Persecutors of any that
would reform them, or any other way notoriously ungodly. Does not this strongly
tempt men to imagine that Jesus Christ came not to cure souls, and bring men
back to God, and save them from sin, but to seek himself and his own honor, and
that he preferred the acknowledgement of his dignity before the Interest of
God, and men's souls? Does it not tempt men to think that Christianity is no
better than the other Religions of the world, when it owneth such Monsters as
the Children of the Church? When we justly condemn a Seneca, Cicero, Fabrit^us,
Socrates, etc. as miserable for not believing in Christ, whom they never heard
of (most of them;) and privilege the children of one worse than Nero,
Surdanapalus, Machiavel, and that for the sake of such a Parent* and as a
member of him, to be in Covenant with Christ, and of the beloved Society, and
Household of Faith: In my opinion this will he a horrid stumbling block to those
without, and give them such cause to blaspheme our holy profession, as our Lord
never gave them, who came purposely into the world to destroy the works of the
Devil, and to bring back revolted man to the Holy Image and obedience of his
Maker, and who professed himself but the Way to the Father, and therefore
established and valued faith in himself, but in order to the acknowledgement
and love of God, and so of Godliness and Holiness, as its end and a greater
good; yea that has purchased us by his blood to a glory which does consist in
the fruition of God, in the perfection of Holiness, and has sent forth his
spirit into the souls of men to be in office their Sanctifier, and to make such
wondrous changes on men's hearts, as shameth all the rest of the Religions of
the world: yea who has made his Kingdom to consist in Righteousness, and
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and the heavenly wisdom to be first Pure,
then Peaceable, Gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
and who has sanctified to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works,
and makes so strict and holy a Law to guide them as he has done. In my
opinion, so loose a doctrine should not be pinned on the sleeve of so Holy a
Savior.

Argum. 24. That doctrine and practice is not by good Christians to be
received, which (besides the forementioned evidence of Scripture) contradicts
the doctrine and practice of all the Primitive Church. But such is this. Ergo.

I admire that grave men among us, and Godly, who will stretch their wits to
the uttermost to defend that which is the more common opinion of Divines of
best repute among whom they live, before they will differ from them, can yet
make so small a matter of differing from the Fathers, and universal consent of
the Primitive Churches, (as far as we have any means to disprove it.) That it
was their Judgment and practice to refuse to baptize any Notorious ungodly
person, while such, appears past all doubt. 1. By their requiring a profession
of Repentance. 2. And a profession of Believing in the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and renouncing the world, the flesh and the Devil, and promising a new
life. 3. By their Judging the Baptized to be in a state of salvation, which was
on supposition of their true sanctification. 4. By their too much care in
delaying the Catechumeni (in later times) lest they should be unmeet.

Let me recite the testimonies of one or two of our own, and one of those
Ancients, each of the highest Authority in the present case.

1. Mr. Gilespie, Aarons Rod. l. 3. chapter 15 page 544. says, [ It were a
Profanation of the Sacrament of Baptism, to Baptize a Catechumene, a Jew, or a
Pagan, professing a Resolution to turn Christian, he being manifestly under the
power of abominable Reigning sins, and being still a profane and wicked liver,
although he were able to give a sound and orthodox Confession of Faith.] From
whence he argues, that therefore the same men are not to be admitted to the
Lords Supper.

2. Spanhemius Epist. ad D. Buch. pa. 14. gives three reasons to prove that
Athrists, Epicures, Profane men, qui vitam inter flagitia traducunt, and aperte
ostendunt se non habere fidem, qua creditur, nec spiritum sanctificationis
secundum ullum ejus gradum, quamdiu in ista impietate perstant, nec
poenitentiam tum profitentur tum spondent, may not lawfully be baptized.

And our Divines commonly say, In Baptism we engage our selves to a holy Life:
those therefore which live not holily are covenant-Breakers, and herefore have
not Right to the benefits of the covenant. See Piscat. in Mat. 3. Obser. ex v.
6 8.10. and in Mat. 28. v. 19. and Davenane is Col. 2.12. Peter Martyr in Romans
6.3. Zanch. in Ephesians. 5. loc. de Bapt. cap. 3 These. 37. many more I omit.

3. The Doctrine of the Ancients I have given a touch of elsewhere, as to these
points. All that I shall now say is to desire the learned Reader (that has not
done it) to peruse all over that book of Augustine de fide and operibus, which
is wholly written on this subject. There were then some Christians, whose
opinion was, that if a Heathen lived in whoredom, when he turned Christian, he
was not to be refused Baptism till he would promise Reformation, and would put
away his whore; but because that the Apostles baptized upon believing, and
required obedience afterward, and works are to be the consequent fruit of
Faith, therefore the Pastor should first baptize them on their profession of
Faith, and then help them on to obedience afterward. Yet were these men so far
from imagining that it was not Justifying faith that is required to Baptism
that upon that supposition, they run into another error, which Augustine takes
to be their worst and the root of the rest; and that was, That this Belief in
Christ was the foundation, (meaning a dogmatical faith) and that an evil life
of such baptized believers was but hay and stubble built on the foundation, and
such should be saved, though as by fire. Against all this Augustine wrote that
Book, and proves that such may neither be saved nor baptized, and that Faith is
another thing, and Obedience of another necessity than they imagined. The
Reading of this Book I expect will do more in this present Argument, to
persuade most dissenters, than the perusing of all my Arguments, because of the
Authority of Augustine, and especially of the Church, whose Practice he
discovers.

If it be said that this concerns not Infants, I answer, I suppose it will be
but few that will not by what is said, be persuaded, that no man in an estate
unfit for Baptism, can convey a right to his Infants to be baptized. Read also
Augustine. Epist. 23. ad Bonifac. where is much worthy observation. And ad
Laurent Euchrid. c.

We come next to answer the chief Arguments of the Dissenters, which are not
already answered in what went before, in way of defense to the several
Arguments as we propounded them.

Argum. 1. The children of Notorious ungodly parents had right to circumcision,
before Christ's Incarnation: therefore the children of such have right to
Baptism since.

This is the great Argument, besides which there is scarce any that has a show
of difficulty.

Answ. 1. It is certain that the Fabric of the Jewish Polity, especially the
grounds and Reasons of all Gods Institutions of those times, are so imperfectly
known by us, that it is utterly unfit to reduce so many clear Gospel Arguments
to one dark one from those Laws. For it is a most necessary Rule, that in all
our Disquisitions, we must reduce Uncertainties to Certainties, and not
Certainties to Uncertainties: our Argument must be a notioribus ad mi^us nota.
Mr. Blake confesses it very dangerous to argue from mere analog^e, and
professes that he does not so, but from the ground of the Institution: And how
dark are those grounds in some Cases to us?

2. I yet see no proof of the Proposition, that then such Infants of
notoriously ungodly parents had (on their account) a right to Circumcision.

Where first note, that we must first denominate men Godly or Ungodly, as
principally in their respect to God himself, so next from their respect to the
Rule of Godliness then in force; which being not the same in many things then
as now it is, Godliness was not in the exercise, the same materially then in
all things as it is now. The sum of it was, to take the Lord that Redeemed them
from bondage to be their God, and to give themselves in consent to be his
people, and obey his Laws.

Now let us see where is their proof of the proposition. They say, all
Israelites whatsoever were to be Circumcised, by right; I answer, that is no
proof: Let us look to the Institution, Genesis 17.7, 8, 9, 10. and there we shall
find, 1. That the Covenant goes before the Seal; and this Covenant is, that God
will be a God to them, which they were on their parts to take him to be. 2.
This Covenant is with Abraham and his seed after him. 3. Next follows an
Injunction that he and his seed do keep Gods Covenant. 4. And then is
Circumcision Instituted (though called the Covenant, yet but) the Token of the
Covenant, as it is called ver. 11. By all which it appears that the seal
Instituted supposes the Covenant Instituted, and the seal applied supposes
the Covenant entered, and then by that it is signed between God and them: As if
the Prince confer such Lands and honors on a Noble man and his seed in all
generations, and require every Heir to come, and upon taking the Oath of
Allegiance, to receive the great seal for the confirming of his Title: This
supposes that this Noble man and all his seed, that expect that benefit, do
continue their Allegiance; that for all this Grant, If any of them turn
Traitor, his Posterity can receive no right from him, but it is prevented.

Moreover, it is known that every Israelite was often to renew this Covenant with
God: yea all the Body of the People often together did it in Moses days, and
they owned God continually in Sacrifices, and other Holy Worship. Moreover
consider, that the People at that time seem to be generally or mostly such as
were not of the strain that now we are enquiring about, viz. Notoriously
ungodly. To evidence this, Observe. 1. That they had holy, excellent Teachers,
Moses, Aaron, etc. and God among them in signs and wonders. 2. They were
generally zealous in their way of Religiousness, which was very costly and
laborious in comparison of what is now commonly done. 3. That they had most
strict Laws, prohibiting all uncleanness; yea even Ceremonial, to teach them
the evil of the greater Moral uncleanness. 4. They are often called a Holy and
peculiar people: and God frequently charge them to hold to it, and remember
that he was a Holy and Jealous God. 5. There were more severe penalties then,
and less indulgence to Offenders then is under the Gospel. 6. Even Balaam
testifies for them, that God saw not iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in
Israel; that is no such Idolatry or ungodliness as was among the Heathen. 7.
Note that the visible sins which they are most at that time accused of, and
destroyed for, seem to be but either some particular Facts under Temptation, or
some sad discoveries of their Mutabil^y and wavering not in the main; Whether
they should renounce their God (or at least they did not actually and visibly
renounce him) but about his Power in a strait and difficult case, or some the
like: From which a man could not conclude them notoriously ungodly, though
their sin was very great, and God that knew their hearts might discern
ungodliness in them, and men might suspect them, and fear the worst. 8. Note
also, that even for such particular sins before they could manifest fixed
impeni^ency and obstinacy, or a course of ungodliness, God usually let loose
against them his Jealousy, and by some destroying Calamities cut them off. 9.
When the Psalm^st does aggravate their sin Psalm 78. and 104. it is particular
sins, and unstedfastness of heart, but still with professions of Repentance and
Returning under their frequent afflictions. 10. Yet I must desire that none
here mistake me, as if I would free the Israelites from any charge that God
lays on them by his Prophets: I speak not now of their times of greatest
Apostasy and Rebellion: And I know that afterward, when the Princes and Rulers
were evil or negligent, then the Church must needs be defiled, and the Laws of
God unexecuted. And perhaps I may mis-interpret some texts of Scripture to a
more gentle sense then others do, or then is meet: Of this let every man judge
as he please: its no time now to call all such texts to account. If any be
offended at my charitable thoughts of the body of the Jews (Gods only peculiar
people on earth) let them blot out these fore going considerations, or take
them as non dicta; for I lay not the stress of my Cause upon them. But the
Principal thing which I would have observed is this. That by Gods Political Law
of this Commonwealth, all Notorious ungodly persons were to be put to death;
yea, and many far short of that degree. I know it is a controversy among
Divines, what is meant by all those places, that speak of [ Cutting off from
his people.] Mr. Gilespie with others think it is meant of Excommunication.
Others think it is meant of the Magistrates punishing them with death, or Gods
doing it extraordinarily if the Magistrate should be negligent. The main reason
brought against this Exposition, is, that it seems too bloody. But it must be
considered how terrible the Law was, and how God designed in it the
manifestation of his Jealousy, Holiness and hatred of sin. If every man that
did ought presumptuously might be cut off from the Church, why not from the
Living? The Apostle in Acts 3.23. reciting that of Moses, says, [ He that will
not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from the People.] However let that
phrase mean what it will, we have proof enough beside, that not only all
notorious Ungodly ones, but also many Godly ones that fell into gross sin, were
all to be put to death. From whence I argue thus:

If it was the Law of God that all such persons should be presently put to
death, then was it not the will of God, that their Infants should have Right to
Circumcision for their sakes, no nor on any other account: But the Antecedent
is true, therefore the Consequent.

The Reason of the Consequence is this: Either th^se men's children were born
before the parents turned ungodly, or after. If before then were they
circumcised the eighth day, as the children of the Godly. If after, then it was
against Gods Law, that they should be born, much less circumcised. For if Gods
Law had been fulfilled, the parents had been put to death, (we speak of both
parents) and then how could they have had a child?

All the doubt then lying in the Antecedent, I shall from Scripture put it is
past doubt. Let us look over all the Commandments, and see whether Death were
not to be inflicted for the gross breach of them, except the last, which is
secret in the heart.

For the first Commandment, see Deuteronomy. 13. If a Prophet wrought wonders to
entice to worship strange Gods, or if the nearest kinsman secretly enticed them
to it [ to thrust them out of the way which the Lord commanded them to walk in,
ver. 5.] he must be put to death. If a City be withdrawn by such, they are all
to be put to death; Children, Cattle, and Goods were to be destroyed and
consumed.

Deuteronomy. 20.18. They were not to save alive any person, no not Infants, of the
Cities that God delivered them to dwell in, Lest they teach them to do
according to their abominations.

Exodus 22.20. He that sacrifices to any God, save the Lord only, shall utterly
be destroyed.

The breach of the second Commandment is punished with Death, Exodus 32.26.27,
28. The Priests of Baal are slain, 1 Kin. 18.40. 2 Kin. 10.21.22, to 29. and
23.5, 19, 20. Yea, in one word, he that would not be Godly positively, was put
to death, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13. It is spoken in their commendations, that they
entered into a Covenant, to seek the Lord God of their Fathers with all their
heart, and with all their soul; that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of
Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.]

Lev. 24.15, 16. Whosoever blasphemeth the name of the Lord, was to be put to
death: So ver. 23.

Every one that did any work on the sabbath, or defiled it, was to be put to
death, Exodus 31.14, 15. and 35.2.

He that smitteth or curses his Father or Mother, must be put to death, Exodus,
21.15.

Murderers, Man-stealers, Incestuous, Sodomites, Adulteres, Wizards were to be
put to death, Exodus 21. Lev. 20. yea and those that turn after Wizards. Any
Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in Gods name, which he has not
commanded him to speak, or that speaks in the name of other Gods, must die,
Deuteronomy. 13.20. In some cases Fornicators must die, Deuteronomy. 22. Every man that
forsook God and broke his Covenant was to be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3, 4,
5, 6.

Many the like passages might be cited; but I will conclude with two or three
of chief note for this purpose.

Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which
will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that
when they have chastened him will not hearken unto them, then shall his father
and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City,
and to the Gate of his place: and they shall say unto the Elders of his City,
This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice, he is a
Glutton and a Drunkard: And all the men of his City shall stone him with stones
that he die: So shall you put away evil from among you, and all Israel shall
hear and fear.]

Here I suppose it will be granted, that it is the Parents duty to restrain
their children from all ungodliness; and that Gluttony and Drunkenness are but
instanced in, as part, in stead of all the rest. And if all children must be
put to death that will not be ruled for good by their Parents, then when they
are dead they will beget no children who may claim Right to Circumcision for
their sakes.

But if any say, that this extends not to those that are from under their
Parents tutorage or Government, I answer, First, Sure the same sin deserves
the same punishment afterward from the Magistrate, if they are obstinate
against his pious precepts. Secondly, but to put the case out of doubt, see
Deuteronomy. 17.12. And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto
the Priest, that stands to minister there before the Lord thy God, or unto
the Judge, even that man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from
Israel, and all the people shall hear and fear, and do no more p^esumptuously.]
To these Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. From all which it is evident, that as Impenitency or
Obstinacy in sin is the great cause of Excommunication now, so was it then to
be punished with Death; and consequently that the evident discoveries of a
state of Ungodliness (and many more) were then punished with Death according to
Gods Law.

And then it must needs follow, that no child of a man Notoriously ungodly,
born of his procreation in that condition, had right to Circumcision: For dead
men do not procreate.

And whether [ Cutting off from his people] be meant of capital punishment,
such places as Exodus 31.14, 15. would make one doubt: [ Ye shall keep the
Sabbath therefore, for it is holy unto you: every one that defiles it, shall
surely be put to death: for whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall be
cut off from amongst his people.] See also Levit. 20.17, 18.

And if it be meant of Excommunication, if the parent be [ cut off from his
people,] then cannot his son for any Interest of his, be ^nnumerated to that
people, and entered among them.

The first Observation and this last laid together, clear the whole Cause, viz.
that the Magistrate was not to force any barely to be Circumcised, but to enter
into Gods Covenant, and so to be circumcised: and therefore was he not to force
any out of the Covenant to be circumcised: and then, that he was to cut off the
Covenant-breakers, or notoriously ungodly ones.

11. The next Observation that I would give toward the Answering of this
Objection, is, that it could not be expected that any Magistrate, Priest, or
other in Power, should hinder any Israelite from circumcising his children. For
to circumcise them was every man's Duty, and to baptize them is every man's Duty
in the world now: that is, to give up himself and his child in sincere Covenant
to God, and seal it, as he has appointed: but not dissemblingly to use the
sign, without the Covenanting and Resignation on his part. Now if any Israelite
were unfit for this Ordinance, it being the Magistrates duty to put him to
death, or cut him off, he could not judge him unfit, and so forbid him the
Ordinance, without condemning himself. The first thing that lay upon him was,
to cut him off for the sin which caused his unfitness.

12. Note also that Circumcision much differed from Baptism in this, that it
was not the Priests work but Parents to circumcise his children: this being so,
no wonder if there were not the scruples about the persons fi^ness and
worthiness, and the childrens right, as now there is in Baptism. For what man
is so prone to scruple or question his own Right or his childrens, as another
may be? And the same reason that should move a Parent to question his Right,
would move him also to Repent and Recover his Right. No wonder therefore if the
Execution answered not Gods Institution.

To all this it is objected, that we read not that any Infants were kept back,
or that God blamed them for it.

Answ. 1. I have given sufficient Reasons. 2. God would rather blame them for
that sin which caused their unfitness, it being not the Circumcising then, in
the Baptism now, that he is against directly, but the ungodliness; and
therefore would not have the ordinances forborne, but on supposition that the
sin will not be forborne: tha's the disease that he would have them heal both
then and now.

Obj. Joshua is commanded by God to Circumcise them, and accordingly he does
Circumcise all the people: yet no doubt many of them were Notoriously ungodly.
Josh. 5. Answer 1. Joshuah did but command it to be done. 2. I have given the
reason why all should be Circumcised. 3. It is unproved that any one of them
were know to Joshuah to be ungodly. To clear this further, I will add two more
observations.

13. Note that all those that were charged with Murmuring, Unbelief, etc. in
the wilderness, were all destroyed there, and also that for 40 years their
Children had been uncircumcised. Only Caleb and Joshua were left. So that those
of 40 or 30 or 20 years of age must be Circumcised on the account of their own
Covenanting, and not plead the right of their Parents.

14. Note also, that the very examples of Gods Judgments do intimate that
Notorious Ungodliness was not so common among them as some imagine. Multitudes
are thought very Godly now, that murmur in lesser straits than they were then
in, and that are palpably guilty of much unbelief, or less temptations. All
Israel was put to the worse for the sake of one Achan, that plundered no man
unjustly, but only thought to rescue some desirable treasures from the flames:
I wish that no soldiers would now do worse that are reputed extraordinarily
Godly, and are never blemished by such actions in their own eyes or any others.
I will not stand to add more, because I have been so long.

If any man Judge that all this is no sufficient answer to their Argument from
Circumcision, I further add. 2. Though this be my own thoughts, yet it is not a
few of those Divines that are Godly and Learned, that give one of these two
following answers.

1. That External and Ceremonial Purity was then most openly looked at, which
was but a Type of the spiritual purity under the Gospel: and therefore no
wonder if God that then permitted Polygamie without reproof, permitted the
circumcision of all Jews, yea encouraged it, seeing that the Body of that
People were Gods visible Heritage, as a Type of the Catholic visible Church
now. The Magistrates therefore might compel them as Jews to be Circumcised,
but so may not ours compel us as Englishmen.

2. That Circumcision was not only appointed to be the seal of the Covenant of
grace, but also a peculiar Covenant annexed to Abraham and his seed: and that
not all, but those only that were to possess the land of Canaan: And therefore
as it was not all the people that God had on earth that were promised to
possess the land of Canaan, but only the Israelites, and those proselites that
came over to inhabit among them; so neither was Circumcision commanded to all,
nor was necessary to them: but to a Jew it was necessary as a Jew, how ungodly
soever.

Though this be none of my answer, yet among many Improbable opinions, I see
not but the Thesis which I deny, is much more improbable than this is; and
therefore if I needs must hold one, I see not but that I should rather hold
this.

Nor will this weaken our Argument for Infant Baptism, fetched from the Infant
Church Membership of the Jews (which is the great objection) as long as the
whole species of Infants are of distinct consideration from a Jews Infant, as
such; and as long as the grand Covenant of grace, and the peculiar promise to
the Jews, are so distinct; yea and Church Membership, and Circumcision so
distinct as they are, Let them leave us to make good our Arguments in this.

Argu. 2. We may lawfully Baptize the Infants of any Church Members.
Notoriously ungodly persons are Church Members, therefore we may lawfully
Baptize their Infants.

Ans. 1. I deny the Major. Because some Church Members are in such a condition
as that the first thing you are bound to do with them, is to cast them out, (or
suspend them till then) When you are bound presently to cast him out, you are
not at the same time to give him the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, nor his
Infants on his account the Sacrament of Baptism.

Indeed if they had Right to Church Membership, their Infants might have so too.

2 I deny the Minor. Other ungodly persons are visible members: but notorious
ungodly ones are not, They are pso jure excommunicate, not merely as m^riting
i^, but on the Notoriousness of their incapacity, and the pleasure of the
Legislator, as is before declared.

Obj. The Notorious ungodly were Church Members among the Jews, therefore they
may be s^ now.

Answ. 1. Prove the Antecedent. 2. The question is not what men mis-judged
them, but how God esteemed or pronounced them. 3. God would not have them to be
Church Members, while such, whom he commanded the Magistrate to put to death.
But, etc. Ergo.

Obj They were not to be excommunicate or put away from the Passover. Answ. 1.
He that is stoned to death is excommunicate and put away from the Passover. He
that is cut off from the living, is put out of the Church on earth. 2. I will
not waste time to prove Jewish excommunication, till I know of some tolerable
answer given to that which Mr, Gilespie (beside many others) has written so
largely already.

Argum. 3. Infants in Covenant have right to Baptism The Infants of Notorious
Ungodly Parents are in Covenant. Ergo.

Ans. I have in my account to Mr. Blake, told you so fully, how far they are in
Covenant, and how far not, that I must refer you thither, and not here recite
it. I deny that God is actually engaged to them in the covenant of Grace, which
Baptism seals; but conditionally only, and so he is to Infidels that
persecute it. Though they may be engaged more to God by their own Verbal
covenant to him; but that alters not the case.

Argu. 4. Dogmatical faith gives Right to Baptism. Notoous ungodly Parents
have a Dogmatical faith. Ergo. etc.

Answ. I have said so much to Mr. Blake on this, that I need not now to add any
more.

Obje. Simon Magus had a faith which gave him right to baptism. But Simon Magus
was then a Notorious ungodly man; therefore a Notorious ungodly man may have a
faith that may entitle him and his to baptism. Ans. See what is said to this in
the place before cited. Further 1. I yield that Simon had a faith of
superficial Assent, such as the Devils have in a greater measure: and that he
professed more than he had; and that hereupon the Apostle was warranted to
baptize him. 2. But I deny the Minor that he was then notoriously ungodly.
Consider well of Psalm. 50.16.

Argu. 5. Josiah was lawfully Circumcised upon the Right of Manasseh and Ammon;
but Manasseh and Ammon were Notoriously ungodly: Ergo.

Ans Either Josiah was born before his Father Ammon proved Notoriously ungodly,
or after. If before, then he received not his right from a Notoriously ungodly
Parent. If after, 1. Then was it contrary to Gods Laws, and so could be no true
Right. For by Gods Laws Manasseh and Ammon should have been put to death. And
if it be said that these Laws were not to be executed on the Sovereign; I
answer, the want of a power of execution does not hinder, but that they
notoriously lost their Right, though they kept possession, and therefore could
convey no Right. It follows therefore that either Josiah was circumcised
without Right (if it be first proved that his father was such at the time of
his birth): or else that he had his right some other way, intimated in the
General answer to the Jews case. And to them that think the former a hard
saying, I shall anon show that the rule holds good in this case that Quod fieri
non debet, factum valet.

Argu. 6. Deuteronomy. 24 16. The Children shall not be put to death for the Fathers
sin; and we read not that Ecclesiastical censure should be more severe. The
child of a Thief is not committed with him to prison; and I see no reason that
he is committed with him to Satan: therefore there is right to Baptism in the
child of an excommunicate person.

Answ. The question is not of excommunicating a child, or committing him to
Satan, but of addmitting him into the Church at first: The Parent cannot convey
to the child the Right whith he has lost; we speak only of the Children born
after the Parents are excommunicated vel sententia vel ipso Jure. But of this
enough (I think) before: the state of the question is by these Arguers
strangely over-lookt.

Argu. 7. Those that the Apostles Baptized had been ungodly immediately before,
only at the present they did profess Repentance: And so do many of these that
you call Notoriously ungodly. Ergo.

Answ. 1. If it be a probably serious and credible profession (fit for that
name) then are they not Notoriously ungodly. 2. According both to Scripture,
and Reason, and common use, a man's first or second profession may be credited.
But if he frequently break his word, his credit is lost: he is not capable at
present of covenanting again, till he have by actual Reformation recovered his
credit. I have such Neighbors as this twenty years together have been constant
drunkards, and lament it, and promise Reformation when they have done, and yet
once a week or fortnight usually are still drunk. To take these men's often
breaking words were to delude Scripture and all Discipline, and cross common
Reason.

Yet here we must carefully distinguish between Repentance for such gross sins,
as continued in, are inconsistent with true Grace; and Repentance for such
infirmities as may stand with Grace, not only to live in, but not to have, or
manifest a particular Repentance of: As those which are not convinced to be
sins: etc. We speak now of the first.

Argum. 8. By denying them Baptism, we may exasperate the wicked to engage
themselves against Christ, and us.

Answ. The Primitive Church under Heathen Princes had much more cause to fear
this than we have: and yet it did not change their course. I take not such
carnal Reasons to be worthy to have place among the servants of such a Master
who fears not his enemies, and will make them bend and return to him, but will
not himself bend and return to them.

The truth is, had we Magistrates that would so severely punish notorious
ungodliness, as (I think) they should do according to Gods Laws* that most of
this Controversy would be ended: and instead of driving men from Gods
Ordinances, they should be driven from such ungodliness. But when Magistrates
are so tender of hurting men's Bodies, that they let their souls perish, or are
so much against formality and outside Reformation, that they had rather men
were Heathens, and openly wicked, and sinned with Body and Soul too, than with
the Soul alone; this puts us upon a necessity of doing the more in a separation
by Church power, than else we should do.

Arg. 9. If no Children of notorious ungodly parents have Right to Baptism, 1.
then is their Baptism Null. 2. And then ours is Null which we received, on
supposition of the Right of such parents. And 3. then must many be baptized
again; For if Ministers had no power to do it, it must needs be Null. The
determination of this Question about the nullity of Baptism, depends upon the
true definition of Baptism: some only put Gods part and the Ministers into the
definition, and not the receivers act of profession, covenanting or
self-resigning to Christ; taking him to be no Agent in the Essentials of the
Ordinance, but a recipient; and that the Acts on his part are only Integrals,
or Duties necessary to his participation of the benefits of the Covenant. If
this definition hold (most common with our Divines) then the resolution is most
easy. For the Minister performed all that was essential to Baptism: And
therefore that which is undone, is only the man's duty on his own or child's
behalf: that which was well done (as to the act) is not to be done again, that
is, the Ministerial Baptism (though sinfully misapplyed;) but that which was
undone; that is* 1. the persons duty; 2. and thereupon Gods Grant (actually) of
the benefits. According to this definition of baptism, if through error a Pagan
be baptized in the true form, it is not Null as to that form of the Ordinance,
nor to be done again when he is converted; but only his own duty was Null, and
to be done again For example; if one that cannot speak our Language should be
thought to profess faith in Christ by signs, and be baptized thereupon, and it
after appear that it was no such profession, but contrary: so if we should
mistake a Pagans child for a Christians. I pretend not to decide the Question,
Whether this be the rightest definition of Baptism, or best Answer to the
present Doubt; but if this hold (as it is common) all is clear against the
pretended Nullity or re-baptizing.

2. If it hold not, let the Objectors answer themselves, who say that a
Dogmatical faith gives right to Baptism: We have abundance of people that have
not so much as a Dogmatical Faith; that know not who Christ is, nor what he
has done; nor are they in most places (since the Directory was in use) called
to profess their faith when they offer their children to Baptism; Are the
children of these persons to be rebaptized? or themselves, if it were their
case? or is the Administration of the Lords Supper to such a Nullity, or only
unprofitable? I have had the aged here, that have said, Christ the Son of God
was the Sun in the Firmament: yet they have had both Sacraments. Answer this
for your selves.

3. But suppose the persons covenanting be essential to Baptism, let us so far
advantage the Objectors as to deal with them on that ground.

Answ. 1. I distinguish between [the Nullity of the external part, commonly
called, Baptism, containing the Ministerial Administration, and the persons
Reception of the Water and Washing, with his profession, or external covenant
to God;] And [the Nullity of Gods Engagement or Covenant to the sinner
actually; and so of the sinners Reception of the Benefits of Baptism] Among
which Benefits I distinguish, [the special and spiritual, as pardon, Adoption,
etc.] from the more common and external, such as are [the external Privileges
of the Visible Church.] Whereupon I answer first to the Matter in these
following Propositions: and then to the Argument, as in form.

Pr^po. 1. If any essential part of the exterior Ordinance be wanting, then it
is Null: As if the party he not (more or less) washed. If he be not baptized
into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (at least implicitly, if not
by full Verbal expression) If the party use but the bare name of God, while he
professes, or openly discovers that it is not indeed God the Father, Son or
Holy Ghost that he means. If he openly put in any exception against any
essential part of the Christian Faith or Covenant; as to say, I will only be
pardoned by Christ, but not sanctified; then, I conceive, it is no Baptism. But
if there be all the exterior Essentials, there the exterior Baptism is not Null
nor to be repeated. 2. The foresaid exterior Baptism is effectual to the
engaging or obliging of the person so baptized: And so his own part of the
Covenant is not Null. A Dissembling promise binds the Promiser in Law: for
his dissimulation cannot hinder his own Obligation, though it may another.
Nemini debetur commodum ex proprio delicto; 3. But if there be not sincerity in
the Covenanter, beyond all this, his Baptism is not available to the pardon of
his sin, or to convey to him a R^ght from God in any of the Covenant benefits
(directly as given to him) common or special. 4. Nor should the Minister or
People believe this man, if by Notorious Ungodliness he give them reason to
take his present Profession to be false, and himself now to dissemble. 5. But
yet seeing a Natural Profession it is, though false; and the falsehood is not
declared by him at that time in the Ordinance, but disclaimed, but only is
declared before he comes thither, therefore it seems to me, that there is the
whole external Essence of Baptism, and therefore it is not Null, nor to be
Repeated: But if that person do afterward come to the sense of his own
Dissimulation, and of the want of Truth in his Profession and Covenanting, he
is to do then that which he did omit before, that is, to Covenant Truly; but
not that which he did perform before, that is, to be externally Baptized. Such
a person therefore should in the face of the Congregation, when he comes to
Repentance, bewail (with the rest of the sins of his life) that falseness in
the Baptismal Covenant, and there unfeignedly renew it: To which end, among
others, in the ancient Churches, it was usual in Confirmation to renew the
Covenant more solemnly, where any flaw was found in the Baptism, which yet did
not prove a Nullity. 6. And for external Church Privileges, I conceive, that
as God does not by Covenant give this person a right to them, so it is the
Ministers and Peoples Duty to deny them to the Parent himself, while he
continues notoriously ungodly: and the Error of wrong baptizing him, (or
continuing him in the Church till now) will not oblige them to continue
communion with him. But yet being admitted by Baptism, he should be solemnly
cast out. But if the Guides of the Church be faulty and will not cast him out,
then must the people distingu^sh between communion with him as a Christian in
general, and as a member of that particular Church; as also between communion
Moral, and merely Natural; and so, First, they must avoid ^hristian communion
with him in ordinary ways wherein they are free; as all private or voluntary
open familiarity: Secondly, But if he intrude (by the Pastors approbation) into
Public communion, in Prayer, Praises, or Sacrament, they ought not to withdraw
from the communion of the church, because of his presence First, because they
have the Liberty of esteeming him as they please; Secondly, because it is not
their fault, but the Pastors. Thirdly, and therefore it is but a Physical and
not a Moral communion that they have with him. Fourthly, because they are bound
to hold communion with the Church in the use of Ordinances.

And as for the Infant on that account baptized, i^ is so few acts of communion
that an Infant is capable of, that the question seems to be of no great moment,
how far we should have communion with them. But I conceive, we should take them
as baptized persons externally, and so far members of the Church, though
wrongfully admitted.

7. To which purpose, it is not altogether inconsiderable, that the Minister
being by Office the Baptizer, and so the Judge of his own Actions, whom he
ought to Baptize, and whom not; the action is not Null, though he mistake in
his Judgment, and apply the Ordinance to one that he should have refused. For
he does but an act belonging to his Office, though he do it amiss, or on a
wrong subject. As if a Judge do pass sentence mistakingly, yet may it be valid,
as to some execution; For though he have no power given him directly to pass a
wrong Judgment, yet in order to passing a right Judgment, he has power to
follow his own discretion, and to pass such a Judgment as shall (at least in
tantum) stand, though it prove wrong. I confess the Ministerial Power somewhat
differs from a strict Decisive Judicial power; but yet there is so much
resemblance as may serve to illustrate the matter in hand.

Object. Then if a Minister Baptize a Heathen, it is not Null, because he is
Judge whom to baptize.

Answ. 1. On the grounds we now go on, it it a contradiction to baptize a
Heathen, that by a present profession is such. For Baptizing essentially
contains the persons external Covenant, or Profession of Believing in, and
Dedication to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. If there be not by the person and
Minister such a Dedication, it is not Baptism: for if the bare external Washing
were Baptism, then we were every day baptized. Now he that is Baptized into the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, does thereby renounce Heathenism so
far: Though whether his Profession shall be credited, depends on the
probability of its verity or falsity. But on the first mentioned Definition of
Baptism, it will be granted you, that Baptizing a Heathen is not a Nullity, as
to the outward Baptism, though it be unprofitable and sinful. But to go on
former grounds, I further answer, 2. It is one thing for a Judge to mis-judge a
Cause that belongs to his Judgment; and another to mis-judge a cause that is
wholly exempted from his Judgment, and belongs not to him. In the former,
his Judgment may stand, in diverse cases, because he was made Judge. In the
later it is wholly Null, for he is but a Private man, and has nothing to do in
the business: and therefore whether he judge right or wrong, it is Null; As if
a Judge go to another Bench, or into another Circuit, which is out of his
Commission: So here, where a man lays claim to Baptism, and professes
himself a Christian the Minister is to judge whether he do it truly, or falsely;
and therefore though he mistake, the Baptism is not Null; For though the man be
notoriously ungodly yet it is supposed that the Notoriousness is not absolutely
unquestionable, and that the person does not profess it when he comes to
Baptism, but deny it, by professing Faith and Repentance; and so though the
Church have sufficient ground to discredit that profession, by reason of h^s
contradicting Life, yet a Controversy it is, while the person claims a Right
in Baptism for his child; and being a Controversy, the Pastor is judge. But if
he baptize a Heathen that makes No Profession of Christianity, true or false,
then he medleth in a matter exempted from his Power, and out of his Commission,
and contrary to it, and that which can be no Controversy fit for his
determination: and therefore it is Null, and indeed no Baptism.

Object. If the Pastor be thus Judge, how can you say as before, That the
Notoriously Ungodly are ipso Jure Excommunicated?

Answ. 1. Ministers are limited in their judgment by the Law of God, which
tells how far they may or may not Judge, and how far it shall or shall not be
effectual. The people are not absolutely tied to follow their judgment when
they err. 2. God has directed his Precepts for the avoiding of notorious
ungodly ones to every Christian directly; and not only to the Pastors directly,
and to the people only from them; so that if a Pastor command us to have
communion and familiarity with such, we are yet to avoid them (as far as was
before expressed) for all that, because Gods command is contrary to the
Pastors. And the Law openly declares that such are not true Christians (or
Believers;) and therefore a Pastors sentence cannot make them such: His erring
judgment may do more to bring a man into the Church than to keep him in; and
in keeping him in as to possession, it may do more to the conveyance of those
Privileges which are to come merely from his own hands and administration,
than those wherein the people are to be instruments: Because he is more the
Determiner of his own Actions, such as are baptizing, administering the Lords
Supper, etc. than of theirs: For his own Erring Judgment may ligare, etsi non
obligare, entangle him in a kind of necessity of sinning, till that Judgment
be changed; but it cannot tie them, nor so necessitate them to sin, though it
may bring them under some inconveniences; and for Order and the Peace of the
Church, they must quietly, peaceably, and submissively dissent. By the Law of
the Land, the Kings Judges in his Courts and Assizes; were the lawful Judges
of a Traitor that was brought before them; and yet in some notorious Cases I
suppose he is condemned ipso Jure, and any man that can come at him might
lawfully stab him without Judgment, yea is bound to do it: as if they had
stood by and seen the Kings Person assaulted, as the Lord Major of London did
by Wat Tyler: Or if it were not in defense, but in avenging of the Treason, if
heinous; and in several Cases they might kill them in a forcible apprehension
if they resist, as they did by the Powder-Traitors here near us at Holbetch
House. But what need I mention these things, when it is so commonly known that
in several Cases the Law enableth us for to Execute without Judgment, and yet
this is no denial of the Authority of a Judge. So much to the matter of this
Argument.

And now in Sum to the Argument as in Form, 1. I deny the first Consequence, if
it speak of the Nullity of the External Baptism, and not only of the Effect,
and of Gods Engagement to them.

2. And consequently I deny the two later Consequences.

3. Yea if our Parents Infant Baptism were null, it follows not that so is
their childrens, which they had on their account. For our Parents might get a
Personal Right in Christ and the Covenant after their Baptism, before they
presented us in Baptism, though themselves had not been Baptized. 4. And I
believe it will be no easy matter to prove that our Parents (any, or many at
least) were notoriously ungodly at our birth. 5. Lastly, if all this satisfy
not, but any man will yet needs believe, that it is an unavoidable consequence
of our Doctrine, that [The Baptism of the Infants of Notoriously Ungodly
Parents is null] though I am not of h^s mind, yet I think it is a less
dangerous opinion, and less improbable then theirs whom we now oppose. I know
no such great ill effects it would have, if a man that mistakingly did suppose
his Baptism Null, to satisfy his Conscience were baptized again, without
denying the baptism of Infants, or any unpeaceable disturbing of the Church in
the management thereof. I confess I never had any Damning or Excommunicating
thoughts in my mind against Cyprian, Firmilian, and the rest of the African
Bishops and Churches, who rebaptized those that were baptized by Heretics, and
in Council determined it necessary, and were so zealous for it. And, though
while I captivated my judgment to a Party and to admired Persons, I embraced
the new Exposition of Acts 19. which Beza thankfully professes to have
received from Maruixius, who as some say was the first Inventer of it; yet I
must confess, that both before I knew what other men held, and since I better
know who expound it otherwise, and on what grounds, I can no longer think that
is the meaning of the Text, especially when I impartially peruse the words
themselves. Calvin did not think that the 5th vers^ was Paul's words of John's
Hearers, but Luke's words of Paul's Hearers: and had no way to avoid the
Exposition which admitted their rebaptizing, but by supposing that Paul did not
Baptize them again with Water, but with the Holy Ghost only. (and that of that,
the fifth verse is meant.) I never read that John Baptist did Baptize in the
name of the Lord Jesus expressly and denominatively, but only as Paul here
speaks, that they should believe on him that should come after, whom Paul here
Expositorily denominateth the Lord Jesus. And the words [ When they heard this]
seem to me plainly to refer to Paul's saying, as the thing which they heard.
Also the Connection of the fifth verse to the sixth shows it: For else there is
no reason given of Paul's proceeding to that Imposition of Hands, nor any
satisfaction to the doubt at which he stuck, or which he propounded. And I
confess, if I must be swayed by men, I had rather think well of the judgment of
the Fathers, and Church of all Ages, who, for ought I find, do all (that have
wrote of it) with one consent place a greater difference then we do between
John's Baptism and Christ's, and did expound this Text so as to assert that
these 12 Disciples were baptized again by Paul, or on his Preaching. And for
that great and unanswerable Argument wherewith Beza and others do seek to
maintain the necessity of their sense, I confess it rather persuades me to the
contrary: For whereas they imagine it intolerable for us to conclude or think
that Christ was not Baptized with Christian Baptism, which himself did
institute or command, I must needs say, I think it much more probable that he
was not, seeing the Christ an Baptism is Essentially a Covenanting and Sealing
of our Covenant with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as our Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and appointed to be Gods Seal of his washing away our
sins by Christ's blood; all which I know Christ was not capable of; And I
suppose it more credible that Christ himself should be the Instituter of such
an Evangelical Ordinance than John; and that he came to fulfill all Legal
Righteousness, rather than that Evangelical Righteousness which consists in
obeying himself, by doing those things which he has appointed to redeemed
sinners as such for their recovery. But of this let every man judge as he is
illuminated. If I err, my danger and deserved reproach, I think, is no greater
than the Ancient Fathers and the Church for so many hundred years that were of
the same mind: Even they that were nearer to that Age when these matters of
Fact were done.

But for our case, its apparent there is no need of Re-baptizing; for there is
no Nullity.

I have done with the Argument, but yet there is one Question more that may not
be passed over, though but on the by; and that is, Whether the Baptism of all
those persons be not Null, and they to be Rebaptized, who were baptized by
such as were Notoriously or Secretly unordained men, and no true Ministers? To
which I only say in brief, No: 1. If they were not known to be no Ministers, it
was no fault of ours: we waited in Gods appointed way for his Ordinances; and
therefore though they were sins to them, they are valid blessings to us, that
were not guilty. 2. If they were Notoriously no Ministers, though it might be
our Parents sin that we were presented to such for Baptism, yet it is not Null:
For in these Relations these Instruments are not Essential to the Relation, nor
to the Ordinance at all; Though I would be loath, as the Fathers and Papists
did, to allow a Lay person (yea a woman says Tertullian) to baptize in case of
Necessity: yet should I not be very hasty to Re-baptize such, supposinig that
they had all the substance of the Ordinance, as being baptized into the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Argu. 10. Whoever ought in Duty to dedicate his Child to God, in the holy
Covenant, ought also to Baptize him. But all notorious ungodly men ought so to
dedicate their children to God Ergo, etc.

Answ. I grant the Conclusion: It is every man's duty on earth that hears the
Gospel, to be baptized, and give up his children (if he have any) to Christ in
Baptism: that is to believe and consent to the Covenant of Grace, and so to be
baptized. But it follows not that it is their Duty to be Externally Baptized
without Faith and such Consent.

2. Note also that this Argument as well proves that all the Children of
persecuting Heathens should be baptized, as ungodly pretended Christians: For
it is their Duty too.

Object. But when they present their Children, they do their Duty, though but
part of their Duty; and we ought not to refuse any part of a man's Duty.

Answ. 1. It is not a duty, but a sin to do the External later part without the
former Internal part. It is a duty to intend to relieve the poor, and perhaps
to express it by promise, but to promise without any intent to perform it, is
to lie, and so to sin. The tongue must not go before and without the heart,
because the action of both is a duty. It were better say nothing at all. 2. The
Sacrament of Baptism is not appointed to be affixed to every kind of duty, but
to our dedication to God, and Gods acceptance of us.

Object. If their Profession may engage them, then may we seal it by baptism;
but it may engage them. Ergo. etc.

Answ. I deny the Consequence. A false dissembling may oblige the Promiser: but
Baptism was not appointed to seal every notorious false promise. It is also
Gods Seal as well as man's: Circumcision is his sign, and called his Covenant,
Genesis 17. And Abraham received it as a seal, Romans 4. And it signifies Gods
action of washing the soul by the blood of Christ. Therefore where we are sure
God disclaimeth it, and withdraws his Action, there may we not apply the
Mutual Seal and Sign.

Object. We see in New England the sad effects of denying baptism to the
children of the unregenerate, now they are all come to be obstinate Infidels.

Answ. Th^s is more than I have heard any good testimony of, and therefore am
not bound to believe it, Secondly, They in N. England, as we hear do refuse to
baptize all that are not children of the members of their own Churches; but so
do not we: they baptize not the members of the Universal Church, unless they be
in a particular Church; but we do otherwise. And its reported that they
requ^red positive proof of Conversion, beyond a profession of faith and
Repentance; but so do not we. Thirdly, Men's obstinacy in sin, and proceeding
worse, will not warrant us to take an unlawful course in pretense to do them
good. Fourthly, Do you give us any reason to believe that a notorious ungodly
person in your Church is in any better a state than an Infidel? Nay, that they
are not in a state much worse? It is they therefore that should chiefly move
you to compassion. Can you so lament the estate of the less miserable, and not
of the more miserable?

Object. But it is good that at least in words they confess Christ.

Answ. Either you speak of a Good of Duty, or a Good of Means: For the first,
it is a Duty, and so good to confess Christ with heart and tongue; but if with
the tongue alone, it is a sin, and no duty; Indeed the tongue conjunct with the
heart does part of the duty; but separated, it loses the Goodness. And as a
means, First, to their own salvation, it is not good, but rather condemns
them. Secondly, As to Gods honor, if he make it a means in providence thereto,
that's no thanks to them.

And if you did not now speak of the Notoriously Ungodly, but should suppose
men to be near to the Kingdom of God, it does not follow that therefore they
must be baptized, because they have some good in them, (for some good must go
before the nearest aptitude) nor yet that this good is the effect of Baptism in
the unlawfully baptized; or if it were occasioned by Baptism, it follows not
that therefore unmeet persons should in hope of it be baptized. Use Gods means
to his appointed Ends, and do not frame a course of means of your own heads for
Gods ends. For it is the means of his appointment and blessing that must
succeed.

Though I have done with the Ques^ion it self, yet I suppose it is not the
least matter; in reference to our practice, that is yet behind, though I shall
dispatch it in brief.

What the better are we to know that we may not baptize the children of the
Notoriously ungodly, till we know who these are; Let us therefore answer this
Question, Whom must we take for Notoriously ungodly?

As in all that is gone before, I doubt not but I shall be thought too rigid;
so in this which follows I as little question, but I shall be censured as too
loose in my Doctrine, and charitable beyond the warrant of reason. But Truth is
Truth, which I will search after as well as I can.

And first on the Negative, I lay down these Propositions.

Proposition. 1. In General, We are not Certain of every man's ungodliness, whom
we probably, strongly, and groundedly suspect to be ungodly. We may have more
reason of fear than of hope concerning them, and yet not be able to conclude
that they are certainly ungodly. Secondly, In General, It is not easy judging
of the certainty of men's ungodliness at a distance, nor by some actual gross
sins, till we have spoke to them, and admonished them, and discern what degree
of obstinacy, and impentency, and wilfulness they are guilty of, or till we
understand this certainly by those that have admonished them, and heard their
Answers. Thirdly, It is hard judging of the certainty of a man's ungodliness by
one, or two, or a few Actions, without knowing the course and scope of a man's
life. Fourthly, I think it is few among a thousand of the common people that we
can say are certainly ungodly, though we have reason to think that the most by
far are so. More particularly Fifthly, A man must be guilty of more sin than
Noah was, than Peter was in denying and forswearing Christ, that is notoriously
ungodly: Yea than Lot was, who was drunk two nights together, and committed
Incest with his own Daughters twice, and that after the miraculous destruction
of Sodom, of his own Wife and his own miraculous deliverance.

The Opinion of most of our Divines, is, that a man that is Notoriously Ungodly
(in the sense in hand) or unsanctified, must be a greater sinner than Solomon
was, 1 King. 11. He loved many strange women of the Nations which God forbad
the Israelites to join with (such as Ez^a caused them to put away after
Marriage:) He kept three hundred Concubines, besi^es seven hundred Wives: When
he was old his Wives turned away his heart after other gods, and his heart was
not perfect with the Lord, as David's was. He went after Ashtoreth the goddess
of the Sidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Amonites; and he did
evil in the sight of the Lord. He built an high place for Chemosh the
abomination of Moab in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech the
abomination of the children of Ammon. And likewise did he for all his strange
Wives, which burnt Incense, and sacrificed to their gods. And the Lord was
a^gry with him, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which
appeared to him twice, and had commanded him that he should not go after other
gods, but he kept not that which the Lord commanded: he kept not the Covenant
nor Statutes of the Lord.

Perhaps you will Object, If this be not Notorious ungodliness, what is? The
sin was more heinous than Drunkenness, Fornication, yea or Murder it self; to
be an Idolater, and to set it up to defile the Land: and it was a sin lived in
who knows how long? besides his fleshly life, in having three hundred
Concubines and seven hundred wives: If all this may stand with Godliness, then
we cannot know any man to be ungodly, and then you will harden all the wicked
in their presumption. Answ. 1. If I should but look on it as a thing uncertain
whether Solomon had true grace at that time, or whether any intercision were
made in his Justification and true Sanctification, I should incur the heavy
censure of many Divines. If I question not the certainty of his grace and
perseverance, then I am supposed to make every common scandalous sinner to be
fit for the reputation of a Saint, and to contradict the Apostle, who says, If
ye live after the flesh ye shall die; and neither Whoremonger, nor Idolater
shall inherit the Kingdom of God. What is to be done in this strait? I will
tell you plainly what I think safest, and let men think what they please. 1. It
is not improbable that Solomon committed much of this sin merely under
temptation to please his Wives. 2. And that more of it lay in tolerating their
Idolatry, than in his own committing it. 3. And that he did in other things
continue his worship of the true God. 4. And that he repented and wrote the
Book Ecclesiastes on his Repentance, though the History make no mention of it.
5. Yet because the Holy Ghost does so expressly charge him with having his own
heart turned after other gods, and going after them, and building high places
to them, and his heart. turning from the Lord] and because the very setting up
of so many Idols for others (his 700 Wives) is it self so heinous, I think it
is undeniable that he was an Idolater, and lived in that sin, besides his
living with 300 Concubines, and taking so fully the pleasure of his flesh, as
in Ecclesiastes he does confess. We are certain that all these are heinous
sins, and hazardous to a man's salvation.

7. If the Devil tempt any wicked man upon the consideration of this Example,
to presume that he is in a state of Grace, and to think with himself [why may
not I live in whoredom, or drunkenness, or worldliness, and yet be in a
justified estate, as well as Solomon, who did worse,] he may do well to bethink
himself that 1. It is certain that he that lives after the flesh shall die,
and that such gross sinners shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. But we are
not certain whether Solomon were justified and in a state of salvation at that
time: it is a Controversy among wise godly learned men; and many of the
Ancient Fathers thought that he was not. 3. And therefore any prudent man will
take heed of venturing his salvation upon such uncertainty; and will look more
at the certainty which is on the other side, of perishing if he live in such
sins. 4. And he may do well to consider, that though Godliness be the same in
all Ages in the main, and equally necessary, yet some sins may be more damning
at some time than other. In those days of Solomon God had for some just
reasons permitted or connived at the multiplicity of Wives, and little is said
against Concubines: he had in his promises to his people made the most full and
express mention of temporal blessings, as Children, long Life, prosperity, etc.
and in his threatenings most expressly mentioned temporal evils: Spiritual and
Eternal things were mentioned more obscurely and sparingly. This Honor was
reserved to Christ and the Gospel, to bring Life and Immortalty (more) to
light, and to promise Spiritual and Eternal blessings, and threaten Spiritual
and Eternal misery, more expressly and fully: And consequently some sins of the
flesh might not then be so certain marks of ungodliness as now: and as it is a
greater measure of spiritual refining and purity that is promised and justly
expected under the Gospel, so a greater measure must be looked after, by every
man in himself, and by the Guides of the Church in its members; and we must go
directly to Jesus Christ for our Direction in such Cases. So much to prevent
the hurt of the wicked by this Example.

Yet I thought it necessary to make mention of it, 1. because it is objected by
the opposers of Discipline, whose Objections must be answered. 2. and because
there is something in it (at least ad hominem) that the over-censorious have
reason to consider of, as to the point in hand. How far we must take notice of
such Examples in Discipline, we shall further show anon. The rest of our
propositions for the Negative shall be introduced by way of Answer to some
Questions.

Quest. 7. May we not take a man for Notoriously Ungodly, that has been often
drunk, or often committed fornication? Answ. The Practice is ungodly, and his
Case sad; but we cannot certainly say he is graceless on that account alone,
unless he live in it impenitently. Lot was twice drunk and incestuous: And it
is not possible for us to say just how often a man may commit such a sin, and yet
have true grace.

Quest. 8. May we not be certain that he is graceless or ungodly, that is a
frequent Swearer?

Answ. It is a very dangerous case; but simply considered, no certain evidence
of the point in question. For 1. We know many that we see great signs of Grace
in, and that are well reputed of as eminent for Godliness, that do frequently
commit as great sins as some kind of rash swearing seems to be: For example, it
is too rare to meet with a person so conscionable that will not frequently
backbite, and with some malice or envy speak evil of those that differ from
them in Judgment, or that they take to be against them, or that they are
fallen out with: They will ordinarily censure them unjustly, and secretly
endeavor to disgrace them, and take away their good name, and love those that
join with them in it: So how many Professors will rashly rail and lie in their
passions? How few will take well a Reproof, but rather defend their sin? How
many in these times that we doubt not to be godly, have been guilty of
disobedience to their Guides, and of Schism, and doing much to the hurt of the
Church: A very great sin. 2. Peter, Lot, and its like David, did often commit
greater sins.

Quest. 9. But what if they live many years in Sweating, or the like sin, is
not that a certain sign of Ungodliness?

Answ. It is very sinful and dangerous. But. 1. we know not what information
or Conviction they have had of it, which much varies the Case. In some
countries, where some oaths are grown customarie, and of no great ill repute,
it is possible for a godly man to be long guilty of them, as it is known that
many well reputed of for Godliness, are in Scotland.

Reputation does much with many even that are Godly, to make sin seem great or
small: with us now a Swearer is reputed so great a sinner, that he is reckoned
with Adulterers, and Drunkards; but Censoriousness, Backbiting,
Church-division, disobeying those that rule over us in the Lord, spiritual
Pride, etc. that are greater then some swearing, do not so brand a man, nor
make him odious with us. But God judges not of sin thus by the custom of
Countries, but according to the nature of the thing. In England a
Sabbath-breaker is taken for a sin inconsistent with Grace: In the
Low Countries, Helvetia, France and most other of the Reformed Churches, much
of it taken for no sin at all, but we are censured for superstitious herein.
Every one is not ungodly there that lives and dies in that sin, without
particular Repentance. Men that have not heard much of the evil of some petty
oaths, may not understand the evil of them; and custom may do much. And it is
not inconsiderable, as to the extenuation of some men's sin, that its not a
little doubtful whether it be indeed swearing, if a man do use those words
which are the ordinary matter of an oath, and does not know it to be an oath,
nor intend the form of an oath in it: As if one use the terms of an oath in
Latin or another Language which he understands not, he is not formally a
Swearer: And if men do know it, and yet do not at that time intend any such
thing as a calling any creature to witness, or appealing to them as sufficient
to avenge a lie, but only use a customarie term inobservantly, it is a sin; but
whether formally swearing, may be questioned. But if it be the Name of God that
they abuse in swearing, or if they indeed put any creature in his stead,
appealing to it as the Avenger of a lie or perjurie, that is a heinous sin, and
cannot easily be done in ignorance. 2. It is judged by Divines that David lay a
twelve month in his sin of Adultery and Murder unrepented of: Certain it is
that he was long contriving and executing that horrid murder of Vriah, that his
own shame might be covered, and he might enjoy his wife* How long Asah or
Solomon, sinned we know not: Nor can any man possibly determine just how long a
man may live in the practice of such a sin, and yet have true special Grace,
and a state of Justification.

Qu. 10. But what if they are Neglecters of Gods Worship, as Prayer in their
families, or the keeping of the Sabbath, or public hearing the Word, or godly
discourse; is it possible that in such there should be saving Grace? They that
love God will seek him in his Worship.

Answ. It is not enough for the certain knowledge of a man's ungodliness, or
gracelesness, to know that he neglects this duty of outward worship, unless
it be known with what mind, and on what reasons he neglects it. For example,
Many a man neglects Prayer in his Family, as supposing himself unable to
perform it; and that this alone is not a certain sign of gracelesness,
appears thus. 1. God has not said that all that neglect it are graceless, or
shall perish: As for the Text of Jer. [Pour out thy wrath on the Heathens tha^
know thee not, and the Families that call not on thy name] Its past question
that by Families is meant Tribes or Nations, and calling on Gods name, is put
for [Owning and Worshipping the true God] without any mention of the special
sort of prayer in a Family (though I believe the dueness of that may be hence
gathered.) 2. Many that we have reason to hope are godly, have of late years
given over Family prayer, as supposing (though very blindly) that it is not a
duty required by God. 3. Many godly people do as much neglect Teaching their
Families as some of these in question do Praying in their Families, and yet it
is more expressly commanded, Deuteronomy. 6 and 11, etc. And for the Observation of the
Sabbath, I answered before, that most of the Godly in the Reformed Churches (as
far as I can learn by their Writings, or by Report) are against it in
strictness: And therefore I suppose that sin is consistent with godliness And
for [ Godly Discourse] I would no godly people were not so neglective of it,
that their company becomes too unprofitable thereby. Some are much disabled to
good discourse by natural impediments, as Bashfulness, etc. want of words
through ill Education, and disuse may hinder much. It is only those that
privately live and converse with people, that will be able to judge of them
certainly on this account, and not all such neither.

And Lastly, For hearing the Word, it will not alone make a certain discovery:
For 1. we know not what may keep a man away till we speak with him. 2. Its
possible for a godly man to be of the opinion of the Separatists, that think it
unlawful to hear our Ministers, or in our Assemblies, and having, no other to
join with, may hear none at all; as I have known it the case of some in the
Bishops times. So that the Certainty of Ungodliness is not discernable by this
alone.

Quest. 11. But there are some that will scorn and deride or revile the Godly,
yea and persecute them, where they have power: Is not that a certain Note of
one Graceless?

Answ. It is one thing to scorn or persecute a Godly man, and another to scorn
at Godliness: Or, it is one thing to persecute and scorn a man as he is Godly,
directly on that account, and another thing to scorn and persecute him for
something else; as upon some personal falling out, or for some sin, or false
opinion, or the like cause. The later can be no certain discovery of an Ungodly
man.

Quest. 12. But what if they deride and persecute Godliness it self, or a man
because he is Godly?

Answ. It is certainly a heinous sin: But we must distinguish between the
deriding of a man for the Essentials of Christianity, or for Godliness, as
such; and deriding him for some doctrine or practice of Godliness, which is not
essential: also between a known Truth and Duty, and an unknown. It is too
possible for a Godly man to persecute and deride the Godly for some Truths
which he took to be Errors, or some Duties which he mistook to be Sins, or to
be no Duties; or for the manner of some Duties which he took to be wrong. Alas
I how common is it for the Separatists and Anabaptists (many of them) to deride
our Ministry, Assembles and Duties: and many among us to deride theirs? And
they are the bitterest taunts and persecutions that come from blind zeal.
These times have by sad experience convinced us, that men seeming otherwise
Godly may both scorn (in press and pulpit) persecute and kill each other. As
one Godly man may persecute another for some Truths and Duties, which he knows
not to be such; so in particular, it is possible that such may imagine that
private Meetings tend to schism or proud singularity, and so may deride them:
Or he may by strangeness to them entertain some false report of the stricter
Professors of Religion, as if they were proud, humorous, schismatics,
disobedient, and differed only in these things, and not in true piety from
others. And I believe I have known some in former times that were such; who had
such thoughts as these of all the Godly that were not conformable, and of
others that used any private Meetings, living where they had little
acquaintance with any of them, save two or three that by scandals increased
their prejudice, and hearing no better language of them, these persons would
reproach them as bitterly as most that ever I heard, and yet themselves lived
not only uprightly to men, but so piously, that they seemed to hate all
profaness, and spent more time in secret prayer and reading, then most I have
known. It is not therefore all scorn or persecution of Godly persons,
Doctrines, or Duties that will prove a man to be Notoriously Graceless or
Ungodly.

But again, left any Ungodly person take occasion of presumption from all this,
let me add this much more: 1. Though another cannot know such to be certainly
ungodly, yet they may know it by themselves; who know their own ends and
reasons better then we can do. And (alas!) the souls of such are never the
safer, because we are bound to judge charitably of them. This is but to prevent
our wronging them, but it will not prevent their damnation. 2. Though we know
them not to be certainly ungodly, yet God does: and it is he that must judge
them. And therefore he will put many a thousand out of heaven, whom we may not
put out of the Church. When the Tares and Wheat are so mixed, that we cannot
pluck up the Tares without plucking up the Wheat (that is, in doubtful
inevident cases) there we must let both grow till the time of harvest (both in
forbearing persecution by the sword, and Excommunication:) but then God will
sever the wicked from the just, and gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them that work iniquity, and cast them out into the lake of fire.
3. And our selves may see cause enough to bewail the misery of many as too
probable, whom yet we cannot certainly conclude to be miserable: yea, we have
cause to call them out of our communion: of which more anon. I must therefore
entreat two sorts of Readers that they do not mis-interpret these foregoing
passages. First, The Ungodly are desired to beware that they pervert not this
to their own delusion nor to the opening of their mouths against the teachings
and censures of the Church. I cannot but foresee that such will be prone to
draw venom out of necessary truths; and to say, I may be godly and be saved,
though I pray not in my family, though I swear, or be drunk, etc. But such must
know, 1. That [they cannot be saved, if in the bent of their lives they live
after the flesh, and if God be not dearer to them than all the world, and if
their hearts be not more on heaven than on earth, and if the main aim and
business of their lives be not for God and the life to come; nor can they be
Godly or saved unless they truly hate their sin, and long to be rid of it, and
are willing to be at the cost and labor of using Gods means by which they may
be rid of it; unless in the bent of their lives they overcome gross sin, and
live not in it, and groan under their infirmities desiring to be rid of them
feeling the need of a Savior, and flying to his blood for pardon, and to his
word and spirit for cure.] All this must be in every one at age, that will be
saved. Now though we may be uncertain of a man's ungodliness by one or more such
falls as Peter's or David's were, when the bent of his life appears to be holy;
yet if the bent of your lives be carnal, and you have not all this that I have
now mentioned, then you may be sure that you are Graceless, though you never
commit any scandalous sin; much more when you live in them. 2. And remember
that you may know your own hearts and secret lives, when we cannot. Its no
comfort to you therefore that a Minister is not certain of your Gracelesness,
if you be indeed Graceless: what if we must hope the best, who know not the
worst? alas this will be no relief to your souls.

Nor should you be offended, if Ministers in preaching and personal reproof, do
speak terror to you for all this: For 1. they preach to you as described in a
graceless state and not named. 2. They must tell you what every sin deserves,
and whither it leads, and tell you of the sad probabilites of your damnable
state, though they have not a certainty.

2. I foresee also that some Godly people will think that these passages,
though true, may accidentally harden the wicked in their sin, and therefore
that this will do more harm than good. To whom I say, 1. That the wicked will
draw evil from the most certain truths, and all must not be concealed which
they will abuse. 2. Yet I must confess, that my own heart made this Objection;
which caused me to think this Paper my self unfit to be published; and so I did
this two years lay it by: And had I not understood that from the Copy which I
sent one friend, so many are communicated, and at such a distance into the
hands of strangers, and that somewhat defective, and had I not been acquainted
that they will print it, if I will not, it might have yielded still to this
Objection for ought I know: for had I been left to my own choice, I should have
laid it in the dark.

Now for the Affirmative, I will show you, whom we may take for Notoriously
ungodly: and then I will show you whom we must judge probably to be godly, and
whether we must not exclude some persons, and refuse their Infants, who yet are
not Notoriously ungodly.

1. A man that (not inconsiderately, or in a Temptation but) deliberately and
obstinately denies any fundamental Article of the Christian faith, is
notoriously ungodly: for he cannot have a godly heart, that excludes the
necessary principles of Godliness from his head. I mean those Truths without
which there is no salvation; for surely without them there can be no Grace. He
that denies thus the God head, or the Goodness, Wisdom, or Power of God; or
the Incarnation, Holiness, Death, Ransom of man thereby, Resurrection, Rule, or
Judgment of Jesus Christ, or the everlasting life that he gives to Believers,
or the necessity of our holiness and Obedience to him: He that denies the Holy
Ghost, the Truth of his Miracles by which he sealed Christ's Doctrine, or the
necessity of his Sanctification: this man is Notoriously ungodly, if he
Notoriously deny these: for he professes ungodliness it self; So does he that
denies Christ has any Church on earth, and that denies to have communion
with his Church.

2. That man is notoriously ungodly, that is notoriously utterly ignorant of
God and his son Jesus Christ, of the Goodness, Wisdom or Power of God; of the
Incarnation, Death and Resurection of Christ, and his Redemption of us hereby:
of the necessity of Faith and Holiness, and of the evil of sin, and of the
everlasting blessedness that is promised to the Saints. I will now only say,
(excluding not the rest) that the Ignorance of any one of these is inconsistent
with true Godliness. But I must tell you anon, that there is need of much
wariness in judgeing of such Ignorance.

3. All those are Notoriously ungodly, that do Notoriously, upon Deliberation,
and with Obstinacy, profess that they will not take God for their God and
Governor; or that they will not take Christ for their Redeemer and Lord, nor
be Ruled by him, nor Trust in him for pardon and salvation; or that they will
not believe his word, nor will be sanctified by his Spirit.

4. All those are Notoriously ungodly, that deliberately, and ordinarily, when
they are themselves, do Notoriously profess that they set more by the
Pleasures, Profits, or Honors of this world, than by the promised Blessedness
in the life to come: and that they will not part with these for the hopes of
that Blessedness.

5. All those are such also, who, though in the general they will say, that
they will be Ruled by God, saved by Christ, Sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and
guided by Gods Laws, yet when it come's to particulars, do deliberately in
their ordinary frame profess that they will not part with their known sins, at
the command of God, but resolve to displease him rather than obey.

6. Such also are all those, that though in general they profess to prefer
Heaven before Earth, yet when it comes to practice and trial, do Notoriously,
and deliberately in their Habituated frame profess, that they will not let go
particular known sins for the hopes of Heaven.

7. Such also are all they, who living in gross sin, and being convinced of it,
will not promise a sincere endeavor to reform: nor will remove from or put
away the removeable occasions which draw them to sin: nor will be persuaded to
use those known means which God has commanded for the curing of their sin; as
to hear the Word, to change their Company, to confess their sin, and take shame
to themselves, and profess Repentance. They that Notoriously thus refuse
Reformation, when by Ministers or discreet Christians they are urged to it, or
that refuse Gods means which they are convinced he requires of them, and this
obstinately, are notoriously ungodly, though they do not profess it in words:
For though it be exceeding hard to determine how great, many, or long, the sins
of a true Believer may be, yet we are certain that he cannot manifest such a
Love to them, or Habituated unwillingness to be cured of them. For that will
not stand with true Repentance.

8. All those are Notoriously ungodly, that profess or express notoriously a
Hatred of those that would draw them from their sins, (not for their harsh or
indiscreet management of a reproof, nor upon a mere mistaken conceit that the
Reprover owes him ill will, but) on that very account, because they would draw
them from known sin. For this is Notorious impenitency, and shows a Love of
sin, and the Reign of it in the Will.

9. All those are Notoriously ungodly, who do by Scorns, Threatenings,
Persecutions, or otherwise Notoriously express a Deliberate, Habituated Hatred
prevailing in their hearts, against God, Christ, the Spirit, the Scripture, or
Godly men because they are godly, that is, because they do Believe, love God,
and live a Holy life, and obey God in those things which they are convinced
that he commands. For this shows that Ungodliness prevails in the heart.

10. All those are Notoriously ungodly, that being convinced that its a Duty to
pray, to hear the Word, to mind the Life to come, and prefer it before this,
and to live a holy Life, do yet so far dislike all this, or any of this, that
they profess themselves resolved never to practice it, and that they will
venture their souls, come on it what will, rather than they will make so much
ado, or live such a life; yea, though they will not profess this, yet if they
will not on the contrary be persuaded to profess that they resolve to live such
a life, and will not be drawn actually to the practice of it in their
endeavors; thereby manifesting that it is not so much for want of Ability, as
from a predominant unwillingness to be Holy in Heart and Life: I say, if this
be Notorious, then is it Notorious that these people are ungodly: and
accordingly to be judged and used by the Church.

Though I understand that many think that it is too rigid to go so far as I
have already done in maintaining the Negative of the former Question; yet I
think it necessary to go further, and to determine, that [ It is our Duty to
refuse to baptize the Children of more th^n the Notoriously Ungodly.]

If you would know who else it is that we must exclude or refuse, remember that
before I told you of Excommunication from 1. A particular Church; for some
reason proper thereto or to some more, but not common to all. 2. From all
Incorporated Congregations, as such. 3. From the society of Christians, as
such: and that this last is either for a time because of the scandalousness of
the sin, and the credit of the Gospel with those without, though we may yet see
signs of Repentance in the sinner. 2. Or for the Infectiousness of the sin as a
Leprosy: As if a man take himself bound to persuade all men to some greater
and dangerous Error, which yet may stand with Grace and Salvation, but makes it
very difficult and much hinders it; and if no means can convince this man of
his Error, nor take him off; this is a kind of a Heretic, who must be excluded
from all Christian Communion* but is not certainly and notoriously graceless.
3. There is also exclusion from the society of all Christians, upon an evident
Proof that the man is no true Christian; that is, that he is Notoriously an
Unbeliever or Ungodly person: This I have spoke to all this while. 4. But then
there is also an exclusion upon a violent Presumption, or very strong
Probability, though short of a Certainty that such a man is graceless or
ungodly.

Hereupon I lay down what I take to be the Truth, in the Propositions following.

Proposition 1. I may not deny the right of the Infant to Baptism merely
because the Parents are excluded from one or more particular Churches: because
Baptism does necessarily and directly enter them among the number of
Christians, but not into any one particular Church. And therefore I will not
forbid or dissuade the baptizing of such.

Pr^position 2. Yet do I take it to be no duty of mine to baptize any such more
than any other Ministers, further than I have a special Call or Reason: For
Example: Here live some hundreds in this Parish, that upon public Proposal,
Whether they take me for their Pastor, and themselves for members of this
Church? do disown it, or not own it, when they are told that their owning or
declaring it shall be taken as the sign to know it; I take my self no more
bound to baptize their children than any strangers else: For I cannot be their
Pastor whether they will or not; nor can I take them for any special charge of
mine, that will not take themselves to be so, nor take me for their Pastor.
Therefore they can no more blame me than any stranger, if I refuse to baptize
their children: Though yet I deny not their right to Baptism.

I am not bound to baptize all the children in the Country; and therefore not
theirs.

Proposition 3. It ordinarily falls out that a Minister has more work to do in
his own special charge than five men are able to do: So that he cannot bestow
so much time as to Baptize the children of others and to take an account of
them concerning their Faith or Profession (such as is more necessary from
strangers, and refusers of Discipline, than others) without neglecting some
duty to his own Charge the while: While I am speaking to them, there are twenty
poor souls of my own Charge that call for my help. And I am more strictly tied
to those of my special charge than to others.

Proposition 4. Yet in case that, for the avoiding of offense, or for an
advantage to win them to a better temper, or the like reason, I see any special
cause for it, I doubt not but I must rather omit a lesser duty to my own
Charge, than a greater to others.

Proposition 5. If a man reject Church Communion, or withdraw himself from one
Church upon a reason common to all Churches as Incorporated, (as for Example,
because he will not be under any Discipline) he gives us reason to question his
very Christianity: And therefore we must call him to account on what grounds he
does this: And if the grounds are found such as are consistent with
Christianity, we may not deny the right of his Infants to Baptism: though our
selves may have no Call to baptize them.

Proposition 6. If the Parents do either produce no Title to the baptizing of
their child, that is, do not seem Christians or Godly; Or if they give us
grounds of a violent presumption that their profession is false and
counterfeit, in either of these cases, as we are to exclude them from Christian
communion, so are we to refuse the baptizing of their children, that is, to
suspend both, till such a Title be showed, or till the grounds of that strong
presumption be removed: Although we may not declare such persons to be no
members of the universal Church, nor absolutely deny their children to have any
Right in the Covenant, or fundamentally and remotely to Baptism; as not being
certain, that their Parents are in a Graceless ungodly state.

This last Proposition is it that I am now to give my Reasons of. For indeed it
is a matter of such exceeding difficulty, to conclude another man to be
certainly graceless, that it is not one of multitudes, nay, it is but few of
the commonly scandalous gross sinners that we should be able to prove it by
(which I desire the Cesorious well to consider of.) But yet a strong
presumption we may have of more that they are graceless, and thereupon may
suspend them and their Children, as is said before.

Arg. 1. If the Parent have given just cause for us to question his own
Christianity, and Right to Christian communion thereupon, then has he given us
sufficient cause to question his child's right to Baptism: (and so to suspend
the baptizing it:) But the Antecedent is confessed: For our dissenting Brethren
in this case will suspend, yea excommunicate the Parent. Ergo.

The reason of the Consequence is clear, in that the Right of the Infant to
Baptism is merely on the Parents account, and on supposition of his Right to
Membership of the Universal Church. If therefore his Right be justly
questioned, and ^e suspended, then the Infants Right must be questioned, and it
suspended on the same ground. For Baptism Seals a right of Union, and puts
into actual communion of the Body Catholic.

Argum. 2. We ought not to dispense Gods Seals and Church Priviledges to any
without a produced Title: (Else we must give them to all, that we can.) But for
the baptism of such men's children, as are aforementioned, there can be, or is,
no Title produced; Ergo.

The Major, is further clear, in that Non esse and non Apparere, are to us all
one: For it must be discernable to us by some evidence. or else it is naturally
impossible for us to know it.

For the Minor, its clear that if the Parents Title to membership be
questionable the Infants is so too: because the ground is the same, and it is
from the Parent that the Infant must derive it: and no man can give that which
he has not.

Argum 3. In civil Administrations, and according to the Rules of right Reason,
a very high probability, commonly called Violenta Praesumptio, suffices to
sentence and execution: especially when it is but in the withdrawing or
suspending of a Privilege. Therefore it must be so here. Because 1. here is no
reason to put a difference. 2. Because our distance from other men's hearts,
does in most cases make us incapable of more. Impenitency and ^nfidelity lie
within: and we cannot know them but by their signs and fruits. And 3. It is
their fault in giving occasion of such presumption, and in being so like the
ungodly, if we deny them the Privileges of the Godly; and not our fault. The
Antecedent is clearly known. If a man be known to bear another malice, and be
found standing by him with a bloody sword, the person being murdered, the Judge
will justly condemn him for the murder; though yet it be not absolutely certain
that he did it. If a man be found nudus in lecto cum nuda, he shall be judged a
Fornicator or Adulterer, though it be uncertain. So in other cases.

Argum. 4. If such violent presumption must not stand for sufficient proof for
such suspension of parent and child, then all Discipline (and all civil
justice, if it be not so there) will be eluded. For then, (as no vice almost,
or but few, will be punished among men, nor few men have right) so, almost no
ungodly or scandalous sinners, or few that ought, will be excluded or
suspended: And the fruit of Discipline, its like, will be judged scarce worth
the trouble, so few causes will be brought, as will bring it to be strange.

But Discipline must not be so eluded. Ergo.

Argum. 5. Christ tells us, that by their Fruits we should know them:
therefore by fruits of Godliness or ungodliness we must judge of men as Godly
or Ungodly, as to these acts of administration and communion. We must judge
that to be a Vine which has Grapes, and that to be no Thistle that has Figgs.
We judge not usually of the certainty of men's Impenitency, or Infidelity, but
of the strong probability. Its possible a man's own words may be false.

Argum. 6. We must admit of a weak presumption, or probability for admitting
men to Privileges: therefore we may admit of strong presumption for denying
them. If we must take a probability in one, then in the other: only allowing
the difference, as aforesaid, that we must have a stronger presumption for
denying, than for granting is necessary. For we must be content with less
evidence for a man, than against a man.

Quest. 1. But what is that we may take for a sufficient reason of a man's
claim? And. 2 Quest* What must we take for a violent presumption, of the
unsoundness of his claim?

To the first I say in brief; 1. If a Heathen that yesterday was guilty of the
grossest sin, do come to me this day, and with seeming sorrow confess his
fault, and with seeming seriousness profess to believe in God the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost; that is, to believe all the essential Articles of Christian
Religion, and profess his consent to take God for his only God, and portion;
Christ for his only Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost for his Sanctifier, renouncing
the World, Flesh, and Devil; I shall take this Verbal profession for a
sufficient Reason of his claim, unless any just Bar of exception be put in
against him to invalidate it.

2. The same Title I shall take for valid for the Baptism of his Infants.

3. If a man have made the same profession, and after long continuance in the
Church does offer his Child to Christ in Baptism, and offer to renew that
profession, and enter his child into the same Covenant, I shall suppose his
claim just, till some sufficient reason be brought to prove it unjust.

1. I find that the Apostles took such a profession as a sufficient proof of
the justice of the claim, at the Parents own baptism: Not as being it self the
Condition (called by many, the Title) but as being such an evidence of the
Title to us, as we are bound to accept. 2. In equity and reason if the
condition of a man's interest (or his Title, as they call it) do lie in the
heart, out of man's reach, we must take his own profession as evidence
sufficient, unless he give himself the lie, and give us other reason to
discredit him. If a man say he is a Believer, and profess himself to be a godly
man, that is, a Lover and Honorer of God; I will take him for a Believer, and a
godly man, till I can disprove his profession. I am not not bound to believe an
evident Lie: but I am bound to believe a man till the falsehood of his speeches
be evident. Charity believes all (such) things; and thinks not evil without
sufficient evidence. I need not go to a man's life for his evidence of his first
Title. And for his Right to after-communion and privileges; though other men's
Testimony of a Godly conversation be a good confirmation, yet I am not always
bound to seek or require that, nor yet to have a personal knowledge of it: But
if any from his life will bring a cross evidence to disprove his own verbal
profession of faith and obedience, I will take it into consideration.

And I could wish that all Christians would proceed according to this Rule, and
call no man ungodly when they cannot prove him to be such, at least, so far as
to a strong presumption: But that they would take all for Godly that say they
are Godly, till they can disprove them. I know they will say, then you will
miscall men, and call those Godly that are not, and then you must not
difference the Precious from the Vile: this is large charity indeed. To which I
answer 1. We call them but what they seem; and 2. what God warranteth us to
call them, the Apostles telling such themselves, that they [were all the Sons
of God by faith, heirs, saints, justified, etc.] Gal. 3. 1 Cor. 1.1. and 6.2.
We difference as far as we have evidence to lead us; and further we must not.
As I said before, we must imitate God in this: where the mixture is such that
the Tares cannot be pulled up without pulling up the Corn, both must grow
together till the Harvest: we must not think to difference so exactly, and
search and sift so near to the bran, as God will then do. If the case be so
uncertain and inevident, that we may on such Grounds condemn the Righteous with
the wicked, we must let Righteous and wicked go together as if all were
Righteous, and call the whole field a Corn field, for all the Tares.

Obj. Then must we judge falsely, for we must judge men to be what they are not.
Answ. 1. If it were so, it is no sin in you, but in them that profess falsely.
When ever you judge the most glorious hypocrite to be Godly, you judge falsely;
but not sinfully: for every mistake is not our sin. 2. But I say you are not to
judge falsely neither. For you are not to judge that it is certain that these are
Godly men, but only that its probable. And note well, that there is a
difference to be made within the Church, between the better and worser Members,
as well as between the Church and those without. And observe, that there are
diverse degrees of this probability of men's sincerity: some do so fully second
their profession by a Godly life, that we have a very strong confidence of
their sincerity (though not a certainty). Some do give us some good hopes, but
not so strong a persuasion. Some are so dull and negligent, and faulty in
their lives, that we have much fear of their perdition, though we are bound
because of their profession, to keep up some hopes of them, as being not
without some probability of their honesty. I doubt the common sort of
Christians are but such as these. And therefore we may even in the Church
preach for men's Conversion and Regeneration: because though we know not
certainly who they be that are unregenerate, yet we know that many such there
are that profess Religion, and have great cause of fear and jealousy
concerning many in particular. So that we must place a great difference between
those whom we must permit in the same Church Communion and must administer the
same Sacraments to: we rejoice in our hopes of some: we have much fear of the
condemnation of others. Yet if it come not to a strong or violent presumption
grounded on sufficient evidence, we may not suspend or cast them out.

In a word, it is a verbal profession seemingly serious, and not again
contradicted by a cross profession of word or action, that is the evidence of
men's Interest in Church Priviledges, particularly of the Baptism of their
Infants.

Quest. What take you for a sufficient disproof of a verbal profession? or a
ground for such a violent presumption that a man does lie and dissemble, and is
no Christian?

Answ. I mentioned you ten particulars before, on which we may judge men
Notoriously ungodly. Look over those again, and ye may see what to take for a
violent presumption.

1. A man that denies any Essential part of Christian Religion, though we are
uncertain whether he do it resolvedly and deliberately, yet if he will not upon
sufficient invitation, reverse that denial, and profess Repentance of it; Or if
upon a just call a man refuse to profess his Belief of the Chr^stian faith; It
is ground of a violent presumption that he is no Christian or godly man.

2. Those that are not only unable to give any account of their knowledge of
the Essentials of Religion, but also do by their contrary answers (when we put
them but to affirm or deny) show that they understand them not, and this often,
though its possible they may be amazed, or oblivious, yet its a violent
presumption that they are utterly ignorant of the Essentials.

And here I advise all to be very tender how they exclude people on point of
mere ignorance, if they 1. are but able in private, to those that they are
familiar with, to give a tolerable account of essentials. 2. Or if they answer
truly with a [yea] or a [Nay] when you contrive the matter into your question.
3. And if they be diligent in the use of means, and willing to Learn and live
uprightly. And to this purpose consider of these things following. 1
Fundamentals or essentials are but few. 2. Many poor people are of such natural
bashfulness, or hesitancy, that they cannot speak what they know. 3. Specially
when Rustical education increases it. 4. And especially when it is in public,
or to a Minister whom they reverence. 5. There are indigested ruder
Conceptions, which may be found, and yet not formed ready for expression, even
in some that can speak well. We see some Ministers in Examinations too
deficient: And the best find sometime a light which they cannot utter: and the
force of a reason in their minds, which is no whit ready for the tongue. 6.
Scripture examples in this point observed would moderate us. What did the
Apostles require? 7. He that gives a true [Yea] or a [Nay] shows that he
believes the Truth. 8. He that in his life seeks heaven before earth, shows
that he knows it to be better than earth. I speak these things but to moderate
some men. I add 9. It is commonly as much the Ministers fault, that he has not
a satisfactory Answer, as the persons. I have noted it, that most Ministers,
either speak roughly or indiscreetly, discouragingly, provokingly, or of things
not essential; and that it is a matter requiring greater wisdom than most have,
to draw out the minds of the most ignorant sort of our people. 10. And if they
know not the essentials, may we not help them to a tolerable knowledge of them
at the present, before we part with them? At least, we should try.

3. While men do wilfully delay upon a sufficient Call to profess their Consent
to the matters in the third Article (forementioned) viz. to take God for their
God, Christ for their Savior, the Spirit for their Sanctifier, the Word for
their Rule, we must delay our using them as Godly.

4. He that professes to esteem this world more than that to come, add
reverseth it not, though we know not certainly whether he spoke it
deliberately, must be presumed ungodly till he reverse it.

5. He that professes not to leave his known sins, but rather to venture on
Gods displeasure, though its possible he may speak it hastily in a temptation,
yet is to be presumed ungodly till he manifest Repentance, that he is now of
another mind.

6. So they that profess that they will venture or lose their Interest in
Heaven, rather than forsake their sins, till they repent manifestly of this,
are to be presumed to be ungodly.

7. So they that live constantly in the commission of gross sins, though they
profess Repentance, and promise Reformation, yet have over and over broke their
promises, and still continue in the sin, such men's words are not any more to be
credited (else all Discipline may be eluded) till they actually reform: And
though we cannot certainly tell just how much gross sin may stand with Grace:
yet because we must judge by probable evidence, and the Apostle tells us that
such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, and that if we live after the Flesh
we shall die, we must presume that men are what they appear to be. Had we such
a man as Solomon in his sin to deal with, we ought to use him as an ungodl^
man, I think. So those that have lately committed scandalous Notorious sin, and
will not on sufficient persuasion manifest any satisfactory repentance for it:
we must presume them ungodly till they will manifest repentance: For we know,
except they repent they shall perish; and an undiscovered repentance is to us
as none. And our Divines at Dort conclude, that though a Godly man lose not his
Justification by gross sinning, yet he contracts such an incapacity of coming
to heaven in that state that must be removed by repentance, or else he could
not be saved.

8. Those that will not hearken to them that would admonish them, but refuse to
obey their counsel for the forsaking of known sin, and also despise and abuse
them merely for that: Though its possible this may be as As^ did in a
temptation, yet we must presume till he repents, that he is ungodly; for we
know, that he that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall be destroyed
without remedy: specially when it is a Minister of acknowledged sobriety and
authority that does reprove; and the Reproof has nothing in it that should
seem injurious.

9. Those that do deride or slander or persecute the generality of Godly men
about them, for their apparent Godly practices, in matters of weight in
Religion: though its possible in a Temptation they may do it upon some
mis-reports and mis-apprehensions, yet till they manifest repentance, we have
sufficient reason to presume that they are ungodly men. So for those that
evidently endeavor the disgracing or extirpation of Godliness.

10. Those that either profess to take a godly life as an unnecessary, or that
being convinced, or having full evidence which might convince them, do yet
refuse to hear the word, to pray at all, to seek heaven in the first place, to
hold communion with any Christian Church, or to be guided by the Ministers of
Christ according to his Word, while they refuse to perform these necessary
parts of Christian duty, after due admonition, and give no tolerable reason of
their refusal, are groundedly to be presumed to be persons ungodly.

Object. But (I know some dissenting Brethren will say) what a Labyrinth do you
bring the Church into on your grounds? while we must judge of men's sincerity,
we are left at uncertainty; and who knows among al these difficulties whom to
judge godly, and whom ungodly? Thus Ministers are made Lords of the Consciences
of men, or enabled to tyrannize.

Answ. 1. Where the case is most Notorious, there needs no Judge. Where the
Probabilities are such as require a Determiner, it is the Ministers Office: and
a main part of his work, of necessity to the Church, and not to be called or
accounted Tyranny. 2. But, it is an easy matter to cavil at large against
almost any cause; Destructive arguing is the easiest. But incommodum non solvit
Argumentum. The thing I would see is a better way. Do our Brethrens Grounds
afford us any better footing? Quest. 1. Will you take any verbal profession as
a title, or not? If any whatsoever; then if a man tell you I will come such a
day, and in scorn to Christ profess Christianity, or if he tell you when he
has done, I did but dissemble, for fear or favor, or if he deride while he
does it, or contradict it in other words, you will take it for good. Or if a
man come drunk to present his child in Baptism (as they have done to me to
require it) Or if he fall a swearing and cursing at the Ordinance: Or say, I
will never be ruled by Christ or Scripture: If any profession must serve, then
these; But I hope not so. If not any whatever; Then, 1. Tell us how you will
distinguish; will you not reject all that is apparently lying? How will you
difference between Truth and a lie? what cross evidence will you take for
current? tell us that we may also know. If only words, than what if a man
worship actively the Sun or Moon, while verbally he makes the Christian
profession? will it not disable and discredit his profession with you? what if
he have for twenty years (O that I had none such near me) been drunk, once a
week or fortnight, and sometime thrice a week, and still confess it and promise
amendment? Is his word to be taken? 2. If you were to baptize an Aged man, that
comes new into Christianity would not you be the judges whether his profession
seemed serious or not? and proceed on mere probabilities, as well as we? 3. Do
you not in admitting persons to the Lords Supper, make your selves judges
whether his profession be serious, yea and take in his conversation for
evidence? and are you not put in all this upon the same uncertainties, and to
the use of probabilities as we? 4. So you do, I suppose in excommunication for
impenitency: Or at least, in case of absolution of the penitent, will not you
be judges on probable grounds, whether his Repentance seem serious? and take a
violent presumption as ground for some determinations? Yet I hope in all this
you are no tyrants. There is a necessity of a standing Ministry to decide such
matters, and rule the Church: therefore are such matters to be decided by them.

The fourth Disputation. Whether any besides Regenerate Believers have a Right
to the Sacraments given them by God, and may thereupon require them and receive
them.
WE take it for granted, that the Right of Infants is upon the account of their
Parents Faith, and Dedication of themselves and theirs to God; and that they
are incapable themselves of requiring the Sacraments: And therefore we shall
make but little mention of them in this Dispute; but manage it with special
respect to the Adult, seeing the Case of Infants will be that way best resolved.

We mention [Regenerate Believers] to signify those men who perform that Faith
which is the condition of the Gospel-Promise; commonly called justifying or
saving Faith.

By Sacraments we mean Baptism, or the Lords Supper.

The principal thing that needs Explication, is the word [Right.] And it
signifies diverse things according to the several Objects and Acts to which it
is related. 1. A man may give Right to a Benefit, and another receive it diverse
ways. Either by a Premiant Law, if he be a Superior in Rule; or by a
Testament, Promise, or other Donation or Deed of Gift; or by Sale, Exchange, or
other contract by way of commutation. (...) The last is nothing to our case, as
the Right is made over to us; for we could not purchase it, though the Right
that Christ has to convey it, may be fitly said to be due in Commutative
Justice, as being purchased by him. The Right which we have to Benefits from
God, is always by free Donation (for we are capable of no other;) and by a
Donation that partaketh of the nature of a Law: This Deed of Gift is called a
Promise, Testament, Covenant, etc. in Scripture (for the single promise of God,
is often called a Covenant) the Nature of this Right to Benefits consists in
the Debitum habendi, the Dueness of them to the person from another.

This Right is said to be Given, because it is it self a Benefit, as being
Right to a Benefit; and the Party is said to have it.

2. Another kind of Right to Benefit, is that which accidentally and indirectly
arises from another man's Duty: As e. g. the Physician of an Hospital,
commands his Apothecary to give so much of such a precious Cordial to every
one of his Patien^s who faints or falls into a Lipothymie, but not to the
rest: Some of the Patients that they may partake of the Cordial, pretend to
faint or swoun: The Apothecary does his best to discern whether they dissemble,
and cannot discern it: Hereupon it is his duty to give it these as well as to
others, because he that commanded the Administration intended not that he
should know the heart, or be infallible, but should proceed according to his
best skill and judgment, or else he must do nothing: So that esse and
apparere, and non esse and non apparere, is all one to him. The dissembling of
the Patient does accidentally occasion, or cause it to be his duty to give him
the Cordial: And when it is become his duty to Give it, the Patient may so far
be said to have Right to it, as that he may justify his demand before any
Physicians that are unacquainted with his dissimulation, and the Apothecary had
truly a Right or Power to give it, and may justify it before any. Yet this is
but improperly called A Right to the Cordial, and properly it is but to be the
Object of the Just Action of the Administer. For though the Apothecary had
warrant to administer it upon a claim, though wrong, yet the Patient had no
Right to warrant his claim; and therefore his claim it self being unjust for
want of Antecedent Right, it could not give him a proper subsequent Right,
though in the common judgment of undiscerning men, he had Right.

3. A kind of Right in a Benefit may be conveyed by Actual Physical
Application, without moral conveyance of Title: As if I cast a Garment over a
mad man that strips himself naked, while it is on him, he may (but improperly)
be said to have Right in it: which is but properly non inju^te uti; it is no
injustice in him to use it while you perm^t him. But this is nothing to our
present Case. 1. Because it is not an Antecedent Right to the thing, but a
subsequent Right in the thing when they have it; and is no ground of claim
before hand, the party having no Antecedent Title: But our Case concerns an
Antedent Title; or else the question would be only whether Sacraments be Null
to such when they have them. 2. Because this is not proper Right. 3. Because
even this non injuste possidere, never falls out to be the Case of the
unsanctified unbelieving Soul; because it is not bare providential disposal
that casts Sacraments upon him like the rain from Heaven, but it is his own
unjust claim and seeking that antecedeth and causes his possession, so that we
may dismiss this from our further enquiry. And there is (that I remember) no
other way of conveying Right to Benefits which can possibly concern our Case,
than these abovementioned: and therefore I may suppose that here is a
sufficient Enumeration. If any would make a Contract or mutu^l Covenant to be a
different way, they are deceived: For as our covenanting Act conferreth not the
Benefit, but is only a condition of Gods Collation, (else a man should give it
to himself.) so the covenanting act on Gods part is by the fore-described free
Donation; and it is only by the standing promise, which is not altered when we
consent, though only then it become effectual, because that consent is the
condition of its efficacy.

So much concerning the Right to Benefits, and the debitum habendi, or
antecedent Title.

The next kind of R^ght is that which respects not Benefits, but our own
Act^ons. And this Right or Justness of Actions, is 1. Of the Actions of an
Officer or Administrator, which is Autoritas agendi, and proceeds from a
Commission, or a command which is equivalent. 2. The Actions of a subject as
such in Obeying; which is Officium, or Debitum agendi, commonly called Duty.
This resulteth from the preceptive part of every Law. And so every man has a
Right to do his Duty; which strictly is but to say, It is right that he do it,
or it is due from him to God, or he is obliged to it. 3. The third sort of
Actions are such as are neither commanded nor forbidden, but either the Law
medleth not with them, and so negatively permits them, or else it expressly
makes them indifferent, and so positively permits them, such we say a man
may rightfully do; which is indeed neither necessarily, nor sinfully; but only
the things are Licita, such as may be done.

To apply these to our present Case; It is evident that none of these are meant
in our present Question. For 1. the Question is not, whether it be lawful to a
Minister to give the Sacrament to any that is unregenerate: For, supposing that
they require it, this is out of doubt; and we may justly (though with due
limitations and conditions) excite them to desire it, while we know them not to
be unregenerate, or persuade them to do it with Faith and Repentance. 2. Nor
yet is it any of our Question, whether the Action of Receiving be commanded to
any that are unregenerate, and so be his Duty? Though this Question being as
necessary to our End, as that propounded, I shall also speak anon to the
decision of it. 3. Nor is it any of our question, whether Sacramental Reception
be merely quid licitum, or an indifferent thing to them: For this is not
pretended.

Our Question is then 1. of the Benefit directly, and of the Duty but
consequentially. 2 and of the Debitum habendi directly, and but consequently of
the Debitum agendi. 3. and of the Title which is the foundation of Right, or of
an Antecedent Right to the benefit, even a Right that may warrant before God a
claim; and not of a mere subsequent Right in it; much less of a Possession
without proper Right, or of a being an Object of the just Action of another. 4.
It is of a Right given by God, and not of any thing which they may call a Right
that comes another way.

Before I come to the Negative of the Question, which I shall maintain, I shall
lay down what is easily granted the Opponent in these few Propositions
following.

Prop. 1. God has bestowed Christ with his Benefits, Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, and Right to Sacraments; Conditionally upon all (at least, that
hear that word:) Even Infidels, Heathens, Persecutors of Christianity, that
never had a thought of accepting Christ.

Prop. 2. Ministers may and must give the Sacraments to many Professors of
saving Faith and Repentance, who have not the Faith or Repentance which they
profess, supposing that these shall require the Sacraments at their hands.

Prop. 3. These Hypocrites may have right to the Sacraments in foro Ecclesiae;
that is, Ecclesia Judice: which is no more than this, that their pretense of a
true Right before God, is such as the Church cannot judge to be false, and
therefore is bound to administer the Sacraments to them, as to men who seem to
have that proper right, as far as they can judge.

Prop. 4. If it shall after be discovered that the party had no proper right,
but that the Church was mistaken in their judgment, it will not follow that
therefore the external Baptism was or is Null, or to be re-administred, though
it reaches not its main ends.

Prop. 5. Infidels, Heathens, Turks, are obliged to seek to be baptized, and to
receive the Lords Supper; that is, to become true Believers, and then to seek
and receive the Sacraments.

Prop. 6. When the Church administreth Sacraments to Hypocrites, as they do but
their duty, so God approves their action, as knowing they do their duty: And
therefore so far as that comes to the improper Right Coram Ecclesia, is also
Coram Deo. As in the foresaid Comparison: If the Physician knew his P^tient to
dissemble, that he might have his Cordial, and the Apothecary did not know it,
the Physician will justify his Apothecary in his Administration. So will God
justify the foresaid Administration of his Sacraments, and acknowledge the
Hypocrite to be the Object of our just tradition.

For the Negative; Prop. 1. God has not given by promise, Testament, or any
other Deed of Gift, a proper Title to Sacraments to any that have not saving
Faith and Repentance (and their seed) which Coram Deo, will warrant them to
require and receive them.

Prop. 2. God has not commanded or allowed any that have not saving faith, to
seek or receive the Sacraments, in that condition; but has made it the order
of their Duty, first to Repent and Believe, and then to seek and receive the
Sacraments.

These two Propositions I shall now briefly, but sufficiently prove. The first
has in it three parts, 1. That God has not made any Deed of Gift of
Sacraments or right to Sacraments to any that are short of saving Faith, (save
the seed of the faithful) 2. That therefore such have no title to Sacraments
Coram Deo, that can properly be so called. 3. That therefore they cannot
lawfully Claim and Receive them (though if they claim them we may lawfully
Administer them) To avoid confusion, I shall take these distinctly.

1. That God has made no Promise or Deed of Gift of Sacraments or Right to
them, to any that are short of saving faith, or on any lower Condition than
saving Faith, I prove:

Arg. 1. There is none such to be found in Scripture. Therefore God has made
none such. We have long expected the production of any such Gift or Promise;
and yet none is produced: Which is likely would have been if it could have been
found. And if it be not in Scripture, it is nowhere.

Arg. 2. If the Promise or grant of Right to Sacraments be made on any
Condition besides saving faith, then 1. either on the Condition of the
Profession of that Faith; 2. or on the Condition of a real inferior faith; or
3. on Condition of the Profession of that inferior faith. But none of these
three. Ergo.

The Enumeration will be acknowledged sufficient by them that we have now to
deal with. And 1. That the bare profession of saving Faith is never made the
condition of any Promise or Deed of Gift, by which a Title to Baptism is
conveyed, appears, 1. In that none such are found in all the Scripture: God
nowhere says, If thou will but profess or say that thou believe, thou shall
be baptized, or have Right to Sacraments (though the Church must administer
them on that Profession) 2. Else God should command a man to lie, or justify
him in it, and make a lie the condition of his mercies. Though every duty be
not the condition of Justification, yet every such condition is a duty, and
every duty is commanded; and God does not Command any man to lie, or to profess
to be what he is not, or do what he does not, or have what he has not. Much
less will he make this the condition of his promises.

Object. God commands both Believing and Profession; therefore Profession is
part of their duty; and their sin is not that they Profess, but that they do
not Believe.

Answ. But God so connexeth these duties together, that the later is a sin, and
no duty, if it keep not its place, and be performed without the former. If a
man tell a lie by speaking any good which he never thought, its true that God
would have had him both think it and speak it, and then it would have been no
lie; but he would not have him speak it before he think it; for then its a lie:
And you cannot say that his sin is only in not thinking it, and not in speaking
it, which was part of his duty: For it was both his sin, Not to think it, and
to speak it when he did not think it; and spe^king it was not his duty, save
upon presupposal that he think it, or it was not in any other order to be
performed. The same is here the case between Believing and professing to
Believe.

3. God makes nothing the matter of Duty, or the Condition of his Gifts, but
what has some moral worth in it which may show it fit to be well pleasing to
him. But the bare verbal Profession of that which is not in the heart, has no
such Moral worth in it as may make it pleasing in his eyes. Ergo.

2. And then for an Inferior Faith, that this is not the condition of Gods
Promise, I have fully proved in another Disputation: Moreover, 1. No such
promise can be produced out of the Word of God: If it could, its l^ke we should
have had it ere now. 2. The promises are expressly made on the condition of
saving faith; therefore not of any other. Of this more in the following
Arguments. Only here I add, that as to the Administration of Seals, no man can
know the sincerity or reality of an inferior kind of Faith any more than of a
saving Faith.

3. And then for the third, viz. The Profession of a Dogmatical or other
inferior Faith, it can be no condition. 1. Because the faith it self professed
is none; therefore the profession of it i^ none. 2. The profession of a saving
faith is none: Much less of a lower faith.

Observe in all this, that when I mention a Dogmatical Faith, I take it in Mr.
Blake's sense, and the sense that its commonly taken in, viz. for an assent
that comes short of that which justifies; and not as some of the Ancients did,
who called justifying Faith by the name of Dogmatical Faith, as did not from
Miraculous Faith, because they ordinarily placed Justifying Faith in Assent: So
Cyril, and John Hierosol. Cateches. 5. page ( mihi) 43. distinguishes Faith
into D^gmatical, which is saving, and into that which is of Grace, by which
Miracles are wrought. He means by Grace the extraordinary Gift of the Spirit.
And so some Protestants too. Leg^ D. Alard. Vaek. Comment. in Symbol. Apost.
Proleg. Cap. 5. page 20.21.

Argum. 3. It is one and the same Covenant, Testament, or Deed of Gift, by
which God bestows Christ, and Right to Sacraments, and that on the same
conditions. But the Covenant or Testament bestows himself only on the
condition of saving Faith. Therefore it bestows right to Sacraments only on
condition of saving Faith.

That there is any Covenant distinct from that one Covenant of Grace, Mr. Blake
disowneth as a fancy that never entered into his thoughts: page 125. That this
one Covenant or Testament gives Right to Christ and to Sacraments upon the
condition of one and the same faith, is evident: 1. Because the word
distinguishes not; therefore in this case we may not distinguish. It offers
Christ and Sacraments to men on these terms, if they will believe; but it does
not give us the least hint that by believing is meant two several sorts of
faith, whereof one is of necessity to right in Christ, and the other to right
to Sacraments. Mr. Blake that so abhors the imputing of equivocal terms to
the Scripture, I hope will not feign them to speak so equivocally. If the Word
had ever said, It is such a kind of faith that is the condition of Right to
Christ; and such a different kind of Faith that is the condition of Right to
Sacraments; then we might have warrantably so distinguished our selves; but
there is no such thing. Yea, the Scripture makes it plain that it is saving
faith which it means, that is pre-requisite to Baptism, as is already
manifest from Acts 16.30, 31, 32, 33. and 16 14, 15. and 15 7, 8, 9. and
8.37.2.38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44 Mark 16.16, etc. To which add Mat. 28.19, 20. Go
ye therefore and Disciple me all Nations, Baptizing them in the name etc. Those
and only those that are Discipled, must be baptized. But none are Discipled
Internally but true Believers, nor visibly but the professors of a true
(saving) belief (and their seed) Therefore no others should be baptized.

The Minor (which only requires proof) is thus proved. None are Disciples but
those that take or profess to take Christ for their chief Teacher and Savior.
But all that do so heartily, or profess to do so, have or profess to have
saving faith: Therefore none but those that have or profess to have saving
faith, are Disciples.

The Major is undeniable. The Minor is clear. If he that heartily takes Christ
for his chief Teacher and Savior, have not saving Faith, there is no such
thing. It is he that will not hear the Prophet that shall be cut off; and he
that will hear him that shall live. And he that heartily takes him for his
chief Teacher, is willing to hear him and learn of him: And he will give rest
to the souls of all that will come to him, and that learn of him, as Matthew.
11.28, 29.

Argum. 4. God gives Right to Sacraments to none but those to whom he gives
Right to Remission of sin. But he gives Right to Remission of sin to none but
true Believers: Therefore he gives (p^oper) Right to Sacraments to none other.

The Major Mr. Blake wonders at, that all men should have right to the End or
Fruit of the Ordinance, who have right to the Ordinance; when it is the right
use and Improvement of Ordinances that must give right to the End. But 1. the
form of a Sacrament is Relative, and the nearest end essential to it; and
therefore all ends are not separable, and at a distance. 2. God gives no man
Right to use Sacraments contrary to his Institution: But the ends to which the
Sacraments are instituted, is to seal up Remission of sin already given him by
the promise: therefore he gives Right to Sacraments to none but those to whom
he gives Right to Remission of sin. The Major is proved in the former
Disputation. Object. But our Divines say that Baptism is not only for the
Remission of sins past, but of future sins. Answ. 1. True: but still including
sins past. 2. It is the review or consideration of Baptism which they say is
for the strengthening of our faith concerning the Remission of sin, daily as we
commit it. 3. If any of them do make Baptism to be effectual to the Remission
of sin hereafter, when present sin is not remitted, they suppose this to be by
accident, when contrary to the intent and Institution of God, it is misused at
the present, but rightly considered of in believing reviews.

He that has not Right to be baptized for the obsignation of Remission of sin,
has no Right given him by God to Baptism. For God has appointed no other
Baptism. There are indeed certain distant benefits of the Sacraments which are
suspended upon a distant improvement of them. But a saving participation in
Christ and pardon of sin is a present benefit, which the person must be
qualified for the obsignation of before he have Title by Gods gift to that
Sacrament.

Ar. 5. Ad homine^. It is but few Protestants that I know of, that seem
adversaries to our present Assertion; and those few also do grant it: Mr. Blake
says pa. 124 of Sacraments: [ so that I conceit no promise of these ordinances
made to such a faith but an actual investiture of every such believer in them.]
And when I supposed that he had thought there was a distinct promise of Church
Privileges upon condition of a faith not justifying, or saving, he tells us of
some body (I know not who) that said I rather feigned this of him, then found
it in him, and himself adds [ And I profess I know no man whose brain ever
hatched or vented such a crotchet] we are therefore here secure (or should be
one would think) from Mr. Blakes opposition. If this much secure us not, see
him p. 122. where (having thrown by my distinctions as confusion, page 120. and
my positions as not looking toward the business, ( i. e. for ought he could
see) and having confuted me by my own words, page 121. before he understood
them) he brings me in thus stating the Question [ Whether these men be in
Covenant with God, as to Gods actual engagement to them; so far as that Gods
Promise is in force for conveying actual Right to them as to the promised
Blessings? And so whether it be a mutual Covenant; and both parties be actually
obliged? And thus I say, that wicked men are not in Covenant with God; that is,
God is not in Covenant with them, neither have they any Right to the main
Blessings given by the Covenant, viz. Christ, Pardon, Justification, Adoption,
Glory.] To this I annexed, (which he leaves out) Nor to the common Blessings of
this Covenant; for they are given by the same Covenant, and on the same
conditions as the special Blessings: so that though they may have Right to them
at present on the Ground of Gods present collation, or trusting them with them
(as a servant has in his Masters stock,) yet have they no Right by Covenant --
] Mr. Blake replyeth. 1. That he knows no man that has spoke so much to
prove the affirmative as I. But where? He will tell us Logically thus. [ So
long as they break not the Covenant Engagement in which he confesses they have
obliged themselves, God stands engaged to them for the greatest spiritual
blessings. But according to him they break not Covenant till they arrive at
final impenitency and unbelief.] Rep. 1. I said in another book, that as the
new Law of faith is called Gods Covenant, so no man but final unbelievers, does
so break that Covenant, as to be the subject of its proper actual commination,
i.e. penal censure; or that its penalty should thereby become his due (the
penalty being a peremptory remediless exclusion from all hope). And what does
Mr. Bl. but make me say in an unexplained general, [ that they break not
Covenant till they arrive at final unbelief etc] 2. I said over and over that
they broke their own covenant engagements, though they did not so far violate
Gods Covenant as to incur the foresaid curse: And what does Mr. Blake but
intimate that I teach [ that they break not the Covenant engagement, in which
they oblige themselves.] Yet he stops when he should have repeated these words
in his Minor, perceiving it a cleanlier way to let the Reader infer them. Ah
sorry Tempter that could procure such a volume of so worthy a man, to abound
with so many passages of this nature, that are such strangers and enemies, not
only to truth, and common equity, but even to that Ingenuity that should be
manifested to an enemy. But this on the by. His second answer is, [ That
therefore before mentioned which he calls the great Question between him and me,
is no question at all! It were madness to affirm that which with those limits
he thus denies.] See Reader, though I was so Mad as to prove the Affirmative of
this Question which I deny, yet Mr. Blake is not. And may I not now venture to
conclude that thus far we are agreed.

Well then, if Mr. Blake never dreamed of a promise of God, made to a
dogmatical faith, giving them right to Sacraments, nor thus actually engaging
God to them, let us stay a little here to enquire what it is then that in his
Judgment gives them Title and Right. page 141. he brings me in saying, [ But
if you speak only of Covenant. Right to Baptism coram Deo, by his gift of
Covenant, then I make them of the same extent. And he answers, I cannot tell
what other Covenant-Right to speak of, etc.] So ofttimes he says that they
have a Right or Title from God by his Covenant. What should the sense of this
mystery be? Does Gods Covenant give it them, and yet is there no Promise of it
to such as they? Nor is God actually obliged to give them the blessings of the
Covenant? Certainly this cannot be. For 1. God has no Covenant-act on his own
part, but that which we commonly call his Promise or Testament. He says [ he
that believes shall be saved, etc.] and [ If thou believe thou shall be saved:
If thou receive Christ thou shall have power to be the Son of God] And when the
Soul consents it is a mutual Covenant, without any further deed of Gift from
God: so that it is this same Promise which is conditional, and whose condition
is our acceptance of the gift, which gives right to the Benefit when the
condition (our acceptance) is performed; that is, when our hearts consent. And
so God has no Covenant act on his part to convey a Title, but his Promise:
therefore if there be no Promise of Title to Sacraments, there is sure no
Covenant-gift from God of such a Title, when they are the same. Can Mr. Blake
show a Covenant of God ex part sui distinct from this Promise? Why then is it
not done?

But p. 122. Did ever a man speak of an absolute tie in a conditional covenant,
whether the conditions are performed or no] It seems then that it is but a
conditional tie that he speaks of all this while. But what is that to the
conveying of Right? The efficacy is suspended while the condition is
unperformed: or else it were not a Condition. If God had conditionally by his
Covenant given Title to Sacraments, that Covenant could give no Title, till the
condition were performed. So that it is not a conditional Promise or covenant,
till performance of the condition, that can give right. And yet Mr. Blake often
says, that God gives a Covenant-Right to such as (he seems to maintain
himself) perform not the condition. 2. But for all this, I still say our very
faith or acceptance of Christ in the Covenant of God is our performing the
condition. And therefore (which its sad should be an egregious affected piece
of nonsense in the eyes of any Divines) our very heart covenanting, is our
performance of the condition of the covenant of God, that is, God offers to
be our God, and Christ our Savior, if we will accept him by consent. Our
hearts consent and say, Lord I am willing. And this is our heart covenanting;
that ties the marriage knot: and this was the condition of Gods Promise, or
part in the Covenant. And therefore every true sincere Covenanter or Believer,
as he performs by consenting the condition of his first right and Possession,
so he has immediately the said Right and Possession: A marriage Covenant is
such a performance also, as gives present Title and Right. We are members of
Christ, Pardoned, Adopted, as soon as ever we consent to the terms of the
Covenant, that is, do believe. Its a poor put off for Mr. Blake to tell me,
that [ we are ofter said to be espoused to Christ, then married to him.] For
what although the solemnization of the Nuptials with all the Church in one body
be reserved to the last day, does it follow that each particular soul is not
married to Christ before? Does not Scripture expressly affirm it? Do any Divines
deny to question it? What matter is it then which is oftener mentioned, wh^le
both are mentioned, and both true?

But yet it cannot be his meaning that a conditional promise gives Right to
Baptism: At least to men of his inferior faith For he expressly says, that he
[conceits no Promise of these Ordinances made to such a faith]. He does
therefore sure conceive (for all the former words) that there is some other way
of giving Title by Gods Covenant, or by God another way than by Covenant. And
page 124. He expresses it thus. [ But an actual investiture of every such
Believer in them]. Surely if we can but understand these words, we have his
sense. I would not fall a racking this word Investiture, to make it confess its
signification, if I knew where or which way else, besides in this one poor
word, in all his two Volums to find his meaning. But if it must lie in one
word, and that not obvious to all understandings, it concerns us to enquire
what that word does signify. The word Investiture applied to mere Physical
subjects, signifies but a merely Physical alteration, and that can give no
Title or Right: and therefore no doubt, that is none of his meaning. When the
word is taken in a civil sense, it is usually forma concedendi feudi, but
sometime applied to other benefits, and it is commonly distinguished into that
which is Ceremonial, Abusive, or Improper, and that which is Natural and
Proper. The former is preparatory to Actual Possession of the Benefit: and is
said by Lawyers to be equal to, or much like to the Judges Decreeing a man's
Possession, which is not a corporal putting him into possession: and the form
usually runs thus, Investio te hoc annulo, ense, etc. Here the thing that he is
invested by, is the ring, sword, etc. but the thing that he is invested of, is
not them, but the Benefit which they signify, and that but preparatorily, as
to corporal possession of the thing it self: and this is used to be done in the
face of a Court, or some eminent witnesses. This is Investiture, abusive sic
dicta. 2. The latter ( Investitura vera and proprie dicta) is the very delivery
of Possession of the Benefit it self, which is done (say the Civilians) many
ways. As 1. When the foresaid Ceremonial Investiture is not at a distance as
before, but in ipso feudo, vel oculis subjecto. 2. Si Dominus proprie
investiendo utatur verbo tradendi, potest Vasallus propria autoritate ingredi
possessionem vacuam. 3. Si Dominus coram paribus Curiae, etc. juberet
beneficiariam ingredi possessionem feudi. 4. Si beneficiarius per Dominum ipsum
aut jussu ejus per alium introducatur in possessionem feudi.]

Now which of these is it that Master Blake here means?

1. The Sacrament of Baptism delivered upon Gods command upon the ground of his
preceding Promise, is his true, proper Investiture of the Believer in the
pardon of sin, and Membership of Christ and his Church. These therefore being
quoad ipsam possessionem, delivered up by this sacred sign, it follows that it
is only those that have antecedent Title to these Benefits (Christ and Pardon)
that can receive the Investing sign to that use and end, and to no other
separated uses is it instituted by God. And as to the distant Benefits (the
Kingdom of Glory, etc.) The Sacraments are a ceremonial Investiture as to them,
and therefore should be applied to none that has not a precedent Title to
those distant benefits, Ecclesia judice; or should be claimed and received by
no other. Nor is it proper to call that an Investitu^^ of the sign it self,
which is it self an Investiture of another thing. We use to say, by this Ring,
Sword, etc. I invest thee of that Benefit, but not by this Ring I invest thee
of this Ring.

2. Our Question now in hand being not of an Investiture of the signified
Benefit, but of a Title to the sign it self, it is apparent that it cannot be
the first sort of Investiture, viz. Ceremonial: For then it must be by some
other Ceremony that we are invested of this Ceremony. And what that other
Ceremony is by which God does invest men of Baptism, no man can tell, nor I
think has gone about to tell.

3. It must be therefore the latter sort of Investiture, or none, viz. the
Natural and true: but that presupposes a Title by some antecedent Promise or
Gift: and is but the means of delivering possession of that which men had right
to before; or of giving the jus in re, to them that had the jus ad rem. Now our
Question is not of Possession, but of Title, or the jus ad rem, which is
antecedent to Investiture, and may warrant a claim.

4. And if you should say that this Investiture does of it self confer Title to
it self, you would speak a contradiction, the Title being antecedent to the
right (as being its foundation) and the right (ad rem) antecedent to the
Proffession which the Investiture gives. Or if you feign an immediate donation
to be concomitant with the Investiture, or closely antecedent, you must prove
it, and show what it is. It is most certain that it must be somewhat, that is,
Signum voluntatis Divinae de Debito habendi, that must confer on us a Title: a
mere providential disposal is no such thing; for that is no civil, but a
Physical Investiture, and signifies not the will of God de Debito, but only de
Eventu, and therefore of it self is no Title: (Of which see the Lancashire
Ministers against the engagement, at large.) It must then be a Testament or
some Deed of Gift, which in the Gospel goes under the name of the Promise,
which before this possession must give the Title: But a Promise in the present
case, as made to the dogmatical Believer, is denied by the Opponent. A new
immediate donation concurrent with the Investiture (so called) there is none.
God does neither then say, I give thee Title to this Sacrament, Or I deliver it
to thee absolutely; but only has long ago in his Promise said, that which is
equivalent, conditionally; so that he has no new donation but only the old one
of his Promise, newly applied by his Minister; and the condition of that
Promise is a saving faith, and, not another sort of faith.

There remains therefore but two acts or ways of this proper Investiture,
which can be pretended: And that is 1. A command to them to take Possession
(which is not pretended) or to claim it of the Minister. 2. And a command to
the Minister as Gods Agent to deliver it to such a man. And for the first, it
will fall under our further consideration anon, where we shall show that there
is no such command. Nor can any command give Title to a Benefit, but what has
the nature of Gift, as well as a command. If then there be no Promise or Gift,
there is no right to the benefit: commands as such do only oblige to duty. And
as for the command to Ministers to deliver the Sacraments. 1. It is in
Scripture commanded them that they baptize them that Repent and Believe (and
their seed) but no others: Therefore whereas by Reason and Scripture-example
and general Rules, it is made their duty to baptize, or give the Lords Supper
to Professors, that is as they seem Believers; seeing God never intended to
make us the searchers of hearts, therefore we must follow the common Rule of
humane converse, to take men's words about the secrets of their hearts, till
they utterly forfeit the credit of their words. But to them that profess not
truly to believe, we may not give them. 2. Nor may we give them as from God to
men under the bare notion of Professors but as Believers. I mean, that in our
invitation and offer, we may not tell men [ All that profess to believe, come
to this Sacrament, for its Gods will that you have title to it,] nor may we
manage the ordinance in the terms of our prayers or Delivery, as to mere
Professors, but as to Believers, and so must we call them, as in probability,
and from their profession esteeming them such.

3. As it is only true Believers that we must Call to receive them, so if any
other come they come contrary to our Call, and so contrary to the word that God
put into our mouths, and to his Will; and therefore they have hereby no Title.
Its true that it becomes our duty to deliver them the Sacrament, but that is
accidentally, on supposition of their unjust claim, and hyhocritical or false
profession: and ex propria calpa nemini debetur commodum. God imployeth not
heart searchers in his Administrations; but he offers his Ordinances only to
heart-searchers and on heart-conditions: And therefore the Pretenders of such
conditions may warrant our delivery; but they can never warrant or justify
their own claim, or false pretense in order thereto: And therefore they being
not the people that God offered his Benefits to, and called to receive them
(unless by turning true Believers) it follows that they have not Gods consent
to receive it; and therefore there is no Gift from him. As the Minister does in
the Word, so does he in the Sacraments: In the Word we are to offer Jesus
Christ to all that will accept him by a living faith, that is, to offer him to
all that he may be so accepted, and on condition of such Acceptance, may be
theirs. But if some unsound Professors shall in their way, lay hold of him, and
say, he is theirs, it is they that make the false application, and not either
God or we. So if we are to comfort any afflicted conscience, we are no
heart-searchers, and therefore cannot say to any, Thou art a Believer, and
therefore this comfort belongs to thee; but we can only deliver them this Major
Proposition [ This Comfort belongs to all true Believers] and this
conditional conclusion [ If thou be a true Believer, it belongs to thee:] But
it is the person himself that must affirm [ I am a true believer] and so must
make the conclusion absolute. And then if the Assumption be untrue, it is his
own, and not Gods or ours. So we are to offer the Sacraments (and Christ in the
Sacraments) to all true penitent Believers. This is our Duty. If any now will
step forth and take the Lords Supper among the faithful, it is himself that
makes the sinful application: And if any will say [ Baptize me, for I do
heartily repent and believe,] If this be false, it is he that makes the false
Application. And therefore here is no Divine donation can be proved; nor any
consent of God to his claim; though we are justifiable for the actual giving it
upon that claim. So that here is no such Investiture that can be proved which
conveyeth any Title, or warranteth any claim: There is only a command to us to
offer it to true Believers, and to give it by actual delivery to such
Believers, and to believe them that say they are such Believers, till we have
just cause to discredit them, or can sufficiently disprove them. So that actual
delivery upon such a false profession of theirs, is morally no Gift, nor
Investiure, but only such as is merely Physical, as to any collation of Right,
the application being by themselves, who can give themselves no Right, and not
by God, who never gave consent to the claim.

And thus I have proved and vindicated the first part of my first Proposition,
concerning the Sacraments considered as Benefits [that God has not made any
gift of them to any but true Believers.] The two next I need to say less to,
because enough is said on the by, in vindicating the former.

The second was, that [ seeing God has given no Title, therefore they may not
lawfully claim them.] And this is clear from the common Laws of Propriety, that
no man may lay claim to that which he has no Title to. He that would not be
questioned as an Usurper, must look to his Right before he take possession or
use.

Object. What another is commanded to give me, that I may lawfully claim as my
Right.

Answ. He is commanded to give it Believers, and to you if you will profess
that you are a Believer; but withal you are forbidden to profess it if it be
false, and therefore that is a sufficient Bar against your claim, Coram Deo in
the Judgment of God; though its true that Ecclesia Judice, your claim is such
even upon a false profession which they cannot deny. If they be commanded to
give it you if you claim, and you not commanded and warranted to claim it, then
their duty of giving it upon such claim, will prove no title in you before God.

The next part of my Proposition does so clearly follow from what is said, that
I need not say any more to prove it, It is your sin to claim and receive that
Sacrament, which the Minister may deliver to you upon your claim without sin;
because you must judge by heart-evidence, but the Minister cannot.

But whereas Mr. Blake does make it so strange that a Minister may lawfully
administer that Sacraments to a man which Coram Deo, he has no right to
(against which he is so confident) I would demand of him whether Coram Deo, or
Deo Judice, a man have true title to Sacraments without any faith at all, I
mean a downright Infidel or Heathen? If he say, No; then he yields all the
cause. For if this Heathen will so far play the Hypocrite as to profess a
Dogmatical Faith (as he says) or a saving faith (as the Church says) then he
will confess that it is the Ministers duty to give him the Sacrament upon his
claim; and so he must give it to a man that Deo Judice has no true right to
it. But if he say that such an Heathen has right to it Deo Judice, I shall not
stand now any further to confute him, then 1. to challenge him to prove his
Title: And 2. to advise him to be cautelous how he undertaketh to justify his
title and claim at the bar of God when the reckoning comes, and these matters
must be reviewed.

And thus I have done with the first Proposition, which speaks of Sacraments ut
Beneficia, and proved that God has not given, by Promise, Testament, or any
Deed of Gift, a proper title to Sacraments to any but sound believers (and
their seed) which will warrant them to claim and receive them.

2. The next thing to be done, is to speak of the Receiving of Sacraments as it
is Officium, a Duty, constituted by some command of God; and the Proposition is
that [ God has not commanded or allowed any that have not saving faith to
claim and receive the Sacraments in that condition, but has made it the
necessary order of their duty, first to repent and believe, and then to claim
and receive the Sacraments.

Arg. 1. If no man is commanded or warranted to receive the Sacraments without
a Profession of true faith and repentance, then not without that faith and
repentance it self. But the antecedent is true; therefore so is the consequent.

The Antecedent is proved in the other Disputations. The Consequence is plain:
For no man is commanded or warranted to lie, or make a false profession: But to
profess that Faith and Repentance which they have not, is to lie, or make a
false profession (at least if it be not a profession limited) Therefore, etc.

I have proved before that such a Profession is not only pre-requisite to
Sacraments, but also that the very reception of them does contain it.

Arg. 2. No command can be produced in Scripture, which will warrant a man to
seek and receive the Sacraments without a saving faith: Therefore there is no
such command. I shall pass by all other Arguments (because they may be gathered
from what I have said already) and shall only enquire into the commands which
are pretended, because the proof lies on them.

Obj. Every Jew and his children were commanded to be circumcised: Therefore
the impenitent, hypocrites, etc. are commanded to receive the Sacraments. As
Genesis 17.14.

Answ. 1. They were not commanded to be circumcised whether they consented to
the Covenant or not, but Circumcision was the token of the Covenant, and a seal
of the righteousness of that faith which they had or professed to have, being
yet uncircumcised, Genesis 17.11, 12. Romans 4.11. That is, the Parent for himself
and his child professed a true consent to the Covenant. And this Consent I have
before proved to be saving faith, or inseparable from it. And so Covenanting
was then as strictly required as Circumcision.

Object. But every male was to be cut off that was not circumcised.

Answ. I shall not now stand to enquire into the meaning of that cutting off:
But whatever it was, it is certain that there is as much threatened to them that
did not covenant with the Lord.

Obj. But that cannot import a sincere Covenanting in saving Faith; For then
how great a part of the people must be cut off?

Answ. It plainly speaks of the profession of sincerity in Covenanting, 2.
Chron. 15.12 13. And they entered into a covenant to seek the Lord God of their
Fathers with all their heart, and with all their soul, that whosoever would not
seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great,
whether man or woman.

Obj. But (says Mr. Blake) though they covenant to believe savingly, yet they
do not profess that they do so; and it is not covenanting that proves men in a
state of justification and salvation, but keeping the Covenant.

Answ. He that covenanteth from that time forward to take the Lord for his God
sincerely, does by that Covenant at present express that he consents to have
the Lord for his God, (upon the Covenant terms:) but he that professes such a
Consent, does eo nomine profess saving faith, which is nothing else but Assent,
and that consent producing affiance. There is no act proper to saving faith, if
Consent be not. 2. As therefore faith, which is (or is inseparably joined with,
as others confess) the hearts consent does justify a man before he express it
in works of actual obedience, so it is but the same thing which we say, that
heart-covenanting, or consent, does justify, or prove a man justified, before
he do any further keep that Covenant by any positive effects of it. For it is
the performance of the conditions of Gods promise that first prove us
justified; and God promises Christ and Justification with him to all that
believe, or receive Christ, or accept him as offered. And this receiving, or
accepting, is the same thing with consent or heart-covenanting. So that all
that we oblige our selves to for the future in our sincere covenanting with
Christ, are not any means of our Justification as begun, but only of the
continuance or not losing of it. 3. Yet still we easily grant that or all
covenanting without the hearts consent will save none.

Ob. Is it credible that all Israel must be forced to profess themselves true
believers, when many were not?

Answ. God required them first to be such, and upon pain of damnation, and then
to profess themselves such, and seal it by his Sacrament. He warranteth no man
to profess a falsehood, but that they truly consent and then profess it. Though
Asa and the other Rulers could search no deeper then an External Profession or
Covenant and their practice in seeking God, because they did not know the
heart. And that it was indeed no other then that which then was saving faith
which was professed (and so required) in that Covenant, does appear in the
terms of it. It was to take God, to be their only God, and to give up
themselves to be his people; and the mention of their deliverance from the
Egyptian bondage, and the nature of Circumcision show that it was in Deum
Misericordem and Redemptorem, they that professed to believe, with such respect
to the blood of the Messiah as those darker times required. The terms in Deuteronomy.
26.16, 17, 18. do plainly express that faith which then was proper to the saved
[ The Lord thy God has commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments;
thou shall therefore keep and do them with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul: Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his
ways, and keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to
hearken to his voice: And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his
peculiar people, as he has promised thee, etc.] Sincerely to take the Lord for
our God is the sum of all Religion, and the very nature of Sanctification. For
it is not the bare Name of God, but God himself that is here meant. And this
can be no less in any tolerable sense, then to take him by Assent and Consent,
for our absolute Lord and Sovereign, and chief Good, or End.

And that the Jews themselves thus understood the Covenant of Circumcision,
Ainsworth on Gen 17. shows out of their Rabbis in these words.

Ex lib. Zohar. At what time a man is sealed with this blessed seal of this
sign, thenceforth he sees the holy blessed God, properly, and the holy soul is
united with him. If he be not worthy that he keeps not this sign, what is
written? By the breath of God they perish, Job 4.9. For that this seal of the
holy blessed God was not kept; but if he be worthy and keep it, the Holy Ghost
is not separated from him.] And after v. 12. ex Maimonid. "[By three things did
Israel enter into the Covenant, by Circumcision, and Baptism, and Sacrifice,
etc. And so in all ages when an Ethnic is willing to enter into the Covenant,
and gather himself under the wing of the Majesty of God, and take upon him the
yoke of the Law, he must be circumcised, and baptized, and bring a Sacrifice,
etc. When a man or woman comes to join a Proselite, they make diligent enquiry
after such, lest they come to get themselves under the Law, for some riches
that they should receive, or for dignity that they should obtain, or for fear.
If he be a man, they enquire whether he have not set his affection on some
Jewish woman; or a woman her affection on some young man of Israel. If no such
like occasion be found in them, they make known unto them the weightiness of
the yoke of the Law, and the toil that is in the doing of it, above that which
people of other Lands have, to see if they will leave off. If they take them
upon them, and withdraw not, and they see them that they come of love, then
they receive them; as it is written, When she saw that she was steadfastly
minded to go with her, then she left speaking unto her, Ruth 1.18. Therefore
the Judges received no Proselites all the days of David and Solomon. Not in
David's days, left they should have come of fear: Nor in Solomon's, lest they
should have come because of the Kingdom and great prosperity which Israel then
had. For who so comes from the Heathens, for any thing of the vanities of this
world, he is no righteous Proselite. Notwithstanding there were many
Proselites, which in David's and Solomon's days, joined themselves in the
presence of private persons, and the Judges of the great Synedron had a^ care
of them; they drove them not away after they were Baptized, out of any place,
neither took they them near unto them until their after-fruits appeared

Ob. 2. If none but the Regenerate or sincere Believers have Title to Baptism
and the Lords Supper, then none can seek or receive them, till they have
Assurance of their sincerity, which would exclude abundance of upright
Christians.

Answ. 1. God lays his commands upon us conjunctly, and our casting off one,
will not authorize us to cast off another. Upright Christians are obliged both
to judge themselves to be what they are, and to receive the Seals of the
Covenant: And if they judge themselves not to be upright when they are, or
question their integrity as a thing to be doubted of, this is their sin, and
cannot be done inculpably. And this sin will not justify them in forbearing
the Sacraments: For one sin will not excuse another. The thing therefore that
such are bound to, is, first to use right means to know themselves, and then to
judge of themselves as they are, and then to seek and receive the Sacraments.
And if he say, [I have tried, and yet I cannot discern, or I fear I am unfound]
yet that will not free him from the blame of mis-judging, nor from the
obligation of judging more justly of himself.

2. There is a true discerning of a man's own faith and repentance, which is
far below a strict Assurance; and he that truly discerns that he repents
and believes, has a clear ground to profess it, though he have much doubting
and fear of the contrary. The judgment of few or none is in aequilibrio, but
it swayeth and determines either to judge that they are sincere, or that they
are not. If it judge that they are not, when they are, their duty is to
rectify that judgment out of hand. If they judge that they are sincere,
though they attain not a full Certainty, they have reason to act according to
that judgment. Man's heart is a dark piece, and much unacquainted with it self;
and if Mr Blake, or any of his opinion, will prove that a man must suspend all
his Actions which are not guided by a certain assured judgment, he will
evacuate most of Gods service in the Church. I doubt not but he will confess
that it is only the penitent that should profess themselves penitent (in that
Condition) and only they that truly desire Christ and Grace, that should say
they desire them; and only they that have received saving grace that should
give God thanks for it as a received benefit. And yet if no one should confess
sin with profession of penitence but they that have full assurance that they
are truly penitent; if no one should beg grace with profession that he desires
it, till he have full assurance of the truth of those desires; and if no one
should give thanks to God for Redemption (in the special sense) and effectual
Vocation, and Conversion, and Justification, Adoption, Reconciliation,
Sanctification, etc. but those that have a full assurance that they have
received these, I doubt God would have little Confession, Prayer, or
Thanksgiving of this sort from his people. Is it unlawful to say [ Lord I
believe] as long as we have any Unbelief to be removed? When Peter knew not but
that he might shortly deny Christ with cursing and swearing, yet might he
lawfully confess his belief in him. A man may warrantably speak and profess the
Truth which he is not fully certain of, as long as he does it bona fide, and
really means what he speaks, and utters his very heart so far as he
knows it. 2. And as long as he is not negligent in his endeavors to know it,
but faithfully labors to be acquainted with it. All such ordinary Professions
do imply this limitation [ This is the truth, so far as I know my own heart.]
And if it were not lawful to go on this ground, I must give up almost all my
duties. For I find so great darkness in my own heart, and strangeness to my
self, that it is few things that I say of my own heart, which I can speak with
such assurance as this. When Christ commanded me, Matthew. 5.24. to [ Leave my
gift before the Altar, and go my way, and first be reconciled to my Brother,
and then come and offer my gift;] as I am uncertain when my Brother's mind is
reconciled to me, so if I should never offer my gift till I had full assurance
that my own mind is sincerely reconciled to him, perhaps I might sometime be
put upon a long forberance. For many a one that can say, [ I know nothing by my
self] is yet so conscious of the falsness of his heart, that he is forced to
add [ yet am I not thereby justified] and [ I judge not my own self, etc.]
Christ has told us that God will not forgive us, unless we truly repent and
believe, and from our heart forgive one another. If none may thank God for
remitting their sins, till they have undoubting assurance of all this, God
would have little thanks for forgiveness. Then the scruples of those that
reject singing Psalms, would turn off almost all. Who durst say or sing Psalm
116.1. [ I love the Lord, etc.] Psalm. 119.10. [ with my whole heart have I
sought thee, etc.] Psalm. 138.1. and 91. and 111.1. [ I will praise thee O Lord
with my whole heart, etc.] unless so few as would make but small melody. Many
particulars might be instanced in, to show that this ground would evacuate most
duties.

3. As Mr. Blake is uncertain of every one of his hearers that seeks
Sacraments, whether he have indeed a Dogmatical faith or not, so I doubt he
would Baptize but few Children in comparison of what he does, if none should
seek it but those Parents which are undoubtingly certain that they do truly
Believe with that Dogmatical faith. 1. Certain I am upon much sad trial that a
great number of the Parishioners that have long been our constant hearers, and
have presented many Children to Baptism, have not a Dogmatical faith it self as
to the essentials of the Christian Religion; For many tell me that they Believe
not that the Son or the Holy Ghost is God, or that any one has suffered for
us, or made satisfaction for our sins, and that they trust only in Gods mercy
and their praying, and amendment for Pardon. 2. I meet with the most humble,
Godly, learned and judicious men of my acquaintance, who manifest more
doubtfulness about the Dogmatical part, or Assenting Act of their faith, then
any other, or at least, their doubt of the rest is most here grounded, because
they doubt of their truth in this. And though they are comforted in this
consideration, that even Assent is imperfect in the Saints on earth, and mixed
with doubtings, and that they lament their infidelity and doubting, and have so
much Belief of the truth of Scripture, as prevails with them to resolve to
trust their everlasting happiness only on that bottom, though with the
forsaking of all earthly things, yet are they far short of a full assurance or
certainty of the truth of the Gospel, and are principally in doubt of the
sincerity of this act of their faith. Now I would know what Mr. Blake would
have these Godly persons do that are not assured of their Dogmatical faith, but
are often ready to say, [I shall one day perish by this Unbelief.] If he would
have them receive the Sacraments without assurance of a Dogmatical faith, we
have reason to think that they may receive them without assurance of a
justifying faith, though we make this the condition of their Title as they do
the other. 3. It is a great controversy among the Reformed Divines, whether an
unconverted man can have that faith which we call Dogmatical. I know but two or
three Divines to be of Mr. Blake's opinion (though its like enough there may be
more) And one of them thinks that the nature of justifying faith lies only in
Assent, another I have heard in conference maintain that wicked men (or the
unconverted) do not indeed Believe God; nor that the word of God is true. And
if this be so, then sure a Dogmatical faith is a justifying faith, and he that
must be sure of the one, must be sure of the other, when it is not really
another but the same, or an essential part of the same. This also is the
judgment of many Protestant Divines, as Bishop Downam, Camero, and his
followers, and many more, viz. that faith lies in Assent or a persuasion of
the truth of the word; and the common opinion of Protestants is, that this
Assent is one essential part of justifying faith, and that it is in the
understanding as well as the will, (I remember scarce any of note besides
Amesius that places it in the will only, and make the act of the Intellect to
be but Integral or preparatory.) And if there be any such thing as Grace, or
Holiness and Rectitude in the Intellect, I do not yet conceive wherein it can
consist, if not in Light, procuring knowledge of, and Assent to the truth. And
how much of this ( jure vel injuria) Mr. Blake yields to the unregenerate, see
him on sacr. page 179. As in these words. [ And therefore though the wicked
match the Regenerate in assent in their understandings, it will not follow that
their understandings therefore are truly sanctified] I am far from believing
that the wicked do match the Regenerate in assent in their understandings: But
if he can prove this, I would fain know what the Rectitude or Sanctity of the
understanding is, seeing he supposes that this is not it. He that with a deep
habitual assent does Believe that God is the chief good, and that for him, and
that Heaven is more desirable than earth, and that there is no salvation but by
Christ received as our Priest, Prophet, and King, etc. I think he has a
sanctified understanding, or else I know not who has, nor what it is. But in
such great points as this, if Mr. Blake have made any new discovery of the
nature of sanctity or rectitude in the intellect as a thing differing from
assent, he might have dealt charitably to have told us what it is, and not to
have left the world at a loss.

4. And I still think, that (at best) if the wicked have a true Dogmatical
Belief of the essentials of Religion, it is as hard or harder for them to
attain assurance of the truth of that Dogmatical Belief in its kind, as it is
for the Regenerate to attain assurance of the truth of saving faith in its
kind. Therefore if the wicked may lawfully claim a Right in both Sacraments
without assurance that they are sincere in their kind of faith, why may not the
Godly claim a Right without assurance of sincerity in their kind of faith? And
if Mr. Blake will say that neither assurance nor persuasion, that we have
either the one or the other, is necessary to a claim or Right, but only a
promise of them for the future, then Heathens and Infidels have right, and may
lay a claim. For they can promise to be Christians, and yet remain Heathens.

Obj. 3. If you take none to have such a right as may warrant their claim and
receiving but only sound Believers, then you make election, and the covenant
and seals to by commensurate: which is not to be done.

Answ. The terms are ambiguous, Supposing that we understand each other as to
the sense of the word [Election,] I say of the word [Covenant] that it may mean
three differing things. 1. If you mean the conditional promise of Christ and
life to all that will Believe, I say that this is not commensurate with
Election: For as to the tenor it belongs to all the world, and as to the
promulgation, to all that hear it. This is sometime called a covenant in the
sense as all Divine constitutions be, about our life: and sometime as it is the
offer of a mutual covenant; and sometime as it is seemingly accepted: But still
God is but conditionally obliged: And this is no sufficient Title to the seal:
For then it were due to open Infidels, if not to all. 2. If by the word
[Covenant] you mean, man's own promise to God, or consent to his offer, so I say
it is either sincere or not sincere. Sincere consent to Gods offer is
commensurate with election (unless you can prove that such fall away totally
and finally.) But unsincere consent (as when it only to half) the offer or
unsincere promising (with the tongue, without the sincere consent of the heart)
is not commensurate with election; nor does it warrant the Hypocrite to claim
the Sacraments, though it may warrant me to give them if he claim them. 3. If
by the [Covenant] you mean. Gods actual obligation, which follows man's
acceptance, which is the performance of the condition of Gods promise; then I
say, it is commensurate with election (unless you could prove the foresaid
doctrine of Apostasy) For when God has promised us Christ and life on
condition of our acceptance or consent, and we hereupon do sincerely consent,
then Gods promise does induce on him (as we may speak after our manner) an
actual obligation, and give us an actual Right to the benefits, and is
equivalent (as to that present benefit) to an absolute promise. And it is only
this that will warrant our claim to any of the benefits.

Obj. 4. Says Mr. Blake, page 121. [ And whereas he so peremptorily
determines, that though wicked men oblige themselves, yet God still remains
disobliged, let him consider, whether God be not some way obliged to all that
he voucheth to be his people? If this be denied, there will be found no great
happiness to a people, to have the Lord for their God; But God avoucheth these
to be his people, Deuteronomy. 26.17. who are yet in an unregenerate state.]

Ans. By [some way obliged] you mean either conditionally (and so he is obliged
to all the present living Infidels that ever heard the word, if not to all the
world) or absolutely, or actually: and for the later let Mr. Blake on the next
page answer Mr. Blake on this page: his words are [ Did ever man speak of an
absolute tie in a conditional covenant, whether the conditions be kept or no?
that therefore before mentioned which he calls the great question, is no
question at all. It were madness to affirm that which with these limits he thus
denies.] The Condition suspendeth the Actual Obligation, or at least the Right
given beyond all controversy. Indeed if the stipulation were only in diem, and
not conditionally, then the thing promised were presently Due, that is, to be
hereafter received: and the promissary had jus ad rem, though not statim
possidendi and statim crederet dies, etsi non statim veniret dies. For in a
stipulation in diem crescit dies, quia statim debetur: sed nondum venit, quia
non efficaciter peti potest. But in a promise conditional, there is no right,
in the promissary, nor proper actual obligation on the promiser, till the
condition be performed.

And if Mr. Blake deny this, he should have told us what it is that God is
actually obliged to do, on men's bare profession or common sort of believing.
But this he could not do without contradicting himself and the truth.

And for Gods avouching Israel to be his people] I answer, 1. He avouched them
all to be what they were, that is, a people that had actually made an open
profession of consenting to his covenant, and had ore tenus taken him for their
God. 2. He avouched them to be his people also, because that very many (how
many Gods knows) were sincere in this covenant; and the whole may be
denominated from the better part (especially if also the greater)* as our
Divines use to tell the separatists, that as a field that has much Tares is
called a Corn-field, not from the Tares, but the Corn, which is the better and
valued part; so the Church is so denominated (say they) from the sincere
Believers. 3. He avouched them to be his people, in regard of his peculiar
choice of Isreal's seed to those temporal Mercies and privileges, which they
had a promise of above other Nations of the earth; as many such are known. What
benefits the Hypocrites had shall be enquired into anon.

Ob. 5. The Jews had much advantage, and the Circumcision much profit every
way, Romans 3.1, 2.

Answ. The great advantages of the whole Nation, were principally for the sake
of the Elect, as the third verse following shows; and many mercies the rest
had by being among them, which were not by a Moral Donation given particularly
to those Professors, but to the Nation, denominated from the better part.

2. The Unbelievers or Ungodly had much advantage by providential disposals
(planting the spiritual Church among them, etc.) of which they had themselves
no proper grant by donation, and to which they could lay no claim that was
justifiable before God. And they had much accidentally from the Ministers
Commission, as is before explained. And thus the ungodly may have still, both
Word and Sacraments, and outward Communion with the Church, and much of Gods
protection and blessing for the sake of the godly, to whom they join themselves
by outward profession. But this is formerly answered, and so are all the rest
of the material Objections that I remember in my Apology to Mr. Blake; and
therefore I shall, to avoid further tediousness, refer the Reader thither; and
if he have read that and this, I think he will not need more words (if he read
not in the dark) to save himself from being deceived by any of the rest of Mr.
Blake's Replies. Only one or two of his Summaries I shall examine, as I find
them set together, page 141, 142. and page 551.

Ob. 6. Says Mr. Blake, page 141. [ My third Argument to prove that a Faith
short of Justifying may give Title to Baptism, is, [to make the visible seal of
Baptism which is the privilege of the Church visible to be of equal latitude
with the seal of the Spirit, which is peculiar to invisible members, is a
Paradox.] When I put him to prove that this Paradox is mine, in the generality
here expressed, he proves it from my own words; where I say, We give the seal of
Baptism to all that seem sound Believers, and their seed; and we say the seal
of the sanctifying spirit is only theirs that are such believers.] I am
convinct beyond denial, viz. To seem believers, and to be believers, is all one
and seeming believers and real believers are terms of equal latitude. And thus
I am confuted, as Mr. Blake uses to confute me; no doubt, to the full
satisfaction of some of his Readers.

The Visible Seal may be said to be of equal latitude, 1. Either in regard of a
Title by Moral Donation which Coram Deo will warrant a Claim and Reception; and
so I say that saving faith and such a Title to Sacraments (with the adult) are
of equal latitude. 2. Or in regard of the justifiableness of a Ministers
Administration, and the persons claim Ecclesia judice; and so they are not of
equal latitude.

But says Mr. Blake [For his distinction which he hints here, and plainly
delivers elsewhere, of Right in foro Dei, and in foro Ecclesiae, both to
Covenant and Baptism; I suppose considerate men will pause upon it, before they
receive it, especially in the sense which he puts upon it.]

I like considerate pausing Readers. But lets hear your Reasons.

1. (Says Mr. Blake) they may press him with his own Rule, Ubi lex non
distinguit, non est distinguendum; such a Right to visible Ordinances before
men never granted of God, I would fain learn.

Answ. But I know not what Teacher you would fain learn of. Far be it from me
to imagine that I can teach you in any thing. But yet I may presume to tell you
(though not to teach you) 1. That (as is often manifested) such an improper
right may result from the Precept or Ministerial Commission (to give the
Sacrament to Believers, or Professors of Faith that claim them) without a
Donation of Title to themselves to warrant that claim. 2. That the nature of
things must be distinguished from those Morals which the Law must constitute. I
am of opinion that we need not go to the distinctions of the Law, to prove
either that God, and the Church are not all one, but are really distinct, or
that the Understanding and Judgment of God and of the Church are not all one;
or that Gods Approbation, Justification, or Condemnation, is really distinct
from man's.

3. There are some necessary Distinctions afforded us by that Doctrine which
treats de legibus in Genere, which we may receive without recourse to the Law
of God in Specie. Without Scripture it may be known that a Precept is not the
same thing with a Promise or Deed of Gift; and that a Power of Administering to
one that demands, is different from a Power to demand it, or any just Title
that may warrant a claim.

4. If this will not serve you, I add, Lex distinguit, ergo distinguendum est.
1. You confess that a Dogmatical Faith is necessary to our Title. And what is
that equally Coram Deo and Exclesia? If a Jew say, [I will go and deride Mr.
Blake; I will tell him to day that I believe in Christ, and I will be Baptized
by him, and tomorrow I will scorn Christ to his face,] will you say that this
man has equal Right Deo judice, as he has Ecclesia judice? I will not be too
confident of my understanding your mind, but upon consideration, I think you
will not.

2. Matthew. 22. and Luke. 14. The servants had power to bring in (by persuasion)
that person that had not on the wedding garment (though they were to persuade
him to come as a meet guest, and so with that garment, yet the performance they
left to himself:) But yet he had no warrant for his access in that condition,
and he meets there with a judgment of God, which was distinct from that of the
Church, which with a [ Friend, how came thou in hither] etc. left him
speechless; Nor would it have saved him to have said, [ Lord I was taught by
learned Divines that there is no Forum Dei to judge of my Right to Sacraments,
besides the Forum Ecclesiae: and I had Right in the judgment of the Church,
and therefore so I have in thine.] And thousands will find this Plea prove
uneffectual, if they shall be encouraged to use and trust to it.

3. 1. Cor. 11.31, 32. I think there is a judgment of the Lord mentioned
against unworthy receivers, that is not the same with the judgment of the
Church: Nor is it my opinion that it was the Churches judgment which laid some
of them in sickness, some in weakness, and some asleep. God took cognizance of
men's not examining themselves, and eating, and drinking unworthily, which was
an eating and drinking damnation to themselves; and of their not discerning the
Lords Body; and that further then the Church did.

4. It has till now been taken for granted that there is a twofold forum or
judgment expressed in Mat. 16.19. and Mat. 18.18. Where binding on earth and
binding in heaven are distinguished, and loosing on earth and loosing in
heaven. The Treatisers that have wrote of the power of the Keys, and the
Expositors upon this Text, have not thought that these two were but one, nor
did offer so injuriously (that I say not reproachfully) to expound Christ's
words. If you say that [though they be not the same yet they agree, for that
shall be bound or loosed in heaven, which is bound or loosed on earth] I
answer; that is, quando clavis non errat. When the Church judges justly, as
the truth is. For God will not judge erroneously or unjustly because man does
so. Yea though the Churches error be inculpable (as if they absolve or
excommunicate a man upon the full testimony of false witness, etc.) yet God
will not therefore judge as they. Though he will justify their act of judging,
yet he will not censure the true Title of the person to communion accordingly,
nor bind or loose in heaven according to any mistaking sentence. Many other
Texts do sufficiently evidence this distinction.

But because Mr. Blake does page 187. and often so peremptorily renounce this
distinction in this controversy, I shall yet add one or two Reasons to show
the necessity of it.

Arg. 1. If the judgment of God, and the judgment of the Church concerning men's
Right and claim here be all one, then either the Churches judgment is
infallible in this matter, or Gods judgment is fallible. But neither is the
Churches judgment infallible, nor Gods judgment fallible. Therefore they are
not both one.

The force of the consequence is evident. And for the Minor, 1. To say Gods
judgment is fallible, even that which he does himself immediately exercise (of
which we speak) is to Blaspheme. 2. To say that man's judgment here is
infallible, is to speak, 1. That which cannot be proved. 2. More than the
Papists, yea more than the Italian Papists say of the Popes: For Bellarmine
himself will confess him fallible about such personal causes as these; whether
such a man's cause be good or bad, etc. 3. If the judgment of man be in this
case infallible, then no man was ever wrongfully admitted by the Church, and so
the argument would hold a facto ad jus, such a one was admitted: therefore he
had Right to claim and Receive: But the consequent is intolerable. For 1. It
hinders all hypocrites in the world (that should believe it) from repenting
of their unjust claim and Receiving, and justifies them all Coram Deo; but
sure it will prove an uneffectual justification. 2. The same it does by all
Ministers that ever administered the Sacraments: It teaches them to justify
themselves as infallible, and to disclaim Repentance for any mistake: He that
dare tell all the Ministers in the world that they never gave a man a Sacrament
without Right Coram Deo, or all the Receivers in the world, that they never
received it without such Right as will warrant their claim and Receiving, will
show whether the weakness even of good men's arguings may seduce.

Moreover if the Minister be infallible in this case, then either by an
ordinary ability of discerning, or by extraordinary privilege; The latter is
not pretended by any, Protestants or Papists, that I know of: The former cannot
be said, unless it be also said, 1. That all other men as wise be Infallible as
well as they. 2. And that therefore the case has such evidence that no
Minister can possibly be mistaken in it. But this cannot reasonably be said.
For 1. If an Infidel or Pagan come in scorn to be Baptized, and profess a
Dogmatical faith when he has it not, the Minister cannot know his heart. 2.
And if Mr. Blake will say that the very scornful words of such a Professing
Pagan, are a sufficient title coram Deo, yet the Minister may possibly mistake
his words, and think he says [ I do believe,] when he says [ I do not
believe.] 3. Or the Minister may easily mistake the extent and nature of Mr.
Blakes Dogmatical faith, and think that the Infidel does profess that
Dogmatical faith, when it is but some faith yet lower than it, or but part of
it.

Furthermore, if Ministers be thus infallible, then none of their Acts can be
Nullities: but the contrary is true, and has been the Judgment of the Church
expressed in many Councils (de rebaptizandis non legitime baptizatis quoad
essentiam baptismi.)

And this would put us hard to the enquiry, Which is the Church that has this
Infallibility? Unless we say that all have it that call themselves the Church;
against which many Councils have Judged, when they required the rebaptizing of
all that were baptized by the Paulianists, etc.

In a word, all the Arguments which we use against the Papal Infallibility,
might be here taken up, and Voluminously managed against this.

And if Mr. Blake disown this Infallibility, there is no way left, but either
to say that God has no Judgment of this Case but what is fallible (which I
hope he will not); or that God has one Judgment of it, and the Church
another; and then we have that we seek. If he say that God has no immediate
Judgment at all of it, but only the Churches, which is mediately his: I
answer, 1. The Churches is not mediately his, when it is sinfully erroneous. 2.
If God have a knowledge and observance of it, then he has a Judgment of it.
But to deny Gods knowledge or observance of it, is intolerable: therefore. 3.
And I must say, that since I have observed in Scripture, both the use that God
makes of good Angels and of evil, about the sons of men, and what appearances
they make before him, Job 1. and how the faithful have their Angels beholding
Gods face; how they have charge of us, and bear us up, and are ministering
spirits for our good, and how the Excommunicate are delivered up to Satan, with
much more of the like, I easily believe that God may well be said to have a
forum, and pass his sentences on the sons of men before his Angels, were it but
by committing his will to Execution by them: For so far as they are
Executioners, they must have a Commission for Execution, which contains or
implies the sentence. And so there is a Justification and a Condemnation now
before them.

Argum. 2. If God have no other Judgment about Right to Ordinances, but the
Churches Judgment, then Hypocrites have equal Right before God and before the
Church, (or Judice Deo and Judice Ecclesia;) yea it is the same Right which is
more than equal Right. But the Consequent is false: therefore so is the
Antecedent.

A Jew that would make a jest of Christ and Baptism by a feigned Profession,
has such a Right Ecclesia Judice, as that the Church cannot contradict it: But
God can contradict it. The Church cannot find any imperfection in it but God
can. Ecclesia Judice, his Right is as good as the soundest Believers: but God
will not say so. He may charge the Church with doing him wrong, if they deny
him the Sacrament: but so he cannot charge God, if he hinder or prohibit it.
Surely God will acknowledge a further Title to Sacraments in the Saints, than
such a Jew or Pagan has.

Argum. 3. Where there are different Executions, there are different
Judgments: But God has an Execution different from the Churches (in this
Case) as is apparent, 1 Cor. 11. [ For this cause many are sick and weak etc.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, etc.] Therefore God has
a Judgment differing from the Churches.

Argum. 4. If about all humane acts God have a Judgment differing from man's,
then about the present Case. But the Antecedent is so evident and so momentous,
that I hope few Christians will question it.

Instead of arguing such a Cause any further, I shall lament the case of the
Church among us, that any should be found among its Reverend, Pious Guides,
that shall so confidently publish, or so easily entertain (as some seem to do)
so strange a point as this which we oppose: For how far may they yet be led,
that can so easily be led to this. Compassion of the Church of Christ does urge
me to speak thus, though I know to the guilty its like to be offensive.

But yet we may thank God that there be so few of such conceits: sure I am, it
is ordinary with Protestants and Papists in such cases to distinguish between
forum Dei and Ecclesiae, Gods Judgment and the Churches. Instead of citing
many, I shall now take up with one only, whose Cause (against the Separatists)
did lead him so much to have enterta^ned the helps that lie on that side, that
if he had thought this notion of Mr. Blakes sound, he was very like to have
received it.

Rutherford in his due Right of Presb. Cap. 9.. 9. p. 242. Did. 1. [ Any who
blamelesly professes Christ, is Ecclesiastically, in foro Ecclesiae a true and
valid member of the Church visible, having Ecclesiastical power valid for that
effect, but except he be a sincere believer, he is not morally, and in foro
Dei, a living member of the invisible Church. Did. 3. The Invisible Church
Catholic is the principal, prime, and native subject of all the Privileges of
Christians, the Covenant, Promises, Title of Spouse, Bride, Redeemed, Temple of
the holy Spirit, etc. And the Church Visible as she is such, is no ways such a
subject; the non-consideration whereof we take to be the ground of many Errors
in our Reverend Brethren in this matter, which also deceived Papists, as our
Divines demonstrate. Did. 4. A seen Profession is the ground of members
admission to the Visible Church. Hence there is a satisfaction of the
Conscience of the Church in admitting of members, either in the Judgment of
Charity, or in the Judgment of Verity. Did. 5. There is a satisfaction in the
Judgment of Charity Positive; when we see signs which positively assure us
that such an one is Regenerate: and there is a satisfaction Negative, when we
know nothing on the contrary, which has a latitude; for I have a Negative
satisfaction of the Regeneration of some, whose persons and behavior I know
neither by sight or report. This is not sufficient for the accepting of a
Church Membership, therefore somewhat more is required. page 244. Concl. 2. The
Invisible, and not the Visible Church is the principal, prime, and only proper
subject with whom the Covenant of Grace is made, to whom all the Promises do
belong, and to whom all Titles, Styles, Properties, and Privileges of special
note, in the Mediator do belong. If our Reverend Brethren would be pleased to
see this, they would forsake their doctrine of a visible constituted Church,
etc. 1. The Church to whom the Covenant and the Promises of the Covenant are
made, is a Church and a seed which shall endure as the days of heaven, Psalm.
89.35, 36. and such as can no more fall away from being Gods people in an
eternal Covenant with him, then their God can alter what he has spoken, or
lie, Psalm. 89.33, 34, 35. They can no more cease from being in Gods favor, or
be cast off of God, than the Ordinances of Heaven can depart from before God,
etc. Jer. 31.35, 36, 37. Isa. 54.10. or then God can retract his Oath and
Promises, Heb. 6.18, 19, 20. But the Visible Church of this or that Parish,
etc.] Page 246.2. The Church with whom the Covenant is made, and to whom the
Promises of the Covenant are made, is the Spouse of Christ, his Mystical Body,
the Sons and Daughters of the Lord God Almighty, a Royal Priesthood, a chosen
Generation, Kings and Priests to God: But this is the Invisible Church of elect
Believers, not the Visible Church of Visible Professors. -- ] Page 248. [ The
Church whose gathering together, and whose unity of faith, etc. the Lord
intends by giving to them to that end some to be Apostles, etc. must be the
Church to which all the promises of the Covenant and Privileges do belong. But
the Lord intends the gathering, etc. only of the Invisible Elected and
Redeemed Church, not of the Visible Professing or Confessing Church, etc.] Page
249.4. The Invisible Church, and not the Visible, as it is such, has Right to
the Sacraments: because these who have Right to the Covenant, have Right to the
Seals of the Covenant -- But only the Invisible Church has Right to the
Covenant. For God faith only of and to the Invisible Church, and not of the
Visible, in his gracious purpose, Jer. 32.38. And I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Jer. 31.33. I will put my Law, etc. Now the Visible Church,
as the Visible, is not within the Covenant. therefore the Visible Church as the
Visible Church, and being no more than the Visible Church, has not Right to
the Seals of the Covenant; but in so far as they are within the Covenant, and
in so far as God is their God, and they his pardoned and sanctified People, as
it is, Jer. 31.33, 34.

5. It is known here that our Brethren join with the Papists. For Papists,
ignorant of the doctrine of the Visible Church, labor to prove that, etc. Just
so our Brethren take all the places for the Privileges, Covenant, Promises,
Styles of Sister, Love, Dove, Spouse, etc. -- ] 6. A Church in Covenant with
God, and the Spouse of Christ, etc. -- is a Church whereof all the members
without exception are taught of God, etc. -- But so it is that no Visible
Church on earth, that are visible Professors of any competent number, is such a
Church, etc. -- therefore no Visible Church as such is a people or Church in
Covenant with God. See Roger's Catechis. part. 2. Art. 6. page 176, 177. Concl.
3. A visible Profession of the Truth and Doctrine of Godliness, is that which
essentially constituteth a Visible Church. Only our Brethren and we differ much
about the Nature of this Profession -- Our Brethren will have none members of
the Visible Church, but such as are satisfactory to the consciences of all the
Visible Church, and give Evidences so clear, as the Judgment of discerning men
can attain unto, that they are truly regenerated. -- ] See further.

This much I have cited specially as to the main Cause: Further (as to the
Distinction in question) see him after page 185.4.. 5.

1. Did. All Believers, in foro Dei, before God have Right to the Seals of the
Covenant: These to whom the Covenant and body of the Charter belongs, to
these the Seal belongs: But in foro Ecclesiastico, in an orderly Church way,
the Seals are not to be conferred by the Church upon persons because they
believe, but because they profess their believing. -- ] See further.

Page 188. [1. The Seals of the Covenant are principally given to the Invisible
Church, as the Covenant it self, etc. -- and The Invisible Church as such, as a
number of Believers, have only Right before God to both Covenant and Seals. --
2. It Is true, the Orderly and Ecclesiastic way of dispensing the Seals, is
that they be dispensed only to the Visible Church. -- ]

Page 286. [ These and many other places do strongly prove our point: and
specially that the Profession of Simon Magus, who before God deserved to be
cast out of the Church, Act. 8. is sufficient to make one a member of a Visible
Church. Yea, but none deserve in foro Ecclesiae, in the Churches Court, to be
cast out, but such as either confess scandalous Sins, or are contumacious, or
convicted judicially of the same before witnesses, etc.]

The same Author in his Peaceable Plea, page 181. [ We preach and invite in the
Gospel all the uncircumcised in heart, and all the wicked to come, and hear,
and partake of the holy things of the Gospel, and receive the promises thereof
with faith: And when they come to this heavenly banquet without their wedding
Garment, Math. 22.12, 13. 2 Cor. 2.16. Mat. 21.43, 44. it follows not,
because they profane the holy things of God, that Ministers who baptize the
Infants of hypocrites and profane persons, are accessory to the profaning the
holy things of Christ -- It is one thing, whom Ministers should Receive as
members of the Sanctuary and Church: and another thing, who should come in -- ]

Page 183. [Object. Divine wrath is kindled for the profanation of holy things.
Answ. That this is the Ministers or Churches profanation of holy things, is not
proved: It is not wrath procured by the Ministers, or those who Receive them
into the Church; but wrath procured by the unworthy In comers. -- ] So far
Rutherford.

Having said thus much to Mr. Blakes denial of the distinction of Gods
judgment and the Churches in this case, I proceed to that which follows in
his book. page 141.

[Mr. Blake. 3. They may tell him of the necessity that is put upon Ministers
to profane this Divine Ordinance, in putting this seal ordinarily and
unavoidably to mere blank paper: which is a most contumelious abuse of it.]

Ans. They may sooner tell it, than prove it, to be any profanation or
contumelious abuse. Big words, may be bad arguments. Its the Claimer that is
the Prophaner, whom you encourage by telling him that he has a Title: but it
is not the Minister; who was never made a searcher of hearts, no not to know
the truth of a Dogmatical faith: and therefore may justly set the seal to a
blank paper, when the Receiver is made judge whether it be blank or not, or at
least, is to give us the evidence that we must proceed upon. I would you would
before this have told us whether one that dissemblingly pretends your
Dogmatical faith, be a blank paper or not, or one that as a Parrat is taught to
say [I believe in God, etc. [when he understands not what he says. If not,
it seems a Dogmatical faith is not the Title then in your account. If yea,
then does the Minister profane the Ordinance in giving it such; and has not
Mr. Blake sealed to many such blanks, and contumeliously abused the Ordinance?

[Mr. Blake. They may tell him that poor souls are thus miserably cheated, in
bearing them in hand, that these great privileges, and consequently all
further Church privileges are theirs, when the conveyance is mere fraudulent
that casts it upon them.

Answ. 1. Alas poor souls! Alas miserable cheaters! But who are they? They that
bear them in hand that these privileges are theirs by conveyance: which is not
1. Let Mr. Blake answer for himself. 2. It was a gentler passage than this,
that caused Mr. Blake presently to infer. [ It seems he has met with a
company of cheaters.] 3. But to call his brethren cheaters, is nothing so
dangerous as to call the conveyance fraudulent. That do not I do: for I say
that there is no such conveyance, (unless you take the word improperly.)

[Mr. Blake They may yet tell him that a door is here opened to Anabaptism, or
multiplication of Baptism. A new door, of which either nothing, or very little,
has ever been spoken.]

Ans. 1. They may tell me so: but how will you prove that they tell me true? I
see by you, that telling is easier then proving, and commoner then truth. 2.
Your making this a door to Anabaptism, does give them that which you cannot
warrant them, and advantage the Anabaptists more under pretense of renouncing
their advantages, than you desire: the common success of passionate
oppositions. 3. Your feigning this to be new, and never or little spoken of
before, in my understanding, imports one of these consequences; either as if
you had said [ All History is false; believe nothing that ever you read in
them; nay trust not your eyes and ears, that see and hear the contrary to what
I say;] or else as if you had proclaimed. [ Take heed how you credit even Godly
Divines in the heat of their contention, even in the most palpable matters of
fact.]

Mr. Blake. When discovery shall be made that the Title when Baptism was
administered was barely seeming, then all was Null ab initio in such
proceedings: and as such persons always were in the eyes of God, so now in the
eye of men they are unbaptized persons.] Ans. What proof of all this? but you
say so? 1. Baptism is sometimes taken for the mere external Ordinance: sometime
for that conjunct with the grace signified, or with the effects. As to the
actual conveyance of pardon and life, I affirm that Sacraments are uneffectual
to unbelievers; and so do you; If that be a Nullity, call them Null. But how
prove you that the external Ordinance is a Nullity where there was no Title?
The Title indeed was Null ab initio, but prove that the Ordinance was so too?
well! this must be proved from Simon Magus and from Titius: [ If Titius got
possessions presumed to be his due inheritance, and afterward it be made
appear that it never pertained to him, but to Sempronius, all is to be judged
invalid.] Ans. But if this possession was delivered by a sealed instrument, as
possession of pardon is to a Traitor or Malefactor (where right and possession
are co-incident,) and the Tenor of this instrument be, that only those that are
returned to loyalty shall have the benefit, ( e. g. pardon) and a messenger is
sent to deliver these instruments to all that profess Loyalty; here if any
Traitor shall profess that Loyalty, and seek to kill his sovereign the next
day, though all be Null as to the effect of pardoning him, yet the external
acts of sealing and delivery are not themselves Nullities. And if it be the
will of the Prince that this act shall be effectual to its end, when the person
shall return to his Loyalty, without the sealing the instrument anew, it may
even to the effect be valid afterward, that through his fault was not so before.

But if the Anabaptists must have this news that I am turned so far to them as
to open them a new door, let them take altogether, and make merry that Mr.
Blake and I are turned so far Anabaptists together, and then there may be hope
that while we two hold open the door, more may come in ere long. He often tells
us that it is a Dogmatical faith, or a faith short of justifying, that
entitleth to Baptism: England swarms with people that have not a Dogmatical
faith, and yet they receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and their
Children are Baptized (and what faith their ancestors had, who knows?)
There Is scarce a week but I hear one or other tell me, that Christ is God and
not Man, or Man and not God, or that they do not think any one has been our
surety, or made any satisfaction to God, or suffered for our sins.] If all
these Baptisms and other administrations be Nullities, and if Mr. Blake will
but teach that all should be rebaptized, whose parents are now discovered to
want the Title of a Dogmatical faith, I much fear, he will yet have more
rebaptized persons in one County than now is in Ten, at least.

If the Minister be commissioned to deliver the Sacrament on an unjust claim,
this justifies his act, and as he did his duty, so he has no Scripture for
the repeating it.

I before instanced in the case of a scornful Jew, that purposely comes to
Baptism to deride Christ, or to be in a capacity to mischief his cause or
people. Has this man a Title by Gods Donation to Church Membership, seals, and
all the blessed privileges of the visible Church, which Mr. Blake sets forth?
If he have, then malicious wickedness is the condition of Gods great mercies.
And when shall we see the Donation that conveyed this Title to him?

Mr. Blake. [6. " They may tell you that that Scripture distinction of
Circumcision in the flesh, and Circumcision in the heart, is hereby
overthrown.] Ans. 1. They may tell it me twice, before I will believe them
once. 2. They may tell it you as well as me. Was it not possible for a Jew upon
mistake to Circumcise a man that had no Right to it, and yet upon some kind of
misunderstood profession? Resolve whether that were a Nullity first for your
self, and then I will study a further answer.

Mr. Blake. [7. They may tell him that this principle standing, all persons
dying unregenerate, die unbaptized; yea all that were baptized in infancy and
after converted remain still unbaptized.] Answ. 1. What! if I saw them Baptized
with mine eyes? many such tales I know I may hear, and I will believe them as I
see cause. 2. I suppose by this that you seem your self to judge, that all that
are without a Dogmatical Faith are unbaptized.

Mr. Blake. [8. That it is much to be feared, if not certainly to be concluded
that the Major part by far of Worcestershire combination consists of unbaptized
persons, there being I doubt no good evidence of true conversion in the most
considerable part of them -- I am sure it is voiced that the most profane
where the Minister carries any authority, are as forward for subscription as
any.]

Answ. 1. As to your bold censure of so many persons whose faces you never saw,
and whose names you never heard, it shows us what you dare do. You might more
safely have learnt of Christ [ Judge not that ye be not Judged,] and have
hearkened to Paul [Who art thou that Judge another man's servant?] 2.
Especially when your censure is founded upon lying fame, as it is. This is the
way to discredit all history, when Godly men dare publish that of so many in a
County, which the whole Country almost, that are capable of understanding such
marters, do know to be false. 3. Have we groaned, and prayed, and suffered so
long in hope of Discipline, and yet are there Godly Ministers among us, that
have the hearts to calumniate and reproach the attempts of it, where they never
had the face to acquaint us with the least mistake or miscarriage in our way?
Ah what wonder if the poor Church consume away in its corruptions and
divisions, when this is the friendship and assistance of its guides! But of
this before.

The other summary of Mr. Blakes oppositions, is page 550, 551. in his
introduction, where he thus declares his mind.

Mr. Blake [ And truly (Sir!) if I should have a thought of changing my
opinion, I know not how to look to the end of the danger that will follow. I
must first necessarily engage my self in an everlasting Schism, being not able
to find out a Church in the world of any interest, in which I shall dare in
this account to hold communion.]

Answ. O the power of prejudice! What Church in all the world was ever of your
Judgment? And would you have separated from all the Churches in the world? But
lets hear the reasons of your fear.

Mr. Blake. [ I shall see in many members too clear symptoms of
non-Regeneration and Unbelief. -- ]

Answ. 1. Do not those persons profess a Justifying faith? 2. Or is it
Infallible symptoms of the contrary which you mean, or which are sufficient to
nullify or invalidate that Profession? if not, you say nothing: if so, then 3.
Dare you hold communion with no Church that has some members that in your own
Judgment are unfit to be there? How often has this opinion been confuted in the
Separatists? But you add your reason.

Mr. Blake. [ Though this will not bear a separation, yet this consideration of
their non-baptism will necessarily enforce it. -- ]

Answ. 1. The Enemy of the Church needs no hands to do a great part of his
work, but our own. The Anabaptists take us to be all unbaptized, and thence
infer a necessity of Separation. Their Separation troubles the Church much
more than their opinion for re-baptizing. Our endeavor is, at least to bring
them to this, that being rebaptized they would rest satisfied, and live in
peaceable communion with the Church. Mr. Blake steps in and confirms them in
their consequence, on supposition of the Antecedent which we cannot satisfy
them in; and so frustrateth all our labor, and gives them the day, in that,
and considers not I fear the danger of promoting such a schism. But he would
do well first to answer the many Reasons that Mr. John Goodwin has brought
against that opinion, and take his work clean before him. If I knew a Church or
whole Nation of men that thought verily they were truly baptized, and I thought
that it was not so, if yet they professed true Faith and Holiness, I durst not
separate from them. 2. But how irksom must it needs be to your Judicious
Readers, to have such conclusions tossed up and down with mere confidence, upon
suppositions, which you disdain (or deign not) to prove? One Argument to have
proved that our Principles infer the Nullity of the Baptism of the
Unregenerate, had been more worth than all this kind of talk. I say that Deo
Judice such men have no Title by any Grant or Gift of God to claim or receive
the Sacraments, though the Minister have Commission to give it to some unjust
claimers. This opinion professes the Nullity of the Title which is denied. Do
you prove that it also infers the Nullity of the external Baptism it self,
which was justly administered, though unjustly demanded. Its tedious to read
voluminous Disputes, where that which requires proof is still taken for
granted.

But if all this were so, I think you must still be a Separatist on your own
Principles. For where would you find a Church (among us) where there be not
many that have not a Dogmatical faith, which you say must give them Title to
Baptism?

Mr. Blake. [ And if I be helped out (as indeed I utterly despair) by any
distinction of forum Dei and forum Ecclesiae, Univocal and Equivocal, what
thought then shall I entertain of the Holy Scripture?]

Answ. I cannot tell what thoughts you will have of it, but I can partly tell
what thoughts you should have of it. Will you deny that the Scripture most
commonly speaks of God himself himself in equivocal terms? I hope you will not:
And how should it speak otherwise to man's understanding? And yet what thoughts
will you entertain of the Scripture? You will not I hope take on you to know no
difference between Jesuitical dissembling equivocation, which is to deceive,
and the use of equivocal terms, either necessarily for want of other words in
being, or Rhetorically for ornament, or when custom of Speech has made them
the most apt? Will you so far equivocate with equivocal terms, as to confound
the culpable equivocation with the laudable, and then say, [What thoughts shall
I have of the holy Scriptures?] this does not beseem an Expositor of the
Scriptures.

And whereas you next add the many titles given to the unregenerate, I have
answered it before, and more may do in the next Dispute, besides what you had
even now from Mr. Rutherford. These titles were never given to any of your
Professors of a faith short of that which Justifyeth. And yet there is no
passage in your Book that amazeth me more than your frequent and confident
Assertions of the contrary, and pretenses of the common Judgment of the Church
to be on your side.

Page 116, 117. When I had said that Dr. Ward would not have found a second to
undertake his cause, you say, [ How this passage fell from his pen, may well be
to very intelligent Reader matter of admiration -- that a man of such
multiplicity of reading should think that Dr. Ward in this opinion would not
have found a second, when if he had perused our approved Authors about the
question, especially since it came to a punctual just debate, he may soon see
that he has almost every one to appear for him, if this which he mentions be
his opinion: unless perhaps he has been so held in reading the Fathers and
other Writers for the first thirteen or fourteen hundred years (in which few
will I think come out and vie with him,) that he has not regarded what has
been said this 1500 years in this corner of the world.]

Answ. 1. Your groundless insipid scorn, about reading the Fathers of the first
1400 years, does no whit clear the Truth, nor strengthen your Cause, nor (I
think) tend to the pleasing of God. 2. One of us have certainly exposed our
selves to the Readers, -- when we stand wondering thus at each other, and
profess our understanding to be at so great a distance about a matter of open
fact. I must still say, that I hoped Dr. Ward would not have found a Second to
undertake that Cause. But this does not intimate either that I never read that
any was of his mind before, or that I expected not that any should be
afterward: Its one thing to be of that Opinion, and another thing as his Second
to undertake it. But I will now say more than that which you wonder at. I must
profess that I do not know of any one Protestant Divine, reputed Orthodox, of
that Judgment, before Dr. Ward and you: though some Papists and Arminians I
knew of that mind: and since I find Sir Hen. Vane maintain it; and one John
Timson, in his Defense of M. Humphrey; and now newly M. Humphrey, in his second
Vindication of Free Admission. Let all Readers now come and wonder at your
wondering and mine, or at least the vast disagreement of our Judgments, in
such a point of fact. All that ever open the books of Protestants, come and
judge betwixt Mr. Blake and me. Dr. Ward and he do maitain [ That a certain
kind of faith which is short of Justifying faith, gives title to Baptism even
before God] I say, [ that only true Justifying faith is the condition of our
Title before God, as given by him, and warranting our claim; but that the bare
profession of that Justifying faith (but of no lower) does make us such whom
the Minister must give the Sacraments to if we claim them, and so by it we have
a Right to them before the Church, and so far before God as he is the approver
of the Churches act.] Mr. Blake says, almost every one of our late Writers
appear for him: I say, I remember none of the Reformed Divines for them. Nor do
I find that Mr. Blake himself has produced any to that end, but by mere
abusing them, Certain I am, that the common doctrine of Reformed Divines is, [
that sound believers are members of the mystical Church, and that professors of
that belief are members of the visible Church, to whom we must give
Sacraments.] But as for your third sort, who believe with another kind of
faith, or profess so to do, it is not their use to take these as members of
either, or such as have right to Sacraments.

One more Objection I find much stood upon (which I had almost forgot) viz,
The Sacraments are appointed for the visible Church: therefore all that are of
the visible Church have Right to them.]

Answ. the word [appointed] is ambiguous. If it mean only that Ministers are
appointed to deliver it to men upon an outward Profession and Claim, this we
still grant. But if the meaning be, that Hypocritical or Unregenerate
Professors have any Moral Donation or Promise of them, or any command to claim
and receive them, in their present state, this is but a bare affirming of the
thing in question; and so their Consequent is the same with the Antecedent.
What Mr. Galespie and Mr. Rutherford, and many other Divines have said against
it, you have seen before; as also by what Scripture-Evidence it is destroyed.

Ob. But it is said of the Jews, that to them pertained the Adoption, and the
Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God,
and the Promises.] Romans 9.4.

Answ. 1. Yet will it not follow that all these pertain to all the Visible
Church, and therefore not to the Church as Visible. The Glory, that is, the
Ark, and other signs of some Glorious Presence, and the giving of the Law here
mentioned, with other Privileges expressed in the next words, were proper to
the Jews. 2. The Jewish Nation contained some that were truly sanctified, and
some that were not. To the later sort was given the Law* Covenants, Promises,
etc. providentially, and by way of Offer: God so ordered it, that among them
these excellent mercies should abide, and to them they should be offered; and
if they had heartily accepted them, they might have had a proper Title to the
Benefits of the Covenant it self. And it fell out that the seals were actually
applied to them upon their pretended acceptance of the offer, and upon their
claim. But to the former belonged the Covenants and Promises as the instruments
of Gods Donation, whereby he conveyed to them actual Right to the Benefits:
But so it did not to the latter (unless we speak of some particular promise
made to this or that indiviall person, or some temporal promises to the Jews as
Jews, and not as a Visible Church) Yet may it well be said that to the Jews in
general the Covenants, Promises, etc. belonged; not only because the Regenerate
were Jews, and the whole Nation was denominated from the better part sometime,
but also (which is Paul's sense in that Text) because it is not the foresaid
proper Right that is here spoken of, but the actual sending of this Light among
them, and the tendering of it to them, and continuing it with them, together
with the success of it so far as that some were sanctified by it, and others
seemingly consented to it. And thus we may say of England now in the general,
that it enjoys the Gospel, and Sacraments, etc. in that they are among us,
and all men that are truly willing may have a saving title to them, and the
rest that pretend to be willing and are not, do actually partake of the
External Ordinance, though to their own condemnation, through their own
default. But this is no affirming that the unregenerate have a proper Title
given them, which may warrant their claim in that estate; I mean, to the
Sacraments, which are special Ordinances.

The Reverend Vindicator of Free Admission, Second Vindication, page 6, 7, 8.
lays down 13 Reasons to prove that [ the Covenant in the general Grace and
external Administration of the Ordinances belongs to the whole Church as
Visible, and to the several members alike] To which I say, 1. that it [belongs]
to them, is too large a word without distinction to use in a profitable
discourse. I have elsewhere showed that Covenant and Seals do belong to them in
some sense, and in other not; and how far such are in Covenant. 2. Note on the
by, that if this were granted, its nothing to Mr. Blake's main cause against
me, that [a Faith short of justifying gives Right] For no man was ever a member
for a Faith short of justifying; but only for a saving faith, or the profession
of a saving faith. 3. Note that the stress of the Controversy is not [Whether
it belong to them at all?] but whether (as he affirms) to all alike? Enough
is said before for the solving of his Arguments. More particularly.

To the first. Page 6. How the whole Nation of the Jews were in Covenant, is
before declared, (more than which is yet unproved:) and also how little this
makes for his End.

To the Second: We easily grant that the Gentiles are graffed into the same
Olive, and are as much in the Covenant of Grace as the Jews were (so many of
the Gentiles as profess Christianity.) And because it is no more, it is
nothing to their purpose.

To the Third: I Answer: There Is no doubt but the promise belongs to all that
God shall call; that is, the bare offer belongs to all them that are called
uneffectually, and still remain in unbelief: And the worst of them are invited
to Repent and Believe, which when they do, they have Title in that same promise
to Remission and the Seals of it: And when they profess to Repent and Believe,
and so require the Seals, they have such a Right Coram Ecclesia, as that* we
must admit of them. But more than this here is yet no proof of.

To the Fourth: The Called some of them obey not at all: some of them obey ore
tenus, and as to some faith short of justifying: and some of them obey the Call
sincerely. You mean the Second: Of whom I say, 1. Prove if you can that any
called ones may have the Sacraments, that profess not saving Faith. 2. And
prove that they who barely profess it, have the Title which is in controversy
between us, which will justify their claim, as well as our giving it on that
claim. The saying that they are called is no proof. As for your phrase of [an
outward being in Covenant] you know I affirmed it long ago ex part hominis,
they outwardly covenant with God, and oblige themselves. But if you mean it ex
part Dei, that he has any such mere outside promises when he means not as
he speaks, or that he is actually obliged as a Covenanter to them, yea but for
outward things, I have long waited from others for the proof in vain. As to the
phrase [Equivocal] you shall have more of it, God willing, in due place.

To the Fifth: There Is difference between the Jews then and the World: 1. In
that one part of the Jews were sincere in the Covenant, and that in great
numbers; in whom, as it were, the life of the Church did abide. 2. In that the
rest of them (as to the main body) professed that true faith which others had.
3. And in that such bare professors were thereupon admitted into that Society,
and into those Ordinances, which tended to help them to that sincerity which
they wanted; some of which Ordinances they were immediately bound to use, and
others of them but in order after their Conversion: and though they used them
unjustly before Conversion, the thing was a mercy in it self, though
mis-received by them. 4. And then they had many temporal promises which no
other Nation had: nor have we. I think here is a difference from the Gentile
world. Prove more, if you affirm it.

To the Sixth: I have answered it over and over before. They are commanded to
be circumcised but as a sign and seal of the Covenant: Therefore they are bound
first in order to consent in heart to the Covenant: And if they do the former
without the later, it may show that they have by outward covenanting obliged
themselves to God, and so are annumerated with his listed soldiers by the
Church: But it proves not that God is in actual obligation to them, except
only as to any of those mercies that were absolutely promised to the
Israelites, and belong not to us.

To the Seventh: The weak unworthy Author of the book of Infant Baptism, whom
you are pleased to load with a Title which his conscience does disown, does
heartily persist in believing that the conditional Covenant is made to more
than the Elect, even to all, at least that hear it; and that this is the effect
of Christ's blood; and that the entrance into covenant, and accepting the terms
of it, ore tenus, or not sincerely and unreservedly, is common to Elect and
Reprobate.] But all this is nothing to the present business.

To the Eighth: It is a strange consequence that such [Must renounce their
profession, and never come to ordinances, etc.] Must imports Duty. And their
duty is sincerely to Repent, and Believe, and Profess, and not to renounce
profession, but only to lament the falsehood and hypocrisy in professing what
they did not do. Nor is any bound to stay from Ordinances simply, but to
repent, believe, and so come; as Peter hid Simon Magus, Repent and Pray, etc.
But if he will profess falsely, and come without Repentance, let him do it at
his peril, and not think God is obliged to bless him in it; which would lead
hard up to the Papists Opus operatum, though I know how much this is disclaimed
by Mr. Blake. For when you liberally give such men a a Title Coram Deo to the
Seals, what can be that Title but the Opus operatum of a verbal profession: For
though a Faith short of Justifying be talked of, none of you all can tell who
has it, and who has it not; and yet I find not so much openness as to speak
out and tell us whether indeed all the Hypocrites that have not so much as the
Dogmatical Faith which they profess, have indeed a Title before God to the
Seals, on the Opus operatum of profession or not: Though by consequence it
appears that you must say so, or cast all your cause away.

To the ninth I Answer: If you know him not a dissembler, he is to you what he
professes to be: If therefore he profess that the Foundation is laid, when it
is not, you must endeavor to build him up. But if you know him to dissemble, I
suppose you will rather help to lay the Foundation before you go any further.
But 2. If you can say as much to prove that I may not teach any but Disciples
the observable commands of Christ (in sensu activo; that is, do my best to
teach them) as I have done to prove that wicked men have no Title to the
Sacraments which will warrant them Coram Deo, to claim them, you will do much
toward the changing of my mind.

To the Tenth I answer: This confusion marrs all. I have often told you,
unregenerate men are really in covenant as to their external engaging act; and
this they may break. But does it follow that they cannot violate their own
promise, unless God be actually obliged by promise to them.

To the Eleventh. I will not stand now to search whether Judas was one of them
that was bid Eat, and Drink: But supposing it granted, it is most certain that
he was commanded as much to take and feed on Christ by faith: and that he was
offered the Sacrament as a Sacrament, that is, a sealing and professing sign,
as I have before explained. Now if he had so received it as it was offered, and
in the nature of a Sacrament, as Christ bid him; Take, Eat, Drink, then
certainly he had done it in faith. And if he did not so (as he did not) he did
not what he was commanded. And therefore you cannot hence prove a Right in
Judas by any grant, to the separated sign, while he was destitute of the faith
which by his action was professed Receiving the Sacrament as a Sacrament is an
actual profession o^ faith: And you can never prove that Christ commanded Juda
to lie, by professing the faith which he had not; but only that he commanded
him at once to Believe and thus profess it. He that will have men compelled to
come in (to the Church) intends that they must bring a wedding garment: or
else they shall hear, how came thou hither?

You apprehend John Timpsons words to be apposite, which imply a contradiction,
or touch not the point: If the right Object be really believed (even that which
is the full Object of saving faith) that very belief is saving, and proves the
holiness of the person.

To the Twelfth I answer. General and special Grace, I resolvedly maintain. But
when will you prove that it is a part of General Grace to have a proper Title
given by God to the Sacraments which seal up the pardon of sin actually where
there is such Title? To have the universal conditional promise (or covenant ex
part Dei) enacted, and promulgate and offered the world, with many incitements
to entertain it, is General Grace: But so is not either our actual
heart-covenanting, the Remission of our sin, nor such a proper Title to the
sign of both.

When you tell us of the Worlds Potential, and the visible Churches actual
Interest in General Grace, you give us (pardon the truth) a mere sound of words
that signify nothing, or nothing to purpose. You cannot call it General Grace
Objectively; as if the Saints had a particular Objective Grace, the rest a
General: For Generals exist not but in the individuals. It is therefore the
General conditional promise or gift, which you must mean by General Grace: This
is to the world (without) indeed but an offer: But is it any more to any of the
unbelievers or unregenerate within? what can be the meaning of [an actual
Interest in a conditional promise] which all the hearers have not, and yet is
short of the true actual Interest of them that perform the condition? I feel no
substance in this notion, nor see any light in it. I confess there is a certain
possession that one such man may have more then others; but as that is nothing
to proper Title, so it is not the thing that Sacraments are to seal.

I have not Mr. Hudsons book now by me: but your solution by the two sives had
need of some sifting. Its one thing to ask what is the end of Sacraments quoad
intentionem praecepti: and another thing to tell what eventually they produce.
I do not believe that the sive that brings men into a state of Grace is in the
hands of God only, so as if he used not Ministers thereto. Ministers are said
in Scripture to convert and heal, and deliver and save men.

To your 13th and 14th and last, I answer. That we easily confess that the
covenant under the new Testament is better than the old: but this makes nothing
for you, nor do you prove that it does: the force of the first section of your
book, as it may be the matter of an Objection, I have answered before. As to
your Authorities I say, 1. Mr. Vines says nothing which proves any
approbation of your opinion: whether Mr. Burgess do, I leave to himself, for I
know not certainly. All that I know of, since Dr. Ward is Mr. Blake, Mr.
Humphrey, and John Timpson; and John Timpson, Mr. Humphrey and Mr. Blake. Your
3d and 4th Sections need no more answer I think than what is already given. You
needed not these pillars to support that point which is the design of your
Treatise.

To these I find you add another, the greatest of all, page 611. which you say
sinks deep into you: but if reason will do it, I will pluck it up by the roots;
partly by desiring you to peruse what I have twice or thrice before answered to
it, and partly by adding as follows; That 1. If a man by mistaken doubtings
shall keep himself away from a Sacrament, that does not destroy his Title to it
or the Grace signified, nor is it any ones fault but his own. I therefore deny
your Minor: It is not this doctrine that cuts off doubting Christians from the
Sacrament, but themselves that do culpably withdraw. To your Prosyllogism; I
deny the Major: that doctrine which concludes it sin in the doubtful Christian
to Receive, does not cut him off: For it concludes it not his sin to Receive
in it self, but to Receive doubtingly: so that it is not Receiving, but
Doubting, that is properly his sin: and withal we say, that it is his Duty to
Receive, and his greater Sin not to Receive than to Receive. And though an
erring Conscience does always ensnare, and so create a necessity of sinning
which way soever we go, till it be rectified, yet its a greater sin to trespass
against a plain precept, than against an erring Conscience in many cases. But
the main stress lies on your proof, which is from Romans 14.23. [ Whatsoever is
not of faith is sin.] But I could wish you would consider it better, before you
press home that Text to the same sense against all other duties as you do
against this, lest you leave God but little service from the Church. 1. It is
one thing to doubt about indifferent matters, such as Paul speaks of, as
eating, etc. For there he is condemned if he eat; because he is sure it is
lawful to forbear; but not sure that it is lawful to eat. But press not this
upon us in case of necessary duty. If God command me to pray, praise or
communicate, my doubt will not justify my forbearance; and though it entangle
me in sin, it cannot disoblige me from duty; but I shall sin more if I forbear.

You say [ If it be sin for the unregenerate to Receive, then cannot the
doubting Christian be persuaded, and consequently sins.] Ans. True: but
that's not long of the doctrine, but of his error: and it is the case of all
practical errors; which will not therefore justify you in blaming the
doctrine: its the unavoidable effect of an erring Conscience. And again I say,
he sins more in forbearing.

Whereas you conclude this Argument to be convincing, I have told you before
why it convinces not me: but to your selves I would ask, whether it do not
also convince you that your own doctrine is as unsufferable? For I am past
doubt that not only most Christians, but even most doubting Christians have
more knowledge that they have true justifying faith, than the rest of the world
have, that they have true Dogmatical faith. Though the wicked doubt less,
because they believe and regard it less, yet indeed they have not only far more
cause to doubt of the truth of their Dogmatical faith, but have less true
knowledge of it. At least many of them its thus with, when so many true
Christians do as much doubt of their Dogmatical faith, as of any. Now what will
you do with all these? If you take their faith it self (though common) to be
their Title, then they must according to you, all keep a way, while they doubt
of it: And if it be but the verbal profession of that Dogmatical faith that is
their Title, before God, and their own Conscience, then any infidel may make
himself a Title at pleasure by a lie, and the bare opus operatum of speaking
the words which he never believed, but derideth the sense while he utters the
terms. As you will save your own Communicants from condemning themselves then
for want of Assurance of their Lower faith, so shall you direct us to do by
ours.

I will only add this Question, What Description must that man give of the
faith short of Justifying, which entitles to Baptism, who takes Justifying
faith it self to lie but in Assent? You know my meaning: It will be certainly
another kind of faith, than Mr. Blake describes that such a man must require.

I had thought I had done with you at this time: and this day I received a Book
of Mr. Prins writing, containing the fruit of your Doctrine; and therein I
find a passage of yours cited from page 125. which makes me think it may
deserve further consideration than I thought to have taken of it.

You say [ Giving and Receiving being Relata, all those Texts that prove it the
duty of any to Receive the Sacrament, does eo nomine oblige the Minister to
deliver it to them, or admit them; because posito uno Relatorum, ponitur
alterum.]

Answ. Must Logic do the deed at last? If so, it will give us leave to
distinguish between Relata secundum dici and secundum esse; simplices and
duplices relationes, etc. Ponitur autem hoc unum Relatorum vel in esse, vel in
debito: If you speak of the former, then you know 1. that our Giving is not
effectual Giving, but Offering, when it goes before Receiving: and 2. that as
scibile may be sine scientia, as existent; so Offering may be without
Receiving, though not Receiving in our present sense without Offering:
therefore one of these may be put without the other. But I suppose it is
Debitum offerendi, and recipiendi, which you think are thus related. But 1.
here the debitum offerendi goes first, and the debitum recipiendi comes after,
and is but conditional and not actual, till the very act of oblation. You may
be bound to Offer your people the Sacrament, and not perform your duty: they
are not bound to Receive it, when you are bound to Offer it; but only on
condition or supposition that you actually do Offer it: so that it is not your
duty and theirs that are connexed as Relata: else they should be bound to
Receive that which is not offered them; for you may neglect your duty. Nor is
it your actual Offering and their actual Receiving that are inseparably
connexed as perfect Relates; for you may offer it, when it shall be refused.

But you will say, [ At least the thing intended stands good; that posito
recipiendi debito ponitur etiam debitum offerendi.] I answer: Not always so
neither, unless you take the Duty of Reception to be actual and absolute, and
not conditional: For you may be bound to Receive on supposition that I offer:
both this and many other things which I am not bound to offer: Much less am I
eo nomine (as you strongly say) obliged to deliver it to you. You may be
obliged to give me Thanks, supposing I bestow a Benefit on you: and your thanks
has relation to my Benefit: and yet I do not yet understand that I am eo
nomine obliged to give you that Benefit, because you must be thankful if I do.
Your Obligation to receive, is plainly consequential and hypothetical,
supposing I actually offer it: and that cannot so necessarily infer the duty of
Offering. For I make little doubt to prove, that in many Cases when the
Minister sins in his Offer, it is yet the Peoples duty to receive it if he
do offer it. The Scribes and Pharisees might unjustly usurp the Chair of Moses,
and yet it may be the peoples duty to hear them. The Priests may usurp their
place, and yet the cleansed Leper may be bound to show himself to them. Nero
may sin by asking Tribute, when it may be my duty to give it him if he ask it.
If Mr. Prin had thought that your Argument would justify a Thief in taking his
purse by the high way, I do not think he would have cited it. Giving and Taking
here are Relatives too: If a Thief demand your purse, resolving to kill you if
you deny it, it may be your duty to Give it, to save your life; when in my
opinion it is not eo nomine his duty to Demand or Take it.

Well! but this is not the chief part of my answer to you. If you had laid
better grounds for it, and well limited it, I might well grant you, that when
the People are bound to Receive, it implies the Ministers duty to offer it
them. But then you must take duty as you find it entirely, at least
essentially, and you must not cut off a piece of a duty; yea, leave out the
essentials, and turn it into a sin. God commands people first to Repent and
Believe, and then to profess it by words and sacramental actions, and therewith
receive the seals of his special grace. This is your Duty: Perform your duty so
far as is antecedent to mine, and I shall confess that mine will follow, and I
must offer you the Sacraments. But if you will refuse to repent or Believe, or
to profess that you do so, in a credible sort, or will by word or life profess
that you do not so, and yet will demand the Sacrament, you do not your duty,
and so I am not obliged. Prove that it is a man's duty to receive the Sacraments
without Faith and Repentance (yea or a credible Profession of them,) or to
profess by that Reception that he Takes Christ and Believes in him, when it is
a lie, and then you say somewhat. All men are bound mediately to receive the
Sacrament; that is, first to seek after the Word, and then to hear it, and then
to believe and repent, and then to seek the Sacraments: but it follows not
that they may do the last first, and receive before they repent.

Moreover, as the Receiver is bound ad ordinem and modum, and not simply and
any how to receive: so I am bound ad ordinom and modum, and not any how to
give. And therefore I must first know my call to it as a Pastor, and I must do
my best to help the people to a due preparation, and I must do it Decently, in
Order, and to Edification: and the miss of one of these may turn the duty into
a sin. I am not therefore of your opinion, as you next express it, that [ there
is as many Scripture precepts and presidents to deliver the Sacrament to all,
as to any, supposing them within the Church, and neither unintelligent or
excommunicate.] If this were true, then 1. If any of the Parish will say, Sir!
I am none of your Flock; I renounce your Pastoral over sight; but yet I will
have the Sacrament from you; it seems I must be forced to do the office of that
Relation where it is disclaimed: And if all the Anabaptists or Separatists of
some neighbour-Church demand it of me, I must give them all the Sacrament: or
if all the Parishes about stock in to me, or a thousand strangers, I must give
it them all; or if the Parishioners will refuse to speak to me, and to be
personally instructed, and one will have it leaping, and singing, and laughing;
and others will have me bring it them from house to house, I must give it to
them all; and why not, if they swear and curse when they demand it, or profess
to take it merely to ensnare me? For none of these are supposed unintelligent
or excommunicate.

But I find you take up this Reason before in another sort, sect. 2. page 5.
Having given a touch about Arminius so doubly defective of ingenuity, as shows
you to be but a man, (of which more in due place) you add [ This doctrine
enforces them to distinguish between what gives Right, as to a man's own part,
to Church Membership and Ordinances, and that which gives Right to be admitted:
whereas the truth is, these are Relata, quorum posito and sublato uno ponitur
and tollitur alterum. Besides, there is this great inconvenience it runs down
right into, that the Minister shall be bound to administer the Ordinances
(particularly the Sacrament) unto people, when they are bound upon pain of
damnation not to take them.]

To all this I answer: 1. I do not think you ever read such a distinction as
you here frame: at least not from him, whom (you know) I have reason to think
you intend. Doubtless, he that has Right to be admitted, has also in eodem
foro a Right on his own part to Ordinances. This is not fairly done: Indeed a
Right of Admission may be in the Minister, (who is another subject) when yet
the party has no Right (of the same sort) to be admitted, or to seek or
Receive.

But we must once more consider your Canon de relatis. And to what is said
before, let me deal plainlier with you, and tell you that the things in
question are not Relata: For though actual Giving and Receiving have some kind
of Relation, yet several Rights, viz. the Jus dandi, and Jus accipiendi, are
not Relates. Show us if you can, how Jus ad Jus refertur.

Moreover, the Distinction which is used by those whom you here oppose, is (not
as you feign it, but) between [a Right Coram Deo to claim and receive the
Sacraments] and [a Right or Duty of the Minister to give it upon claim or
demand.] Now the former Right is actual and positive; the later but
suppositive: Demanding or seeking is supposed to go before my giving, and my
right and duty to give: And I think (according to my small skill in Logic)
Demanding and Giving are no inseparable Relates; and I am content that any
beggar at your door be Judge: This or nothing you must prove to your purpose.
And if you prove it, I may the next time I see you demand all your Estate and
Learning; and what will you do then? And (with submission to the Judgment of
better Lawyers, especially the Learned Citer of your words) I conceive that [a
Right of delivering on supposition of a demand or claim] does not so
necessarily suppose a Right to demand and claim, as one Relate supposes its
Correlate. If a man demand your coat (upon terms of violence) you may give him
your cloak also; and yet no more justify his demand, than you justify his
smiting you by turning the other cheek. But if I should be mistaken in these
Law-matters, I must remember Mr. Prin, that when ever he delivers to
soldiers the key of his house to prevent the breaking open the doors, or
delivers them his Arms or moneys to save his life, or a contribution to save
the rest, he justifies their Right to claim all this. And by the same rule
when ever he went to prison at their command, he justified their right of
commanding him: For Commanding and Obeying are as much Relates, as Demanding
and Delivering are.

By this time you may see what is become of the [ Grievous inconvenience] which
you dreamed we were running downright into. I hope you would not persuade the
World that ever we taught, that it is our duty to give Effectively, which ever
causes a reception, nor yet to deliver the Sacraments, but on supposition of
their claim or seeking, to any such men; nor yet to persuade them to claim or
seek them in statu quo, in their present unbelief and impenitency, with a false
profession of the contrary. And then do you indeed count it so grievous an
inconvenience that we should be bound [to give it to an unjust claimer on
supposition he demand it, on a lying profession of Faith and Repentance, which
yet is credible to me] and yet that he deserves damnation for his lying
profession and unjust claim and receiving. If the Iliaca passio were common in
London, and this miserere provoked some rich Physician to so much compassion,
as to deliver to his servant a gold bullet to swallow for the Cure (which is
reputed so good a medicine) and many come for them that are really sick, and
swallow the bullet, and it saves their lives; but many others counterfeit the
disease through covetousness of the gold, and the servant believing them,
dilivereth them the bullets; do you think here the servant did more than his
duty, when he is not able to judge who dissembleth, and the Physician thus
leaves it to him? Or do you think that the covetous dissemblers had coram
donatore a just claim, supposing him to be able to discern their deceit? Or is
here such a Grievous inconvenience as you imagined? I think not.

And as for the inextricable difficulties which you think this leads into,
another may see the way out of them, when you do not; and he may as confidently
conceive that the difficulties and inconveniences of your way are far more.

As for that part of your Book which owneth Church Discipline, and the power of
the Keys, I give you thanks for it, and assure you if we could but see it
practiced, even less rigorously than the ancient Churches have practiced it,
when there was no coersive power of violence to enforce it, but rather the
sword of persecutors to discountenance it, we should not trouble you with
Contests for any other suspension, For my part I blame many of the suspenders
as heartily as you do; but it is not for doing too much, but for doing too
little, and in disorder. And I hope you that are for Excommunicating where
others do but suspend, (though Mr. Prin can tell you that even that is [in
truth an actual Excommunication, without any precedent citation, articles,
legal proceeding, hearing, sentence, etc.] Append.) will do more than they, and
not less, according to this principle. And if you will needs believe that you
are not authorized to do it (a ready way in this age to put off some
troublesome work) I hope you will seek to them that you think have Authority:
If it be in a meeting of Ministers, make use of them: If in a Bishop, use him
if you have one, if not, procure one. For me thinks men that own the necessity
of Discipline, should do their best to procure the exercise of it.

And as for that Book of Mr. Prins, which occasioned me to say the more to you
on these passages, though I highly honor the Author's name, and disown the way
of his Vicar A. against whose way he principally intends it; yet I must say
that his writing shows me, as well as his Icon, that All flesh is grass: the
best men vanity -- And what the Church and World must suffer, if the best men
had the ruling of it. That all ministers who will not give the Sacraments to
all their Parishioners (legally qualified and desiring the same) p. 4. should
be used as he directs, viz. their Tithes withheld by the people, themselves
imprisoned, and ejected, I cannot wish; especially if I consider what the legal
qualification is, and if I believe him (here) that no Ordinance can be made
without the consent of King, Lords, and Commons, and that the Ordinances
wanting these are mere Nullities in Law. These evils which I foresee, go not
down so easily with me as with that pious Author: 1. That hereby the greatest
part of the ablest godly Ministers in England (as far as I am able to learn)
must be turned out and imprisoned: 2. And then the Churches either left
destitute, or possessed by ignorant, drunken, scondalous men; there being not
worthy men of his judgment to supply them. 3. And how many thousand souls may
perish everlastingly? 4. And Gods worship be abused, and his name dishonored
through the Land. 5. And the great hopes of godly people frustrate concerning
the prosperity of the Church as to posterity; and their joy turned into sorrow.
6. And the enemies have their ends. 7. And would be able to tell us that where
the Bishops cast out one able Minister, they have cast out many. 8. That even
the men whom Mr. Prin most intends, should have so much to say for their
former resistance and usage of such men as he; as to say [You see now what men
these are, and what desolating cruel works they would make, if it had fallen to
their Lot to govern.] 9. That even the multitude of sober Godly men, should
have such a temptation, to rejoice at that which once they lamented, even that
such as Mr. P. are kept from power, and that they have escaped so great a
calamity as he here designeth them. 10. That indeed such a spirit of violence
should be found in so good a man, that has tasted of so much persecution
himself, as to endeavor to imprison and eject all the Ministers in England,
that think the Law of God is stricter then the Laws of England, (standing as
heretofore) in point of Qualification of Receivers whom we must admit. 11. That
the Quakers, who are now crying down Tithes, should be so much furthered in
their design, as to have the people taught to detain them by Law; and they that
are crying down the Ministry, should be so far directed to eject them. 12. And
that the multitude of obstinate, rebellious people, that will scorn to come to
a Minister, or hear him speak to them personally, or will live in many
notorious Vices (which the Law enabled us not to use Discipline against) or the
ignorant that know not who Christ is, God or man, nor will be accountable to us
of their understanding the Essentials of Religion, but watch all advantages to
defame their Ministers, and hinder their doctrine, and detain their
maintenance, and get them out; I say, that these should have now directions put
into their hands, for non-payment of Tithes, and for imprisoning and ejecting
them: All these things I confess are grievous to me; though I believe that the
principal intention of the Author was, to direct some better men, that might be
wronged by the overmuch rigor of some Minister, that was guilty of
unwarrantable separation: But good meanings will not warrant such attempts.
Were I of Mr. Prin's Judgment against suspension from Sacraments, I think yet
I should rather choose to be suspended in another sort my self, than be guilty
of Imprisoning and Ejecting all the Ministers in England, that gave not the
Sacraments to all their Parishioners, according to the Laws which never were
repealed by the threefold consent of Kings, Lords, and Commons.

And herein I see what one bad opinion or principle in practicals will do, even
in the best and most experienced men; and what actions must be expected from
the best man, if his Judgment be mistaken: And I see also whether the Doctrine
of Common Admission leads.

The fifth Disputation.
De Nomine. Whether Hypocrites and other Unregenerate persons be called
Church Members, Christians, Believers, Saints, Adopted, Justified, etc.
Univocally Analogically, or Equivocally?
Luke 14.26. If any man come to me and hate not -- his own life, he cannot be
my Disciple. And whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after me, cannot be
my Disciple. Verse. 33. Whosoever he be that forsakes not all that he has, he
cannot be my Disciple. Gal. 5.24. And they that are Christ's have Crucified the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts. Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 9, 10. He that Believes on
him shall not be confounded -- unto you which Believe he is precious -- Ye are
a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People,
that you should show forth the Praises of him who has called you out of
Darkness into his marvelous light: which in times past were not a people, but
are now the people of God. Romans 6.16. His Servants ye are, to whom you Obey.
John 12.26. Where I am, there shall also my Servant be. Ephesians. 5.23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 29, 30. -- Christ is the Head of the Church, and he is the Savior of
the Body. As the Church is subject to Christ, so let Wives be to their own
Husbands in every thing. Husbands love your Wives as Christ loved the Church,
and gave himself for it: that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it with the
Washing of water, by the Word; that he might present it to himself a Glorious
Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be
Holy and without blemish. -- No man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church. For we are Members
of his Body, and of his flesh, and of his bones. See also Ephesians. 4 12, 13, 14,
15, 16. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 26, 27. For as the Body is One, and has many
members, and all the members of that one Body, being many, are one Body: so
also is Christ. For by One spirit we are all baptized into one Body -- And
whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be
honored, all the members
(...) necessary to say somewhat to the point: which I shall do with as much
brevity as I can, without injury to the Cause.

Because here are several Titles commonly given to unsound Professors, which
the Question does take in, and we cannot speak to them all at once, I shall
begin at the first, and then the rest may easily be dispatched: yea, the most
that needs to be said concerning them, will fall in, in order to the handling
of the first.

But what shall we do for a Judge or Rule for the determining of our
Controversy? Custom is the Master of Language: and if any one will pretend to
so much reason as to tell the signification of words from the bare Etymology,
contrary to Customs interpretation, the world will but laugh at him: For how
well soever he plays his part, he will but tell us how such words should be
used, and not how they are used; and therefore he will help us to the right
understanding of no man's words or writings thereby. Its Custom therefore, and
not Etymology, that we must be judged by: But Custom is here double-tongued.
The world is not agreed of the sense of Analoga, nor well of aequivocals and
univocals. I must crave of the Reader that he will suppose here what I have
already written about these terms to Dr. Kendall; that I need not to repeat
what is there. The Controversy, though but nominal, is old between the Papists
and the Protestants; and the Protestants have commonly maintained all along
since the Reformation, that Hypocrites or mere Professors are but Aequivocally
called Members of the Church: The Papists have resisted them in this: and yet
been forced in the opposition to cut the throat of their own Cause. Though it
be the Defense of the old Protestant Cause here that is finally my Business,
yet it is the late opposition made against it by two Protestant Divines that is
the occasion of my undertaking; to wit, Mr. Blake, and (since him) Mr.
Humphrey. And yet with them I need not have much ado: For, if we are not
agreed, we know not well the state of our difference; and therefore have
happily made our selves incapable of following it far by Controversy, as being
in the dark. In my writing to Mr. Blake, I use to say that such men are
[Church-members, Christians, Saints, etc. but Equivocally or Analogically,] as
being willing to avoid all needless Controversy about words; but sometime
(supposing that Assertion) I use the common language of the Protestants, and
mention equivocally only. I do not remember that Mr. Blake does affirm that
such men and true Believers are univocally called Church Members, Covenanters,
Christians, etc. nor yet that he denies it: so that I know not what he is for;
but what he is against I partly know: For the term [Equivocal] here, he tells
us that he abhors: But he would take it as tolerable, if I had used the term
[Analogical.] And if that might reconcile us, it is but his more heedfull
reading of my words, and he will find that I do ordinarily use it. As page 62.
lin. 4, 5. [ It is an imperfect Consent, Analogically or Equivocally called
Covenanting, etc.] And after at the bottom of the page, [and therefore such are
said, as to the Faith, Consent and Covenant so required, but Equivocally or
Analogically to Consent Covenant or Believe, etc.] And page 64. lin. 6, 7.
[these men in proper strict sense are no true Christians, but Analogically
only.] And page 65. [As he is Equivocally or Analogically a Beleiver, or
Christian, so I yield he is a Member of the visible Church, etc.] These and
other such places may satisfy Mr. Blake, if the term [Analogical] will
satisfy him. Well! but yet the term [Equivocal] he abhors: If so; then he must
either judge that they are Univocally called Church Members, Saints, etc. or
else that there is a third, between Univocal and Equivocal. The former he
speaks not out: the later (I suppose) he knows is denied by many Philosophers
with so much reason, as that it deserves his pains for a better proof. Its
like he has read it inter leges Aequivocorum, in the Logicks commonly read in
the Schools, that Omne Analogum est Aequivocum, (as Fascic. Log. page 21. and
alii.) Its agreed on, that Vnivoca vel Synonyma are sometimes taken so strictly
for Paronyma, and sometime so largely as to comprehend the paronyma, si careant
homonymia: and thus it is that we have to do with the term. Burgersdicius
divides Genus in synonymum sive univocum, and homonymum sive aequivocum, and
makes all that is spoken inequaliter de speciebus suis to be Genus aequivocum.
But then he means not by inaequaliter that mere inequality in the Degree of
Excellency in the several species, (on which some Scotists affirm, that Animal
is Genus Analogum quoad hominem and brutum, because man is prastantius animal:)
but cum una species ab altera pendet, and so the Genus does magis uni, alteri
minus convenire, aut uni mediate, alteri per alterum. And so he concludes that
Ens, si genus sit, aequivocum genus est; quia substantia magis est Ens quam
Accidens; imo Accidens non est Ens, nisi quia and quatenas pendet a substantia.
Yet this which is by the Schoolmen called Analogum attributionis, is as like to
belong to Univocals as any Analogum is: as the same Author says page 155.
Omnium longissime a synonymis absunt homonyma a casu, quaeque causam homonymiae
habent in nobis: propius ad synonymorum naturam accedunt tropica, ac imprimis
analoga: at omnium proxime quae ambigua sunt ob inaequalem attributionem: And
yet these does he there again reckon among the homonyma or aquivoca; dividing
homonymie into that which is a Casu, and that which is a Consilio, and into
that whole Reason is in nobis, and whose Reason is in rebus; among which this
inaequalis attributionis is the highest, which the Schoolmen call Anologie.
For which Burgensdicius, Keckerman, and other of our Logicians, with some
contempt reject the School-mens doctrine of Analogae.

Scotus maintains, that inter Vnivocat and Aequivoca non datur medium, in 1
Did. 8. q. 2. For 1 Denominatives (as diverse of the Scotists show at large,
and its past doubt) are not media between them. Nam licet non praedicentur
univoce de suis subjectis, quia de illis non praedicantur essentialiter, sed
denominative, tamen sunt praedicata Vnivoca, quia tributine candem rationem,
licet accidentariam, secundum idem nomen, suis subjectis; ut Meurisse. For
Scotus makes this difference in 1. Did. 3. q. 3. and in 3. Did. 7. q. 1.
between univoce praedicuri, and esse pradicatum univocum, quod illud sit
praedicari secundum candem rationem essentialem univocatis: hoc vero sit
praedicari secundum candem rationem accidentariam inferioribus. And as
Paronyma, so Analoga are not media inter univo^um and aequivocum. Nam inter
unum and multa nullum medium inveniri potest in rebus: ergo nec in vocibus
inter, significare unum and multa, medium invenietur. At univoca and aequivoca
opponuntur pones significare unum and multa: ergo inter ea nullum potest
constitui medium. Si igitur nomes aliquod significat quidpiam unum multis
commune, univocum est: si vero plura, aequivocum. Quare nullum est analogum
quod sit simpliciter tale, sed vel est analogum univocum, vel analogum
aequivocum: Analogum quidem univocum, si Ratio ejus una and eade^ conveniat
multis, cum ordine tamen ita ut prius dicatur de uno quam de altero: v.g. ratio
animalis respectu hominis and bruti, etc. ut Meurisse Metaphys. Scot. l. 1. p.
58, 59.

So Guil. de Rubione in 1 D^st. 3. q. 3. says, Vnivocum opponi scli aequivoco,
non vero analogo and denominativo: quia univocum se habet ad aequivocum, sicut
unum ad multa: unum autem proprie solum multis opponitur: se habet autem ad
anal^gum and denominativum, sicut superius ad sua inferiora: quia univocum
aliud est purum, aliud non purum: non purum est aut analogum aut denominativum:
Nullum superius autem opponitur suis inferioribus. Itaque univocu^ non
opponitur analogo and denominativo: sed ab analogo distinges tur tantum
univocum purum, and a denominativo univocum qui ^ditativum, seu illud quod est
and praedicatu^ univocu^, and univoce praedicatur.

See also Posnaniensis in 1. Did. 3. q. 1. act. 3. dub. 3. and Ocham. in 1.
Did. 2. q. 9. lit. E. denying tha^ there is any Analogical praedication
contra-distinct from Univocal and Equivocal. Lege Meurisse Metaph. l. 1. page
60, 61. etc. and page 110.111, 112, etc. and ^hil. Faventin. in Philos.
Natural. Scoti Theo^em. 95 page 654. usque ad 674. Vid. and Cajetani Opuscul.
de Analog. nom. cap. 1. and 4. and 6. and Fonsecam 4. Metaphys. cap. 2. q. 2.
sect. 3. etc. And so Porphyre gives it as the sense of Aristotle, that Ens
aequivoce dicitur de primis december generibus, c. de Specie: which Suarez
expounding, says, [ Dicendum est ab antiquis autoribus Analoga sub aequivocis
comprehendi, Suarez. Mer. Disp. 32. sect. 2. page 162.
ut constat ex Aristot. in Anti^raed. c. 4. and ex Aug. in Categoriis, c. 2.
and hoc significavit Aristot. locis infra^ citandis de Anolog^a Entis, and
praesertim 1 Elench. c. 6. ubi agens de aequivocis exempla ponit in Ente.]

So that if these be not mistaken, I may call the same term Analogical and
Equivocal, yea and I must call it either Univocal or Equivocal when I have
called it Analogical. To the same purpose have written R^da, Antonius Andreas,
Francis. May^o, Trombetta, Pendasius, Bonettus, Joan. Canonicus, Scribonius in
Pantalit. Raconisius and others. And Guil. Camerarius Scotus in Part 3.
Disput. Philosoph. select. makes it his first question, and determines it as
all the Scotists, Nulla dari Analoga media distincta ab univocis and
aequivocis, page 304.305, 306, 307. So Irenaus Brassavolus in Scoti
universalia, q. 7. and 8. so that if this hold, the Opponents must prove that
Hypocrites are Christians, Saints, Church Members, etc. univocally as well as
Analogically, or else they will prove to be such but equivocally.

I know other Schoolmen are of another mind; and indeed they are of so many
minds about the very sense of the word Analogum, and the true nature of
Analogy, that it may well make us despair of a fair end of this Controversy.
They are not so much agreed wherein it is that Analogy does consist: some say
that it consists in dependentia: and some (as Petr. Hurtado de Mendoza,
Disput. Logic. 9. sect. 4. subject. 5.) in transcendentia, etc. Read but
Hurtado himself of this, Disput. 9. from page 111. to 124. and see whether
there be not opinions enough about Analogy, to warrant us to despair of a
determimination of this Controversy, from the Consent of the Learned. Should I
but tell you out of Tartaretus in 1. sent. did. 3. qu. 3. and Rada, and
others, of the threefold Univocation, Logical, Physical and Metaphysical, and
the Description of each, and out of Francis. de Marchia of the four several
degrees of Univocation, and many more distinctions which must be taken in, if
we would exactly discuss this point, you will think before we have done that
the Matter is not worth our pains. In a word, seeing our Controversy (as is
said) is de nomine; and the Custom of Artists is the only Judge that can
determine such Controversies, and they are here all in pieces among themselves,
as much as about almost any one word in use with them, as far as I can
remember, it follows that Mr. Blake and I must stay for a decision till our
Judges are agreed, what Analogy is.

For my own part, I make so small account of the Controversy, that where the
term [Equivocal] offends any, as it does Mr. Blake, I am very willing to let
it alone, and to use the term [Analogical] which they can more patiently hear:
I am loath we should quarrel about so small a matter. But because I am on the
Defense, I shall yet briefly tell you, what Reasons I had to use the term
[Equivocal] as well as [Analogical.]

And first I shall argue from the Definition to the Name; and secondly* from
Authority.

And 1. We may here suppose what is commonly acknowledged, viz. that Vnivoca
sunt quorum nomen est commune, and secundum nomen ratis sustantiae est cadem:
Aequivoca vero quorum nomen est commune, and secundum nomen ratio substantiae
diversa. [Vbi [Ratio substantiae] denotat conceptvm objectivum, quisquis ille
sit, vel substantialis, vel accidentalis: Et Conceptus objectivus semper
accip^tur red^plicative, in quantum significatur per nomen, and sic sumitur
essentialiter: quia leoni ut albo essentialis est albedo. Igitur aequivoca hoc
differunt ab univocis, quia his communis est and Vox, and Conceptus formalis
and object vus: univoca enim sunt ipsa universalia, atque ita eisdem omnino
verbis ac conceptibus constant quibus and illa: Aequivoca vero neque habent
eundem conceptum formalem, neque objectivum, quia significata sunt omnino
dissimilia in ratione significata per nomen, ut Hurtad, de Mendoz. Log. D^sp.
9.. 1. But as he further notes, They that hold that we do uno actu plura ut
dissimilia cognoscere, must say also that, praeter nomen conceptus formalis est
idem aequivocis, and differt ab univocis, quod univoca habent eundem conceptum
objectivum similem; secus vero aequivoca, quae habent plures dissimiles; item
differunt in conceptu formali, quia aequivocus aequivalet pluribus, etc.

These things about the nature of Equivocals being supposed, I must next
consider of the several terms now in question, and examine them hereby, as
applied to the Godly and the Wicked.

And first the Word [Church] in its general sense is not the thing that we have
now in question: Otherwise I should soon confess that in all Assemblies there
is something common: a Congregation of materials is common to them all. And
thus it may as well be said that the word Ecclesia is univocally spoken of a
mutinous confused tumult, Act, 19.32, 39, 40. or any other common Assembly; as
of an Assembly of mere Professors. But it is a Christian Church than we are
speaking of; which being Coetus Fidelium, vel Christianorum, is differenced
from other societies by the Matter, and by the End. And for the first: If bare
Professors are but equivocally called Christians or believers in Christ, then
they are but equivocally Church Members, nor a Church as consisting of such,
but equivocally a Church. But the antecedent is true, therefore so is the
Consequent. The Consequence is undeniable, because it is not a Congregation or
Society in general, but the Christian Church thus specified by its Matter and
End, which we speak of, as is said. The Antecedent I prove, reducing the
Paronyma into the Abstracts; and first of the term Believers: If Faith be but
equivocally attributed to the bare Professors and the true Believers, then they
are equivocally called Believers. But the Antecedent is true, as I prove thus:
If the name of faith be the same, and the ratio substantiae secundum illud
nomen, be diverse, then faith ascribed to bare Professors and to true Believers
is an aequivocum. But the Antecedent is true, as is most apparent: For that its
the same name [Faith, Belief, Believers] we are agreed: And that it is not the
thing in both that is thus named, I think we are also agreed. For in one sort,
it is a true saving Faith, that is called by the name of [Faith]: and in the
other, it is no faith at all, but the bare verbal Profession of that faith
which they have not. And I hope we are agreed, that faith, and the Profession
of Faith, are not the same thing.

Object. But though this hold as to bare Professors, or mere Hypocrites that
have no faith, yet it will not hold of these that have a faith short of
Justifying.

Answ. 1. It cannot be denied that bare Professors of saving Faith are visible
members of the Church, though they have no faith at all; therefore it must be
granted of all them, that they are but equivocally Believers, and of them is
our question.

2. I have before proved, that it is this profession of a saving faith, that
constituteth a visible member; and therefore all such and only such (with their
seed) are visible members; and that it is not the reality of any faith (special
or common,) that constituteth a visible member. For that which makes visible,
must it self be visible: But so is neither a special nor a common faith: for no
man knows it in another. So that a quatenus ad omne, a forma ad nomen, it is
plain that all Professors and none but Professors are visible Members, and that
if any have the Faith professed (special or common) that makes them not visible
Members; but the profession of Faith whether they have it or not. So that it
plainly follows, that a visible Member, qua talis, is denominated a Believer
only equivocally.

3. And if they be denominated Believers ab ipsa fide, scil. that which is
short of Justifying, yet its plain that this faith it self is not the same with
that of sound Believers; no not of the same species, Mr. Blake himself being
Judge, who so keenly girds me for making saving and common faith to differ but
in degree, when in the very writings that he must fetch the slander from, I
again and again profess that they differ morally in f^ecie.) If then his lower
faith and saving faith do so much differ, then there is not the same ratio
substantiae secundum illud nomen: For I have not yet found that it is a
Generical Nature common to both, which he supposes signified by the word
[faith] in our Question; much less that Church Membership is constituted by
such a thing; But if he should come to that, I must first desire him to
describe that Generical nature, and no more to lay it upon the specifical
nature either of Dogmatical or Justifying faith; and when he has so done, I
doubt not to bring many more species that shall on as fair pretenses put in for
a place as participant in that generical nature, as his Dogmatical faith has
done.

So that by this it is evident, that not only the thing which constituteth men
visible Church Members, (which is always in the Adult, a Profession and not
the Faith professed) is but equivocally called Faith; but also that the lower
faith is equivocally called the Christian Faith. But the first alone suffices
us to prove that visible Members as visible, are but equivocally called
Church Members, because the ratio substantiae is diverse, secundum illud nomen.

2. And it is as plain that bare Professors are but equivocally called
Christians. For the Ratio nominis in found Christians is true Faith in Christ
as Christ: but in the other it is only the Profession of such a faith: and
these are certainly diverse. And If you again carry the Question to Dogmatical
Believers, I answer as before; both 1. That they are not the persons in our
Question; 2. That as such, they are not members visible (no nor mystical.) 3.
That even as to them the Ratio substantiae is so diverse, as makes the name
apparently equivocal.

3. The same also may be said of the word [Saints] Holiness in the Regenerate
is the hearty Devotedness and Separation of the Person to God as God. Holiness
in bare professors (who are visible Members,) is but the verbal Devotion and
extrinsick Separation; And Holiness in the common Believer, is but a half
Devotedness and Separation, and wants the Essentials which the Regenerate
have So that it is not the same thing that is called Holiness in these ^hree*
and therefore the word Hol^ness as to them is equ^v^c^l*

4. The same also I say of Regeneration: The true Believeer is called
Regenerate, because he is so changed by the spirit, as to be as it were born
again, not of flesh, nor of the wiil of man, but of God, and is become a new
creature: but the bare Professor is called Regenerate, only because he is
baptized, and professes Regeneration, and is entered extrinsecally into a new
society. And the lower sort of Believers is said to be regenerate, but only
because he has some common work of another species: so that Regeneration is
equivocally spoken of these.

5. So also is Justification: Its clear that it is not the same thing that is
called Justification in the one sort and in the other, as I suppose will be
confessed.

6. The same also I may say of Adoption as is undeniable.

7. And the same I may say of being in Covenant with God. For 1. ex part Dei,
with the Regenerate God is actually in Covenant, that is, as it were obliged to
them: but to the rest it is but conditionally, which will induce no actual
Obligation, or Debitum, till the Condition be performed. 2. And on their own
part, the regenerate are said to Covenant with God, principally because they
consent to his terms, and heartily Accept his Covenant, as it is; which
Scripture calls sometime their Believing, (If thou believe in thy heart,
etc.) and sometime their Willing: (whosoever will, let him drink of the waters
of Life freely): so that the Regenerate man's Covenating is always with the
Heart,) and comprehends all the Essentials); and sometime with the Mouth
also: But the bare Professors Covenanting is but with the mouth alone; and the
lower Believers is wanting in the internal Essentials: so that it is plain,
that it is not the same thing that is called [Covenanting] in them: and
therefore the word is equivocal.

And then by this it is put out of doubt that they are equivocally called
Church members: Because the things forementioned that constitute their
Church Membership are not the same.

If any Papist should here set in, and with Bellarmine plead, that it is
Profession and Engagement to Church Polity that constituteth all Members, and
that the Church in its first notion signifies only the visible Body, and that
Faith and Holiness, or any thing intrinsic is not necessary to make a Member,
but only to ma^e a living Member; 1. I should desire such to be at the pains to
see what our D^vines, Amesius, Whitaker, and abundance more, have said already
to show the vanity of this, yea and its self-contradiction. 2. Were it not done
by so many already, I would show such from many Scriptures and Fathers, that
the word [ Church] in our Christian sense does principally signify the number
that are cordially congregate unto Christ, and united to him. 3. But whomsoever
the word is first applied to, it is certain if it be applied to both, that it
is equivocal: unless you will say, that it signifies some Generical nature in
common to both: which cannot be as is aforesaid; and if it were granted, 1. It
would exclude the spiritual aggregation to Christ to be the Ratio nominis,
contrary to Scripture; and 2. It would exclude all Saints that have not the
opportunity of a visible profession and conjunction with the Visible Body, from
being of the Church, and so from Salvation; Or 3. It would make two Churches
specifically distinct, which both Papists and Protestants do so vehemently
disavow.

Having thus given my Reasons from the common description of Equivocals, and
the nature of the things, why I say that mere Professors, and consequently
visible Members as such, are but equivocally called Believers, Christians,
Saints, Members, etc. I shall next come to Authority, and enquire what is the
Custom of Divines in this case, seeing that Custom is so much the master of
Speech: and it is only Protestant Divines that I shall allege, because it is
for the sake of Protestants that I write, to dissuade them from siding with the
Papists in this point: For between them and us it is so ancient and well known
a Controversy, that with men that are exercised in such Writings, my
allegations will be needless: but for the sake of some confident men, that have
derided the common ^ssertions of Protestant; against Papists, as if they were
singularly mine I shall annex some of the words of our most esteemed Writers by
which these men may discern the minds of the rest; wishing that such men would
rather have been at the pains to have read the Authors themselves, than to
suffer their passions and tongues to overrun their understandings.

1. Calvin in 1 Cor. 12. Calvin. 1.
[ His interea duobus ep th^tis declarat quinam habendi sint inter vera
Ecclesiae membra, and qu^ ad ejus Communionem pr pry pertineant: Nisi enim
vitae sanctimonia Christianum te ostendas, delitescere quidem in Ecclesia
poteris, sed ex ea tamen n^n eris. Sanctificari ergo in Christo o^ortet omnes
qui in populo Dei censeri volunt. Porro ^anctificationis verbum s^gregation in
sign^ficat; ea sit in nobis quum per spiritum in vitae novitatem regeneramur,
ut serviamus Deo and non Mundo. -- Una cum omnibus invoc. -- Et hoc commune est
piorum omnium Epitheton -- Quod exponunt quidam de sola Professione, mihi
frig^dum videtur, and ab usu Scripturae alienum est.]

Idem Institut. lib. 4 cap. 1. sect. 7 [ De Eccl^sia visibili and que sub
cognitionem nostram cadit, quale judicium facere conveniat, ex superioribus ^am
l^quere existimo: Diximus enim bifariam de Ecclesia Sacras Literas loqui.
Interdum quum Ecclesiam nominant, tam intelligunt quae revera est coram Deo; in
quam nulli recipiuntur n^si qui Adoptionis gratia filii Dei sunt, and spiricus
sanctificatione vera Christi membra. -- Saepe autem Ecclesiae nomine universam
hominum multitudinem in orb diffusam designat, quae unum se Deum and Christum
colere profitetur. -- In hac autem plurimi sunt permixti hypocritae, qui nihil
Christi habent praeter titulum and speciem, plurimi ambitiosi, avari, invidi,
maledici, aliqui impurioris vitae, qui ad tempus tolerantur; vel quia legitimo
judicio convinci nequeunt, vel quia non semper ea viget disciplinae veritas
quae debebat.]

2. Beza in Confess. Christ. fid. p. 34. c. 5. sect. 8. 2. Beza. and in Eccles.
^st Hom. 24 page 470, 471. and Annotat. in 1 Timothy 4.1. ^^^untur crede^e, ^^od
c^edere vl^^antur.
[De veris Ecclesiae membris.] Vera sunt Ecclesia membra qui characterem illum
habent Christianorum proprium, id est, fidem. Fidelis autem aliquis ex eo
agnoscitur, quod unicum Servatorem Jesum Christum agnoscit, fugit peccatum, and
studet Justitiae, idque ex praescripto Verbi Dei. -- Nam quod ad rel quos
homines attinet, cujuscunque tandem sint statu^ vel conditionis, non sunt
numerandi inter Ecclesiae membra, etiam si ut ita loquar) Apostolatu
fungere^tur. Sed hic cav^ndum est ne vel ulterius progrediamur quam par sit,
vel temere judicemus: expectandum enim est Dei judicium in detegendis
hypocritis, and falsi fratibus. -- Et page 32. sect. 2. he shows [ unam
duntaxat esse veram Ecclesiam;] and therefore he speaks here of that one Church.

3. Junius in his most accurate Tractate de Ecclesia (Vol. 2. p. 998.) says,
3. Junius.
[ Ecclesia absolute dicta in Divinis, appellatur Coetus eorum quos Deus evocat
e natura and modulo naturali ipsorum per gratiam indignitatem filiorum Dei ad
gloriam ipsius. -- Justam Ecclesiae formam adscripsimus -- Vecatur a Deo
quisquis ad Ecclesiam pertinet e natura and modulo naturali suo: qua autem? per
gratiam supernaturalem, and viam illius gratiae; and quo tandem? in statum
supernaturalem apud Deum in coelis -- ]

Et page 1014. speaking of the matter of the political Church, Non videtur
satis explicata definitio illa -- nisi vocem illam [fidelium] aequivoce
acceperis -- non eos solum oportet intelligamus, qui vere sunt fideles, non eos
solum qui professione externa prae se ferunt, licet animo and cord non sint:
sed utrosque communiter, loquutione plane aequivoa, non tamen insolente plane,
quia utrique saltem convenient in nomine, quamvis toto genere secundum rem and
veritatem differant.]

Et page 1115 1116, 1117. Animadvers. in Bellarm. he says, [23. Ibid. Nomen
fidelis accipi pro eo qui fidem public profitetur.] Nempe aequivoce and
secundum quid, puta rationem externam ipsius, ut pictura hominis dicitu^ homo.

24. Art. 27. [Vocari Chatolicos qui fidem Catholicam profitentur, quicquid sit
de fide interna.] Aequivoce igitur, ut proxime dictum.

25. Art. 28. [Christianus enim nomen est Professionis.] Negatur haec tota
Responsio: Nam Patres quum dicerent, vere Christiannos, intelligebant secundum
formam internam Christiani, quae per severa est, Christianismus verus. Nam qui
sola professione sunt Christiani; ii vere quidem de Ecclesia sunt secundum
rationem externam illius: non autem secundum internam illam in qua est
Christianismi veritas. Christianum autem nomen Professionis esse nullus homo
negat: sed nomen esse negamus professionis solum, nisi aequivoce: Nam and
Clemens Alex. definit strom. 7. nomen sensus, sidei, and cultus and
prof^ssionis est.

Cap. 11.3. Art. 2. Vera Ecclesia non esset illa quae dicebatur Ecclesia, sed
pii quidam pauci.] Haec Lutherus recte de Ecclesia justa secundum parts
essentiales ipsius considerata, id est, formam internam externamque ipsius
simul formaliter and materialiter in membris ipsius. Nam Papa and qui sunt
ipsius, in Ecclesia sunt materialiter, ut Ecclesiae (...), non Ecclesia sunt;
qui autem in Ecclesi^ sunt materialiter atque formaliter, ii vera Ecclesia
s^nt, essensi disque. Ecclesia autem vera quidem est quae utrosque quidem
complectitu^, ut rete pices bonus and malos: sed quae membra sunt illius, non
omnia vera sunt illius formaliter: sed quaedam vera materialiter, formaliter
aequivoca. Hoc itaque respectu Ecclesia in membris suis considerata, dicitur ex
part vera, and ex part non vera: quemadmodum meta aut strues messis dicitur
triticum, quae considerata in suis partibus verum habet triticum and paleam,
quae non est verum triticum, sed palea tritici and ipsum cont^gens. Vtrumque
simul Ecclesia: sed illi materialiter atque formaliter, id est, essentialiter;
isti materialiter solum, id est, aequivoce. Verum autem, figurato, and
aequivoce dicto etiam opponitur.]

6. Ibid. [Distinguunt duas E^clesias.] Falsum. Non duas Ecclesias numero
statuunt, sed unam numero Ecclesiam duplicem esse modo and ratione dicunt pro
condition membrorum ipsius, cum alia sint vera formaliter, eoque essentialia
Ecclesiae membra: alia materialiter solu^, ac proinde aequivoce dicta. Atque
hoc respectu postea membrorum contemplatione veram Ecclesiam vocant, numerum
eorum qui membra sunt Ecclesiae vere and essentialiter; falsam vero eorum, qui
membra sunt Ecclesiae materialiter solum atque aequivoce. Hoc autem quisquis
verum esse negat, solemn meridie lucere negat, and bis duo esse quatuor. (if I
had spoken so confidently --) So page 1113.20. Art. 31. [Non essent membra
Corporis viva.] Id autem est, non esse membra Ecclesiae secundum partem
rationemque formalem, sed secundu^ materialem ac co^munem ipsius, ut ante.

22. Art. 15. [In nullo horum locorum distingui duas Ecclesias.] Quasi vero cum
ipsa veritate, cum art, cum ratione pugnet quisquis distinguit aequovocationes.

So page 1112.12. Art. 17. [ Ex priore multi membra and sancti dicuntur
aequivoce, quia membra sunt tantum materialiter: ex posteriore autem sancti
proprie appellantur atque formaliter.]

I hope here is enough to signify Junius his mind.

4. Zanchius in Tract. de Eccles. Vol. 3. cap. 2. p. 56. 4. Zanchius.
[3. Si Ecclesia latius accipiatur pro Ecclesia Militante, quatenus etiam
reprobi multi and hypocritae ibi connumerantur licet non sint vere de Ecclesia,
nec Ecclesia, nec parts Ecclesi^ -- quae licet mixtos habeat reprobos and
hypocritas multos, existentes quidem in Ecclesia, cum tamen (ut d xi) sint
neque Ecclesia, neque parts Ecclesiae, etc. -- Et page 58. [ Hypocritae vero
et si sint in Ecclesia, non tamen sunt parts Ecclesiae, neque vere ad
Eccl^siam pertinent. Ecclesia enim est Sponsa Christi, corpus Christi unde
Augustinus dicere solet roprobos in Ecclesia multos esse, non tamen de Ecclesia
-- Sunt in Ecclesia sicut palcae in frumento, quae ita sunt in frumento, ut non
sint tamen frumentum, nec parts frumenti, sicut comparavit Christus Ecclesiam
Mat. 23. Sunt sicut zizania inter frumentum ab host superseminata. Zizaria
autem non sunt frumentum, nec parts frumenti. Videntur quidem reprobi
hypocritae qui sunt in Ecclesia, ad tempus esse etiam de Ecclesia; quamdiu
scilicet ab ea non deficiunt, and cum aliis Evangelium profitentur, etc. -- cum
ventilantur ventilabro irae Diuinae, vel deficiunt -- patefaciunt se nunquam
fuisse membra Ecclesiae, cum proprium membrorum Ecclesiae sit, semper in
Ecclesia permanere -- Reprobi saepe videntur insiti, and tamen non sunt: vi
lentur esse membra Ecclesiae, and nihil minus sunt. Ratio, quoniam soli electi,
and vera Christi membra, sunt Ecclesia Christi.

Read him to the same purpose, page 73.77.

Et in de Relig. Christian. Fid. cap, 23. These. 6. p. 345. [ Reprobos
hypocritas, licet sint in Ecclesia, de Ecclesia tamen non esse. -- Membra sunt
Satanae, non Christi. Read the rest there: So again, page 535, 536.

5. Polanus Syntagm. Theol. l. 7. cap 1.2, 3, 5. 5. Polanus.
ha^h a long Dispute against Bellarmine, to prove that none but the Elect and
truly sanctified are members of the Catholic or Universal Church: I shall
refer you to the Book, to save the labor of transcribing And page 522. col. 1.
He reckons this among Bellarmine's Errors as the sixth: [ Quod impios quidem
n^gat esse viva corporis Christi membra, at intera statuit esse mortua membra
corporis Christi. At 1. embiguitate ludau^: Nam membra corporis Christi vel
(...) sunt vel (...). Deinde si de membris Christi (...) sermo sit, falsa est
distributio quaedam membra Christi-esse viva, quaedam mortua, Vt enim in vivo
corpore naturali -- etc.] So page 521. col. 1. he says, that only the justified
are called the sons of God (...), and others only (...). And col. 2. he says
the like of their Saintship. [ Et hic tertius est istius ratiocinationis error.
Sancti enim (...) dicuntur: Proprie quidem soli santificati spiritu adoptionis:
Improprie vero and (...) ii qui sanctam fidem Christi ore profitentur, licet
non sint spi^itu s^ncto s^nct^ficati.

6. Ravenellus Bibliothec. page 510.511. says, 6. Ravannellus.
[ Vox Ecclesiae ambigue sumitur: Proprie and stricte pro coetu illorum hominum
quos Deus ante jacta mundi fundamenta elegit, and in tempore efficaciter voc^t,
etc. vel Improprie, etc.

And having cited many Texts to prove that Electi and Fideles sunt Membra and
corpus Christi, he adds [ Quod nota contra Pontificios, qui docent ipsos
reprobos and sceleratos ad Ecclesi^m proprie dictam etiam pertinere.

7. Peter Martyr in 1 Cor. 1.2. p. 5. 7. Pet. Martyr.
defines the Church thus; [ Esse dicemus, coetum credentium ac renatorum quos
Deus in Christo colligit per Verbum and Spiritum sanctum, etc. -- Nam illi
(sancti) solum vere and coram Deo sunt de Ecclesia. Quae alioquin habet
admixtos permultos alienos a Chr^st^: and hi specie tantum, no^ reipsa
pertinent ad Ecclesiam. Et Paulus postquam dixisset, hoc loco [Ecclesi^e Dei,
per oppositionem adjunxit [sanctificatis per Christum Jesum, vocatis sanctis]
ut intelligamus impios ad Ecclesiam revera non pertinere, licet in ea perpetuo
versentur. -- Scio commentum circumferri, quod impii membra Christi sunt, verum
mortua; quae tamen vivificari possiat. At hoc ita est verum, at si mortuum
hominem dixeris hominem esse -- sed in praesentia id tantummodo contendimus,
tales homines reipsa and quo ad Deum, non esse parts Ecclesiae.

So on Romans and Loc. Commun. he has much of the like. Indeed Loc. Com. Clas 4.
c. 1. p. 741. he has the very same words over again at large, which I have
cited from him on 1 Cor. 1.2.

8. Musculus Loc. Com. de Eccles. p. (mihi) 655. 8. Musculus.
Porro cum Scriptura docet esse Ecclesiam Corpus Christi, an non satis
manifest significat, Ecclesiam Christi non esse eorum qui inter membra Christi
recenseri non p^ssunt? Sum quidem in externae professionis societate
quamplurimi mali; atque hactenus in Ecclesia: verum de Ecclesia non sunt, quia
verae Ecclesiae membra non sunt: Aliud est esse in externa Christianorum
societate; and aliud pertinere ad internam, quae spiritus est and fidei, qua
Caput and Corpus and membra cum membris spiritualiter and veraciter
communicant. Aliud (inquam) est esse in Ecclesia, and aliud esse de Ecclesia.]
And he cites that of Austine (as many other Protestants do) l. 2. contra.
Crescon. c. 21. [ At per hoc etiam nesciente Ecclesia, propter malam
pollutamquae conscientiam damnati a Christo, jam in Corpore Christi non sunt,
quod est Ecclesia: quoniam non potest Christus membra damnata habere.] See him
on Mat. 3. p. 33.

2. Rutherford 's Pe^ceable Plea, 9. Rutherford.
page 93. c. 9. [4. Did. If a true Church and a visible Church, as visible,
may not for a time be opposed by way of contradiction, etc.] Page 96.
[Separatists Arguments must be weak, for they all conclude that which we deny
not, and no other thing, to wit, that Heretic, Adu^terers, Sorcerers,
Blasphemers, be no parts of Christ's visible Church, as it is a Church: Yea, we
may say that as the tree-leg, and the eye of glass, and the teeth of silver by
Art put in the body, are no members of the living body, so neither, are these
members of the true Church, and so much do all our Divines, as Calvin, Beza,
Junius, Whitaker, Tilen, Piscator, Pareus, Vrsine, Trelcatius, Sibrandus,
Amesius prove against Papists.

Page 107. A Church, and a visible Church, may be opposed by way of
contradiction, as a number of Believers, and a number of non-Believers. For a
Church essentially is a number of ^elievers, and Christ's mystical Body, else it
is not a Church etc.

Page 114. The Church visible as a Church, is indeed Christ's Body, a royal
Priesthood, a chosen Generation; but as visible, it is sufficient that it be a
Royal Priesthood only by Profession, etc. Our Adversaries give us no right
description of the true natural and lively members of the true visible Church:
he that would give such a definition of a man, as agrees both to a living man,
and to a pictured or painted man, were but a painted Logician. --

Page 173. -- Although the Parents indeed, as concerning any real union of
faith, be plain strangers to the Covenant, and members of the Church only, as
an arm of wood is a member of the body. -- See him also in his Due Right of
Presby^eries, chap. 9. sect. 9. page 256.257.259.

10. Maccovius College. Theolog. Part. 4. Disp. 13. These. 3, 4. etc. 10.
Maccovius.
[ Haec Ecclesia jam dicitur visibilis, jam invisibilis: Quae distinctio non eo
spectat, ut statuantur duae Ecclesiae, etc. -- sed est haec distinctio nominis,
ut loquuntur in Scholis -- 7. Et hinc jam liquere potest quomodo Ecclesia
visibilis sit and invisibilis: visibilis nempe confuse, dum in socictate illa,
quam definivimus, credimus esse electos aliquos, etiamsi qui illi sint non
novimus scientia perfecta, sed conjecturali duntaxat. 21. Notae ergo Ecclesi^e
ad hoc nobis ser viunt, non ut sciamus distinct qui pertineant ad Eccle siam,
sed ut sciamus quibuscum nobis colenda sit communio, seu publica, seu privata;
nempe cum illi, quibus illa insunt, unde judicio charitatis colligi possit, eos
veram esse Ecclesiam, vel pertinere ad veram Ecclesiam.

11. Cocceius de S. Scriptur. Potent. p. 575. 11. Cocceius.
[ Quod attinet coetu^ sive multitudinem vocatorum, saltem Verbisono, and
Christi fidem profitentium, eam vocamus Ecclesiam, partim propter fideles, qui
in eo sunt, partim propter spem. Charitas en^m omnia sperat. Eo modo sanctos
etiam promiscue appellamus qui se Christianos nominant, and in quibus non
deprehenditur a nobis hypocrisis, etc. -- Imoratione fidelium tota multitudo
appellatur Ecclesiae.

Et page 555. [ In Majore Ecclesia Vniversalis visibilis significat, (si vera
est Propositio) omnes p^ofitentes Nomen Christi, and in coetus ubique locorum
collectos: inter quos sine dubio sunt fideles: Propter quos illa multitudo
vocatur, Ellclesia Dei.

Page 649. [ Ecclesiae statum in his comp^ehendi certum est sed bonos and malos
simul Ecclesiam a Christo dici, atque adeo Ecclesiam ex malis constare, quomodo
fratres pergunt loqui number. 52. nentiquam admittimus. Licet admittamus
multitudinem illam profi^entium, in qua and Ziz^nia, vel Zinecdochice, vel
prop^er spem fidelium, vel etiam propter gloriationem om^ium, di^i Ecclesiam;
and Zizania esse in Ecclesia, quia bonis mali perm^xti sunt: ut and
Antichristus sessurus erat in Templo Dei, hoc est Ecclesia, nempe inter
fideles, and in congregationem Justorum, ipse infidelis and injustus omnibus
myriadibus suis stipatus, etc. Vid. ultr.

12. Luther. Tom. 4. p. 333, 342. ut in Loc Commun. Class. 5. cap. 4. page 12.
12. Luther.
[ Hypocritae volunt Ecclesia esse, and non sunt, quia non cognoscunt Ecclesiae
thesaurum, scilicet Christum; Pii vero cognoscunt, and taemen non videntur esse
Ecclesia, sed manent absconditi coram mundo: Ita stat illud argumentum a
principio mundi; Ecclesia non est Ecclesia: Et, Non Ecclesia est Ecclesia. Ergo
nihil nos moveat, si impii jactent se esse Ecclesiam, and non possunt
intelligere -- See him also de Conciliis toward the end, de Ecclesia.

13. Sutlive, 13. D^. Sutlive.
contr. Bellarm. de vera Eccles. p. 6.7. c. 2. [ Non aliter coalescunt and
augentur membra Ecclesiae nisi per Char^tatem, nec aliter vivunt quam per
Spiritum sanctum; nec aliquis merito in Ecclesiae catalogo recensetur qui non
studet sanctitati: Est enim Ecclesia non sceleratoru^ and improborum, sed
sanctorum communio, etc. -- In hac tamen sanctorum societate, non negamus
multos versari and hypocritas and sceleratos, qui nihil habent hominis
Christiani praeter nomen. -- Non tamen propterea censemus deserendam esse
fratrum societatem quia inter eos sunt nonnulli homines scelerati and impii,
qui non sunt vere Ecclesiae membra.] Next he reprehendeth Bellarmine for not
admitting the various acceptions of the word Ecclesia: And reciting his
definition, he adds, [ Cujus d^finitionis tot sunt peccata quot vocabula. Nam
primo, ut quis sit membrum Ecclesiae, non tantum requiritur fidei professio,
sed etiam ipsa fides. Non est enim Ecclesia societas profitentium fidem, sed
credentiu^, nisi velit ille fideles mentiri, quando dicunt, Credo in Deum; and
sine fide nemo ad Deum accedit, nemo fit me^brum Corporis Christi. -- His fifth
Chapter is to prove that no Reprobates belong to the Catholic Church, and he
concludes fol. 17. col. 2. [ Sic neque reprobi, quantumvis videantur
Christiani, vera erunt Ecclesiae membra. -- His sixth Chap. is to prove against
Bell. that wicked and unconscionable livers are not true members of the
Catholic Church and communion of Saints, Fol. 19. he says, [Aristoteles negat
mortuum membrum, esse membrum. Quae autem aequivoce dicuntur membra, non magis
sunt membra, quam homo pictus est homo rationalis -- And because he so
effectually pleads this Cause, I will recite the substance of his Arguments.
Argum. 1. Qui spiritum Christi non habet, hic non est ejus: At qui scelerato
vivunt, non habent spiritum Christi: merito ergo tales existimamus non esse
vera membra Christi. 2. Omnes pii ab hominibus impuris and sceleratis animo and
moribu^ recedere debent. -- At a fratribus and membris veris Ecclesiae
discessionem facere nefas est -- ergo. -- 3. Omnes Christiani sunt velut unus
panis and unum Corpus: At panis non fit nisi ex uno frumento, non ex paleis,
and Corpus non consistit ex membris dissentientibus inter se. -- 4. Totum
Corpus Christi incrementum ex eo capit per Charitatem. At homines impuri and
selerati non habent charitatem, etc. -- 5 Non modo Ecclesia Dei, sed omnia ejus
membra sunt Templum Dei, and in eis habitat Spiritus sanctus. At ubi regnat
peccatum, ibi non est Templum Dei, etc. -- 6. Christus est Caput Ecclesiae, and
ipse est servator Corporis sui: and tradidit se pro ea ut illam sanctificaret,
etc. -- At Christus non est hominum impurorum aut sceleratorum caput. Totum
enim Corpus ex Christo Capite per nexus and conjunctiones subministratum and
constructum crescit in augmentum Dei, non servat homines in peccatis stupidos,
etc. 7. Quivere in Ecclesiam tanquam membra in Corpus inferuntur, coelestis
Vocationis fiunt participes, Hebr. 3. justificantur, Romans 8. and spiritum Dei
habent. At homines isti, etc. -- 8. Ecclesia dicitur puteus aquarum viventium.
At homines flagitiosi and magni peccatores in peccatis mortui sunt. -- Non sunt
ergo ex Ecclesia: quod August. ex loco colligit lib. 5. de Bapt. contr.
Donatist cap. 27. -- 9. In filios Ecclesiae illa quadrant quae dicit Apostolus,
Romans 6. Liberati a peccato, servi autem facti Deo, fructum habetis vestrum in
sanctificationem, finem vero vitam aeternam. At hominibus improbis, etc. 10.
Cives Ecclesiae in Scripturis vocantur sancti, 2 Cor. 1.2. -- Quare nisi
homines impuri and flagitio si possint vere dici sancti, non possunt homines
ejusmodi propter externam suam professionem vera Ecclesiae membra censeri. --
11. Ecclesia Christi tota est pulchra, 2 Cor. 11. virgo casta. At, etc. -- 12.
In Symbolo dicitur Ecclesia sancta, and sanctorum communio. At si homines
scelerati and impuri vera essext Ecclesiae membra, tum sanctitatis
denominationem amitteret, and esset non sanctorum communio, sed sceleratorum
colluvies, quod plane impium est vel dicere vel cogitare. (See his Replies to
Bellarmine's Answers,) -- 13. Ecclesia supra petram a dificata est, and port
inferorum aduersus eam non sunt praevaliturae. At contra peccatores portae
inferorum praevalent. -- 14. Ecclesia dicitur plenitudo sen complementum
Corpor^ Christi. At -- 15. Ecclesia est columna and firmamentum veritatis. At
improbi non pertinent ad hanc columnam, etc. -- 16. Diserte Scripturae
excludunt ex sancta civitate homines impuros and sceleratos (Here some Texts
are cited. -- 17. Qui ex patre Diabolo sunt, non habent Deum patrem, 1 Joan 2.
At homicidae and scelerati. -- At si ex Deo non sunt, non possunt inter
Ecclesia membra numerari -- 18. Ab Autoritate patrum: where he cites Cyprian,
Origin, Hierom, Ambrose, Ruffinus, Gregory, Epiphanius, Augustine, Chrysostom,
Theophilact, Bernard, etc. -- 19. Arg. A consensu and testimonio totius
Ecclesiae Catholicae ducitur. Recitantes enim Symbolum Apostolorum, omnes
Christiani profitentur se credere sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, Sanctorum
Communionem. -- 20. Arg. Ab Adversariorum confessione (of which more anon.)

And six Reasons he adds fol. 24. col. 2. And fol. 25. he refuteth
Bellarmines Arguments for the contrary, (the same that others since make use
of) from Scripture and Reason. Where Bellarmine says, They cannot be cast out
of the Church by Excommunication, if they be not in it; he answers, [ Si Fide
and Charitate and Spiritu sancto careant, tum licet vel Praelatorum seeds
occupent, vel in Ecclesiae catalogo censeantur, non tamen sunt vera membra
Ecclesiae. Nec ad rem facit quod Christus malis Praelatis obaudiendum docet:
Hoc en^m sit, quia tales adhuc videntur esse in Ecclesiae -- Of a Councils
testimony produced by Bellarmine he says, [ Licet Concilium quoddam Et
iscoporum in colloq. cum Donatistis fateatur malos esse nonnunquam in Ecclesia
velut paleas in area, -- non tamen asserit hujusmodi malos esse vera membra
Ecclesiae, sed ostendit quid vulgus existimat.

I know the answer to all this must be, that Dr. Sutlive speaks all this only
of the Catholic mystical Church, and not of the Visible Church. To which I
Reply, 1. He and other Protestants profess, that they hold not that there is
two Churches, one Visible and the other Invisible; but one Church, only. 2. And
that this one is called Invisible from its essence, and Visible from an
adjunct, which is so. 3. And therefore that where there is Profession without
true faith, and so men that have only that which denominateth it Visible,
without that which denominateth it Invisible, these are only equivocally and
not truly members.

Hear further what Sutlive says of this, fol. 25. [ Hinc ergo cadit calumnia
illa Adversarii, quasi nos faceremus duas Ecclesias. Vna^ enim nos facimus
Ecclesiam Catholicam, quae tantum bonos continet, licet mali in ea conseantur,
quia non omnes certo norunt esse malos. At Bellarminus revera duas facit
Ecclesias, unam ex bonis tantum, -- alteram ex malis and bonis, and aliquando
ex malis tantum. Nam ad Ecclesiae formam constituendam nullam putat requiri
intornam virtutem. --

And fol. 26. answering to Bellarmines Arguments from the Fathers, he says of
Nazienzen, [Nullus dixerit eum existimasse hujusmodi homines vera esse membra
Ecclesiae. Loquitur enim de Ecclesiae militantis part; (that is of the
particular Church of Constantinople) idque secundum vulgi sententiam, and non
secundum veritatem; and ubi proprie loquitur Moabitas and Ammonitas licet in
mysteria nostra irrumperent, distinguit a veris Christianis]

Cap. 7. He proves that Infidels and Heretics (though occult) are not vera
Ecclesiae membra. And fol. 27. col. 2. he says, [ Vt agamus de forma
Ecclesiae, ubi potius essentialis ejus forma posita est, quam in fide Christi
interna? Forma enim illa substantialis est, and non accidentalis; Ecclesiaeque
dat esse, and vere demonstrat quis ad Ecclesiam pertineat. At confessio fidei
externa non magis demonstrat Ecclesiam, ejusque parts, quam tabula picta
hominis naturam. --

Licet ad Ecclesiam admittantur qui profitentur fidem, ut dicit Bellarm. non
tamen sequitur eos fieri vera Ecclesiae membra, nisi habeant etiam fidem quam
profitentur. Neque enim civis est qui pro cive se gerit, licet aliqui ita
putent, sed qui revera Jus habet civitatis.

Fol. 28. Praeterea nos ostendimus, excludi omnes ex Ecclesia Catholica,
tanquam membra non vera, sed ficte adnascentia, qui non habent charitatem; and
hoc Catholicorum omnium testimonio confirmavimus; adeo ut jam constet
Bellarminum esse Monachum, a Christi Ecclesia extraneum, and non Catholicum: (I
desire the contrary-minded of our Brethren to mark what a heavy censure I must
fall under, if I should turn to their opinion.)

Fol. 29. Nulli fere haeretici non se Christianos esse pro^^^ntur: eos tamen
Chrysostomus ex Ecclesia excludit. Nam non nomen, sed veritatem, facere
Christianum.]

Many Arguments he here uses, of which I will recite only the last, fol. 30.
col. 2. [ Si Fides non minus requiritur quam Baptismus ut quis fiat membrum
Ecclesiae; cur magis sit membrum Ecclesiae qui profitetur se fidem tenere and
non tenet, quam qui profitetur se baptismum habere and non habet?]

They that will read the rest may see much more to the same sense: but I find I
have staid long enough on one Witness.

14. Amesius Medul. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 32.11. 14. Amesius.
[ Illi autem qui professione tantum sunt sideles, dum remanent in illa
societate, sunt membra illius Ecclesiae, sicut etiam Ecc^esiae Catholicae,
quoad statum externum tantum, non quoad statum internum aut essentialem, 1
Joan. 2. ver. 19.]

Et in Bellarm. Enervat Tom. 2. lib. 2. c. 1.3. confuting Bellarmines calumny,
that feigneth us to make two Churches, a Visible and an Invisible, he says we
only affirm, Vnam quoad essentiam internam, and alteram quoad modum existendi
externum: and urges Augustine saying, [ Bonos sic esse in domo Dei, quae est
Ecclesia, ut ipsi sint domus constructa ex vivis lapidibus: malos sic esse in
domo, ut ipsi tamen non sint domus.]

. 7. Where Bellarmine says, Reprobates belong to the Church; he answers, [
Hoc non potest negari si intelligatur secundum extrinsecam rationem Ecclesiae
militantis, prout capilli, ungues, aut mali humores pertinent ad corpus
humanum: quam explicationem dedit nobis Bellarm. cap. 2. aut quemadmodum
Civitas Romana multos non Cives dicitur complecti.]

. 8. Bellarm. Magni and manifesti peccatores sunt in Ecclesia. Resp. At hoc
etiam conceditur a nobis eodem sensu quo antecedens illud effatum -- i. e. ita
ut istius modi peccatores non sint membra vera, nec simpliciter corporis
Ecclesiae, sed tantum secundum quid and Aequivoce.

15. Wendeline in Christ. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 28. 15 Wendeline.
is large upon it; He makes spiritual Union with Christ to be the Internal and
Essential form of the Church; and visible Externals to be but an Accidental
external form. In all his definitions he makes only the Elect-believers and
Justified to be the true members, and that both of the Universal Church and of
Particular Churches. He has nine Arguments against the Papists to prove
Hypocrites no true members of the Church, concluding that then Heretics and
notorious ungodly persons are much less members. He answers the Papists
Arguments at large, (the same that are now taken up against us) drawn from the
Parables of the Tares, the Net, the ten Virgins, etc. and from the coruptions
of the Jewish and other Churches: and concludes page 736. [ Hypocritas quod
attinet, ex judicio Charitatis habentur quidem pro veris Ecclesiae membris; sed
non sunt. Aliud est esse quoad externam Professionem, and aliorum Opinionem;
aliud vere esse. And showing how the true Church is visible, he does it thus,
page 737. Deinde ex judicio Charitatis pro veris Ecclesiae membris habentur
omnia coetus particularis membra, sive hypocritae, sive vere fideles sint, in
quibus externae nostrae notae deprehenduntur. Hoc igitur respectu quoque vera
Ecclesia, vera inquam, sive (...) sive secundum Charitatis judicium, est
Visibilis.

Yea, having mentioned those Notes wherein the external accidental form
consists, he adds, [ Harum respectu Ecclesia appellatur visibilis, cujus
membra sunt vere fideles and hypocritae; illi tamen ipsa rei veritate, hi ex
judicio Charitatis and hominum opinione.] I desire the Reader that needs it to
peruse the Chapter throughout, because the book is common, and it thoroughly
handles this point against the Papists.

16. Keckerman System. Theolog. l. 3. c. 6. 16. Keckerman.
shows the equivocal use of the word Ecclesia, and makes the consideration of
that the ready way to decide the Controversy between us and the Papists.
Ecclesia late accepta he makes to be that which contains all Professors, viz
that profess Christ to be their King, Priest, and Prophet: of which he lays
down these Canons; [1. Ecclesia est quiddam (...), quod una essentiali and
generali definitione comprehendi nequit.] And adds, [ De Ecclesia variae
intercedunt Controversiae Ecclesiis Pontificiis and Reformatis, inter qua^
prima est haec, Vtrum videlicet etiam Reprobi ad Ecclesiam pertineant?
Affirmant omnes Pontificii, and statuunt etiam Reprobos ac Damnandos homines
Ecclesiae membra esse, idque hoc confilio, etc. -- id interim concedunt,
Reprobos esse putrida Ecclesiae membra: At vero considerare debebant, membrum
putridum non esse amplius animae instrumentum in corpore, and idcirco nec
Membrum, nisi (...) dictum; sicut Aristoteles de Manu dicit, Manum resectam,
aut it a mutilam ut resecanda sit, non esse Manum, nisi (...). Sicut Serra qua
secare non possumus, aut Culter ligneus, non est Serra vel Culter, nisi
homonym^s: Tota ergo Question facillime expeditur distinctione Ecclesiae, quae
vel late accipitur, and quidem cum homonymia quadam, vel stricte and proprie
sine homonymia. Priori modo Reprobi profitentes Christum, sunt membra Ecclesi^;
posteriori nentiquam. Ducatur Argumentum a similitudine Reipub. and Regni
alicujus, ubi quidem Civis late and (...) dicitur etiam flagitiosissimus
quisque, and qui preditario est in patriam animo, inque ea seditiones movet --
sed proprie ac sine homonymia, etc. --

17. Gomarrus in Loc. Commun. Eptom. per Sibolium collect. Loc. 50. page 57.
17. Gomar^us.
[ Materia (ex qua Ecclesiae est) sunt omnes and soli Electi, Romans 8 29, 30,
33. 1 Pet. 25, 9 -- ] Page 510. Speaking of the Militant Church, as joined in
external communion, he says. [ Et Reprobi velut hoedi cum ovibus permixti,
Math. 25.32. proprie sunt in Ecclesia, sed non ex ecclesia, 1 Joan. 2.19. nisi
secundum quid, and Metaphorice, ob similitudinem professionis Fidei and
Obedientiae; qui hircinum ingenium ovina hac pelle contegunt, and oves Christi
fallaci specie simulant. --

18. Dr. Humfrey in Jesuitismo Part. 2. Rat. 3. 18. D. Humfrey.
having in the Index said [ Ecclesiae vox aequivoca,] does page 210. and
forward, labor to manifest it. And page 279 [ Quamvis enim Ecclesiae nomen sit
(...) and aquivocum, tamen si de vera Ecclesia proprie loquendum est, illo
egregio nomine soli digni sunt fideles. Donius est cujus Lapides vivi: Vinea
and Pomarium Domini est, cujus arbores fructuosae and fructum ferunt, qui non
peribit sed perdurabit. Nam homo pictus non est homo sed statua, ita nec
Ecclesia nisi quae Fide fundatur, Charitate rigatur, Spe sustentatur, Spiritu
animatur ac sanctificatur.

19. Sharpius in Curs. Theolog. de Corp. Eccles. milit. is large against the
Papists, 19. Sharpius.
and near twenty times mentions an homonymie in the word, Ecclesia, and calls
the members of the Visible Church only, sons (...), and the Godly (...). And
often distinguishes betwixt being in the Church as the Reprobates are, and being
of the Church as Believers Justified are. And that you may know what he takes
the Church as Visible to be, note what he says page 1763. ad Obj. 12. Obj.
Quod est in part est in toto: at Reprobi sunt in part Ecclesiae Catholicae,
viz. Visibili: ergo. -- Resp. Non concludit quod est in Questione, quia Question
est, An sunt ex Ecclesia, seu membra Ecclesiae; non An in Ecclesia Visibili?
Deinde, sunt in part, non ex part, que est pars Ecclesia Catholicae. Nam
Visibilis Ecclesia tota qua talis, non est pars Ecclesi^ Catholica. -- Page
1766. Confundit esse in Ecclesia, and esse de Ecclesia. -- Vid. caetera.

20. Rob. Bodius Com. in Ephesians. cap. 1. verse. ult. page 186. 20. Rob. Bodius
Troch.
[ Quinimo ne Membra quidem omnino nisi (...) and aequivoce dici possunt, ut
docet Philosophus ipse naturae lumen ductumque secutus, lib. 2. de anim. oculum
visu destitutum. h. e. coecum non amplius oculum esse inquiens, nisi aequivoce,
etc. -- Page 187. Bellarminus spinam quae ipsum hac ex part pungebat quasi
digito nobis indicat. (Nempe, si mali sunt aequivoce tantum, and non vere
Membra Ecclesiae, sequetur (inquit) inde malum Pontificem non esse Caput
Ecclesiae, and malum Pastorem equivoce tantum esse Pastorem: quod (inquit)
inter Errores Joan. Hussi. damnatum fuisse, Sess. 15. Council. Constant. -- Page
188. Quare hoc saltem ex Bellarmini distinctione consecuti sumus, males
Plebeios, qui tantum ut Membra, non autem instrumenta, considerari possunt in
Ecclesia esse mortua, ac proinde non vera Membra.

21. I. H. Alstedius in Encyclopaed. lib. 25. Theol. sect. 3. Loc. 24. page
382. 21. Alstedius.
Cum Ecclesia militans dicitur esse and Invisibilis and Visibilis, neque est
distributio generis in suas species, neque integri in sua membra; sed
distinctio adjunctorum ejusdem subjecti (therefore there must be the same
subject of Visible Profession, as of Invisible Faith.) Non itaque hic est
sensus, quasi Ecclesia una sit Invisibilis, altera Visibilis: aut quasi una
pars Ecclesiae sit Invisibili alia Visibilis: sed Invisibilitas est affectio,
seu modus Ecclesiae respectu for^ae essentialis, and internae; Visibilitas est
affectio seu modus Ecclesi^, quantum ad formam Accidentalem, and ex^ernam, Nam
forma essentialis est Invisibilis, quia est Relatio and quidem spirtualis --
Forma accidentalis est visibilis. --

22. D. Georg. Sohnius (one of the most learned accurate Divines the Reformed
Churches have possessed) Tom. 1. Method. Theol. page 195. 22. Geo^g. Sohnius.
Itaque illi in quibus nihil agit Christus, non sunt membra Christi and
Ecclesiae: vel certe sunt (ut quidam loquuntur) mortua membra. Nam vulgo sic
dividunt membra Ecclesiae; ut alia viva, alia mortua esse dicant. Page 196.
Ecclesia visibilis est Coetus hominum ad tractandas res divinas convenientium,
in quo Coetu etiam sunt mali and hypocritae multi, sed tamen de doctrina
con^entientes: qui quamvis in Ecclesia versantes, tamen non sunt de Ecclesia;
id est, non sunt Ecclesiae vera and viva membra. Visibilis dicitur Ecclesia
propter ordinem Ecclesiasticum, and formam exteriorem ac visibilem: que quidem
fecit ut Ecclesia s^t and dicatur visibilis. Etsi autaem hic fidelibus admixti
sunt hypocritae, tamen non nisi propter fideles dicitur Ecclesia.

Et in These. Marpurg. page 118.. 13. Quibus multi admixti sunt hypocritae, qui
quamvis in Ecclesia versantur, tamen non sunt de Ecclesia, id est, non sunt
ejus vera vivaque membra.

23. Ph. Melact. in Apol. August. Confess. Impress. Witteberg. 1542. f. 65. 23.
Melancthon. Certa and immota veritas decet, non esse membra Ecclesiae eos qui
scienter oppugnant verhatem, and stabiliunt idola and vitiosos cultu^. Joan.
Manlius Loc. Commun. de Eccles. page 468. ex Melancth.
Concedimus quod hypocritae and mali in haec vita sint admixti Ecclesiae, and
sint membra Ecclesiae secundum externam societatem signorum, etc. -- At
Ecclesia non est tantum societas externarum rerum ac rituum, sicut aliae
politiae, sed principaliter est societas Fidei and Spiritus sancti in cordibus,
etc. -- Fol. 66. Et in Decretis inquit Glossa, Ecclesiam large dictam complecti
bonos and malos. Item malos, Nomine tantum in Ecclesia esse, non Re: bonos vero
Re and Nomine. Et in hanc sententiam multa leguntur apud Patres. Hieronymus
ait, [Qui pecator est aliqua sorde maculatus, de Ecclesia Christi non potest
appellari, nec Christo subjectum dici.] Quanquam igitur hypocritae and mali
sint socii hujus verae Ecclesiae secundum externos ritus, tamen cum definitur
Ecclesia, necesse est eam definiri, quae est vivum Corpus Christi: Item quae
est Nomine and Re Ecclesia. Et multae sunt Causae: Necesse est enim intelligi
quae res principaliter efficiat nos membra, and viva membra Ecclesiae] Leg. and
fol. 67. and quae habet Sohnius in These. Theolog. ex Corpore doctr. Melanct. c.
17. p. 52.

24. Learned Sadeel in Respons^ad Turriani Sophism. is so large in proving the
Internal form of the Church only to be Essential, 24. Sideel.
that instead of citing his words, I must refer the Reader to the perusal of
the Book, contenting my self now to recite these few about the Membership of
Reprobates.

Page 315. ( mihi) Sic igitur habeto: quia particulares habent Ecclesiae
Electos, hinc fieri ut elogia totius Electorum Ecclesiae de singulis
particularibus Ecclesiis dicantur: no^ quia sunt vifibiles (ut tu existimas)
sed quia visibiles Ecclesiae Electos habe^t propter, quos etia^ Ecclesiae
dicu^tur. Sic dicu^tur Hebr. illi ad quos scripsit Apostolus, accessisse ad
Jerusalem coelestem, and myriadas angelorum, conventum and concionem sive
Ecclesiam primogenitorum qui conscripti sunt in coelis, hoc est, ad Ecclesiam
Electorum.] Sic dicuntur Ephesii Concives sanctorum, and Domestic Dei. Sic
Corinthii, sanctificati. Sic Philippenses, Colossenses Thessalonicenses,
dicuntur sancti. Deinque sic illi ad quos scribebat Petrus, dicuntur Electi.
Quae omnia visibilibus Ecclesiis tribuuntur, and nihilominus sunt Electorum
propria: ut enim de Vite dici potst eam proferre vinum ad vitam hominis tuendam
accommodatum, neque id tamen ad aridos and mortuos palmites, sed ad solos
frugiferos erit referendum: Ita quod hic dicitur de Ecclesia, and multa alia
consimili ita dicuntur de Ecclesiis visibilibus, ut ad solos Electos, non autem
ad Reprobos and Hypoeritas pertineant. Recte enim Hieronymus, Nihil interest
(inquit) de Corpore quid dicatur an de Membris, cum and Corpus dividatur in
Membra, and Membra sint Corporis. [Quamobrem duo tibi fuerunt consideranda,
Turriane, quae te ab hoc inepto concludendi genere revocarent. Vnum, hypocritas
and reprobos proprie non esse parts conficientes, sed, ut ita dicam,
deficientes, vel vel potius esse parts (...) quand Ecclesiae Visibles dicuntur
constare ex electis and Reprobis.] Sic page 314 [ Visibilis Ecclesia constat
etiam and imprimis ex electis, tanquam dignissimis, and propter quos (ut ante
diximus Ecclesia vocatur.

25. Sam. Maresius Colleg. Theolog. Loc. 15. page 386, 388. 25. Maresius.
[ Quum vox Ecclesiae sit ita (...), non potest certa definitione ejus
quidditas exprimi, nisi caetera significata tanquam analogata ad primarium
aliquod caput revocentur. Hoc vero statuimus esse Ecclesiam Electorum etc. --
Distinctio frequens Ecclesiae in universalem and particularem non est generis
in species, aut totius in parts, sed vocis ambiguae in sua significata.

Ratione Professionis and Vocationis Christianae, quum in aliis sit duntaxat
externa, in aliis vero interna quoque and seria, Ecclesia membra sunt duum
generum: Qu^ dam enim Univoce, quaedam vero non nisi Aequivoce talia dici
debent. Aequivoce tantum and solum secundum dici, Ecclesiae membra sunt
Hypocritae, occulti Infideles, and Reprobi; E nobis egressi sunt, sed non erant
ex nobis: Illi sunt in Ecclesia, ut mali humores aut lumbrici in nostro
corpore: Univoce vero, proprie and secundum esse, soli Electi and vere
Credentes. Vos non creditis: non enim estis ex ovibus meis, etc.

Idem in Exeg. Confess. Belgic.. 15. Art. 27. p. 386, 387. [ Inde autem
nonnulla magni momenti Consectaria nascuntur; 1. Reverae dari Ecclesiam
praedestinatorum sive electorum: imo hanc proprie and univoce esse solam
Christi Ecclesiam, etc. 2. Solos electos post efficacem suam vocationem
constituere in terris univece and proprie illam Christi Ecclesiam quam
credimus; alios vero non nisi aequivoce, secundum dici and putative ad illam
pertinere. Quae in contrarium disputantur a Bellarmino, plane futilia and
ficulnea sunt.

26. Altingius Loc. Com. Part. 1. Loc. 11. page 180, 181. 26. Altingius.
Item Part. 2. Loc. 11. page 580.581, 582. [ Cum solis Pontificiis certamen
superest -- 1. An ^raeter electos vocatos etiam Reprobi, Infideles, sive
occulti sive manifesti peccatores, verae Christi Ecclesiae membra sint?
Pontificii affirmant: Nos negamus.

Rations nostrae. Ex natura subjecti 1. Qui nec Spiritum sanctum nec sidem
habent, verae Christi Ecclesiae membra non sunt. Reprobi, infideles nec
Spiritum, sanctum habent, nec fidem, etc. -- 2. Qui non sunt ex sive de
Ecclesia, non sunt vera ejus membra: Reprobi, infideles non sunt ex sive de
vera Ecclesia: ergo -- 3. Qui sunt membra Diaboli, non sunt membra verae
Ecclesi^, etc.

Ex natura Praedicati. 1. Omnia membra verae Ecclesiae vocantur secundum
propositum Dei, etc. -- 2. Omnia membra verae Ecclesiae sunt membra Christi,
etc. -- 3. Omnia membra verae Ecclesiae sunt Oves Christi, agnoscunt, audiunt,
sequuntur ipsum, etc. -- ] See the proofs, and the confutation of the Papists
reasons, drawn from the Parables of the Field, the Net, the Wedding Feast, from
Baptism, from the Example of the Apostolical Churches, the uncertainty of
Members, etc.

Idem in Explicat. Cateches. Palate. Part. 2. page 255. [ Item proprie and
Univoce competit veris and sinceris ejus membris, quae sunt vere sideles:
Improprie and Aequivoce membris simulatis, qualia sunt omnes hypocritae; qui ut
paleae inter triticum, zizania inter bonum semen, pisces putridi inter bonos,
versantur in Ecclesia, and propter, externae confessionis gloriationem ejusdem
membra censentur.

27. These Salmuriens. Vol. 3. de variis Ecclesiae partibus, 27. These.
Saimuriens.
These. 28. [ Equidem mihi dici velim quid sibi voluerit subtilissimus
Disputator, qui parts veras appellavit membra arida atque mortua. Illa autem
forma quae in corporibus viventibus anima appellatur, semper vitam comitem
habet, neque potest ab ea separari, haud magis quam a seipsa: Ideo neque rami
in arbore demortui parts ejus censentur: neque in animantibus quae loco sunt
excrementorum, quaeque vitam non participant, ut pili and ungues, ab ea part
qua sunt privati sensu, habentur pro corporis partibus: neque in corpore humano
crus aut brachium quod (...) penitus occupavit, membrum ejus censetur amplius;
haud magis quam homo pictus pro homine judicatur: ideoque extirpatur, tanquam
nihil cum corpore commune habens.

28. Lucas Trelcatius senior in Opuscul. Theol. Loc. Com. de Eccles, 28. Luc.
Trelcatius senior.
page 430. [ Ob hoc enim ipsum Ecclesiae nomen singulis coetibus fidem Christi
ex illius Verbo profitentibus recte tribuitur, quod scilicet Ecclesiae
invisibilis ibi membra esse vere credantur; nam propter electos proprie coetus
aliquis vocatur Ecclesia, etiamsi sint minima illius pars. A potiori enim, non
autem saepe majori, fit hic rei denominatio, scilicet ab eo quo res est quod
est: ut acervus tritici, tritici tamen dicitur, non palearum. Page 429.
Visibilis vero Ecclesiae membra sunt hominibus nota, sed judicio Charitatis,
saepe non Veritatis, propter vocationem and professionem externam, sed saepe
hypocriticam. Page 427. Visibiles inquam, non ab illa forma interna quae dat
proprie esse rei, sed a forma externa, etc. -- ] See more there.

Page 448. Resp. Neg. Nec enim mortua membra corporis vivi sunt membra, nisi
homonymos: and vivae Dei Ecclesiae nullum est membrum mortuum.] Vid. and L.
Trelcat. jun. Instit. lib. 2. page 254, 255.

29. Th. Cartwright contr. Rhem. in Joh. 15.1. 29. Th. Cartwright.
[ Branch in me] Rotten branches, and dead members: branches and members in
show and not in truth. And therefore that which they have not indeed, and yet
seem to have in their own and other men's opinion, shall be taken from them.

30. Bucer, and Marlorate citing him, 30. Bucer and Marlorate.
on Joh. 15.2. Quomodo ergo zizania sunt in regno Dei, and putres pisces in
reti Evangelico, carens vest nuptiali in nuptiis Christi; ita in Christo est
qui non fert fructum; Nomine tenus scilicet, and secundum externam speciem
tantum, non etiam vera fide.

31. Joan. Camero Praelect. de Eccles. page 246. 31. Camero
[3. Negandum est posse sciri distinct and certo qui sint verae Ecclesiae
membra; quae sit vera Ecclesia: at concedendum est tamen posse id sciri
distinct and probabiliter; quae scientia vulgo dicitur Judicium Charitatis. --
ergo Ecclesiae dicitur quemadmodum homo. Nam and homo pictus and coloratus a
Philosopho dicitur homo; and verus homo dicitur homo: and homini picto and vero
quedam sunt communia secundum quae tam hic quam ille homo dicitur: attamen nemo
cavillabitur constitui sic duo genera hominum.

Et page 258. [ Negamus in ulla re externa sitam esse Ecclesiae Essentiam,
ideoque nulla vis est quae cogat ut fateamur Essentiam Ecclesie eandem Notam
esse, etc. -- Consequens est, ut quaecunque Deus pollicetur Ecclesiae suae, seu
ea pertineant ad fidem, seu ad mores, intelligenda sint ea de part quae
proprie sine tropo Ecclesia dicitur, neque convenire Ecclesiae illi quae
synecdochice Ecclesia dicitur, nisi per accidens, respectu scilicet illius
partis, quomodo vivere is dicitur, cujus aliqua pars computruit, quanquam pars
putrida (quod and Aristoteles nos docuit) non est proprie pars, sed homonymos
propter similitudinem and figuram: nam reapse non est pars quando non est
formae totius particeps.]

Were it not that I think the labor needless, I should add many testimonies
collected, and at hand, from Zuinglius, Bullinger, Piscator, Paraeus, Bucanus,
Rivet, with many more, yea many score I doubt not might be added: But I shall
spare my self and the Reader that labor, till I perceive it necessary, and
shall only conclude with two of our own: One in a book not past a month old;
that it may appear that we yet hold to the old Protestant Doctrine, as easy as
it is to turn some from it by specious pretenses.

Mr. H. Jeanes in Scholast. and practic. Divinity page 18.19. says thus. 32.
M. Ieanes
[ Use Inform. Is the Church the outward fullness of Christ, considered as Head?
we may then be informed what is the nature and quality of the true members;
that they are effectually called, and truly sanctified, linkt unto Christ with
an internal union by the bond of the Spirit on his part, and of faith on
theirs. Indeed as in the body natural there are hairs, nails, evil humors, and
many other things, which yet belong not integrally thereunto as proper members:
So if we regard not the inward and invisible Essence, but the visible state, or
outward manner of the Churches being, there adhere unto her many uncalled,
unjustified, and unsanctified persons, but it is only as excrements or ulcers:
For every true member of the Church is a part of Christ's fullness, and therefore
must receive of his fullness grace for grace, must be endowed with all saving
and sanctifying graces; otherwise how can it concur to the making of Christ
full and complete?

Use 2. Refut. Whence secondly may be inferred the gross Error of the Papists
in avouching, that external profession and conformity, outward subjection to
the Pope of Rome, are sufficient to constitute one a true member of the
Catholic Church, although he be a Reprobate, an unbeliever, an hypocrite so
gross as Judas or Simon Magus, a professed and notorious impious wretch, that
is utterly devoid of all spiritual life and grace whatsoever. If he take up a
room in the Church, it matters not with them, though he neither do nor can
perform vital actions, yet he shall pass for a true part thereof.

Page 19. He confesses that they are united to the Church but by an outward
Conjunction: And was ever any man so deprived of common sense and understanding
as to call a wooden leg a part of the body to which it was annexed, as to term
wens, warts, and moles, sores and botches members of the body in which they
were?]

33. The other is Mr. Perkins, 33. Mr. Perkins
in whom the Judgment of other English Protestants of his time may be
discerned: Expos. on the Creed, in Vol. 1. page 308. [Hence we learn, 1. That
the Church of Rome erreth, in teaching that a wicked man, yea such a one as
shall never be saved, may be a true member of the Catholic Church, etc. -- ]

But lest you should say that he speaks this only of the Invisible Church,
(though our Divines say that there is but one Church which is Visible and
Invisible in several respects) I shall desire you to consider what he says of
the Visible Chuhch expressly, page 303, 304. [The visible Church may be thus
described: It is a mixed company of men professing the faith, assembled together
by the preaching of the word. -- It is called a Church, of the better part,
namely the elect whereof it consists, though they be in number few. As for
the ungodly, though they be in the church, yet they are no more parts of it
indeed than the superfluous humors in the veins are parts of the body. -- Again
because the profession of faith is otherwhiles true and sincere, and
otherwhiles only in show, Therefore there be also two sorts of Members of the
visible Church. Members before God, and members before men. A member of the
Church before God is he that beside the outward profession of the Faith, has
inwardly a pure heart, good conscience and Faith unfeigned, whereby he is
indeed a true member of the Church. Members before men, whom we may call
reputed members, are such as have nothing else but the outward. Profession,
wanting the good conscience, and the Faith unfeigned; the Reason why they are
to be esteemed members of us is because we are bound by the Rule of Charity to
think of Men as they appear unto us; leaving secret judgment unto God.] so far
Perkins. And so much for these testimonies.

By what has been said it is evident that it is the judgment of the
Protestants that reprobates and wicked men are not properly members of the
Church, but only Equivocally, and that the Church, is but one, which in some
respect is visible, and some invisible, and that it is denominated Invisible
because its Essential form is Invisible; and denominated visible only from an
External Accidental form; and therefore that those members that are only
visible, or have only the Accidental form of Members, or are only of the Church
as visible, are but Equivocally members of the Church properly so called, as
from its essential form. This they commonly maintain against the Papists. I
confess I think that somewhat more should be said for the explication of this
point (which is fullyest done by the These. Salmuriens. vol. 3.) but though I am
not now delivering my own apprehensions, but the words of others, Some Papists
Confessions.
yet that the true [Church] as also [ Holiness, Faith, Christianity, Adoption,]
are Equivocal, as applied to the Regenerate and unregenerate, I wholly agree
with the common judgment, and am past doubt of it, though Mr. Blake contradict
it with Abhorence.

Bellarmine confesses that many of their own (as Johan. de Turre cremata,
Alexander Hales, Hugo, Thomas, etc. did take the wicked to be but Equivocally
called members of the Church: And our Divines (as Dr. Sutlive page 23.24.
mention also Peter a Soto, Melchior Canus, and diverse others ( et. p. 29.) And
Bellarmine himself says they are but Membra Mortua. Fathers.
And for the judgment of the Fathers, herein, other Divines against the
Papists have produced them at large. See Dr. Sutlive de Eccles. lib. 1. c. 7.
fol. 28. etc. 6. fol. 22.23. Now let us hear Mr. Blake.

Mr. Blake p. 150. [ Then it seems there is no Reality in such separations!
Camero tells us otherwise, that there is a Reality in this Saintship by
separation.]

Ans. This is the first time that ever I heard that Equivocal terms express not
Realityes. Is there no Reality in a picture or a corpse? It suffices that the
Reality is not the same that in a man, and a corpse is expressed by the same
word [Man] Camero's judgment of our controversy is declared before in his own
words.

Mr. Blake [ And it seems the Scripture is still under the charge of Equivocal
speeches all over.]

Ans. This anger flies too high. I beseech you make not the undeniable
Equivocal terms which you find in Scripture the Matter of [ a Charge:] Its is
ill judging the Law that must Judge us. Is there a Divine on earth that will
deny that there are Equivocal terms in Scripture? or that there are hundreds,
if not thousand numerical words that are such. And do you not fear to make
these the Grounds of [ a charge?] Scripture shall not go uncharged except it
speak so as to please us! In the highest matters about the Attributes and Works
of God, how common are Equivocal terms? But do you indeed think that all
Equivocal terms are Culpable? yea or unnecessary? or not intelligible? I pray
you distinguish between Jesuitical dissembling Equivocation, and the laudable
yea necessary use of Equivocal words, when either the transcendencie of the
matter, the incapacity of men, the paucity of terms, the custom of speech, etc.
has made them fit or needful: Let God have the forbearance and justice in
your interpretations, as every writer and Speaker is allowed without any
accusation; the Scripture has accusers enough already.

Mr. Blake [ I would know for my learning what advantage or profit a dead corpse
is in capacity to enjoy. I think none at all: but these have much every way.]

Ans. Thus you argue, (or you say nothing:) [If unregenerate Saints,
Church Members etc, have much advantage, and a corpse have no advantage, then
they are not Equivocally called Saints, Church Members, etc. as a corpse is
called a man: But etc. The consequence is not only false, but too gross.
Advantage or disadvantage are nothing to the nature of Equivocals.

2. In its kind a Corpse may have advantage; It may be stuck with flowers,
perfumed, emblamed, and kept from stinking, as ungodly men are by their common
Gifts, for the sake of those with whom they do converse. 3. An Ape is capable
of advantage, and yet if you call him a man it is a more Catachresticall
Equivocation, than to call a corpse so: An embryo or rude beginings of a man's
body before it receive the soul, it is capable of advanatage, in order to
Manhood, and yet is but Equivocally called a man.

Mr. Blake. If such Equivocation be found in the word [Saint] then the like is
to be affirmed of the word Believer; and Believers having their denomination
from their faith, that is equivocall in like manner, and so the common Division
of faith into Dogmatical or Historical, temporary, miraculous, and justifying
is but a Division of an Aequivocum in sua Aequivocata, which I should think no
man should affirm, much less Mr. Baxter, who makes common and special grace to
differ only gradually; and then as cold in a remiss degree may grow to that
which is intense; so one Aequivocatum may rise up to the Nature of another:
animal terrestre, may become Sydus Coeleste.

Ans. 1. Its no good consequence: because the word [ Saint] is Equivocal,
therefore the word [ Believer] is so. 2. Our dispute is not about the sense of
the word [ Faith] or [ Believer] in General: but about the [ Christian Faith]
in special, from whence a man is to be properly called a Christian, and upon
the profession whereof he is to be baptized; for I told you once already, that
as Faith is taken in General, so your lower sort of faith is truly and properly
Faith; and so is believing in Mahomet: To distinguish Faith into Divine and
Humane, and into Christian and Mohammedan etc, is not aequivoci in sua
aequivocata divisio: But to distinguish the Christian Faith which entituleth to
Baptism, into saving Faith, and that which is short of it, is aequivoci in sua
aequivocata. 3. If you thought No man had been guilty of this conceit, whether
that thought do more disparage the said assertion, or your self, I must not be
judge; but I take it as if you had said, [I thought no man had written against
Bellarmines definition of the Church] 4. As to your [ No Man; much less Mr.
Baxter] as I know not the reason of your thought, unless you indeed take me not
only to be No Man, but to be somewhat distinct both from a man and no man; so I
am as little satisfied with the Reason which you alledg: For 1. It is a Gross
untruth unworthy a Divine and a Brother, that I hold common and special Grace
to differ only gradually. And that this should be deliberately published, even
after I had given the world in print so full an account of the mistake of this
accusation from another, once and again, this is yet less ingenuous, and does
but tell us what we must expect from Brethren when passion is predominant. I
never affirmed any more than this, [that there is a Moral specific difference,
between special and common Graces founded in a Natural Gradual difference.] I
manifested in print that Dr. Kendall who writes against me on this occasion,
does not only say the same thing, but profess that others differ not from me,
and resolves his dispute into a reprehension of me for pretending a
difference. Yet after all these writings my reverend Brother Mr. Blake sticks
not to affirm to this and future Ages in print that I hold [ Only a Gradual
difference,] without any more ado. And of such dealing I may say his Book is
too full. 5. Your reason is no reason; I hope you think not either that your
Animal terrest^e and Sydus caeleste differ but Gradually; nor yet that there
are no Equivocals that differ only in Natural degrees: who knows not that in
many hundred cases a Degree may vary the species?

Mr. Blake [ If Juda's faith was only Equivocal, then the unclean spirits were
Equivocal likewise.

Ans. A consequence as well fortified with proof of Reason as much more of your
book is. Yet I take the boldness to deny it.

Mr. Blake [ I shall never believe that an Equivocal faith can cast out a real
devil.]

Answ. 1. You are not able to make good your word: for you have not wholly the
Command of your own belief. I am as confident that you will believe it. 2. But
if you will not that is no good argument to us that the thing is false. 3. An
Equivocal faith is a Real faith; why then may it not cast out a Real Devil
(that is, be a Causa sine qua non? for no faith does properly effect it.) I
hope you will believe that [ the finger of God] can cast out a real devil; and
yet I hope you think that Gods Power is but Equivocally called [ His finger.]

Mr. Blake [ The Apostle tells us of Faith to the removal of mountains, void
of Charity: if this were Equivocal faith, those must be Equivocal mountains.

Still the like proof! you may as well say [If it be Equivocally called Gods
finger, then it must Equivocally be called a devil that is ejected. We need
better proof.

Mr. Blake page 153. brings Du-Plessis, Wollebius, Gomarrus, Hudson, Paraeus,
Ames, saying that good and bad are in the visible Church.

Ans. Have you to do with any man that denies it? But you know, they
distinguish between In the Church, and Of the Church, and 2. that they Judge
not of the visible as you do. And therefore you do but fraudenly page 156. make
it my opinion as joining with Bellarmines unjust charge, that the visible
Church is no true Church, but Equivocally so called, and that there are two
Churches etc. Do but you quit your self of the charge of making two Churches as
well as all, and we shall do well enough for that. And for the other part of
your charge, our Divines say that there are in the visible Church, 1. those
that belong to it as Invisible. 2 hypocrites and reprobates: the former say
they are properly members of the Church in its proper sense, the latter are
only seeming members: and the Church visible is called [a Church] in respect to
the former: And the visible is denominated but from an Accidental and not the
essential form. Their words before cited show this.

Mr. Blake [ And whereas Mr. Baxter says that other Divines generally plead
that Hypocrites are not true members of the universal Church, but as a wooden
leg to the body: I am almost confident that in turning over all his books, he
can produce but few such testimonies,] Had he said [the Catholic Church]
instead of [the universal] I believe he might have found many -- I think that
scarce any man will deny that the universal Church is visible -- yet Whitaker
as largely makes good that the Catholic Church is invisible: If I be now sent
to my Dictionary, to see whether Catholic and Universal be both one -- the one
a Greek word, the other a Latin; I confess it is so in Grammar, but not in
their use of it that handle the question of the Church Catholic in this manner
-- etc.

Answ. Wonderful Confidence^ Readers, take warning by Mr. Blake and me, and for
our sakes be not over credulous, no not in the most palpable matters of fact.
You hear Mr. Blakes confidence, and now you shall hear mine. Whether I can cite
many such testimonies is partly apparent already. Melancthon, Calvin, Beza,
Vrsine, Polanus, Paraeus, Piscator, Zanchy, Junius, and I think I may add an
hundred more, do promiscuously use the terms [ Catholick] and [ Vniversal]
here: and commonly join them thus [ Ecclesia Catholica seu Vniversalis.] I
profess, I mention that which mine eyes have many a time punctually observed:
and I further profess that I never to this day (to my best remembrance) did
read one Author (nor hear of one till M. Blake here speaks it) that did
distinguish between the [Catholick and Universal Church;] and though I may not
say that no man ever did so, as having not read all, yet I will say, I do not
believe that ever one reputed, wise and Orthodox did so, and I think Mr. Blake
would have proved it from some one if he could. I take this therefore to be a
most injurious reproach to our Divines. Name us one man if you can that ever
was guilty of this ridiculous distinction: yea or one Papist that had the front
to charge them with such a thing. It is well known that our elder Reformers use
to plead against the Papist that particular Churches are visible, but that
Ecclesia Catholica seu Vniversalis is invisible (though you stick not to say
that scarce any man will deny the Universal Church to be visible;) and that our
latter Divines do speak more cautelously, and say, that both particular and
Universal Church are quoad formam externam visible: and yet both are well
reconcilable in sense: but your dinstinction I never met with before.

Page 156. I must profess that in perusing all Mr. Blake's book, I found but
one place, that at the first reading might seem to an impartial man (of
intellectuals no stronger than mine,) to be a successful confutation of any one
of my Arguments, and that is the next, where repeating my Argument (that the
distribution of the Church into visible and invisible, is but of a subject into
diverse adjuncts; therefore the members that are merely visible, are indeed no
part etc, because adjuncts are no part of the essence: he answers [ The
consequence might as fairly have bin that these members which are invisible,
are no parts etc.] I confess at the first view its a pausible answer, but open
it, and the inside is no better than the rest. For my argument takes the
adjunct as conjunct with the reason of the denomination, and Invisible is not a
real adjunct, but a negative denomination; and so the argument is thus [The
Church is called Invisible from its internal essential form, which is
invisible; and its called visible but from its external accidental form which
is visible: therefore those Members that are merely visible (note; I said,
Merely,) are but Equivocally called members of the Church, because they
participate only of the accidental form, and not at all of the essential. Thus
argue the Protestants ordinarily against Bellarmine. And now where is Mr.
Blakes splendid answer, Invisibility is but an adjunct, no more than
visibility; true; and not so much neither. But the Reason of the denomination,
or the thing denominated Invisible, is that which Protestants call the essence,
and that called visible is but an Accident in their account.

Whereas page 157. you take the Church to be an integrum, and that the merely
visible Members are parts, yea and the visible to be the Church most properly,
it is notorious that you side with the Papists therein against the stream of
Protestant Divines: Though the thing it self I shall not now debate, it being
merely a Controversy de nomine that we have in hand, and I mention the words
of Divines, because that custom is the Master of speech; and therefore have no
better means that I know of to decide such kind of Controversies.

As to what you say page 132. I reply again; that which is Real, may have an
equivocal name; and men will know this, yea and Children too, when you have
talked your utmost.

And as to what you say page 139.140. about Equivocal Covenanting, I say as I
did of Faith: Take Covenanting in General, and so a wicked man does properly
Covenant ex part sui with his tongue: But take it for the Christian
Covenanting which entitleth to baptism and denominateth us Christians, which is
[a consent to Gods terms on which he offers Christ and life,] and so all the
covenantings, of the ungodly are but equivocally called [Covenanting with God
in Christ] If you will not believe me; at least regard Dr. Kendals long dispute
on such a point in his second volume, on a mistake, intended against me; and
answer him before you persevere. And as for Gods act of Covenanting with them,
I say, He is not actually in Covenant with them or obliged to them; but only
still does offer them his Covenant.

Reader, I suppose I should do but an unnecessary and undesired work, if I
should thus give a particular Reply to all the rest of such passages as the
forementioned in Mr. Blakes book. And therefore having enough of such work
already, I shall forbear, and here dismiss thee.

An account of my Reasons why I make no answer to Mr Robertson, nor a more
particular Reply to Mr. Blake, or Dr. Owens appendix, as they were given
heretofore in a Letter to a Reverend Friend.

Though most of my Reverend Brethren that have written to me of that subject,
do advise me to forbear particular Replies to the words of others, because the
matter is so much obscured or disadvantaged through the verbal quarrels, and
they only desire me to handle the point of Title to Sacraments in some just
Disputations, and to take in that of Mr. Blakes which best deserves a Reply,
(whom I have obeyed in these Disputations,) yet because some few others are of
a contrary mind, I shall lay down my reasons why I do not yield to their
desires; which is, not only because it is impossible to please men of contrary
expectations, and because they are the fewer, but also because to me their
reasons seem less weighty, and the work which they require is less grateful,
and will be less profitable.

And first for Mr. Robertson, he that thinks such a book does need a Reply, is
like to profit little by any of mine, and so I leave him to be of what opinion
the wind and tide shall drive him to. I have read over a M. S. Book of Mr.
Hotchkis which is his vindication against Mr. Robertson; wherein he has
sufficiently and easily done a needless work. To reciprocate gain-sayings with
that kind of men, is an unprofitable and unpleasing thing: The sons of
contention in their greatest darkness, are more zealous and unwearied in their
generation and work, than the Children of light and peace in theirs. Its not
desirable to match them in violence, in selfconceitedness, in rashness, or
false accusations, in scorns, or lowdness, or length of speech. And as
peaceable Readers are grieved with such disputes, so usually the Antagonist is
more hardened in his mistakes. If you have a friend that erreth, whose recovery
you desire, be sure that you write not a confutation of his errors: for
ordinarily that's the way to fasten him in them, and make him worse. Some will
think this a hard censure, to pass on learned godly men, whose hearts should be
devoted to truth, and who pretend to love the light that does disclose it: But
there is no reasoning against common unquestionable experience. Who will doubt
whether it can be so, when he sees it is so? Of all the Cart-loads of
controversal writings that swarm in the world, how many can you name that
convinced the Antagonist, and brought him to a recantation? Bethink your selves
how many you can name. Nay how many that did not provoke and harden them? By
secret explications, and loving debate, the minds of many have been changed;
and many by positive Asserting and proving the truth; and I confess some by
controversal writings that were written against others (else I would never
meddle that way) but how few by those that are written in confutation of
themselves? As soon as you speak to men in the hearing of the world, they
presently apprehend their reputation to be so engaged, that they are excieted
to defend it with all their might; and instead of an impartial consideration of
your arguments, and a ready entertainment of the truth, they bend their wits to
study how to make good what once they have delivered, and to prove that true
that once has past their pens, that the world may not think them so weak as to
have mistaken. Nay when they do profess to love the truth as truth, and to be
willing to receive it; yet this Self is so near them, and so potent with them,
that they cannot easily suspect that which is their own; and especially if they
have espoused it with any extraordinary endearment: It has still a lovely
aspect in their eyes, and they think so intentively what may be said for it,
that they have scarce leisure or room or life to apprehend the force of that
which is said against it. The first eyes which they cast on your writings, is
with a desire to find some such weaknesses in them, which may be matter of
reproach, or insulting for them; and their endeavors are suited to their first
intentions; and thus are they biased in their reading from end to end. You
therefore multiply their temptations to err, when you discover their error: For
now you so involve the interest of their error with their own, that they see
they cannot confess but with some disgrace, nor receive the truth without being
so base as to confess themselves overcome: And therefore they muster up all
their forces to maintain their opinions for the maintenance of their honor. It
must be therefore for other men's sakes more then for their own, that you must
enterprise such works: Unless you meet with those eminently humble self-denying
Divines (they say there are some such in the world) that are most jealous of
their own, through consciousness of their darkness, and take it for the
greatest victory to be conquered by the truth. I doubt not but there are some
such humble souls, where the window stands open to the light, though pride
and prejudice shut it with the most. Of whom if you please to esteem me one, I
shall not much contradict you, but shall thence suppose that you will rather
permit me to speak plainly against the sin, because I have suffered by it my
self.

And as to those other Reverend persons, Dr. Owen and Mr. Blake, whose
displeasure has been so much kindled against me, I shall give you a brief
account of my Reasons, from the quality of their writings, why I think that it
is not to be done, at least by any particular examination of their words.

By the effects of what has been said to them already, you may strongly
conjecture what good it would do them to be contradicted again. In the former
writings there appeared so much calmness, that one would have thought they had
been men that could have endured a Reply: But for their second, they so much
differ from the first as if the men were not the same. If you judged by the
storms that arise in these writings, would you not think that I had somewhere
reproached their persons, or done some heinous thing against them? But whether
it be so, I am content that the indifferent judge. For the former (Dr. Owen) I
desire that any of his tenderest friends will peruse those few lines in which I
contradicted him, and if they can find a word that is uncivil or abusive, I
shall be ready to disown it, and to profess that I was guilty of provoking him
to such an impatient entertainment. If I can understand my self and him, and
may judge by his complaints and by the complexion of his dispute, the heinous
injury that I have done him is that I have gainsaid him; And I had thought
that half the humility which some of his professions of himself do intimate
that he is possessed of, would have caused a man to have judged this a
pardonable fault. As long as his person is not once meddled with, but only his
words examined, and cause set against cause, and reason against reason, what
harm is done to him? what bone is broken? or what one feather is plucked from
his plume? Nay rather it has occasioned the reparation of his honor with some;
For some that before judged that he meant as he spoke, do now begin to believe
that he meant better; since he so earnestly contendeth that he meant as the
Orthodox, and seems to disclaim the Absolution of Unbelievers. And I must
confess I do somewhat the less repent of those disputes that so much offend men,
when they have so good an issue for the matter, though some accidental evils
are occasioned by them. When a bad cause is disowned, I have the thing that I
intended: And though it be very angrily that we agree, and close with somewhat
a sharp collision, yet its well that we agree: Though I must say that it is so
usual for men to love those of their own opinions, that I marvailed to find a
man with such high indignation endeavoring to prove himself of his Opponents
mind; and that we should agree more passionately then we seemed to differ. As
I little thought that Dr. Twisse had been of the same mind with my self and
others in this point; But Mr. Iessop has peaceably and temperately proved it:
and I therein rejoice: so I less thought that Dr. Owen had been of the same
mind; but he has hotly and haughtily proved it; and therein also I rejoice.
As long as we come nearer, and error goes away with the disgrace, we may the
better bear the displeasure of the Reconciled.

As for the great pains he has taken about my Person (for the cause found him
not work enough) to prove from my writings that I am so hypocritically proud, I
know not well what return to make him that will be acceptable. Should I as
faithfully admonish him, it would seem but a recrimination; and its like he
has those that are nearer him that do it, who need not take their ground from
fame, and whose words may meet with less indignation: Should I tell him that a
Minister is not to be prodigal of his reputation, because it is not his own,
and that a man that is voluminously slandered, and that is Calumniated by the
offspring which such Reverend men as he has midwived into the world, may
possibly open his mouth against the Calumniator, and clear his innocence and
the truth without a predominant degree of pride, I should probably incurr the
censure of being yet more proud, by denying any thing that is charged upon me;
though it were that Heresy it self which his parallel does seem to his Readers
to accuse me of. If I should tell him that I do unfeignedly confess the truth
of his accusation, and that I was aware of Pride and Hypocrisy in my heart
before he told me of them, and that the subduing of them is the business of my
desires and care, its ten to one but I shall be proud in seeming so humble as
to confess my pride, and that these (as he speaks) are but good words to cover
it. But yet confess it I must and will, how proud soever I be in the confession.

One evidence of it which I have heard from the apprehension of others, viz.
because I gave him not his due Titles of honor, is no whit cogent with me that
know the case: and I think my justification is unanswerable: viz. that when my
papers were written he was not Doctor, though he was when they came out of the
press.

Whether it be not harder measure that I have met with at his hand, I desire
you to judge by two or three particulars.

1. Though I did purposely again and again profess that I reckoned not all to
be Antinomians that held only some one or few of their opinions, that are not
the worst* and in particular, not all that held the very same opinion against
which I argued with him, and withal entitle him [The most sober and learned
man that I know of that writes that way] even for that opinion; yet does he
think meet to publish to the world that I [enroll him into the Troop of
Antinomians,] when he is unable to produce a syllable of mine that has such a
signification. I think this dealing is not fair.

2. He untruly charge me with [traducing him for maintaining and giving
countenance to the Propositions which I mentioned page 189.] on his page 9. and
3. and thereupon groundeth his tragical exclamations. I mentioned him as the
author of these particular words which I annexed to his name, which I judged
indeed unsound; but will it thence follow that I fasten on him all the errors
that I mention in the precedent or subsequent pages? Having read my words
inconsiderately, he exclaims against supposed injuries, which were caused by
the mistakes of his own imagination, and are not to be found in any of my
expressions. A stranger that reads his passionate scorns upon such occasions,
and had not read the words which did offend him, would little think that so
learned a man should make such a stir upon the pretense of a charge that was
never brought against him, but only against others, a leaf before the mention
of his name. If he ask, Why then did I there mention his name? I answer; As he
defends that particular opinion which his words express, and not as defending
all that other men are charged with: and I mentioned his, because it is too
like to theirs, and they are encouraged by it, as Mr. Eyres allegations may
evince.

3. When in the close of my confession page 462. I called so large a recital of
other men's words, [a spending of much time to little purpose,] even to satisfy
those that look too much at the names of men, he feigneth me to speak this in
reference to the matter and manner of the Book.

4. His splendid fiction of the terrible conditions which I put upon my
answerer, and his insultings thereupon, are only the effects of his
inadvertency and mistakes (page 45.) as I shall show anon.

Page 5. His pretended knowledge of me, as if it were upon much acquaintance
and experience, does argue much sagacity. I think I have seen him as often as he
has seen me, and yet my knowledge of him is very small.

In his anatomizing of my pride page 6 he plays the after-game more plausibly
than his Brethren played the fore-game. They go before, (and partly by his
help) and publish abundance of Calumnies of me to the world, telling them not
only that I am a Papist, but what books they were that made me a Papist, and
what Emissaries I have in all parts of the Land, with much more of the like.
When my discovery of their abuse did frustrate much of their design, this
Learned man comes after them, and at last will prove me proud for contradicting
them; forsooth for talking so much of my self. As if one of the Doctors friends
should accuse me of theft, or murder at the Assize, and when I have justified
my innocence, the Doctor should come after him, and tell how much I had spoken
for my self, and prove me thereby to be proud and selfish. The truth is, I am
conscious of so much of these sins, and so far believe the odiousness and
danger of them, that I take such books as this Doctors for a great mercy; as
knowing that strong corruptions must have something that is strong to work the
cure, and a hard knot must have a sharp wedge; a Shimei may be sent of God for
good; and how unrighteous soever the monitor may be, I am abundantly beholden
to God that does permit it; I had rather have a Messenger of Satan to buffet
me, than be exalted above measure. I confess my pride needs sharper
reprehensions than friends have ever used about me; and therefore they are
better from any body than from no body. But I must say, that I despair of
speaking, writing or doing any thing so exactly, but that ingenious malice may
plausibly put it into as odious a dress as this Reverend man (I hope with a
better mind) has there clothed the passages with, which he refers to.

Page 7. His passion quite conquereth his ingenuity, while he is not contented
to ease his spleen on me alone, but must fall upon the Worcestershire
profession of faith, and therein pick quarrels with the plainest passages,
contrary to the sense that I had told him in my explication we took the words
in; and can find that [in sundry particulars therein we give too great a
countenance to the Socinian abominations] when we have professed that we
believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and then that we consent to take
this God for our God and chief Good, this Christ for our only Savior, etc. he
can find us directly answering Mr. Biddle, and distinguishing the Lord Jesus
our Redeemer as our Lord from that one true God] as if we did not include the
three persons in the first Article of our consent, and in the second respect
the office of Christ rather than the pure Godhead considered in it self, which
was expressed before! Or as if we had not plainly prevented such exceptions! As
God is offered, so is he to be accepted; and therefore our consent must respect
the benefits and offices, and not only the persons in the Trinity as such. And
did this Reverend man forget how often Paul has given him the very same cause to
suspect his words of countenancing Socinianism (excepting the difference of the
authors) as we have done; I mean, how often he does as plainly distinguish as we
here do! But because such eyes will not look at an explication in the distant
leaves, we have since tried a further remedy against such Calumniations, by
putting our exposition in the margent, that he that will see the words
themselves, may see them. But when all is done, you see what dealing you must
expect. I look not to escape the fangs of such excepters, if I say that I
believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; for no doubt but some of them
can find heresy or somewhat that countenanceth it in this.

But the hardest measure of all that I have from him is in his Socinian
parallel in 11. Articles, page 11.12. etc. I never met with Reader but
understood without doubt, that he mentioned the words in the English Letter as
mine: But he was wiser than to say so, much more to quote the places where they
are all found. Indeed part of them are the common Protestant doctrine; and part
of them never fell from my pen, nor came into my thoughts with any approbation.
Yet has he so prudently managed the business, that his Readers shall generally
think he charge them on me (and who will not believe him rather then search
he knows not where to disprove him?) and yet he may deny it when ever he is
blamed for it.

Having thus given you an account of the quality of that Appendix, I hope you
see sufficient Reason why I should forbear a more particular Reply. Nor will I
vie with him in poetical shreds and adages, though a Polyanthea or Erasmus
Apopthegms would furnish me without any further travel.

And next as to Mr. Blake, I find more cause in his last writings to deter me
from all Disputations where pious men may think themselves concerned, than to
encourage me to proceed in the justest defense. And I confess it repents me
for his own sake that ever I defended my self against his accusations, and that
I did not silently suffer him to say what he would: though yet I am willing
that the equity of the Reasons which I gave for my Replying to him in that
Apology, be censured by any impartial man: even those that I have expressed in
my preface to that Book. But I could not then see the consequents as to himself.

I am heartily sorry that I have become by my defense, an occasion or
temptation of so much offense, and of so much distemper and injustice to a man
whom I so much love and honor; should I speak any further for that which I am
confident is the truth of God, how much more might I offend and tempt him? I
well hoped that he that made the assault on his Brother would have patiently
heard an answer; and have been glad of such a collation of our several thoughts
as might tend in any measure to beat out the truth. As he thought it was for
God that he assaulted me, so I as verily think it was for God and his certain
truth that I wrote my defense. And if I be mistaken, why should he be so angry
at it? when I know he takes not himself to be infallible. When I wrote (...)
the Index the contents of one section, thus [ whether it be virtually written
in Scripture that Mr. Blake is justified? and whether it is de fide,] he says
( page 336.) that [ he did not without trembling of spirit read, nor without
tears think upon this thus put to the question.] And what is the reason? why
says he [ Who would not believe that I had directly asserted it, or made some
unsavooy vaunts about it?] Truly, no man would believe it from these words,
that knows what an Index is; but would understand that it tells him the matter
that is contained in the page that it refers him to, and not the matter
directly asserted by another. And must we not dispute against that also which
is indirectly asserted? I profess it never came into my thoughts that the most
render passionate man, that was not melancholy, could have so much matter of
offense in those words as to tremble or weep at them. It is a case wherein I
must speak of some individual, or I could not speak to the purpose. For its
granted that it is not every man's justification that is de fide, nor every
justified man's, and yet some men's was. Had I instanced in Peter or Paul, it had
been nothing to out business: For I confess that Scripture declares them to be
justified. Titius and Sompronius I knew not, and therefore could not instance
in them. Should I have instanced in my self, he might have taken it for
sophistical: For the disproof of my own certainty of justification, is no
disproof of another man's; whom then could I more reasonably and fitly instance
in than the Opponent himself? especially being a man of whose sincerity I am so
confident. It never entered into my apprehension that this was any more wrong
to him, than it would have been to have put this question, Whether Mr. Blake's
Soul be in loco, if I had been disputing with him whether anima humana sit in
loco? I profess if it were to do again, I know not how more fitly to express
it. But if I have not skill enough to draw the index of a Section, without so
great sin or offense as shall cast so Reverend a man into trembling and tears
(no doubt, in compassion of me) I think its time to lay by this kind of work.

I have been (it seems) also a temptation to him to tell the world such stories
of my self, as I little thought such a man would have reported. As Mr.
Robertson talks so confidently of his discourses with Mr. Hothkis who professes
he never saw him or spoke a word to him; so does my dear friend Mr. Blake tell
the world as truly, once on the credit of his Informer, but again absolutely
without such limitation, that I have given out that I have made some body my
Convert, who professes now to be satisfied in his Book: Whereas he might as
truly have told them, that I take my self to be King of France or Spain. If he
will bring his tale-carriers face to face, and prove by any faithful witness
that I ever boasted of any man as my Convert, or ever said of one man living
that I had made him my Convert, in any matter of such opinions, I will give you
leave to spit in my face and call me liar.

As fairly does he cast his censures on the credit of his Informers at the
Wocestershire combination (as he terms it) [ that the most profane, where
the Minister carries any Authority, are as forward as any] with more of the
like: whereas if he had been unsatisfied in their proceedings, there are many
Reverend Brethren there that would have readily given him an account of them,
and a better information: And he was publicly told by them and me, that we
were not gathering Churches or taking in members, and therefore not discerning
who were meet; but only discerning who did account themselves as such, and
profess themselves such already.

And as fairly does he report that he hears I [ bring in the name of Reverend
Mr. Ball to give honor to this, that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome and the
reformed Churches is one and the same, or inconsiderably differing in this of
justification;] And then tells us that he heard it himself and told Mr. Ball of
it, and that he disclaimed it. Whereas 1. It was not half this much that I
spoke. 2. And do not know that ever I spoke it to three men, or more. 3. And I
must profess to the world that the man I had it from was Mr. Blake himself, and
only him, and that at too several times, once mentioning the Papists doctrine,
and the other time the Arminians about justification; and that he reported the
neerness of us to them, as Mr. Ball's saying, but never told me with it one
word of his disowning it. 4. And I never spoke this my self, as approving the
conceit, that the Papists and we did so inconsiderably differ herein. And now
let the equity of Mr. Blakes dealing be judged of, whether he were a fit man
publicly to accuse me of this crime, who was my only Author. I would never
have mentioned these things, if he had not thus necessitated me. Though I am in
doubt that he will take it ill, that in all these things I deny his
Accusations, and do not by my silence interpretatively belie my self.

And as to the main bulk of his Disputes against me, I must needs say that
there is such ordinary mistaking the sense, or quite overlooking the drift of
my Arguments and Answers, and obscuring the matter with mere shifts and
confusions, that if I should give a punctual answer to such a book, I think the
perusal of it would be ungrateful to the Reader. For what profit can it be to
any man to be convinced at so dear a rate, how much Mr. Blake has miscarried in
his arguing? I know my censures of his labors are like to be provoking: But who
can help that? Had I thought him in the right, I had never contradicted him. Or
could I yet see that I have erred, I must needs approve that light which did
reveal it: And if I be in the wrong, it is no news for an erring man to think
that he does not err; and if he think not so, he does not err in mind, but in
word. But if I prove in the right, if it will not excuse me that I do but ward
off the blow that he gives me, not that I plead for Gods truth, at least let
it excuse me that some evidence is cogent, and some light so constraining that
I cannot choose but think as I do think, till I have better evidence to the
contrary than does appear in Mr. Blakes Reply. And so little is my
understanding at the disposal of my will, that if my life lay on it, I could
not choose but be persuaded in my heart, that Mr. Blakes Reply is so full of
mistakes, and built upon such misunderstanding of the words that he Replyeth
to, that it tends more to darken the truth than to clear it, and to pervert
the inconsiderate that will take things on trust, or think his cause best that
has the last word to color it, and put a gloss upon it: and that there needs
no more with the judicious Reader that is willing to try before he trust, and
thinks the truth is worth his labor, than impartially to read over the words
that Mr. Blake does Reply to, for the manifesting of the insufficiency of his
Reply, as to the main of the cause. He will think this is great confidence; but
what Remedy? I think he is near as confident: though both be not in the right.
And I doubt not but Dr. Owen can see the height of my Pride in this confidence.
But certainly when ever I come to be so humble as to believe all that such
Reverend Brethren say, I must needs be so Proud as to disbelieve those that
contradict them; For I see it a matter not to hoped for, that ever they that
are so offended with me, should come to an agreement among themselves. As Dr.
Owen and Mr. Blake are against me; so Mr. Blake and I are against Dr. Owen, and
so its runs round. And if I should be so humible as to agree with one of them,
what shall I do for another inconsistent humility, to make me of the others
mind that is against him?

I must confess that there is one part of the contest between Mr. Blake and me
at least, that I think well worthy a review, and that is the question about the
nature of that faith which gives Right to Sacraments: For as it is a matter
that comes so frequently into practice, and of such moment to particular
persons, to Ministers and to the welfare of the Church, so I do not know of any
that has said so much for that cause which I yet account so bad, as Mr. Blake
has done; and indeed he has put a fairer gloss on this than on any of the
rest. And yet in my judgment he has left it so naked, that a little diligence
and impartially may do much to discover his opinions to be inconsistent (if
reduced into practice) with the Purity of the Church, and such as is unworthy
the patronage of Godly learned men. Yet in this I perceive his writings have
success: For I hear that some Reverend Godly men of his acquaintance are so
confident that he is in the right, that they marvel that ever I should hold the
contrary, and blame me as defending a principal point in the Independent cause.
The Lord enlighten us, and pardon it to us, which soever of us it be that is
mistaken, and does wrong the Church of God.

There are four several Titles that are or may be produced to Baptism: The
first is sincere Saving Faith: The second is the profession of such sincere
Faith: The third is a Dogmatical Faith, short of Justifying Faith: The fourth
is a profession of that Dogmatical Faith. I say, that only they that have the
Justifying Faith, have a Promise-Right to Baptism, properly so called; which I
called a Right Coram Deo: but that the professors of such a Faith and their
seed have an Analogical Consequential Right which follows on Gods Precept to
a Minister to Baptize them. This I called Right Coram Ecclesia, and is less
properly a Right. And that the bare word Right might be no occasion of quarrel,
I distinguished of Right; and showed how far I affirmed or denied it: But such
distinctions and conclusions are nothing to the business with Mr. Blake; but
fittest to be passed by. I conclude in a word that every professor of a
Justifying Faith (that does not invalidate his own profession) has such a
claim to Baptism for himself (if unbaptized) and his seed, as the Church must
admit: But only the sincere Believer has a Right from the Promise, and shall
be taken by God for one to whom he is actually, as it were, obliged by his
Covenant. But for the two later pretended Titles, viz. A Dogmatical Faith not
Justifying, and the Profession of such a Faith, I say, they are no just Titles
at all. Not but that a man who has merely a Dogmatical Faith within, may have
a Title in Foro Ecclesiae; but this Faith is not his Title, but the profession
of a Saving Faith: so that if he profess only his Dogmatical Faith, and not a
Saving Faith, the Minister ought not to Baptize him. This is the brief of the
state of the Controversy between Master Blake and me: And did I think that any
such Reverend Brethren would ever have approved his Judgment in such a cause?
Yea and some of them plead from the same effectual mediums, which are alone
sufficient to prove the contrary; Its the course of Hilary and others against
the Arrians; Hierome, Augustine, and many more against the Pelagians, and other
heretics, to call them to the constant practice of the Church in Baptizing,
for the proving of the nature of that Belief that we are Baptized into, and the
quality of the subject. I appeal to Christ's institution of Baptism, and the
uninterrupted practice of all Churches that ever I read of on the face of the
earth to this day, and to the continued practice of the Churches in England,
and all the Reformed parties, and all the rest of the Christian world, If they
do not generally, Ethiopians, Greeks, Papists, Protestants with one consent
require the profession of a Justifying Faith, I will quit this cause, and tell
Mr. Blake that I have been mistaken, and cry him mercy. Nay if Mr. Blake
himself do not require the profession of a Justifying Faith in the Parent of
all that he admits to Baptism, I shall think him the only singular man I know
alive in this business: But if he practice contrary to all his confident
Argumentations, which shall we have respect to, his opinion or his practice?
Where is the Church on earth that does not Baptize into the name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, and require in the adult, or the Parent of Infants, that
they profess themselves at present to Believe in the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and to renounce the World, the Flesh and the Devil? And therefore they
commonly cause them to profess the Articles of the ancient Creed before they do
Baptize them (which though it has been lately disused by some, I gladly heard
some Reverend Ministers in London yet use) which Creed (as Parker de Descensu,
has learnedly showed) is the exposition of the words of the Baptismal
Institution; and the sum of it is, I Believe in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
I think not only Perkins but our Divines commonly against the Papists have
proved sufficiently that the words [I Believe in God the Father, in Jesus
Christ, in the Holy Ghost, do signify Affiance, as well as Assent. And I
should hope that I need not be put to maintain it, that [to Believe with Assent
and Affiance, in God the Father, Christ the Redeemer, the Holy Ghost, the
witness and Sanctifier, renouncing the Devil, the World and the Flesh] is
certainly Justifying Faith, at least. If they that say they thus Believe, do so
indeed, I dare not be he that shall tell them they are yet condemned, and deny
them to be the justified members of Christ. If they will not so much as profess
thus to Believe, (yea and to Repent) I will never Baptize them, or theirs upon
the^r account. Will Mr. Blake himself Baptize them, that will not thus profess?
would ever the Church of Christ Baptize any but such? and yet some Reverend
Brethren tell us, that the Church universally has gone Mr. Blakes way, against
that which I insist on. Now the Lord have mercy upon all our infirmities, and
pity his poor Church, and bring his servants to so much Unity, that the
universal practice of the Church in all ages and Nations, even among our
selves, which we daily hear, and see, and our own selves practice, may not be
among us a matter of controversy; for then, what are we likely to be agreed in?

Again I must crave pardon of this confidence: but if it seem to them to come
from self-conceitedness and pride of my own judgment, or a loathness to let go
what I have once received; as I willingly confess that I find such sins within
me, and am no Christian, if I blame them not and hate them not in my self; so I
will be bold to tell Mr. Blake and the world the very truth in this business,:
which is, that the partiality that I have felt in the study of this point has
been for Mr. Blakes opinion against my own; and I had rather a great while
(till the light convinced me) have found his opinion true, than my own. As I
knew I should be taken for a defender of the Independants (which is a censure
that I little regard) so I thought that I should the better comply with some
Texts of the old Testament which Mr. Blake much urges, and some other reasons
did cause Mr. Blakes opinion sometime so far to smile upon me, that I strove
against the contrary truth, and studied all that I could to have confuted the
Arguments for it, and was very willing to have found the truth on Mr. Blakes
side: but it was too hard for me, and overcame me after some such reluctance.
For besides many other Reasons which I have mentioned, I find that there is no
footing for a man in his way. He that will not take up with the bare name of a
Dogmatical Faith, knows not (for ought I can find) what to take up with. I
despair of ever prevailing with Mr. Blake, let him write never so much more on
the subject, to give us a true Definition or Description of that Faith short of
Justifying, which entitleth to Baptism, and to prove it from Gods word, or to
agree with himself. Commonly he calls it a Dogmatical Faith: one would think
now you might know the truth by this plain Name: but when I tell him that if it
be merely Dogmatical, then it is only in the understandings Assent, and
imports no consent of the Will, and that this is in the Devils, and may be in
those that say, [We will not have this man reign over us, nor be our Savior,
because he will not let us have our lusts] (And would he Baptize those that
should say so?) Hereupon Mr. Blake will take some consent of the Will, or else
it cannot become a covenanting: but sometime he only describes it negatively
(that it is not such as comes up to Justifying Faith): but who knows by this
what it is? though he tell us what it is not: sometime he makes the expression
of it to contain those two parts: 1. Confession of the necessity of justifying
Faith: 2. An engagement or promise to Believe with a Justifying Faith. But when
I interpret this promise to be [that he will so believe de futuro] he asks me
[how comes de futuro in?] as if every promise were not de futuro; Is it de
praesenti? Does he promise that he does at the present so believe? why this is
not to promise, but to profess: and is the thing that I plead for as necessary,
which Mr. Blake resists: sure then it is de futuro, or it is not intelligible
by common capacities. Well, if it must be de futuro, either its at the next
moment, or some time at longer distance. To say, I consent not now, but I will
the next moment, or tomorrow, is ridiculous: partly because as I have proved to
him, such a person is not capable of making such a promise, so as should be
rationally accepted in a covenant, and partly because we may end the
controversy by forbearing his Baptizing one moment longer, or one day till he
do indeed Believe and consent as he promises. But what time soever it be, as I
told him, upon these terms, a man may say, [I believe the Creed and Scripture
to be true, but because I know that I cannot serve God and Mammon, nor have
Christ to justify me, and live in my sins, I will not yet have God for my God,
or Christ for my Lord and Savior, nor the Holy Ghost for my Sanctifier,
because I will not yet leave my sins, but hereafter I will,] would Mr. Blake
Baptize such a man as this? In answer to such a question, he says page 133. [
I think it will be nothing hard for any honest Christian to say, that a man not
justified may believe every fundamental Article, as to Assent, and that he may
be convinced of the necessity of such Repentance, and accordingly to make
profession of it, as John's Converts were Baptized into etc.] And page 147. he
says [ Seeing Mr. Baxter calls upon me further to declare my self further in
this thing, I do believe and profess to hold, that he that upon hearing the
Gospel preached, and the truth of it published and opened, shall professedly
abjure all other opposite ways whatsoever, and choose the Christian way for
Salvation, promising to follow the Rules of it, is to be Baptized and his seed,
etc.] And are these Descrptions of his Dogmatical faith the same with the
former? Is not Repentance ever concomitant with Faith? John's Baptism was the
Baptism of Repentance for Remission of sins; and if our Divines mistake not
when they maintain to be the same with Christ's, sure Faith was to go with that
Repentance, and that Repentance which is for Remission of sins is not common,
but saving and special. If therefore saving Repentance must not only be
promised de futuro, but professed de praesenti, then doubtless so must that
Faith which is inseparable. 2. And would Mr. Blake have us so Censorious as to
say, that those men that [Abjure all other ways whatsoever, and choose the
Christian way for Salvation, promising to follow the Rules of it,] if they do
this sincerely, are not yet justified, or have not justifying faith? and that
if they do it not sincerely, that is not yet justifying faith which they
profess? For my part I am past doubt of it. If this be Mr. Blakes Dogmatical
Faith, he and I are not much at distance about the Qualification of the
Baptized, but about the nature of justifying Faith. For that's justifying in my
judgment, which is but Dogmatical in his. Christ is the way to Salvation; the
Sanctifying work of the Spirit, and the holy Love and Obedience of the Saints
in this way, in subserviency to Christ, all these are the Gospel way to
Salvation: the false belief of Erroneous men, and the many bypath of the
unregenerate, are the contrary which Satan persuades them to, and makes them
believe may serve the turn. That man that Abjureth all other ways than that
are opposite to the Christian way, and does choose the Christian way for
Salvation, is certainly a true Penitent and believes to justification: or else
I can have no hopes of being saved. Election is that term by which Amesius will
needs express the proper formal act of justifying Faith. Not one of all these
acts that Mr. Blake mentions, either 1. To Abjure all other opposite ways
whatsoever. 2. To choose the Christian way of Salvation. 3. To promise to
follow the Rules thereof. I say, not one of these can be uprightly and
unfeignedly done by the unregenerate; by any that has not true Repentance and
justifying says: Much less altogether. Judge then whether the profession of
this, be not the profession of saving faith? and whether Mr. Blake know where
to fix himself, and how to describe his Dogmatical faith? and whether he do not
yield the cause that I am maintaining?

And whereas he takes it for [ an egregious piece of affected nonsense, to say
that Justifying faith is a promise] and still says [ that Justifying faith
with him is the thing promised, or the thing whereto we do restipulate] page
171. I say, that he can never prove that the Church of Christ did know such a
Baptismal covenant, wherein the first justifying faith was the thing promised
(though the continuance may): And should I so Baptize any person, at age, (or
an Infant in respect of the Parents Faith, which is his condition of Title) I
should think I made a new covenant and a new Baptism; I mean, If I Baptized any
without the present profession of justifying faith and Repentance, upon a
promise that they will begin to Repent and Believe savingly for the time to
come. Indeed the first faith and Repentance unto life, are so much above
corrupted nature, and so much the special gifts of God, (which he has given no
man assurance of in particular, that has them not already) that we must stay
till men have them, before they are meet to be admitted upon promise that they
will perform them.

It has pleased some of the great Calumniators agents, to censure me as an
Arminian, or half one, because I run not so far on the other hand as they. But
its a hard case that I am in, who must needs be an Arminian, and yet must be
forced to dissent from so dear a friend as Mr. Blake for fear of becoming one.
I am confident that Mr. Blake in those points is Orthodox; but so could not I
be, if I should entertain his opinion. For if I did believe that upon the acts
of common Grace men have covenant or promise-right given them by God to be
Baptized, I must needs believe that they had Right to Remission of sin in
Christ's blood; seeing God appointed no Baptism but what is for the Remission of
sin; upon which account I have mightily displeased some Reverend friends that
before over-valued me, who are favorers of the Arminian way, merely because I
oppose Mr. Blake in this point.

For my part, I still take faith to be the very internal covenanting with God
in Christ, and not a condition of our own covenant: though it be the condition
of Gods covenant or promise: and so that condition of Gods covenant, and our
own actual covenanting are one and the same thing: our very first covenanting
with him, or consent to his terms, is that faith on which he promises us
Justification: though there be a further performance required to our Salvation.
It is all one, in my account, to believe in Christ, and to become a Christian:
and Baptism (commonly called our Christening) is not to engage us to begin to
be Christians hereafter: but it is the solemnization of the Christian contract
or marriage between Christ and the Soul, which is supposed to be made in heart
before: so that they are then actually Christians inaugurated or publicly
manifested. And (for all that Mr. Blake has said to the contrary) he that
professes any faith only, that is short of justifying faith, is not a
Christian in the covenant-sence, but is only Equivocally or Analogically so
called. And whereas Mr. Blake makes it more tolerable if I had used the word [
Analogically] then to use the word [ Equivocally,] if he had pleased to observe
it, I frequently put them together as here, [Equivocally or Analogically:] so
that if that will satisfy him, he might have been satisfied sooner. Yet I take
the Scotists controversy to be yet undecided, whether some terms be not both
Analogical and Univocal, and some both Analogical and Equivocal; (which they
handle on the Question, Vtrum Ens dicatur Vnivoce de Deo and Creatura) or
rather that the later clause is past doubt; and therefore in our ease it is
both. Nor am I yet persuaded that his old Testament covenanters, (which are the
great moving instance) did profess only such a faith as was short of
Justifying: and they that lived in such scandal as was inconsistent Notoriously
with their profession, were by the law to be put to death: and then they were
past begetting Children to plead a right in Circumcision.

And whereas he is so confident that according to my opinion, the Baptism of
the unjustifyed is a Nullity, and that they must be Baptized again, and says,
that [ its much to be feared, if not certainly to be concluded, that the Major
part by far of the Worcestershire combination consists of unbaptized persons,
etc.] page 142, 143. I answer 1. it is a mere naked unproved assertion, that
any such consequent does follow on these grounds: Nor can he ever prove it. If
the outward ordinance were rightly administered, and the inward covenanting of
the heart were not performed, it is not that which was well done that must be
done again, but that must be done which was at first omitted, even sincere
internal covenanting or believing. 2. But it is much more disputable according
to his principles, whether all that he should so Baptize, must not be
rebaptized? For as the ancient Councils which were against Cyprians and the
rest of the Carthaginians Rebaptizing, did yet decree that all should be
rebaptized that were Baptized by the Paulionists (not that they allowed really
of twice Baptizing, but that the first was but Baptism Equivocally so called)
because they Baptized not into the Name of the Trinity; so if we should upon
the new Doctrine take up a new Baptism, upon a mere Dogmatical faith, which is
not a believing in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but only a Believing
that there is a Father, Son and Holy Ghost, (and add, if you will, a Promise to
believe in them hereafter) I should be hardly put to it to prove these persons
truly Baptized, and, that it being a Nullity, all were not to be done again:
and yet some Brethren of Mr. Blakes mind think, that my Judgment opens the
way to Rebaptizing; when I doubt it will be hard to avoid it, as to every
person, in the way that he disputes for. Not that I think that any one should
be rebaptized that is Baptized by Mr. Blake or any of them. For I am confident
that neither he, nor they did ever practice their own doctrine, nor ever
Baptized one person but upon the profession of justifying faith it self.

3. But why do they not see, that on their own grounds many of their own
Baptizings would be Nullities, and the persons be Rebaptized. If a Dogmatical
faith it self be of necessity to the Being of Baptism, then what shall be done
with those many hundred Children among us, whose Parents discover to us that
they have not that Dogmatical faith? How many have we often occasion to speak
with, that marvail when we tell them what Christ is, and has done and suffered
for us, as if they had never hard it before, when yet they sit under our
teaching day by day? like Dr. John White's Catechumene, that being asked what
Jesus Christ was? answered that [she did not know; she was never taught so far;
but sure enough it is some good thing, or it should never have been put into
the Creed.] Would Mr. Blake have the Children of all these rebaptized, or not?
If yea, then he is more than I for rebaptizing: if not, then how will it follow
any more from my judgment that the Children of the unjustifyed must be
Rebaptized? I cannot conceive what he can say (without going to the right of
remote ancestors, or the Church which is no more for him than for me,) but only
that it is the profession of a Dogmatical Faith, and not the Faith it self that
is necessary to give this Right. But a man would think that if it be not enough
for an evidence in our case of an Analogical Right Coram Ecclesia, that a man
subscribe the Covenant of God (of which Mr. Blake page 143.) then it can be no
good evidence in his cause of a Right Coram Deo and Ecclesia, that a man
subscribe or speak that which he never understood: or if his Profession of
Dogmatical Faith without the Faith itself be a good Title, then the Profession
of a justifying Faith without the Faith it self, may so far serve turn as to
justify the Baptizing, and to prohibit rebaptizing.

4. And to Mr. Blakes censure (which I will not censure as it deserves) of the
Major part by far of the Worcestershire combination (as he speaks) whether it
be that he know them better than I (which is unlikely when he professes to
conjecture on reports) or whether I be more charitable, or less rigorous in
judging of men's sincerity or what ever else makes the difference of our
censures, I will be bold to say, that I know not one person of all the
Worcestershire combination (as he calls them) whom I know to be an unjustified
unsanctified person, that I can remember: though I confess I have no small
doubts and fears of many: Nay more; I have more hopes than fears, (I mean I
rather think that they are truly Godly, than that they are not) of the far
greatest part of them that I know, even of many to one; and more comparatively
then I will now mention.

And whereas Mr. Blake does instead of answering cast aside above twenty of my
Arguments as not concerning him, and so put them off with a wet finger; I say,
that is too easy a way of answering to satisfy me, how ever it may do by those
that are more easily satisfied? and with a word I shall restore and reenforce
them, as with a word he puts them by.

It is one thing to ask, whether the profession of justifying Faith be a duty
to all that come to be Baptized? Another, whether it be so necessary, that they
ought not to come nor we to admit them without it? and a third, whether Baptism
without it be a Nullity? Mr. Blakes general assertion did in the proper sense
express the first. And thereupon, because I took his words as he spoke them, he
better expounds them, and confesses that justifying Faith is a duty
prerequisite to Baptism, but not such a duty, without which Baptism is Null, or
we may not Baptize: and therefore he puts off above twenty Arguments at once,
and says that they make nothing against him. But I restore them all or most at
once (though one is enough) by telling him, that they prove that the profession
of a Faith that is justifying, must be expected by the Church and found in all
that are admitted to Baptism, and that none ought to be Baptized upon the
profession of any lower Faith. This they prove: and this is the controversy.

In conclusion I will add but these two things, (and I should think such two
might serve the turn.) 1. Consider when the Right that I denied is a
Promise-right, whether Mr. Blake, after all his pains do not yield up the
cause, when he expressly says, page 124. [ So that I conceit no promise of
these ordinances made to such a faith, but an actual investiture of every such
believer in them.] What means this if it yield not the cause, and unsay not the
rest: if no promise, then no Right by promise, and I seek no more. What is the
actual investiture, but actual Baptizing and Receiving the Lords Supper; and he
knows that I did not deny that they actually received it.

2. Me thinks Mr. Blake and my Reverend Brethren of his mind, that marvail at
my maintaining of this cause, should bear some reverence to Augustine who so
diligently defends it. Besides what he says in Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap.
67, 68. he has a well known treatise purposely on this very subject, or on
that does not considerably differ. There were some voluptuous persons
especially at Rome, that kept concubines, and yet professed to be Believers,
and would have been baptized, but would not yet put away their concubines:
whereupon when the Ministers denied them baptism, some laymen that desired the
increase of the Church, and misunderstood the doctrine of justification by
faith only, did plead that because by faith only we are justified, and works
are to follow as the fruits of faith, therefore these persons upon their
believing might be baptized, and afterward they should be dealt with for the
reforming of their lives. Whereupon Augustine writes that Treatise de fide and
operibus, to prove the contrary, that they cannot be justified or saved by any
faith but that which works by love, and that they must not be baptized, till
they actually put away their Concubines and other the like sins, and promise
also to forsake them for the future; so that as it was not any presbyters, but
laymen that, raised this doubt, so both they and Agustine seem agreed, that the
same faith that is saving is requisite to baptism (or as to the Church, the
Profession of it.) And therefore Austin thus repeats the occasion in his
Retractions, lib. 2. cap. 38. page (Edit. Paris.) [ Missa sunt mihi nonnulla,
quae ita distinguerent a bonis operibus Christianorum fidem, ut sine hac non
posse, sine illis autem perveniri suaderetur ad aeternam vitam. Quibus
respondens librum scripsi, cujus nomen est, de Fide and Operibus, in quo
disputavi, non solum quemadmodum vivere debeant gratia Dei regenerati, verum
etiam quales ad lavacrum regenerationis admitti.] If I cited but a line or leaf
you might say I dismembered it, and left behind me the sense, but when the
whole book is to this very purpose* no such thing can be said: see especially
cap. 21. so that if I err, I have no worse a man then Augustine to lead me the
way.

As for Mr. Blak's impotent accusations of my owning the cause of the Papists,
against the Protestant cause in the matter of Justification, because I misliked
the by extreme opinions of some men; as if all had agreed in these opinions, or
the Protestant difference with the Papists in the matter of Justification did
lie either only or principally in these, I look upon it as such dealing as must
be expected from angry men, and as Children of the same Father do sometime use
against one another when they fall out. It was doubtless my sin that I was no
more cancelor^ of provoking him, as it is his to be carried to such injustice
by his passions, as that and many other passages do contain. But I am confident
he forgiveth me, and I am certain I forgive him, and I am persuaded the Lord
whom we most offend, in the abundance of his Grace does forgive us both. I must
confess that when I think I have a call to dispute, I do withal think that I
am called to lay open the nakedness of the cause which I oppose to the utmost;
and being persuaded that I speak against that which is against God, me thinks
if I do not effectually manifest its falsehood, I do nothing, whereupon I find,
that what is spoken against the cause is taken as a dishonor to the person,
and he takes himself to be wounded or wronged by it, when I never touch the
person at all: so that if I do but once name the Imposture of a common
distinction, Mr. Blake comes on, as if I had called all those learned men
cheators or impostors that use that distinction (between fides, qua, and qua)
yea even those that condescended privately to write to me; and so parrallels me
with Mr. Craudon herein. Mr. Craudon spoke of persons, and I speak of
distinctions and reasons: Is not this a mere violence, as if it were to raise
an odium, and set men together by the ears? When I mention the weakness of his
own arguing, he tells me, I must not answer a fool according to his folly, and
marvails I will set my wit against such a ones. Is not such dealing a
sufficient prohibition to dispute? If I show not the weakness of an Argument I
do nothing: If I do, I make the Author a fool. If I show that an Argument is
unsound, or a conclusion false: I make him false; If I show that some common
distinction has unobservedly deceived many, I make all the Learned that use it
impostors, even my friends that privately vouchsafe me their writings. Well I
am satisfied, and take the prohibition. This book of Mr. Blakes I proclaim
unanswerable. These are too hard and unjust terms for me to dispute upon:
Especially when the main issue of a large volume, must be but to reckon up a
Dear and Reverend Brothers mistakes.

Yet I must confess that the controversies about the object of Justifying Faith
(whether Christ as Lord) and the object of Baptism, do seem to me of so great
weight and use to the Church, to be well discust, that I will not peremptorily
resolve against meddling so far with his book, if any more judicious do convince
me it is my duty.

But I have run much beyond my first intention: I thought but to give you some
reasons, why I should not write any Rejoinder to these learned Reverend men Dr.
Owen, Mr. Robertson or Mr. Blake: and giving you my Reasons, I find I have done
some of that, which those Reasons were brought against, and from which I
intended to excuse myself.

But having run so far with the other, I shall say the less of Mr. Robertson:
his dealing with me is like others that have gone before him and do accompany
him: and I am now so used to it, that I the less marvail at it. Of this zealous
Brutus I must needs say. Nescio quid juvenis iste vult; sed quicquid vult,
vehementer vult. Its enough to make us admire Gods patience and mercy, that
will forbear and pardon such things to the Sons of men; and its a sad discovery
of the lamentable case of the Church on earth, that Grace should have so much
corruption with it, and that the Church must make use of such sinful guides as
we are, in the way to glory. For though the Scripture says that a false
witness shall not be unpunished, and he that tells Lies shall not escape; and
that Railors shall not enter into the kingdom of God; yet I hope they may have
Grace that do it in a mistaken zeal for God, though Self may have too much hand
in it. But we may see in our miscarriages that it is not for nothing that God
has let loose such Judgments upon Professors, and such floods of reproach
upon us our selves that serve at his Altar, as lately he has done. I dare say
that many a Heathen would have scorned to have given out against his greatest
Enemy such volumes of notorious impudent falsehoods and imprudent railings as
Mr. Robertson, and other of his spirit have lately done against one that was
none of their enemy. Might I but have truth from them, I care not (for my own
part) for the worst of their words. But who knows how to confute such volumes,
whose very substance is compounded of gross falsehoods and calumnies: Either the
Reader of Mr. Robertsons Book, and his associates, will also read mine, or they
will not. If they will not, let them take their course, and believe what they
list, and not what is true: for how can I help it, if I write again what
likelihood that they will read it, that will not read that which is written
already. If they lose by it no more then I, what cause have I to care? But if
they will but read the book which Mr. Robertson opens his mouth against, I
desire no more; if that will not satisfy them, and make them lament over the
spirit of this man, I have no more to say to them, they are none of the men for
whom I write. But Mr. Robertson has little cause to say that I am for
Justification by Works, when I hope that such men as he are justified, whose
works are such, as I once hoped no man had been so guilty of, that had the
least fear of God before his eyes. I profess I marvail what is the matter that
the wasps of the Nation are gathered about my ears, I cannot but hope yet, that
there are few more such in England, as those that I have had to deal with.

His first assault of me is about the Inception of Gods immanent acts. But
never had I such a confuter before; no not Mr. Craudon himself. He bestows a
whole Epistle, (on part of his book) to tell the Reader how he detests my
Blasphemy: and that's my confutation. Not a line of my Book does he cite and
confute. But in general tells me that I affirm new Immanent acts in God: and
then cries out upon the blasphemy. Must we write confutations of such men as
these? No: they that will believe them, let them take that they get by it; its
nothing to me, that cannot remedy it. What if twenty men will swear that I have
written there is no God? must I write against them all? I laid down my mind in
the case that I am thus dealt with about, in several propositions as plain as I
could speak: the sum of the chief part of them was this; that the substance of
the Act (as commonly called) that is the Essence of God, is neither multiplied
nor begins nor ends; but the Relations and extrinsick denominations are
many, and may begin and end. Yet would I not presume to determine (with Pet.
Hertado. de Mendoza and others) that the Relations are ex part Dei, but only
took what the Thomists grant that they are ex part creatura, whence arise the
denominations of God; and does not this Brother know that the highest
Antiarminians on earth do grant this, and none that I know of did ever deny it.
Yet does this judicious Pedagogue, (before he understands what I have said,
and while Dr. Kendal himself contradicts him in print) fall on with such
words as these, page 7. [ I never did abhor with greater detestation and
indignation the Principles of any man, and the defense of them than I did that
one most blasphemous Principle of yours and your defense of it about the
Immanent acts of God in his knowledge and will as if they were or could be de
novo, etc.] All the rest is but to prepare the way for this sentence; and to
attend it, and this is his Epistle.

And that you may see what impossibility there is of pleasing all men, see what
he says of my Apology against Mr Blake, which cost so much on the other side;
p. 4, 5. [ Though in the first three or four hours reading that morning, of the
first part, of your Apology to Mr. Blake, I was very much taken with so much
of a profound, deep and rational Judgment, with such a clear and solid
understanding, and with so great a height of a piercing wit, as I did apprehend
in some of your reasonings and explications of some points by you holden forth
there, etc.] And so he goes on to show that in the afternoons Reading against
Dr. Kendall, I struck down all the milk that I had given in the morning. Many
men, many minds. Even fair fall you Sir, for I see you are a kind man when the
fit comes on you; and when I please you, your commendations swell over the
banks of common discretion. But what shall I give you to make Mr. Blake of your
opinion? Or to teach me how I may please you both, with the rest of the
offended?

Another part of Mr. Robertson's task, is to satisfy the world how ignorant
Mr. Hotchkis and I are of the Hebrew, and careless of it as well as ignorant. And
I may undo the man if I should confute him here: for he has bound himself in a
most solemn Obligation, p. 82. that if he [do not make it good what here is
challenged, against all the four eyes of us both, (that both of us have no eyes
at all to see with of our own, and therefore see nothing at all with our own
eye in those points, but all the dim sight we have, its only by seeing with
other men's eyes, etc.) then he promises to shut and turn away both his own eyes
from ever looking upon a book again whilst he breaths, even the Bible it self,
which yet he would not do for a kingdom, or his Life.] And should I be so
unmerciful now as to confute this man, if I could do it? No, let Mr. Hotchkis
consider what he has done in doing it himself. He has left him under little
less then a solemn Vow, never to read the Bible or any Book more. Does not this
man think himself very wise in his zeal? [(...).] Mr. Hotchkis says, he had
read over the Hebre^ Bible before Mr. Robertson was born.

And is it not (think you) an honest and sober dispute upon which he brings out
his Hebrew, when I had so fully explained myself in my Confession, of which he
is pleased to take no notice? I still maintain that Punishment properly so
called, has (at least) two species, Paradeigmatical and strictly Vindictive,
and Nouthetical or Castigatory: and so that Chastisement is truly and properly
called punishment; but not of the same species, with the former vindictive or
destructive punishment. Now what does this Learned Brother but over and over
again, so far lay by the ninth Commandment and the fear of God, as to face
down me, and assure his Reader, that I affirm and maintain the sufferings of
the Godly to be not only Chastisements, but proper Punishments, yea Revenging
Punishments for the satisfaction of God as a Judge? And what should one say to
such a man as this? and how is he to be dealt with? Proper Punishments (I say)
they are; because I maintain that Castigations are proper paternal punishments.
And are not all the Philosophers that ever defined punishment, (so far as I
know) agreed in it? But is this to say, They are vindictive, satisfactory to
Justice, or more than chastisements?

If this good man would have made ostentation of his Hebrew, or called for
Scholars to his School, let any indifferent man be Judge, whether it had not
been a more innocent and honest course to have done as the Montebanks and
Lozenge-makers do, to have put it into some weekly News-book, that in such a
street, at such a sign, there is a famous Hebrew Schoolmaster, etc. than to do
he knows not what? For Mr. Hotchkis and me the matter's not great: but he trod
under foot Modesty, Conscience, Truth, the Credit of his Profession, the famous
Translators of the Bible (egregiously befriending Gregory Martin and his
Rhemists): and I wish he have not degraded the far greater part of the godly
Ministers of England, for want of Hebrew as well as us: Nay how many can he
name from the Apostles days, till a few hundred years ago, that are not
degraded by him, in almost all the Church. The Origens and Hieroms were so few,
that woe to the Church if it had no more: And something may be in it to cut the
comb of a Paedagogues insolency, that those that were best at Translations,
were so bad Divines for all that, as to the sense. We had been sure all marrd
if the degraded Augustines that were ignorant of the Hebrew, had not been
better Divines than Origin and Hierom were. But what! has God bid or permitted
this man to speak all this for naught? No: I hope that some will be stirred up
by his language to a more diligent study of the Hebrew Text; and that this good
end may by the overruling providence be attained by it.

But me thinks he should not trust so much to his great Argument, that [ he is
unworthy to be Christ's Messenger that takes the signification of the words upon
trust:] For how does Mr. Robertson with all his Hebrew know the signification
of one Hebrew word, but upon trust? How knows he it, but on the word of his
Master that tells him so? and what other way is there of knowing the
signification of any Language whatsoever?

As for that about [Mental Remission] which he makes such a stir with, I shall
add this to what is said. There are two things among men that are called by
some Mental Remission: 1. A purpose to forgive a fault, (even before it is
committed) when it is done. 2. The actual turning of the mind from Anger and
thoughts of Punishing, to Reconciliation and Acceptance, and the Remitting
those former thoughts of Punishment. The former is not properly pardon at all,
and is in God from Eternity. The latter is not properly in God at all: For he
changes not his mind, nor Remitteth any Punishing, Purpose, or secret
Resolution, or thoughts which he had before: and if he did, that would not
dissolve the Guilt, that is, the obligation to Punishment, without an outgoing
word from God. But yet after the manner of weak man this last sort of Mental
Pardon, may from the Effect to the Affect be ascribed Denominatively, to God:
But then as it is but Denominatively, so that Denomination must then begin,
when the Law of Grace or Promise does Pardon and Absolve, for then only does
the ground of that Denomination begin, though nothing Real do begin in God.

And it is worth the noting also, how angerly this man does tell us, that
neither Dr. Twiss nor any that ever was taught or Catechized understandingly in
the Church, will deny, or is ignorant of this kind of Pardon or Justification
in Law-sense which we maintain? And yet that Mr. Blake will not be persuaded of
any such thing to this day, but disputes confidently against that, which we
are so chidden by Mr. Robertson for imagining that any well Catechized will
deny. Again tell me, what a man should do to be of every learned good man's
mind, or to escape their censures?

And as these Brethren deal in the Press, so do some others privately by words
and Manuscripts. The last week I received a creeping Paper, against my
directions for Peace of Conscience, written by a Minister about the midway
between Mr. Blake and me (Though a Neighbor; I know not that I ever heard his
name before, but once about 16 years ago;) who with the spirit and pen of Mr.
Robertson and his like, does furiously fall on me, to conjure out of me the
Devil of Pelagianism; because I say to doubting souls, that, [ If Christ be not
yet theirs, he maybe when they will] or [ they may have him when they will:]
whereupon to his Councils and Fathers he goes against Free Will. This is a
Minister of the Gospel: and yet knows not that this is a Truth that almost all
the world of Christians are agreed on; and that Austine purposely defends;
and if it be not true, what a case is the world in? And his Reproaches are cast
in the face of the Scripture that says the same, [ Whoever will, let him take
the water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17.] And Dr. Twiss maintains it at large,
that velle Credere is Credere: but doubtless velle Christum oblatum is a great
act of saving Faith. And this man might read that I add withal, as Austine
does, that, Though whoever will have Christ as offered may have him, yet no man
will so have him, but by the work of special Grace. But is it not a sad case,
when the Preachers of the Gospel shall defame and reproach the very substance
of the Gospel, as zealously as if men's salvation lay upon it?

I have given you now (I think) reasons enough to excuse me from wording it
with such inconsiderate men. To which I will add one other: I am conscious of
so much frailty in my self, that I am likely to be drawn also to injure some of
them: And also, I am not able to speak so cautelously, but some words will be
very liable to misunderstanding, on which they may plausibly fasten their
accusations. To give you one instance: In the Preface to my Confession, I noted
a sort of empty men that will not speak to men, nor give them any reasons to
convince them, but only secretly behind their backs, will carry it abroad that
such or such a man is erroneous, half an Arminian, a dangerous man: and if they
speak to us, we shall hear but these general charges of Error: To these I said,
I might expect they should be more Judicious, studied, impartial, illuminate,
sincere, or at lest the chief of these, before I should value their bare
Judgments and Censures, without their Reasons: professing withal that as I
doubted not but there are multitudes of Laborers in Gods harvest, with whom in
these respects I am unworthy to be named, so the Judgment of these I would
value; that is, so far as to suspect anything which they are against, and
silence it at least, till Evidence be very cogent. So that I never mentioned
the Qualifications of men that write or dispute against me, but only of those
that look I should be swayed by their Censures without Arguments. This was my
very mind, of which I desire you to observe the words themselves. But no where
does Dr. Owen and Mr. Blake so take me up as here; mistakingly supposing that I
spoke of those that should Write or Argue against me; and that I require all
these Qualifications in them. No, I will hear Scripture and Reason from a
Child, but I will not be swayed by the Judgment and Censures of a Child. Yet
here the one of them talks of the terrible conditions that I impose upon my
Answerer; and the other (Mr. Blake) comes on with intimations, as if my words
employed that I take my self for more judicious, experienced, holy, etc. than
all those from whom I manifest my dissent, the Assembly, and I know not how
many, (feigning me do dissent from men even contrary to my profession.) These
answers will seem as good to Readers that will not by collation make trial, as
if they were as good as any.

So will his citations out of the Fathers; when among the several points in
difference I desired one line from one Ancient to prove that his opinion was
ever known to the ancient Church: and for one of them (the instrumental
efficacy of Faith to Justification) he does perform it at large: but how? By a
bare citation of Passages from others gathered up, and that without the words,
and that only affirming that we are justified by Faith and not by Works: So
that if Mr. Blake bring testmonies of the Ancients sense, that [ we are
Justified by Faith and not by Works,] he will take these as testimonies that
the Ancients speak for the Instrumental Efficiency of Faith in Justification.
And by such consequences he may make them say many things more, that they never
said indeed. But we have showed him a tertium, another sense in which a man may
be said to be justified by Faith without Works. Sure I am that if I should
maintain [such a Justification by Faith without Works] as many of those Fathers
whom he quote's do assert, (in terms and sense,) even in the words before and
after and in the places cited, I should be more clamorously called a Papist
than yet I have been, at least there were more show of reason for it.

Moreover, the very naming of untrue Reports and Affirmations, would be
offensive to the guilty. As page 664. he says that I say [ Obedience is (only)
the modification of Faith in the first act of Justification,] when I never
spoke or thought such a thing, but deny it to be existent (as its distinct from
Faith) in that first act of Justification.

So page 453. he affirms, that [ in my opinion (an infant) is incapable of
any real change by the spirit] With many such Assertions, which I never
uttered, nor believed.

And when I told him of such a passage in his former Book, (about making
Sincerity the Rule) rather then he will acknowledge the visible mistake, he
again replyeth, as if I wronged him to charge it on him. And why so? Because he
named me not? when yet it is as plainly manifest that its me that he charge
it on, as the rest before and after, which he denies not. But again I must
recall my self, and draw to an end.

Upon all these considerations I must be excused from the foresaid unprofitable
Works: But if it appear necessary to vindicate any particular Truth in another
way, I shall not withdraw, while I am able to do it. As I find that the very
Answering of men does provoke, so when the Cause of God does not require it, I
can believe that I am among those that are to be (...), Tit. 2.9. not
contradicting or answering again, as servants must be to their Masters; much
less should I (...), but imitate that blessed pattern, 1 Pet. 2.23. which O
that I could more do!

Yet would I not dissuade any from a necessary Defense of Truth: for I know
that (...), and that we must (...), Tit. 1.9, 10, 11.

But for my part, I see not yet any Call to such a Work: and if I err, I desire
that no man by me may be drawn into Error; and if I be in the right, I know not
how to importune men to my opinions, if they do not very nearly concern their
salvations: If their stomachs be against them, I am not good at drenching or
cramming. The Lord pardon all our miscarriages, and direct you and succeed you
in your labors for his Church. I remain,

Your Brother in the Work of the Gospel, RICH BAXTER
October. 1. 1655.
Tales meorum Scriptorum Judices velim, qui Responsionem non semper desiderent;
quum his quae leguntur audierint aliquid contradici. Augustine.
The first Postscript.
ON the review I observe that the mixture of some passages of some late
Papists, with the judgment of Bellarmine and the most, does make page 50, 51
of the second Disput. less clear. To remove the obscurity observe, that there
are diverse Questions conjoined: 1. What is necessary to make a man a true
Member of the Catholic Church? And in that they mostly agree with Bellarmine
as cited, that no inward grace is necessary. 2d Question is, what is the Common
effect of Baptism on all that Receive it? And that they say, is the imprinting
of a certain Character on the mind. What this Character is, they are not
agreed: commonly they think either as Aquinas, that it is a certain qualitative
power reducible to the second species of quality, that is, a spiritual power
ordinata ad ea quae sunt Divini cultus, ut 3. Qu. 93. ar. 2. c. Or as Durandus
and many others of them, that it is but a Relation; or as Estius and others,
that it is such a moral power as is Jus Civitatis, and so is a power of
receiving the common privileges of the Church. All the Baptized: But if they
should ficte recipere as to the Sacrament it self, they receive not so much as
the Character; nay, says Aquinas, are to be Baptized again when they Repent.
But the grace of justification, and Remission of sin, they say is not common to
all that are Baptized; but only to those that are duly disposed for Baptism.
Says Aquinas. 3. Qu. 63. ar. 3. c. Character proprie est signaculum quoddam
quo aliquid insignitur, etc. Homo autem fidelis ad deo deputatur: Primo quidem
and principaliter ad fruitionem gloriae and ad hoc insignitur signaculo
gratiae. 2. Autem deputatur quisque fidelis ad recipiendum vel tradendum aliis,
ea quae pertinent ad cultum Dei, and ad hoc proprie deputatur Character
sacramentalis. So that a man in mortal sin may receive the Character, and the
Character does dispose a man to sacramental Grace. So that let them come never
so sinfully to it, yet it puts them in a fair way to justification. (vid
Viguerium cap. 16. ver. 15. fol. 154.) And it has this advantage that the
grace is delible, but the Character indelible. Now those Papists that I spoke
of in the place I refer to ( page 50.51.) do think that all should come to
Baptism, that have but an historical Belief of the points, absolutely
necessary, that so they may receive this Character, and then they have the
Church Priviledges, which being unbaptized they have not: and though yet they
have not Charity or Justification, yet when by Penance they are brought to the
disposition which they wanted the foregoing Baptism will be effectual to do
away all the sins that were at the time of Baptism: and Penance will put away
the rest that were since committed. Though yet quoad officium they say that men
ought to come to Baptism with the due preparations. These requisites they say
are, I. A Right belief, say some, explicit of the Essentials, and implicit of
the rest: say others, it must be rectae fides saltem in communi, ut scilicet
Credant quod Ecclesia Credit (Viguer. Just. c. 16. ver. 4.. 1.) 2. That he
repent of his forepast life, and die to sin. 3. That he have an intention of
Receiving the Sacrament as the Church delivers it, and Christ has appointed.
And if this intention, and a Right belief be wanting, the party is to be
rebaptized ( Viguerius ubi sup.) But what this Belief is, and what this
Repentance is, they are not all agreed. But though some few may require
Contrition, yet their commonest opinion is, that Attrition is a sufficient
disposition, together with a fides informis, a right Belief without Charity.
But yet they require that the will must be toward that Contrition and Charity,
or fides formata, which yet it has not, for it must amplecti Baptismum and
Baptismi effectum, says Thom. 3. Qu. 69. a. 9. c. that is the common measure:
And Charity and Justification are these effects. So that whoever comes with
Attrition and a right Belief without Charity, shall certainly there receive
Charity, Justification, Remission of guilt and punishment (poenarum sed non
poenalitatum) both in foro Dei and Ecclesiae, sed non in foro mundano: And this
because that this disposition does. ex congruo merit Justification in the use
of Baptism. And for all the rest that come without Attrition or a purpose to
leave sin, (and says Aquin. without Belief too. 3. Qu. 68. a. 8. c.) they
receive the Character which puts them in so fair a way to Justification by
Penance as aforesaid, recedente fictione de debita dispositione. But yet I
must say, that it is but few that I hear of, or read of, that will say that
wicked men may come to Baptism for these advantages: But the most Learned of
them conclude that no man ought to come that has not a purpose to forsake all
his mortal sins, at least, and that they are not to be Baptized that profess
not this; and that others get into the Church praeter intentionem Ecclesiae as
Bellarmine says: so that in this, the chief of their Doctors own the cause
that I maintain. Aquin. 3. Qu. 68. ar. 4. does purposely dispute it, Vtrum
peccatores sint Baptizandi? And resolves it negatively, that though Peccator,
quoad reatum, may be Baptized; yet not Peccator ex voluntate peccandi and
proposito persistendi in peccato: and he gives three good Reasons. 1. Because
such are unmeet to be incorporated into Christ, which Baptism does. 2. Because
Baptism with them cannot attain its end, to take away their sin: and in the
works of God and the Church nothing must be done in vain, or that cannot reach
the appointed end. 3. Because else there would be falsehood in the sacramental
signs, which must not be. And one would think by his Answers ad 2m and 3m that
he says as much as I, and is for the necessity of a fides formata and
Conversion it self before Baptism. Says he ad. 2. [ Ideo sacramentum baptismi,
non est exhibiendum, nisi ei in quo interioris conversionis aliquod signum
apparet, sicut nec medicina corporalis adhibetur infirmo, nisi in eo aliquis
motua vitalis nature appareat. And ad 3m answering those objectors that I
intended p. 51. he says [ Dicendum quod Baptismus est fidei sacramentum: Fides
autem informis non sufficit ad salutem, nec ipsa est fundamentum, sed sola
fides formata, quae per dilectionem operatur ut Aug. l. de sid. and oper. Vnde
nec sacramentum baptismi salutem confer potest cum voluntate peccandi, quae
fidei formam excludit. Non est autem per impressionem Characteris baptismalis
aliquis disponendus ad gratiam quamdiu in eo apparet voluntas peccandi, -- ] he
here plainly speaks de fide formata ut afferenda, and not ut recipienda per
baptismum. So that he is here fully for me in the main cause of these
Disputations: and so must they all that do affirm a true death to sin to be one
of the prerequisites; if they will not contradict themselves (and that is
common) For it is a vain conceit that preparatory grace kills sin, and special
grace afterward gives a new life: that which expels death, is life; and
that which expels darkness is nothing else but the light it self. Add also
what Aquinas says sup. Qu. 2. a. 3. c. Nullum peccatum dimittitur, nisi quis
justificetur, sed ad justificationem requiritur contritio.] And what he says
3. Qu. 49. a. 1. ad 2m Per fidem applicatur nobis passio Christi ad
percipiendum fructum ipsius -- Fides autem per quam a peccato mundamur non est
fides informis, quae potest esse etiam cum peccato; sed est fides formata per
Charitatem, ut sic passio Christi nobis applicetur, non solum quantum ad
intellectum sed etiam quantum ad effectum.]

Yet I know they here confound themselves by their sophistry, telling us that
Contrition is before Charity materially, and after it effectively, and that
Contritio se habet ut ultima dispositio ad gratiam consequendam; and that
Poenitentia quae est sacramentum, is before Poenitentia q^^ est virtus, and is
the instrument of effecting it; as though a dissembling Ceremony, or false
profession would work grace; so that there is no hold of them, at the best; for
they have lost themselves in contradictions. I know also that they make the
Sacrament of Baptism to justify and sanctify infallibly all Infants that are
offered by the Church, on their allowed Titles, let the Parent be never so bad;
because they think the Churches Faith may serve instead of the Parents, as the
Churches Intention may serve instead both of the Ministers (says Aquinas) and
the Infants; yea and the Church it self need not lend an Infant any Contrition:
for they are agreed, that neither other men's sins, nor our own Original sin
(which is all that the Infant has) are the Object of Contrition; but only our
own actual sin.

Yet one would think that the ordinary doctrine, that the votum vel propositum
may save without Baptism, should imply that before Baptism the desires of it
are supposed to have Charity or special Grace: The Roman Catechism says, Par.
2. page 142. Baptismi suscipiendi propositum atque consilium, and malae acta
vitae p^enitentia, satis futura sit ad gratiam and justitiam, si repentinus
aliquis Casus impediat, quo minus solutari aqua ablui possint.] And they
confess that none can be saved without Charity; therefore those that die before
Baptism must be supposed to have Charity.

But ordinarily they make Attrition sufficient, and by the Sacrament give to
the attrite, justification; and so Charity is conferred: And thus by an outward
act a man that has but common grace may get special grace. Yea if they
Counterfeit Attrition it self, yet they receive the foresaid indelible
Character which gives them the jura Ecclesiae, and as the Roman Catechism
says, Par. 2. qu. 19. page 125. by this Character, ad alia sacramenta
percipienda redduntur idonei: And then the other Sacraments, at least by the
help of Attrition, will sure justify and save them. And thus they make a
common grace sufficient to let them into the Church by Baptism, yea the mere
Baptism it self without any grace at all; and so make their Character and
Church State the way to justification; which is the thing I charge them with,
Page 50, 51.

And those that do seem exceedingly to comfort and encourage their proselytes,
by telling them of the certain efficacy of the Sacraments, and that they surely
put away all sin and guilt and open heaven to them, so that one would think
there were assurance of Salvation or exceeding comfort reached forth; yet they
take it all away again, and do but Tantalize and delude the people. For they
that (with us) require Contrition before the Sacrament, do withal tell us,
that no man can know by any ordinary means (but only by Revelation) whether he
be Contrite or not, and consequently, whether he shall be justified, pardoned,
or saved ever the more for all the Sacraments: And those that take up with
Attrition, do both confound themselves and their followers with their many
degrees of Attrition, and quarrels about it, and also assure them that they
cannot know whether they have the necessary degree; and so after all
Sacraments, they cannot tell whether they be justified.

This much I thought meet to add, for further explication of the Papists
doctrine, and the state of our Controversies with them herein. Which I shall
conclude in the words of Bellarmine with Amesius's Answer to them, Bellarm.
Enervat. To. 3. l. 1. c. 3. [Bellarm. Fides duplex requiritur in Baptismo:
Actualis una, quae praecedit baptismum, ut dispositio quaedam: quae quidem ut
plurimum, non est ex habitu fidei. Altera est quae sequitur Baptismum, quaeque
est pars essentialis Justificationis, and non est actus, sed habitus.] This is
the very Doctrine which I oppose in this Disputation. To which Amesius
answers. [Protest. Repugnat haec distinctio, 1. Scripturae, quae fidem
justificantem antecedere docet Baptismum, Act 15.9.2. Rationi and experientiae,
dictanti, eadem plane fide recipi Baptismum, qua recipitur fructus Baptismi. 3.
Confessioni ipsius Bellarm, quae exstat. lib 2. de effect. Sacram. cap. 13. [
Adulti per fidem and Contritionem veram justificantur, antequam reipsa ad
Sacramentum accedant.]

Observe here what the Protestant doctrine is.

The second Postscript.
SInce the foregoing Disputations were Printed off, I had occasion to observe,
how much some lay the stress of their cause on the supposition of Judas his
receiving the Lords Supper; And thereupon apprehended, that such would think my
foregoing answer to the Objection to be too short. I have thought meet
therefore to add these few words for the enlargement of it.

The example of Judas is urged to several ends: 1. Some urge it to prove that
such as Judas, yea known wicked men may not be kept away from the Sacrament. 2.
Some urge it to prove that such may not be excommunicate. 3. Also it may be
urged, to prove that it is not as a sign of the thing professed, that we are to
require profession, but simply for it self: because Christ know that Judas was
an hypocrite. 4 And it will be urged by others to prove that such as Judas have
a Right coram Deo to the Sacrament which may warrant their demanding and
receiving it.

I shall first prove that if Judas had received the Sacrament, it would not
warrant any one of these conclusions, and then I shall prove that Judas did not
receive the Sacrament: or at least, that it is a thing that no man can prove,
and that the contrary is much more probable.

1. And (to begin with the last) that it proves not Judas right I prove thus.
1. If Judas had such a right to the Sacrament, then Christ could not have
denied it him, or excluded him: For he may not deny him his right: But that
Christ might nor haved denied it him or excluded him, I have met with none that
do affirm.

2. If Judas his right be hence proved, either it is from Christ's delivering
the Sacrament to him, or from his permitting him to take it; but from neither
of these: therefore.

Not from Christ's delivery: 1. Because he only offered it, and that in its true
Sacramental Nature, and to its proper ends, and propounds both internal and
external duties to be performed in their order: He offers himself to the
soul, by the representation and under the signs of bread and wine. He offers
not bread and wine alone to any without himself as signified and represented by
him. If he say to Judas [take me as thy Savior and a sacrifice for sin, and in
token thereof, take, eat and drink this.] He does not hereby give him any true
right before God, to take the bread and wine without taking Christ. For Christ
is first to be taken by believing, and this duty is first in the command, and
the bread and wine is not to be taken but in signification, that thus we take
Christ, and if we do not so, our taking the bread and wine is a lie. Now if
Christ offer himself first, and the elements as signs, and require Judas to
take himself first and the elements but as signs; then if Judas will separate
what God has conjoined, and will take the sign and not the thing signified,
and will by this taking the sign profess that he takes the thing signified
when he does not; this gives him no right before God to the sign alone, no
more than it warranteth him to make a lying profession: nor is there any show
of such a thing. An offer is but a Conditional Gift, and not an Actual; and
therefore gives no actual right till the Condition be performed: The
Condition is Acceptance. The Acceptance must be according to the offer. 1. Of
the whole gift, (Christ and the signs) and not of the shell only 2. Of the
thing signified first, and of the sign but consequentially. He therefore that
takes the sign alone, takes that which this offer gives him no right to.

2. Moreover, Christ did not offer it to Judas particularly; but to the
Disciples in general; not applying it to each one, but leaving it to themselves
to make the application, as is granted and past doubt.

3. And as Christ's offer proved not Judas right, so neither did his Permission
of his Reception. For Permission gives no Title. All the sins of the world are
permitted physically, which makes them not to be no sin. And for a Moral
permission, Judas had none. To permit, is non impedire, not to hinder.
Hinderance is moral by Prohibition. Thus Judas was hindered: For God had a
standing Law against lying and dissembling. 2. Or it is Physical, by Natural
means: And thus Judas was not hindered, either from Receiving what he received,
or from betraying his Master: but it justified neither.

Ob. But at least, Judas had right to that standing in the Church, by which he
was numbered with those to whom the Sacrament was to be offered.

Answ. It will not prove that he had any proper right (by promise or grant
which might warrant his claim) to Church Membership, or Apostleship it self.

Object. Christ chose him, and called him, and sent him.

Answ. Christ's Choosing him, was no more but his Calling him out of many that
were passed by. His Calling him was not either to Preach, 1. Only. 2. Or in the
first place. But it was first to Believe in him and so to preach that which he
did believe. If he had answered Christ's call, he had done both: But if he will
preach what he believes not, he does no more answer Christ's call, than if he
should speak a lie, or dissemble.

Object. But when Christ knew that he believed not, yet he sent him to preach.

Answ. Never to preach before or without believing. Though Christ knew that he
did not actually believe, yet he knew withal that he lay under the Command and
Obligation to believe, and that in order before preaching.

2. And for the next Conclusion, it cannot be proved by the Example of Judas
that we must take a Profession simply for it self, and not respectively as a
sign of the thing Professed; and so that we must admit a man upon a Profession
which is known to us to be false. For, if you argue from Christ's example and
say, [Christ did so, therefore we must do so] I deny both the Antecedent and
the Consequence. 1. As to the Antecedent: Christ Commanded and Required Judas
his Profession as a sign of his mind and so of the thing professed; that is, as
True* And he neither Required nor Accepted any other profession: But only he
Permitted him to remain in his famil^, though his profession was false, and not
such as he required. 2. As to the Consequence: No man therefore can hence
argue, that we may Require or Accept a profession which is not a sign
(apparent) of the thing professed; for that Christ did not; nor yet that we
must permit a known false professor because Christ did. But this will be proved
under the next points to which it leads us. The other two depending on the same
grounds may be dispatched together. And so I conclude, that it cannot be
gathered from the example of Judas, that we must not excommunicate, or keep
from the Lords Table, such as we can prove to the Church to be unregenerate, or
to be such as Judas was. For 1. There may be Reasons to suspend the performance
of that which ordinarily is to be done. And so Christ had special Reasons to
forbear the excommunicating of Judas, till the last, because he was to be the
Instrument of his suffering, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. When we are
sure that we have as good a Reason to suspend an act of discipline, yet that
will not be an excuse for our ordinary suspense, or a Rule for our ordinary
practice. 2. The Lord Jesus would have Ministers lie under a double obligation,
for their safe proceeding: The one is, to take seeming Believers and Penitent
persons into the Church and to the Sacraments: The other is to take a Credible
Profession for the Evidence of that Faith and Repentance. And accordingly he
would teach us no more by his example. And therefore no wonder if he did not
excommunicate Judas or keep him from the Sacrament: for it was by his Divine
heart-searching power, and omniscience that Christ knew Judas to be an
hypocrite: while he made a Profession that was Probable or Credible to a mere
man. All therefore that can hence be gathered is, that if by heart-searching
omniscience we knew a man to be an Hypocrite, we might not keep him back or
excommunicate him: and yet that will not be proved from the Text neither; till
you can prove that Christ might not have cast out Judas, as well as that he did
not; for, as is said, he might forbear him for some special Cause; Though I
grant that on other grounds it may possibly be proved, that we might not do it,
because we cannot communicate our evidence to the Church. But there is no place
for this arguing, till men are omniscient. Christ is our pattern as he acts
as a man, and not when he exercises Divine omniscience.

3. Christ knew what was in man, and need not that any man should tell him,
John 2.25. And yet he questioned with men in humane Language; he asks some
whether they believed, and Peter, whether he loved him? Did he expect an answer
from men, for the bare words sake? or as a sign of their mind? Did he oblige
them to a true answer, or to a false? The case is not doubtful. And if by his
omniscience he knew that many of these answers were lies, (and yet he silently
permitted the answerer to seem a Disciple) it will not hence follow, that we
must accept a profession simply for it self, and when it is not credible, that
is, that we must believe a known lie, or that we must use those that we have no
cause to believe as if we did believe them.

4. And if their Argument were of any strength, it would not only prove that we
must keep in the Church, and admit to the Sacrament those that we know to have
the Devil in them, and to be Traitors to Christ, contriving the destruction of
his Church (as Judas did of his person) and to be Thieves and Deceivers (as
Christ knew Judas to be,) and so overthrow all Church Discipline, contrary to
the Scripture Laws; but also that it is not Lawful for a Master to put a known
Thief and Traitor out of his Family, or to prohibit him familiarity with him at
his Table, and dipping his morsels with him in the same dish. For Christ did
this by Judas as well as the other. But it is contrary to Psalm 15. and 101.
and Mat. 18.17. and 1 Cor. 5.11. and many other Texts that we should hold such
familarity with such men. But that we may not lawfully do otherwise, is a
Doctrine that I hope no wise Christian Ruler of a Family will believe.

5. The state of Christ's Church being then but in gathering and ordering, was
not so ripe for the execution of excommunication as after his Resurrection, and
the ordering of the Churches.

But though I have said all this on the supposition that Christ did give the
Sacrament to Judas; yet I shall now proceed to show, that [ it is either
certain that Judas did not receive it, or not probable that he did.]

My evidence is this, 1. There is the Concurrent Testimony of three
Evangelists, that may assure us that Judas went out before the Sacrament.
Matthew dispatcheth Christ's speeches to Judas before the Sacrament, and to
those that remained and did partake of it, he says, 1. That he will drink of
the fruit of the Vine with them new in the Kingdom of his Father; which he
neither did after his Resurrection, nor will do with Judas. 2. Its said, they
went into the Mount of Olives: but so did not Judas. 3. He says, all ye shall
be offended because of me this night: But Judas was none of those All.

And Mark does punctually agree with Matthew.

And Joh. 13. does clear both the other. For ver. 30. he says that Judas
having received the Sop, went immediately out. Now it is utterly improbable
that this Sop was after the Sacrament. Though it be controverted whether the
meat which they then eat besides the Paschal Lamb, were before it, or after it,
yet there is evidence enough that it was before the Sacrament.

I know a Reverend Divine of ours in his Harmony of the Evangelists, thinks
that the Supper Ioh. 13. was not the same with that Mat. 26. and Mar. 14. When
the Sacrament was instituted. But his Reasons seem not cogent to me, but may
well be answered; and there seems to be much evidence of the contrary in the
Text, (to say nothing of the singularity of this exposition.) And as for the
coincident controversies, whether Christ did eat a Supper without the Paschal
Lamb, at the Institution of his Sacrament, as Grotius thought, or whether he
did eat the Paschal Lamb a day before the Jews, as Causabone, Scaliger,
Capellus, etc. think, Or on the same day with the Jews, as Baronius, Tolet,
Clopenburgius, and the said Reverend Doctor think, I shall not need on this
occasion to enquire; especially so much being written on it already. See Paul
Burgens. in Lyr. and what Iansenius comment. has ex Euthymio and other Greeks
on that side: and the Testimony of Philo in Cappellus, and his Reasons are
considerable.

The ancient Doctors were disagreed among themselves upon the Question whether
Judas did partake of the Sacrament. Its commonly known that Hilary was for the
Negative. And (says Estius in differ. loc. in Ioh. 13.) Clemens in constit.
Apostol. and Dionysius Arcopag. are of the same mind with others: And whoever
were the Authors of those writings, the antiquity in this case is considerable.
And of the many Doctors that are thought to be on the other side, some speak
only de participatione Coenae; and show not that they mean the Sacrament, and
some ground their opinion on a palpable error, viz. that the Sop given to Judas
was the Sacramental Bread: And Pellargus (in Mat. 26.) says that Theophylact
mentions a Tradition, that Judas took the Bread with him to the Priests, and
said [see here, my Master says, this is his body] and Innocent the Third is
express against Judas Receiving, and Ammonius, Alexander, and Tacianus in their
Harmonies seem to be against it; and Theophylact says, diverse were of that
mind. Rupertus Tuitiensis is plain and large on it, as you may see in the
Author in Ioh. 13. or in Musculus Loc. commun. page (mihi) 829. de Coen. where
his words are cited at large.

The Papists and Lutherans indeed are most on the other side: but yet they are
divided, especially the Papist: Many Learned Protestants of the Reformed party
have written large discourses to prove that Judas received not the Sacrament:
we have diverse common in English: and the beyond sea Divines are many of this
mind. Beza, Grotius, Piscator, Musculus, Deodat, (five of the most judicious
commentators, I think, that ever wrote on the sacred Scriptures,) are against
Judas participation, (and Calvin thinks it uncertain:) besides Zanchius,
Danaeus, Gomarus, Tossanus, and many more that are against it: Though I know
that on the other side diverse are for it.

And what is there now on the other side to move us to think it probable that
Judas did Receive the Sacrament? The slight conjecture of a late learned
Annotator I think not fit to trouble you with. I know but one Argument worth
the mentioning or much regarding that is brought: and that is from the order of
Lukes words, who after the mention of the Sacrament says, [But behold the hand
of him that betrayeth me is with me on the Table.] But to this I must say that
I confess it moves me not to doubt of the matter, considering, 1. that as
Grotius and other expositors truly note, it is so usual with Luke to disregard
the Order of things spoken, and to repeat sayings together as one continued
speech which were spoken at great distance; and to put that before which was
spoken after, and that after which was spoken before: Not by mistake, but
because it was the Matter and not the Order that he there purposed to deliver.
2. And because it is certain that he does thus even in the matter in hand, for
says Grotius in ver. 21. Diversos Christi s^rmones nulla ordinis habita
ratione connectit Lucas. Nam illud de proditore, in Coena justa contigit:
admonitio de vitanda ambitione plane ut credibile est, in lotione inter coenam
paschalem and coenam justam. Ita (...) saepe Luce est (...). And as Calvin
concludes, we cannot from this order in Luke gather that Judas Received. And
says Beza, Apparet omnino ex aliis evangelistis ac praesertim, Ioh. 13.26.
hunc sermonem habitum fuisse in secundis mensis Caenae legalis, quibus demum
sublatis suam sacram Coenam instituit Dominus, ut ipse Lucas ver. praeced.
expressit.] 3. And the reason of Luke's mentioning this after all, seems to be,
because having begun to speak of Christ's communicatory Action in the feast, he
thought it meet to connex his communication of his Sacrament and so dispatch
the history of those communicatory acts together; and then to mention the
matter of Judas altogether, though the words were not then spoken. 4. And the
reason that Rupertus Tuitiensis gives, is considerable, which you may read at
large in Musculus ubi sup. its too long to transcribe. See also what Sharpius
Symphon. page 335. says ex Augustino and aliis. See also what that Learned
judicious man Frid. Wendeline says against Judas Receiving, exercit. 114. 1.8.
and. Christ. Theolog. li. 1. c. 23. p. 544. And it seems there are many of the
same mind in the Low Countries now, or else Maresius would not have so
complained of their indignation against him for the contrary. See Piscator at
large in Mat. 26. schol. And Beza in Ioh. 13 30. Quum igitur non nisi mensis
secundis sublatis Dominus sacrosancta sua mysteria instituerit, ut diserte ait,
Luke 22.20. and Johannes non contentus dixisse Judam accepta offula exiisse,
diserte etiam addat adverbium (...); certa videtur esse eorum sententia, qui
existimant Judam institutioni sacrae coenae non inter fuisse; and quod sic
narrat Luke 22.21. quasi demum peracta coenae, etc. esse ex aliis evangelistis
explicandum; ex quibus liquet habitum fuisse hunc sermonem ante coenae sacrae
institutionem. etc.]

When I had gone thus far, I remembered that Mr. Gilespio has said somewhat of
this subject, and perusing him I find much of that which I have here spoken,
and much more, so that I shall stop here, and desire the Reader to read his
Chap. 8, 9, 10. of lib. 3. Aarons Rod.

And as to the main controversy about unsanctified men's Right to Sacraments.
See Vrsin. Catech. page 2. qu. 8. and 82. with the explic. throughout: and Beza
epist. 20. ad Qu. propositas a studioso Silesio. Tract. Theol. vol. 3. page
227, 228, etc. to whom we might add a multitude of Consenters.

FINIS.

