THE CERTAINTY OF THE WORLDS of SPIRITS And Consequently, Of the Immortality of
Souls. Of the Malice and Misery of the Devils, and the Damned. And of the
Blessedness of the Justified Fully evinced by the unquestionable Hist^ries of
Apparitions, Operations, Witchcrafts Voices, etc.

Written as an Addition to many other Treatises, for the Conviction of Sadduces
and Infidels. By RICHARD BAXTER.

Ephesians 6.12. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities,
against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against
spiritual Wickednesses in high Places (in Celestials)

Matthew 8. 31, 32. The Devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer
us to go away into the Herd of Swine. And he said, Go.

Luke 10. 18, 20. I beheld Satan, as Lightning, fall from Heaven: But in this
rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject to you: But rather rejoice because
your Names are written in Heaven.

Heb. 2. 14. Are they not all (the Angels) ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation?

LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
and I. Salisbury at the Rising Sun near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1601.

THE PREFACE
It seems hard to unruly Minds, that God should keep Intellectual Souls, so
strange to the unseen World of Spirits; that we know so little of them, and
that our Knowledge of them, is no more by the way of ^ente: But there is in it,
much of Gods ^rbitrary Sovereign Power, and much of his Wisdom, and much of his
Justice, and also of his Love.

1. It pleased him to make Variety of Creatures: What harmony would there be
without Variety? were there nothing but Unity, there would be nothing but God.
And various Creatures, must have a various Situation, Reception and
Operations: The Fishes must not dwell in our Cities, nor be acquainted with our
Affairs.

2. We here dwell in Flesh, in Bodies organized for the Souls Receptions and
Perceptions, and Operations: And the Wisdom of God does suitably dispose of his
Communications, and give us that measure of Light, which is agreeable to our
State: The Sun must not shine on the Infant in the Womb, nor must he there see
our Buildings and Tradings, and Business in the World.

3. We have Light here, that is proportionable to our work and interest: So
much as is necessary to our knowing of our selves, and our God and Governor,
and our Duty, and all those hopes that are our necessary Motives thereto. Men
that will but observe the Operations of their Souls, may competently know what
a Soul or Spirit is: And Men that will but open their Eyes, and considerately
look about them, may as certainly know that there is a God, as they can know
that there is any Being: And Men that cannot but difference Moral Good and
Evil, and that know the Duty of Children to Parents, Subjects to Rulers, and
Neighbors to Neighbors, may know their Duty to God, and that the performance
of it shall not be in vain: And if Men will not know all this which they may
know, it is just with God to leave them to their chosen darkness, and not to
know that which further might be known. It is a dismal case to havea Soul that
will not know it self, to be what it is, till utter Misery convince him.

4. And the God of Love makes Advantage of our not-seeing the World of
Spirits, for our Exercise of our higher Intellectual Faculties, by a Life of
Faith; And Intuition (a Nobler sort than our present Eyesight) will be
seasonable, and soon enough when ripeness has made us ready for it. We shall
not need all the Organical parts of the Eye, which Galen admiringly describes,
for our Glorious sight. And to see Devils and other Spirits ordinari^y, would
not be enough to bring our Atheists to the saving Knowledge of God, without
which all other Knowledge is vain. They that doubt of a God (the most perfect,
eternal, infinite Being) while they see the Sun and Moon, and Stars, the Sea
and Land, would not know him by seeing Created ^pir^ts.

As to the Originals of this Collection, it had its rise from my own, and other
Men's need. When God fir^^ a^akened me, to think with preparing seriousness of
my Condition after Death, I had not any observed Doubts of the Reality of
Spirits, or the Immortality of the Soul, or of the Truth of the Gospel: But all
my doubts were about my own Renovation and Title to that Blessed Life. But when
God had given me peace of Conscience, Satan Assaulted me with those worse
Temptations: Yet through Gods Grace, they never prevailed against my Faith: Nor
did he ever raise in me the least doubt of the Being, and ^erfection of God;
nor of my Duty to Love, Honor, Obey, and Trust him: For I still saw that to be
an Atheist was to be ^^ad.

But I found tha^ my Faith of Supernat^ral Revela^ion, ^^st be more than a
Believing Man, and that if it had ^ot a firm Foundation, and rooting, even sure
Evidence of Verity, Surely Apprehended, it was not like to do those great works
that Faith had to do, and to overcome the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and
to make my Death to be safe and comfortable. Therefore I found that all
confirming helps were useful; and among those of the lower sort, Apparitions,
and other sensible Manifestations of the certain existence of Spirits of
themselves Invisible, was a means that might do much with such as are prone to
judge by Sense. The uses hereof I mention before the Book, that the Reader may
know that I write it for Practice, and not to please Men with the Strangeness
and Novelty of useless Stories.

It is no small number of Writers on such Subjects that I have read, it is near
threescore years time from the first occasion: And finding that almost all the
Ath^ists, Sadduces and Infidels, did seem to profess, that were they but sure
of the Reality of the Apparitions and Operations of Spirits, it would cure
them, I thought this the most suitable help for them, that have sinned
themselves into an incapacity of more Rational and Excellent Arguments. And I
have long feared, lest secr^t unobserved defectiveness in their Belief of the
Immortality of the Soul, and the truth of the Scripture, is the great cause of
all Men's other defects: There lies usually the unsoundness of Woridly
Hypocrites, where it is prev^iling, and thence is the weakness of Gra^e in the
best, though it prevail not against their Sincerity.

By which Motives I did (though it displeased some) make it the Second Fart of
my Book called the Saints Rest: And aft^rward^ provoked by Clement Writer, I
did it much more fully in a Book called the Unreasonableness of Infidelity: And
after that provoked by the Copy of a paper dispersed in Oxford, (said to be Dr.
Walkers) questioning the certainty of our Religion, and seeing no answer to it
come from the Univ^rsity Men, I wrote yet more Methodically of all, in a Book
called the Reasons of the Christian Religion: And after added a small Discourse
called More Reasons for it, provoked by one that called himself Herbert, in
which also I answered the Lord Herbert, de veritate: And since then, a nameless
Sadduce has drawn me to publish an Answer to him: And in my Life of Faith, and
other Books, I have handled the same Subject: All which I tell the Reader, that
he may see why I have taken this Subject as so necessary, why I am ending my
Life with the publication of these Historical Letters and Collections: Which I
dare say have such Evidence, as will leave every Sadduce that reads them,
either convinced, or utterly without excuse.

Surely the certainty of so great a change of our place, State, Company and
Works, as Death will certainly and quickly make, should possess every Man that
has the use of Reason, with such serious Thoughts. Affections and Diligence,
as is quite contrary to a Diverted, Careless, Sloathful, Worldly, Sensual and
stupid Mind and Life.

How speedily shall I see the World that I have read of, and Preached, and
talked and written of? O! What a difference will there be between my now hearing
of frightful Apparitions, and prodigious Acts of Spirits, and that sight or
knowledge of all their State and Affairs; which I shall have, and now am going
to. The sight of Devils and Damned Diveses, and unholy Souls, will hereafter be
no Rarity; and if my Soul must pass through the airy inferior Region, where
these Miserable Spirits now inhabit, it will not be as dangerously Assaulted by
them, but in Triumph: For I know whom I have trusted, and into the hands of him
do I commit my Spirit, who has conquerred Death and Devils, and is now the
Glorified Lord of all, and can use them at his pleasure. And those Angels that
rejoice at the Repentance of of a Lazarus, and now are Ministering Spirits for
his safety, will be ready in Obedience to our Lord, to convey his Soul to
Abraham's bosom: Yea, to be that day with Christ in Paradise.

He that chaineth up these Devils, that they molest us no more as their Malice
does desire, will make our passage safe through all their envy and defiled
Regions.

But seeing it is the free will of Man that gives the Devils their hurting
power, and they can do us no harm, nor ma^e us sin, without our own consent or
yielding: O! With how careful and constant and resolved watchfulness should we
live? And how deservedly may every prayerless ungodly Family and person, b^
left for a prey to this devourer. And indeed he has already hurt them more by
blind^ng and hardening their Hearts, than a thousand haunting Apparitions could
of themselves have done.

And when Excellent Zanchy has said so much to pro^e, that it is by h^s very
contig^ous Substance, that the Devil does work on Soul and Body, how dreadful
should Temptations and Sin be to us, if we would not have the very substance of
Devils dwell in us? And why do any think it strange to read so much of
Possessions and Dispossessions in the Gospel.

Lord Jesus let me Finish my Course with joy: And then receive my Spirit. Amen.

July, 20. 1691. Richard Baxter.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. I. Of the great and weighty Uses of the Histories of Spirits, and their
unusual Apparitions and Actions. Chapter II. I. Instance I. The Devil of Mascon. 2.
Colonel Bowen' s Story, in diverse Letters. 3. My Friend and Neighbor Colonel
John Bridge' s Story. 4. One in London, yet living. 5. One at Belfast. 6. One
at Ilchester. 7. Mr. Mompesson' s Story. 8. iAt Lutterworth. 9. Mary Ellins of
Evesham. 10. One in Dorsetshire. 11. Nathan Crab of Exeter. 12. The strange
Story of the Devil of Genluce, in Dr. Sinclare. 13. The Witches hanged in
Suffolk and Essex. 14. The Brightling Story. 15. Lord Breghill' s Story of one
at St. James' s. 16. Simon Jones of Kiderminster. 17. Richard White of
Wilden-Hall. 18. Mr. Hopkins of Bewdley. 19. An Instance now in London. 20.
Another as strange. 21. Mr. White at Lambeth. 22. One from Cambridge. 23. One
at Hunniton. 24. Another there. 25. Mr. Ch Hatt' s Story. Chapter III. The strange
Story of Mr. May Hill, Minister of Beckington in Somersetshire. Mr. Increase
and Mr. Cotton Mather' s Instances. The Story of Mr. Pacy' s Daughters at
Lesto. Chapter IV. Many Histories sent me by Duke Lauderdale, and one that taught a
Minister to speak true Latin, and his Detection of some Popish Frauds. Chapter V.
Of Witchcraft. Inst. 1. Alexander Benedictus. 2. Benevenius. 3. Langius. 4.
Cornelius Gemma. 5. Sidelicus, in Skenkius. 6. Wolphius. 7. Sebastian Brand. 8.
Fabricius Hildanus. 9. Faelix Platerus. 10. Hollerius. 11. Petrus Forestus. 12.
Scribonius, -- Many Instances of the Concubitus of Demons with Women. 13. Many
struck by Demons: Scribonius. 14. Witches raising Storms. 15. Erasmus' s Story
of an Apparition that burnt the Town. 16. The Selling of Winds in Lapland and
Iseland. 17. The Bleeding o^ mu^der^d Bodies. 18. Scribonius^s strange Story.
19. Mr. Farmworth of an Indian Sacrifice to the Devil. 20. Ludovicus Vives
Testimony. 21. Zanchy' s Testimony. 22. Melancthon' s Testimony. 23. A
wonderful Story of Dr. Henric^ab Here. 24. Merik Causabone of Sir Theod
Meyerne. 25. Diverse Instances from Fernelius. 26. Sir Theod. Meyerne' s prudent
Judgment. 27. Gerh. Vossius' s Testimony. 28. Lavater. 29. Bishop Jos. Hall.
30. Cyprian, and a strange Story in him from Firmilianus. 31. The New England
Instances on Mrs. Hutchinson and Mrs. Dyer, published by Mr. Thomas Weld. 32.
Zanchy' s Opinion that the Devil's Substance is in them that they move. 33.
Luther' s Testimony. 34. More of Melancthon' s. Chapter VI. Mr. John Lewis and Mr.
John Davis' s Multitudes of Instances of Apparitions in Cardiganshire; and near
it, of Knockers and Death-Lights. Chapter VII. Inst. 1. Mr. Tilson' s Narrative
from Rochester. 2. Mr. Woodcock' s Letter, and four strange Stories: One of Mr.
Mun; and one of Dr. Lamb and Mr. Barber; and one of Mr. Herlakenden' s House;
and of the Oundle- Well. Chapter VIII. Of good Angels, and some doubtful Spirits.
Inst. 1. Mr. Tate' s Case. 2. The Bolton Instance. 3. The Afric. Bishops, whose
Tongues were cut out. 4. Somewhat from De la Cerda. 5. Mr. Ketilby Woodhouse' s
Testimony of some saved from Sir Richard Greenvile. 6. Of the Books of
Prodigies, 1662. 7. Of Lightnings tearing Churches. 8. Of Whirlwinds and
Hurricanes. 9. Of Mrs. Britton s Apparition. 10. More from De la Cerda. 11.
Hildanus' s strange Story of Lightning. Chapter IX. Inst. 1. Of melancholy Persons
Case. 2. Of Enthusiasts: Instances named, of diverse sorts. Chapter X. Other strange
Providence observable, on my self, on R. C. on Tho. Giles, on J. D. Of Death
foretold: Instance of Mr. Tiro, Colonel Rich and his Lady's Letters of it. Of
the Glastonbury- Thorn, diverse Letters. Of the Kings of England and France
Touching for the Struma. Chapter XI. A strange Story from Belfast in Ireland, fully
attested in a Letter from Mr. Tho. Emlin, a worthy Preacher, now in Dublin. Chapter
XII. A Dublin- Instance, attested by Mr. Daniel Williams, now in London. The
Conclusion, Concerning Angels, and how to know bad Spirits from Good; by the
Matter, and their Method: And what Instruments Christ and Devils use in their
greatest public Warfare.
CHAP. I. Of the great and weighty Uses of these Histories of Spirits, and
their unusual Appearances and Works.
. I. I Have written this Collection only as an Addition to sufficient Proofs of
invisible Powers or Spirits, and their Actions toward Men, which many in full
Treatises have already given the World; because how convincing soever those
Discourses be, Multitudes bred up in Idleness and Sensuality, and thereby
drowned in Sadduceism and Bestiality, never see those Books; nor will the Devil
consent that they shall have so much Wit and Care of their future State, as to
make that diligent Enquiry after such Things as the Importance of the Matter
does require: Nor will they read them, if they have them; nor believe the
fullest Evidence, though they read it; pretending that of Persons and Things so
long ago, and far off, they can have no Assurance, not knowing what Fallacies
may intervene.

Therefore I have chosen many near to them, both for Time and Place; of which,
if they think their Souls worth so much Labor, they may enquire to
Satisfaction.

2. Though I have taken many out of Foreign most credible Physicians, and some
from other Historians, yet, that I may not transcribe too much, I desire them
that need yet fuller Information, to read especially Bodin and Remigius, two
Judges who condemned Multitudes of Witches themselves, and Paul Grillandus, and
Sprangerus, and the Mallei Maleficorum, and Zanchy de Angelis and Demon. and
Danaeus, Joseph Glanvile with Dr. More's Notes, especially the Story in the
West of Scotland, near like that most convincing one of the Devil of Mascon;
and Dr. More of Atheism; and Mr. Increase Mather, and his Son Mr. Cotton Mather
of New England, their two Books of Witches, of which, the latter has most
convincing Evidence; and Dr. Sinclare, a Scot.

3. I confess, it is very difficult to expound the Causes of all mentioned in
these Histories: But prove^ Matters of fact must not be denied, but improved as
well as we can. And I confess, very many Cheats of pretended Possessions have
been discovered, which has made ^ome weak, injudicious Men think that all are
such. Two sorts of Persons have often been found Deceivers: 1. Persons prepared
and trained up purposely by Papists Priests, to honor their Exorcisms. You may
find in print the Story of the Boy of Bilson (Petrius, who afterward I heard
turned Quaker at Bristol) detected and shamed by Bp. Morton himself. Many such
abroad are recorded. 2. Lustful, Rank, Girls and young Widows, that plot for
some amorous, procacious Design, or have Imaginations conquered by Lust:
Though, I think, when they come to a Furor uterinus, Satan often sets in.

But he forfeiteth the Benefit of his own Eyesight, who thinks that none see,
because some Beggars counterfeit Blindness.

4. The Instances tell us, 1. That the State, Converse, Policy, Laws of the
AErial World, or Regions, are much thought not wholly) unknown to us here. 2.
And so is the Natural State of the departed Souls of wicked Men, as to their
having Bodies, or no Bodies, their Power, their Wits, their Motions, and
Passions. 3. And also whether they be proper Devils when joined with them, or
of another Species. 4. And it is hard to know by their Words or Signs, when it
is a Devil, and when it is a Humane Soul that appears. 5. Yea, it is often hard
to know whether it be the Soul of a good Person, or a bad. 6. And consequently,
what distance there is in their Habitations. 7. Yea, and often whether it be a
good Angel, or a bad, seeing bad ones may do good deceitfully, or by
Constraint. 8. And it is unsearchable to us, how far God leaves Invisible,
Intellectual Powers to Free Will about inferior things; suspending his
predetermining Motion, though not his general Motion and Concourse. 9. Yea, we
are not fully certain whether these AErial Regions have not a third sort of
Wights, that are neither Angels, (Good or Fallen,) nor Souls of Men, but such
as have been there placed as Fishes in the Sea, and Men on Earth: And whether
those called Fairies and Goblins are not such.

But as all these, and more such, are unknown to us, so God sees it meet for
us that it should be so, and we should not so much as desire or endeavor that
it might be otherwise.

5. But we may know, (which must suffice us,) 1. That no Spirits can do any
thing, but by God's Will or Permission. 2. And that God will never permit them
eventually to frustrate his Love and Mercy to his People, nor to break any one
of his Promises to them. 3. And that good Spirits are Servants, and evil Ones
Slaves to Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, and shall not frustrate his Grace and
Undertaking. 4. It is surely a wicked sort of Spirits that delight to do
Mischief, and that lie and deceive Men, and that are ambitious to be
worshipped, and to have Men's Souls and Bodies in their power, and make killing
and damning Men their Work: It Is evident that their Knowledge and Misery has
not yet changed them by Repentance, and made them better. 5. It Is evident that
they are Enemies to God, and to Jesus Christ; for their whole Design is against
them and against sanctifying, saving Work. 6. It is plain that they know that
Man has another Life to live: Their Works attest the Immortality of our Souls,
and the Truth of Christianity, in that they maliciously do so much against
them: They urge Men to renounce God and Christ, and his Commandments and
Worship, their Baptism, and all true Service of God: They urge Persons to sell
their Souls to them, and to forsake all that tends to save them. Their
Importunity to destroy us, should teach us the Need of the greatest Care and
Diligence for our Salvation. 7. It seems plain that they are now of a low and
base Condition of Nature, in that they seek such sordid Employments about
Graves and Corpse, and multitudes of sordid, trivial things. 8. And it seems
that they dwell near us, in the Air, Earth and Sea, and not in the higher
glorious Regions. 9. And it is apparent that they have a natural Strength, and
Ways of working, unknown to us, by the Wonders that they do. 10 It is very like
that the ^ou^s of wicked Men now dwell with them as they must do for ever, and
are like them. 11. I think it most likely, that when Witches, Men and Women,
confess their filthy Lying with Devils, that it is done more to exercise the
Lust of the Witch than of the Devil: And that sometimes he does it by a Body of
gross Air, and sometimes may gratify the Lust of one Witch on another, or on a
tempted ignorant Wretch. He that can bring a Witch in without opening the Door,
can bring such an one (Male or Female) into another's Bed. 12. It is not
impossible that wicked Souls may carry with them hence their filthy
Inclinations, and Desire to use them. 13. It is plain that Devils and wicked
Souls are not yet in the utmost of their Misery, but are reserved in Chains to
the Judgment of the great Day of Christ: Such joking, and dallying, and
whistling, as the Devil of Mascon, and many other used, show this. 14. It is
clear, that whether you call it [in State, or Place,] (I think both,) the
blessed Souls and Angels are far above these, in a higher World or Region, and
no wonder if they appear more rarely to Men on Earth. 15. Yet Angels can be
here, and do their Office for us, without such Descent as shall abate their Joy
and Glory; and why not blessed Souls too, if they shall be equal with Angels?
The Sun can enlighten every Eye here, without losing its higher Residence. 16.
When revengeful things are done, (as on Murderers, Defrauders, etc.) it seems
to be from the revengeful Wrath of some bad Soul, especially when it is about
Money or Lands, it seems to savor of the Worldly Mind: Yet it is uncertain
whether it may not be from the Justice of God, and governing Angels, sending
the Evil Spirits on such Errands. A Hawk and a Hound are fitter Messengers to
destroy, than a Dove or a Lamb. 17. When a Genius shows some Kindness to the
Soul, (as his that I mentioned, that knocks at his Bed's Head, and about him,
after every time that he is drunk; and one that Bodin mentions, that was
stricken when he said or did amiss,) it is uncertain to us, whether it be a
good Angel, or the Soul of some former dear Friend, that procures this Leave,
to try to turn and save the Sinner: Or whether Christ and Angels force Satan to
do it against his Will. 18. Though the unquenchable Fire which is to follow
will show the utmost Severity of God's Justice, there is some signification of
his Mercy to the Wicked, in suspending it so far, as to allow them such a
Condition as many of these Apparitions signify by their Words and Deeds. 19.
Yet here is nothing to encourage their Opinion, that think such Souls or Demons
are but in via, and have another Day of Hope, and Means to use, in possibility
of Salvation: And though many are said to have begged of the Living for Mastes
and Prayers, it is liker to prove a Diabolical Cheat, to promote Superstition,
than that there is a Purgatory-State of Hope. 20. Those that are tempted to
think that Souls are all one, and that Individuation is only by Corporeal
Matter, and that Individuation cease at Death, are by all these Examples
fully confuted: Devils and wicked Souls have their Numerical Individuation, and
therefore no Godly Person need to fear the Loss of it. Either it is good or bad
for us: If good, shall the Wicked and Devils have it, and not the Godly? If
bad, why should it be desired? Angels are Individuals, and shall not our Souls?

6. These great Benefits we may get by the right Use of these Histories, and
such others.

1. We may learn to admire that Frame of Divine Government, that has Creatures
so various to rule and order, and makes one beautiful Frame of all. As Toads
and Serpents on Earth are not useless, nor devouring Fishes* Birds and Beasts;
so neither are Devils nor damned Souls, no nor their Sins, which God will use,
though he will not cause.

2. We may gather that in Heaven it self, there will be an orderly Economy and
difference of degrees of Superiority and of Glory, when there is so great
difference through all the World. All shall not be equal to them that shall sit
on twelve Thrones, Judging the twelve Tribes: There are many Mansions in that
House, even to them that be all with Christ.

3. We have great Cause to be very thankful to God, that does not let loose
wicked Spirits against us, that they are not here our Terror and Tormentors.

4. How great a Mercy is it, that we have a Savior that has power over them,
and has Redeemed us from their Power, and from everlasting Damnation.

5. We may see that the Angels of God are not useless to us; but their Ministry
is one of Gods Means for our Preservation, and we owe them, Love and Thanks for
all their Love and Service: And it is not, through Pride or Insensibility of
this benefit, that we do not worship them, whom we see not.

6. If the Devils possessing and tormenting Men's Bodies, be so heavy a Plague,
how much worse is it to have him the Master of their Souls? O! How carefully
should we resist his Temptations? Every Sin that we commit, through Love to it,
or by Wilfulness or Sloth, is worse to us, and more pleasing to the Devil, than
to be Tormented so long by him. He mist of his aim at Job, when he could not by
all his Sufferings draw him to Sin: O! how much more miserable is a Worldly,
Proud. Gluttonous, Dives, Lord, Knight or Gentleman, and sensual Youth
^i^^racted with Vain Mirth and Lust, than one Bewitched, or Bodily only possessed
by Devils: And how much should the most godly be afraid of Sin, and of
Temptations?

7. It is a sensible help, as to Convince Brutists and Atheists and Infidels,
so to confirm the best Believers against all Temptations, to doubt of the Life
to come, and the Immortality of Souls, and the future Judgment and Retribution:
And though it be our shame to need such helps, it is a Mercy to have them. If a
Sadducee will say, If one did come from the Dead, or I saw such things, I would
believe, should not our Faith be past wavering, that have these added to the
greater Gospel proofs.

8. It Is matter of Comfort to departing faithful Souls, that these evil Spirits
that are chained up now, and not suffered to disturb us, shall not hinder our
passage to Glory: If we must pass through the Air inhabited by Devils and
Wicked Souls, Angels will Convey us, and Christ receive us, and it shall not be
to our hurt or loss.

9. It should always keep the Souls of the Faithful in joyful gratitude, for
the work of Regeneration, Grace, Justification and Salvation, which was our
great Deliverance from Devils: And teach us to live as the saved of the Lord.

10. It should warn all to take heed, that they be not helpers and Servants to
Devils, in Tempting and Destroying Souls; O! how many do his work, that defy
his Name? All that by wicked example and scandal, harden Men in Sin, they that
Tempt People to Pride and Lust, and fleshly pleasures. They that draw them into
the Company of Vain, Lascivious, Lustful, Ryotous and Ungodly persons: They
that madly contradict Gods Word, and Cavil and Argue against Faith and
Holiness: They that deride and mock at the Obedience of Gods Commands, and
Reproach the most Religious by scornful Nicknames. They that seduce them by
false Doctrine* and that draw them from Gods Worship, and they that silence
necessary Faithful Preachers, and they that dissuade Men from hearing or
regarding them. O! what an Army has Satan, for his work of destroying Souls.

These Men should think, that it is greater Cruelty to destroy Souls, than to
Rob or Murder Bodies: It is fighting against the Office and Work of Christ that
came to save them, and against all the Ordinannances and Word of God, and all
the Course of his saving Mercies, and all the Desires and Endeavors of the
Godly, that Long and Labor for Men's Salvation: It is to be like Devils, and do
the Devils work, and by hurting others, they more hurt themselves. And if Gods
Mercy should Convert. and Save such wretches, they cannot Convert and Save
those that they have deceived and drawn to Sin: And God only knows what
thoughts they would have, if they come to Heaven, to see or know of Souls in
Hell, that they brought thither. But if they die Unconverted, and go to them,
their Presence and Torment will be the increase of their own.

11. These thoughts should stir up all believers to labor to save Souls from
the Snares and Powers of Devils. O! do not say as Cain, Am I my Brothers
Keeper, say not, that it is only the Work of Ministers: They are Guides in
Christ's Army, but you are Soldiers: You are Vowed to fight against the Devil,
the World and Flesh, and that for others, as well as for your selves: Societies
are for Mutual Helps. A Minister is but one Man, and not an Army, and can be
but in one place at once: You live among and near your Family, Neighbors and
such as you Converse with, and may often speak to them: All in your places must
be Lights and Salt, to Enlighten a Dark, and season a Corrupt Generation. O!
You that believe the Life to come, make haste to help poor Miserable Souls,
before Death put them past Remedy, or Sin has utterly hardened their Hearts:
Do you love your Neighbors as your selves, and will see them continue in
Ignorance, Worldliness and Profaneness, and do nothing or little to save them?
If you saw but their Bodies in need, and shut up the Bowels of Compassion
against them, what love have you to God, to Christ or them? If Christ in
Judgment will Condemn Men for not relieving Podies, Math. 25. will it prove
less sinful to afford no help to Souls. If you are not for Christ, and his
Works, you are against him: If you saw them fall down in a Swound, you would
help them up; And if their Houses were on Fire, you would help and haste to
quench it; yea, if your Enemies Beast fall into a Pit, you must help him out:
And do you believe a Hell, and not help Sinners? The Devil, their Adversary and
yours, as a Roaring Lion, seeks Night and Day to Devour; And will you do
nothing to save Men.

If you cannot do what you would, do what you can: Do but take it for your Duty
and Works, for which you must give account to God, and keep you an account how
you perform it: Ask your selves what have I done for Souls this Week, or this
day? Begin at home, and give to all an Example of Holiness, Heavenly meekness,
and Self-denial: Then look to your Families: O!betray not the Souls of your
Children and Servants, with a few slight good words or forms; but with Love and
Diligence, Labor to make them understand Gods Word, and the things of their
Salvation, Catechize them, and help them to understand and apply it. Keep them
from ill Company, Labor to render Gods Service to them as it is, Necessary,
Honorable and Pleasant: Time is short, Souls are precious, Hell is dreadful:
Heaven is joyful, Devils and their wicked Servants are busy. While you have
opportunity, labor to do good to all: Your Labor, if sincere, shall not be in
vain. If you want Ability, labor to increase it, and get the help of such as
can do better, get them to able Ministers: Put suitable Books into their Hands:
Do not as those Sectaries, that to show their Gifts are ready to intrude as
public Preachers, but instead of Patient and Compassionate Diligence with the
Ignorant and Ungodly about them, do but exasperate them by Reproaches and
Disgrace. Condescend to the least and lowest: Do all with Humility, and Winning
Love. Alas, Satan has a greater and more dangerous Army, to fight against
Christ and Holiness, and Men's Salvation, among the Great, and Rich, and Proud,
and Careless Voluptuous Sinners, than among Witches and possessed Bodies. He
wins and undoes most by pleasing them: If he can get them to prefer Earth
before Heaven, and Wealth and Honor before Holiness, and to be lovers of
fleshly Pleasures more than of God, and keep them from any serious Minister, or
Means that would waken them and bring them to their Wits, and keep them from
serious Consideration, and from thinking whither they are going, and how all
their Carelessness, Ease and Sin will end; this is it that answers his Soul
murdering desires.

12. But especially these Instances of Satan's Diligence and Malice, should
teach Ministers how to preach, on what Subjects, in and what manner, and how to
converse personally with those of their charge: Shall the Captains in Christ's
Army see the Devourer go away with the Prey, and do little for their rescue? Is
ignorant, cold, jingling, contentious Preaching, meet for them that are so
greatly obliged to militate under Christ against the Destroyer, and for the
everlasting saving of Men's Souls? The Lord heal and pardon our Unbelief, and
cruel want of Pity, and our Sloth and Lukewarmness; for it is great and
serious Work which we undertake. But of this I refer those that will read it to
my formed Pastor.

O Lord give to the Christian World, a greater number of Wise, Humble, Holy,
experienced Teachers, and save them from those that hate or believe not the
Doctrine, which for worldly Ends they preach; and that serve the Devil in the
name of Christ, and calling themselves the Church, and their Conceits its Canon
or Rule, do Preach and Rule for themselves, their Honor, Will and Wealth, on
pretense of the Welfare and Unity of the Church, and become the Trumpeters of
Malignity, Persecution and Schism, and have not known the way of Mercy.

CHAP. II. Several Historical Instances of Apparitions, Witches, and mavelous
convincing Works of God's Providence.
. 1. THere are in this City of London, many Persons that prosess their great
unbelief, or doubt of the Life to come, the Immortality of the Soul, and
therefore much more of the truth of the Gospel, and Christian Faith, and
Supernatural Revelations. But they say, that could they be certain of Spirits,
Apparitions, Witchcraft and Miracles, it would do more to convince them than
the Assertions of the Scriptures: But they take all such Reports to be but the
effects of Error, Deceit, and easy Credulity: For the sake of such, I have
recited many Credible Instances in this Book, and my Saints Rest, and in my
Unreasonableness of Infidelity; and I shall here add some more. I doubt not but
abundance of Reports of such matters have no better causes than are here
mentioned, even the mistake of the Ignorant; but that there are true as well as
false Reports of such things, is past all reasonable cause of doubting.

I. I will begin with that most convincing Instance, which you may read in a
Book, called, The Devil of Mascon.

Above twenty Years ago, the now Earl Orery, then Lord Broghil, a Person of
well known Understanding, and not inclined to weak Cre^ulity, told me much of
what is written in that Book, and more; and said, That he was familiar with Mr.
Perreaud, a Reverend Worthy Protestant Minister, in whose House all was done,
and had his Son for his Servant in his Chamber many years; and from Mr.
Perreaud had the Narrative. Not long after, Dr. Peter Moulin, Prebend of
Canterbury, and Son to the famous Peter Moulin Printed the Book, as having it
from his Father, who had it of Mr. Perreaud: And Mr. Robert Boil, Brother to
the Earl of Orery, a Man famous for Learning, Honesty and Charity, and far also
from weak Credulity, prefixeth an Epistle to it, owning it as undoubted Truth,
being acquainted with the Author, Mr. Perreaud, as his Brother was. All these
three worthy Persons (the E. of Orery, Mr. Boil, and Dr. Pet. Moulin) through
God's Mercy are yet living.

I hear some report, that this History of Mascon is denied by some, that say,
they have spoken with some that have been at Mascon, and knew nothing of it.
And what wonder if such things that are talked of but a few days, be forgotten
after fifty or sixty Years: They that will not believe the Narrative from such
Men as the Famous Peter Moulin Senior, and Dr. Peter Moulin Junior, that
Printed it, and from the Earl of Orery, that told me he was Familiar with Mr.
Perreaud, and had his Son many years his Chamber-Servant; and his Brother Mr.
Robert Boil yet living, that has attested it by a Preface, may read all the
History (with many more of Witchcraft printed in French, and Published by Mr.
Perreaud himself: And if they cannot get it, they may go to my Kinsman, William
Baxter, now Schoolmaster at Newington, where they may see it.

Could it be Counterfeit, and never Contradicted in fifty or sixty years (I
remember not just the year) that in a City, so many of both Religions for so
many Months together, might crowd at a certain hour into the Room, and hear a
Voice answering their questions, and telling them things far off, and to them
unknown; and Disputing with a Papist Officer of the City, and the Whirling him
often about, and casting him on the ground, and sending him home Distracted, I
say, if this, and all the rest there written, so attested, be not sufficient
Evidence, I know not what is.

The said Earl of Orery, told me of many effects of Witchcraft or Devils (Men
carried about) near him in Ireland, which I shall not particularly recite,
though many Witnesses were named.

This was written while they lived: Now only Mr. Boil Surviveth.

II. My next History (shall be that of Lieutenant Colonel Bowen, which I will
give only in the words of others, as I received it. Only telling you what they
are.

1. Mr. Samuel Jones, is a Man of known Learning, Piety and Honesty, though a
Silenced Minister, now living in Glamorganshire, by whose Mediation I had the
other.

2. Mr. Bedwell was also a Credible Faithful Minister.

3. Mrs. Bowen her self, either is, or lately was living. a Woman very much
praised for True Piety and Courage, Sister to Colonel Philip Jones, once one of
Cromwells Council.

4. Here is a Letter also from Colonel Wroth Rogers, late Governor of
Here^ord, I think yet living, and a Credible person, though then not willing
the Story should be published, I suppose his Reasons are now over.

5. I sent into Ireland in his Lifetime, to enquire what effect it had upon
him, of which I had the Letter of Mr. Samuel Foley, and Credible Persons yet
living.

6. And Colonel John Bridges then in Ireland, purposely enquired, and could
learn no more, but that he immured himself privately with one Servant in a
Castle, who reported that he used to rise in the Night, and walk about the
Room, talking as to some one with him, and more I could not hear.

7. I desired lately a Worthy Minister in Swansey, to enquire whether ever
since any thing had abated, ^the Belief of the Fact, who tells me (as others
do) that it is as fully believed by those that were in the House, and others as
ever.

Several Letters to Mr. Richard Baxter, in relation to an Apparition in the
House of Lieutenant Colonel Bowen, in Glamorganshire, in Wales, in the Year
1655.
Colonel Rogers, the Governor of Hereford, his Letter: Together with an
enclosed Relation of an Apparition, etc.
Dear Sir,
BY the Enclosed you will find something of the Business you expected from me:
(It is certain and true, I have received it from very good Hands.) More there
was, but they did not think it convenient to put it in Paper. My Request is,
that you will not expose it to public View; it may rather do harm than good. I
know that God has given you Wisdom, and you will make good use of such things:
It may harden others. This, with the Enclosed, is all at present from

Your Cordial Friend and Servant W. Rogers.
Hereford Aug. 23. 1656.
The enclosed Relation of the late strange Apparition in the County of
Glamorgan.
IN the beginning of the late War, a Gentleman of that County being oppressed
by the King's Party, took Arms under the Earl of Essex, and by his Valor
obtained a good Repute in the Army; so that in a short time he got the Command
of Lieutenant Colonel. But as soon as the heat of the War was abated, his Ease
and Preferment led him to a careless and sensual Life; insomuch that the godly
Commanders judged him unfit to continue in England, and thereupon sent him to
Ireland, where he grew so vain and notional, that he was cashiered the Army;
and being then at liberty to sin without any Restraint, he became an absolute
Atheist, denying Heaven or Hell, God or Devil, (acknowledging only a Power, as
the ancient Heathens did Fate,) accounting Temporal Pleasures all his expected
Heaven: So that, at last he became hateful, and hating all civil Society, and
his nearest Relations.

About December last, he being in Ireland, and his Wife (a Godly Gentlewoman,
of a good Family, and concluded by all the Godly People that knew her, to be
one of the most sincere and upright Christians in those Parts, as being for
many Years under great Afflictions, and always bearing them with Christian-like
Patience) living in his House in Glamorgan, was very much troubled one Night
with a great Noise, much like the sound of Whirlwind, and a violent beating of
the Doors or Walls; as if the whole House were falling in pieces: And being in
her Chamber, with most of her Family, after praying to the Lord, (accounting it
sinful Incredulity to yield to Fear,) she went to bed; and suddenly after,
there appeared unto her something like her Husband, and asked her whether he
should come to Bed. She sitting up, and praying to the Lord, told him, he was
not her Husband, and that he should not. He urged more earnestly: What! Not the
Husband of thy Bosom? What! Not the Husband of thy Bosom? (Yet had no power to
hurt her.) And she, together with some Godly People, spent that Night in
Prayer, being very often interrupted by this Apparition.

The next Night, Mr. Miles, (a Godly Minister,) with four other Godly Men, came
to watch and pray in the House for that Night, and so continued in Prayer, and
other Duties of Religion, without any interruption or noise at all that Night.
But the Night following, the Gentlewoman, with several other Godly Women, being
in the House, the noise of Whirlwind began again, with more violence than
formerly, and the Apparition walked in the Chamber, having an unsufferable
Stench, like that of a putrified Carcass, filling the Room with a thick Smoke,
smelling like Sulphur, darkening the Light of the Fire and Candle, but not
quite extinguishing it; sometimes going down the Stairs, and coming up again
with a fearful noise, disturbing them in their Prayers, one while with the
sound of Words which they could not discern, other while striking them so that
the next Morning their Faces were black with the Smoke, and their Bodies
swollen with Bruises.

Thereupon they left the House, left they should tempt the Lord by their
over-bold staying in such Danger, and sent this Atheist the sad News of this
Apparition; who coming to England about May last, expressed more Love and
Respect to his Wife than formerly; yet telling her, that he could not believe
her Relation of what she had seen, as having not a power to believe any thing
but what himself saw, and yet would not hitherto go to his House to make trial,
but probably will ever long, for that he is naturally of an exceeding rash and
desperate Spirit.

August, 1656.
Mr. Samuel Jones's Letter in relation to Lieutenant Col. Bowen, together, with
an enclosed Letter from Mr. Maur. Bedwell, on the same Subject.
Worthy and much Honored,
YOU may be pleased to remember, that when I waited upon you at the Sherift's
House, in Sallop, in August last; amongst your other Enquiries touching the
State of that poor Country where the Lord has cast my Lot for the present: you
desired me then to impart what I had received by Relation, concerning the
Apparitions in one Col. Bowen's House, and upon my return to procure you some
further Intelligence touching that Tremendous Providence. Whether it be by
Time, or Familiarity with the noise hereof, or rather, the (no less to be
admired) Blockishness of the Spirits of Men, that the Horror of that terrible
Dispensation be allayed, I know not, but surely the thing it self was very
Stupendous, and the remembrance of it carries much Amazement with it still, to
them that have any thing of Tenderness or Understanding left them. By the
enclosed, from an Honest and Godly Hand, not far from the Stage where these
things were acted: You may understand the Substance of that matter, the Party
(being a Minister of the Gospel) perfectly knew Colonel Bowen, and has often
conversed with him, both before and since his House was haunted. If you are
pleased to command any further Satisfaction herein, I shall take a Journey my
self into the place, and endeavor to gratify your desire, as to any further
particular that you desire the knowledge of. If any public use be made hereof
you may conceal my Friends name and mine own, lest any offense should be taken
by some of the Parties Relations in Parliament and Council. Of the receipt of
this Paper I desire to hear with all convenient speed. At the Throne of Grace
vouchsafe to remember your weak and wretched Brother, who yet desires to be
found in the number of them that are,

Sir, Yours in the surest Bonds to Honor and Serve you, Samuel Jones.
Coedreken, Nov. 28. 1656.

The Reasons why forbearing Names was desired, being now over (yet Mr. S. Jones
still living) I think my self disobliged as to that Restraint. R. B.

Mr. Maur. Bedwell's enclosed Letter.
Dear Sir,
GLad I am of your safe return, and gladder should I be to be instrumental,
according to my weak Capacity, of nayling you to these parts. I hope, if my
desires are agreeable to the Lord, you will meet with some directing
Providence from him, which will answer all Objections.

As to Col. Bowen's House, I can give you some brief Particulars, which you may
credit, as coming from such, who were not so foolish as to be deluded, nor so
dishonest as to report an untruth: What I shall write, if need were, would be
made good both by Eye and Ear Witnesses. The Gentleman, Col. Bowen, whose House
is called Lanellin in Gowersland, formerly was famous for Profession of
Religion, but this Day is the saddest Man in his Principles I know living. To
me, in particular, he has denied the Being of the Spirit of the Lord: His
Argument thus, Either it is something or nothing; if something, show me, tell me
what it is, etc. and I believe he gives as little credit to other Spirits as
the Sadduces. At his House, aforementioned, he being then in Ireland, making
Provision for removing thither, these things happened. About December last, his
Wife being in Bed, a Gracious Understanding Woman, and one whom little things
will not affright; one in the likeness of her Husband, and just in his Posture,
presented himself to her Bedside, proffering to come to Bed to her, which she
refusing, he gave this answer, What refuse the Husband of thy Bosom; and after
some time, she alleging, Christ was her Husband, it disappeared: Strange
miserable Howlings and Cries were heard about the House, his Tread, his
Posture, Sighing, Humming, were heard frequently in the Parlour; in the Day
time often the Shadow of one walking would appear upon the Wall. One Night was
very remarkable, and had not the Lord stood by the poor Gentlewoman and her two
Maids, that Night they had been undone; as she was going to Bed, she perceived
by the impression on the Bed, as if some Body had been lying there, and opening
the Bed, she smelt the smell of a Carcass some-while dead; and being in Bed
(for the Gentlewoman was somewhat Courageous) upon the Tester, which was of
Cloth, she perceived something rolling from side to side, and by and by, being
forced out of her Bed, she had not time to dress her self, such Cries and other
things almost amazing her, but she (hardly any of her Cloths being on) with
with her two Maids, got upon their Knees by the Bedside to seek the Lord, but
extremely assaulted, oftentimes she would, by somewhat which felt like a Dog
under her Knees, be lifted a Foot or more high from the Ground: some were heard
to talk on the other side of the Bed, which one of the Maids hearkening to, she
had a blow upon the Back: Diverse assaults would be made by fits; it would come
with a cold breath of Wind, the Candles burn Blew and almost out; horrible
Screekings, Yellings, and Roarings, within and without the House sad smells of
Brimstone and Powder, and this continued from some nine at Night to some three
the next Morning, so that the poor Gentlewoman and her Servants were in a sad
case; the next Morning, smelling of Brimstone and Powder, and as I remember,
Black with it, but the Lord was good: Fires have been seen upon the House, and
in the Fields; his Voice has been heard luring his Hawks, a Game he delights
in, as also the Bills of the Hauks. These are the chief things which I dare
recommend upon Credit, and I could with, that they, who question the Existency
of Spirits had been but one Night at Lannelin to receive Satisfaction to their
Objections: This continued so violent, that the Gentlewoman was fain to
withdraw to her Mothers House; but her Husband coming over about some four
Months since. his Confidence did not serve him to lodge at Lannelin, although
we have heard nothing of trouble to the House since his coming over* Sir, the
Dispensation, as it was exceeding terrible, so very remarkable; and what the
Voice of God might be in such a thing it is not known clearly yet: He is as
Atheistical as ever, all his Religion, if I may call it so, being comprised in
the acknowledging a Power, which we, as he faith, may call God, and waiting for
some infallible miraculous Business to verify to him all the rest we own as
our Religion. Sure, Sir, if ever a Blasphemer was unworthy to live, this is the
Man; and certainly his Sin will find him out: He is now gone to Ireland; let
these things be divulged only as to the matter without names. Assure the
Gentleman, your Friend, they are very Truths; I have somewhat more than
ordinary for what I say. At the first we concluded, the Wretch had been dead,
but 'twas otherwise, and therefore the more remarkable.

Your affectionate Brother, to Love and Serve you, Maur. Bedwell.
Swansy, October. 16. 56.

Mr. Daniel Higgs his Letter, concerning the Apparition in Lieutenant Colonel
Bowen's House.
Dear Sir,
AS to the Concern you commit to me about Colonel Bowen, accept of this
Account.

I have discoursed with Brother Samuel Jones, who gave you the first Narrative,
which if you have lost, he hopes he may find the Copy of the Letter, and I
shall send it. 'Twas one Mr. Miles, an Anabaptist Minister, that wrote the
Letter to one Mr. Bedwell, Minister of Swansey, who sent ^t Mr. Samuel Jones.
This Miles (who spent a Night in Prayer in Colonel Bowen's House, ^n the time
of the disturbance) is gone for New England. Two Ministers more, with my self,
went to spend another Night in the House, but Mrs. Bowen was gone with her
Family, and we stayed not, but went ^o give her a Visit, who related strange
things, but I cannot remember Circumstances. The two Ministers are also gone:
But since I received yours, I have discoursed Mr. Bowen's Maid, who was in the
House, and I judge her thoroughly Godly, who does attest the Truth of these
Apparitions, Noises, etc. which I suppose you had fully in your Narrative; but
Time has somewhat obliterated Circumstances wit^ her. I know not well (Sir)
how to get greater light; and I must assure you, I fin^ not any thing out to
invalidate that Report you have had, but much that confirms it I shall proceed
according to your further Direction in this, or any other Concern of your* and
that with much Cheerfulness and Complacency. I commit you, and your huge
Labors to our mighty and merciful Lord, b^ Prayer and all well Wishes. And if
yo^ can think of any thing farther for me, o^ gather any thing by Discourse
with learne^ Men, vouchsafe to impart it; and impri^ me (poor Worm) on your
Soul before o^ Father. I have somewhat trespassed b^ Prolixity, which becomes
me not to s^d a Person, in such a Sphere: But excuse hi^ who is

Your afflicted poor Brother, Daniel Higgs.

Captain Samuel Foley's Letter concerning Lieutenant Colonel Bowen.
Worthy Sir,
THE best Account I can get of Colonel Bowen is this, viz. That he is little
sensible of his sad Condition. He lives in the County of Cork, in a beggarly
way, though he has a fair Estate. Some Months since, he turned his Wife and
Children from him, in that sad unkind manner, that they were forced to seek
Relief from some Friends in Younghall, to help them in their Return to Wales,
where they continue. Not long since, in Discourse with Baronet Ingolsby, and
Mr. Gilbert, Minister of Limrick* from whom I have the most part of this
Relation, he said, he would give Ten Thousand Pounds to know the Truth about
God. It Is reported he is haunted with ghastly Ghosts and Apparitions, which
frequent him. I have written to the neighboring Ministers and Gentlemen of my
Acquaintance as effectually as I could, enclosing a Copy of your Letter; and
from them I hope to have a more full Account concerning this poor Man. Your
Letter ^ndeed came safe, but not till August, though dated in May. Sir, in any
thing wherein I may serve you, you may freely command me: But wherein I may
serve the Church of God, the best and utmost of my Endeavors, through the
Lord's Assistance, shall not be wanting. What farther shall come to my Hands,
shall carefully be reported to you, by him who begs your Prayers, and
subscribes,

SIR, Your very Affectionate Servant, Samuel Foley.
Clonmell, October. 6. 1658.
After this, Colonel John Bridges wrote to me out of Ireland, that Bowen
immured himself in a small Castle, with one Boy; who said, he often rose in the
Night, and talked as if some were talking with him.

R. B.

III. Colonel John Bridges before named, was Governor of Warwick Castle (the
Lord Brooks) almost all the time of the Wars; Afterward he lived with us near
Kederminster, being Patron of the Church, a Justice of Peace, a Parliament Man;
And after lived in Ireland, where he surprised (with others) Dublin Castle, and
Sir Hardress Waller for the King, before he was called home. He was an
Understanding Prudent Man, of Sound Judgment in Religion, Just, and Honest, and
Credible.

He and his Pious Wife have often told me as follows.

They formerly lived in Edson Hall near Alcester, where Warwickshire and
Worcestershire joins; a House famed to be haunted: And being used to go into a
Parlour alone for Meditation, Prayer, and to play on his Lute, once as he went
in at the Portal, he was stopped and held by somewhat invisible, till he resolved
under Gods Protection, to rush through it, and go on.

Another time in a clear Moonshine Night, their Mastiff Dog made such a
howling, as raised up the House: He looked out at the Window, and beyond a pale
that compassed the Court, there stood something like a headless Man, but
taller: He long gazed on it, and trusting God, returned to Bed; And presently
the Hall Door (fast locked and Barred) using to make a great noise in the
opening, having much Iron, seemed to them all to open as it used, and somewhat
came in, and gave three great slams, as with a Staff upon the Hall Table, and
departed. They went down to see, and found the Door locked, and fast as they
left it. Mr. Sommerfield, who since lived in the same House, said, that he saw
nothing there.

IV. A Pious Credible Woman, yet living in London, lately told me oftimes,
being sometime under Temptation by some Discontent of Mind, one day as she
passed through a Room at Midday, the Devil stood before her in the shape of a
Big, Black, Man, and pointed to the top of the Door, Tempting her there to hang
her self; and so stood near a quarter of an hour, and then Vanished away: Which
was so far from dismaying her, that it much confirmed her against Unbelief, and
her Temptations: Any one that will go to her here in London, may hear her
Credible and Confident Report of it.

V. The Elder Countess of Donagal, a Lady Pious, Discreet and Credible, told
me, that one of her Husbands Tenants (near Belfast or Carickfergus, where he
was Lord) agreed with him for to put his Sons Life with his own in a renewed
Lease of a Farm; and he paid part of the Money, and dyed before the Lease was
made and Sealed: His Wife Married another Man, and paid the rest of the Money
out of her second Husbands Purse, and therefore put in his Sons Life, in stead
of her Son by the former Husband into the Lease. The Earl of Donagall going
into England, and being then in the West, a Servant of his in Ireland, his
Porter, a stout lusty Man, was haunted with the Apparition of the Woman's first
Husband, telling him, that he must go to his Wife, and tell her that she should
have no rest till his Sons Life were put in the altered Lease: He asked why he
spoke to him, and what he had to do to meddle in it? It Answered him, thou art
a Man fit for it, and thou shall have no rest till thou do it. The Man delayed,
and was still Haunted with this Apparition: He went to the Minister of the
Town, and told him of it; who counseled him to tell the Woman. She told him,
that she took it to be just, that her Husband that paid most of the Money,
should have the benefit of the Lease, and, perhaps not believing the Man*
delayed. This Apparition came to the po^ter again, and said, that she may
believe thee, go tell her of such and such Discourse and Actions, that were
between her and me in secret, which none else knowe^^ of^ The Man went and told
her all that he was bid. She confessed that it was all true, and Secret between
them; but still delayed, till some trouble (I remember not what) modested her
self: In short, the Porter and she had no rest, till she had drawn a new Lease
with the Name of the first Husbands Son, and sent it into England, to the Earl
of Donagal, who Sealed it, and so altered accordingly.

VI. An Ancient understanding Pious and Credible Man of Ilchester in
Somersetshire, is now in London, who the last week told me, that he was
heretofore in Melancholy Doubts and Trouble of Mind, and in that Condition, had
diverse sensible Molestations by the Devil, as he lay awake in his Bed, his feet
have bin lifted higher than his Head. I told him, that a Melancholy fancy might
make him think so: He added to the confident Assertion of it, that he has in
the open daytime, as he has gone about his Hoose, had a blow struck on his
face, as hard and plain, as any Man's hand could strike, and once so hard, that
where his Nose and Cheek join, it left the place black and blew (as they call
it) to the sight of all, in the same manner, as any other would have done (with
much more.)

VII. The Story of the Haunting of Mr. Mompesson's House in Wiltshire, is
Famous, and printed in part by Mr. Joseph Glanvil: Mr. Mompesson is yet living,
no Melancholy nor Conceited Man: The truth not doubted of by his Neighbors,
within this Month, I spoke with one of them an Attorney, who said, that the
noises heard, the visible moving about of the Boards before their faces, and
such like, were all undoubtedly true: And the thing unquestioned by Mr.
Mompesson (who to his great Cost and trouble, was long molested by it) and his
Neighbors, and those that purposely went thither to see it: Notwithstanding,
that when some unbelievers went from London to be satisfied nothing was done
when they were there. For as God owes not such Remedies to Unbelievers, so
Satan has no desire to cure them: And it is likely, does more in Apparitions
by Divine Constraint, than he is willing to do; because he is most successful,
w hen he is least known. Any one that doubts of the truth of this Story, may
yet have full satisfaction, the Witness being alive: But this partly belongs
to the instances of Witchcrafts, being Credibly supposed to be done by
Witchcraft of a Drummer, as you may see described in the printed Story. I knew
Joseph Glanvile to be far enough from Fanatic Credulity, who himself saw much
of it, and published it.

VIII. In February, 1646. falling into great Debility by Bleeding, at the Lady
Cook's House at Milbourne in Darby-shire; I removed to Mr. Noels House at
Kirkby Malory in Leichestershire, where I lay weak three weeks in March, in
which time, the Neighbors went to see a House in Lutterworth, reported to be
haunted: Multitudes flocks to see it, and affirmed, that at cert^^n hour of the
day, stones were thrown at those that were present, which hit them, but hurt
them not: And that what ever time any one would whistle, it was answered by a
whistle in the Room: And no search could discover any Fraud: What became of it
after, I heard not; but it continued believed commonly by the hearers, those
three weeks that I staid in that County.

IX. But the certainest and fullest Instance of Witchcraft that ever I knew, I
shall here give you in the words of others: Only adding, that about twenty
years ago, the time whem it was doing, my worthy and dear Friend Mr. George
Hopkins, the then Faithful Minister of the Gospel at Evesham, told it me
himself, and told me of their Care and Watchfulness, to see that there were no
Fraud committed in it. And the Witch was hanged at Worcester, and the Woman her
self is yet living in Evesham, and the thing never there doubted of: But having
occasion lately to instance the fact against some Unbelievers, I sent to
Evesham, to a Godly, Credible, Friend, to send me word, whether any doubt had
in these years past risen concerning it, and to send me some of the Flint
Stones which were voided by the Girl: Who sent me word, that there were no
doubt of the thing, and procured the now Minister of the place, to write me the
Narrative which I here subjoin. And he sent me One stone, about the breadth of
a small Groat, and the thickness of a Half-crown, which he said, was all that
is there kept of them, taken by the Majors Wife her self, and kept by her, and
therefore I must send it back again: Many had sent for the Stones, and so many
troubled the House about them, that they threw away, or buried the rest: And
Mr. Boil told me, that the Earl of South-Hampton Lord Treasurer, for his
Satisfaction, had got a great number of them. I carried this about me a quarter
of a year, and then sent it home. But that which I chiefly inform the Reader
of, is, that the thing was so long in doing, and so Famous, and so many Pious,
Understanding Persons minded it, that suspicion of Fraud was by their Diligence
avoided.

The Narrative as lately sent me from most Credible Persons in Evesham, is as
follows.
ABout the Month of April, 1652. Mary the Daughter of Edward Ellins, of the
Borough of Evesham, in the County of Worcester Gardner, then about nine or ten
years old, went in the fields on a Saturday with some other Children to gather
Cowslips, and finding in a Ditch by the way side, at the said Towns end, one
Catherine Huxley, a single Woman, aged then about forty years (as is supposed
easing nature) the Children called her Witch, and took up stones to throw at
her, the said Mary also called her Witch, and took up a stone, but was so
affrighted, that she could not throw it at her; then they all run away from
her, and the said Mary being hindmost, this Huxley said to her [ Ellins, you
shall have stones enough in your -- ] whereupon Mary fell that day very ill,
and continued so weak and Languishing that her Friends feared she would not.
recover; but about a Month after, she began to void stones by the urinary
passages, and some little urine came away from her; also when she voided any
stone, and the stone she voided, was heard by those that were by her, to drop
into the Pot or Basin, and she had most grievous pains in her Back and Reins,
like the pricking of Pins, the number of the stones she voided, was about
eighty, some plain pebbles, some plain flints, some very small, and some about
an ounce weight; this she did for some space, (a month or two, or there abouts)
until upon some strong suspicions of Witchcraft, the forenamed Huxley was
Apprehended, Examined and Searched (at whose Beds Head there was found several
stones, such as the said Mary voided) and was sent to Worcester, where at the
Summer Assizes in the said year 1652. (then at hand) she was upon the
Prosecution of the Friends of the said Mary, Condemned and Executed; upon whose
Apprehension and Commitment, Mary ceased to void any more stones; but for a
while, voided much blackish and muddy Sand, and also, in short time perfectly
recovered, and is yet living in the Town, in good and honest Repute, and has
been many years Married, and has had seven Children; but never voided any
stones since, nor been troubled with the pain forementioned, Abundance of
people yet living, know the Substance of this to be true, and her Mother in Law
(since dead) kept the stones till she was tired with the frequent Resort of
people to see them, and the said Mary, and to hear the Relation of the matter,
and beg the stones (for though many offered Money for them, yet she always
refused it, nor did they ever take any, but it cost them much upon the Girl,
and the Prosecution of the said Huxley) and then she buried them in her Garden,
Edward Ellins, the Father of the said Mary, is also yet living, and a Man of
honest Repute, and utterly free (as also is the said Mary, and all the rest of
her Friends) from the least Suspicion of any Fraud or Cheat in the whole
business: This was known to hundreds of People in the said Town, and parts
Adjacent, and many of them yet living, are ready to attest the truth of it.

X. In 1645, in Dorset-shire, I lodged at a Village on a Hill, called (I think)
Evershot, in the House of the Minister, a grave Man, who had with him a Son,
also a Learned Minister, that had been Chaplain to Sir Tho. Adams in London:
They both told me, that they had a Neighbor that had long lain Bedridden, that
told all the occasion; That for a long time, being a poor Laboring Man, every
Morning when he went out of his Door, he found a Shilling under his Door, of
which he ^^ld no one, so that in a long time, he buying some Sheep or Swine,
and seeming Rich, his Neighbors marvelled how be came by it: At last he told
them, and was suddenly struck Lame and Bedridden. They would have had me speak
with the Man; but the Snow covering the Ground, and I being ill, and the
Witnesses fully Credible, I forbore.

XII. I had the last Week this following Letter sent me, from, and by most
Credible Wise and Pious Persons of Devonshire, from Exeter.

Nathan the Son of Mr. Zacheus Crab, Dyer, without Westgate, had Convulsion and
Falling-Fits about nine Years since: He was a Youth well known to the late Mr.
Robert Atkins the Minister who th^^ght him one very hopeful for Religion Going
from one of his Meeting this Youth was first taken, having (...) came to his
Masters House. (...) ed him, he seemed to be pash'd as it some body tript up
his Heels, and fell forth upon his Hands, but rose again presently. Some weeks
after he had Falling-fits, with foaming at Mouth; thus he continued a Year and
half before any means were used suspected for Witchcraft. After this, hearing
of one Gibs, Mr. Crab, the Father of this Youth, and his Daughter, the Youth's
Sister, went together to Mr. Gibs for help for the Youth. They went once every
Week for a Month with the Youth's Water; the last Week of the Month the Sister
asked, what Mr. Gibs thought now of the Cure? (they went to him in the
beginning of the Week) he said, that weeks Papers of Powder would make a
perfect Cure, but there would be an alteration, that he would have two or three
panging fits different from the former, which things fell out as he said. When
this last Week of the Month was over, they had a Debate, whether they should go
to Mr. Gibs again, at length they concluded to go, and went on the beginning of
the fifth Week with his Water. Gibs then told them, Since you are come to me
again, I will give you that shall make a perfect Cure, that you shall need come
to me no more: then he gave them a Bag to hang about the Youth's Neck, and
Powder to take in White wine for one weeks time: Order was given by him, when
the Youth had worn the Collar about his Neck for a while, the Youth should take
it off himself, and burn it: but Mr. Elson, the Boy's Master, took off the
Collar after it had been on two Days and a Night, and showed it to some, to
inquire, whether it were not a charm? there being nothing in the Collar but a
Paper with this writing, Callen Dan Dant, Dan Dant Callen, Dan Callen Dant.



Mr. Elson kept the Paper by him after 'twas taken from the Boy's Neck, about
eighteen Weeks, not suffering it to be applied again, being told that it seemed
to be a mere Charm; and the Boy being asked, if he were content to have his
Fits again rather than have a Cure from the Devil, who would not cure his Body
without greater prejudice to his Soul, than his Bodily Distemper could be
reckoned? he very readily answered, he would rather choose to have his Fits
again, and would leave himself to the Hands of God, for his Disease or Cure.

When this Distemper left him for the Eighteen Weeks, he returned considerably
to his Senses and Memory, beyond what he had before, particularly to be able to
sort Wool at his Trade, which he had not been able to do in a Year and quarter
before. About the Sixth Week of these Eighteen, the Father went to Mr. Gibs
again, and told him how the Note was taken off, and that several had the sight
of it; Gibs then said, If the Fits do return again, he will be worse than ever,
and at their return he should be able to do him no good. His Fits at the return
were indeed far more terrible than before, and much of another kind than those
of other Persons in the Fallen-sickness: And these Fits did return to him about
18 or 19 VVeeks after they ceased, upon a Shrove-Tuesday: Mr. Elson inquiring
into the time when they returned, said, it was when he threw the Paper that ha^
been about the Youth's Neck, into the Fir^ and burnt it, unwilling to keep such
a thing any longer. This Gibs has the general repute of a VVizard, and his
Father before him. The Youth has a long time been utterly deprived of the use
of his Reason, and is clothed, and otherwise used as a mee^ Natural; and his
Fits so dreadful, that Persons are afraid to behold him.

After the return of his Fits, he was pu^ to one Yoe's in St. Thomas's, where
h^ wrought at his Trade of VVorsted-combing, and some means were used for his
Fits which he pretended to have some Skill in curing, whose Means were used
about a Month without any success; then and ther^ being at his Work, and some
signs appearing of an approaching Fit, they set him o^ a Stool, thence he fell
in a Fit, and brak^ his Leg, the main Bone, in two pieces, another Bone in many
pieces. Then he wa^ brought home to his Father's House; and the Bones being
set, the Chyrurgion said, i^ he should have another Fit his Cure would be
impossible; he lay about a Month o^ five VVeeks very free from Fits, till his
Bones were so well knit, that he could walk abroad with Crutches, which he did
for a while, and then his Fits returned in the same manner as before his Bone
was broken.

After his Leg was well recovered, he was carried to Mr. Pridham of Morchard,
he prescribed Means, which he hoped would do him good, if there were any
alteration by the use of his Pills which he then gave him to carry with him,
and take when he came home: but before the Pills, he had ordered a Vomit to be
taken, in the working of which, they thought he would die. Then they gave him
the Pills which, after they had stayed above an Hour in his Stomach, he vomited
them up as they were taken; which were put up again in the Box, and showed to
Mr. Pridham, who said, If they had been given to a Child of two Months old,
they would have been digest^ed in half an Hour. Upon hearing the whole, he
said, certainly there is something extraordinary in the case. Being asked if he
could do him no good, he said, he did not question but he could, but being a
Minister he feared he should lose his Benefice by Peoples saying he was a
VVhite-VVitch.

The Youth's Mother apprehended, that Mr. Staddon dropped some such words that
her Son was bewitched or possessed, or somewhat to that purpose, who went
through a Course of Physic with the Youth, and found nothing did answer
Expectation.

For some Years the Youth has been much prejudiced in his Speech; sometimes he
cannot speak at all, but is as one dumb for a Week or Fortnight together: He
speaks plain enough between, but when be has the Dumb Fits he can hardly move
his Tongue in his Mouth; and he is generally so deprived of Reason, that he is
clad, and otherwise used as a mere Idiot.

This Narrative was taken in the beginning of April 1688.

Memorandum, The Youth continues in the same condition till this 27 th of
September, 1689.

XIII. Though I collect much written heretofore, I must not transcribe other Men's
Books; I here desire the Reader to read in Dr. Sinclare's Book, called [
Satan's Invisible World] among 36 Histories, the X. called The Devil of
Genluce, where he will find such another Case as that of the Devil of Mascon;
where the Spirit, besides other Acts o^ Molestation and Violence, for a long
time continued familiar talking to Men, before so many Witnesses, as leaves
the truth o^ the History unquestionable.

XIV. The Hanging of a great number o^ Witches in Suffolk and Essex, by the
discovery of one Hopkins, in 1645 and 1646 i^ famously known. Mr. Calamy went
along with the Judges in the Circuit, to hea^ their Confessions, and see that
there were no Fraud or Wrong done them. I spoke with many Understanding, Pious
and Credible Persons that lived in the Countries, and some that went to them to
the Prisons, and heard their sad Confessions. Among the rest, an old Reading
Parson, named Lowis, not far from Franlingham, was one that was Hanged; who
confessed, that he had two Imps, and that one of them was always putting him on
doing Mischief; and (he being near the Sea, as he saw a Ship under Sail, it
moved him to send him to sink the Ship, and he consented, and saw the Ship sink
before him. One Penitent Woman confessed, that her Mother lying sick, and she
looking to her, somewhat like a Mole ran in to the Bed to her, which she being
startled at, her Mother bid her not fear it, but gave it her; saying, Keep this
in a Pot by the Fire, etc. and thou shall never want: She did as she was bid,
shortly after a poor Boy (seemingly) came in, and asked leave to sit and warm
him at the Fire, and when he was gone, she found Money under the Stool; and
afterward often did so again, and at last laid hold of her, and drew Blood of
her, and she made no other Compact with the Devil, but that her Imps sucked her
Blood; and as I heard, she was delivered. Abundance of sad Confessions were
made by them, by which some testified, that there are certain Punishments that
they were to undergo, if they did not some hurt as was appointed them.

And in Lancashire, long ago, many Witches were Convict.

That published by Edmond Bower near Salisbury, is remarkable: I refer the
Reader to the printed Narrative.

XV. I will next insert a late Fact not far off, which when a Pious Credible
Person related to me, I desired him to send me the true Narrative in Writing
when he came Home, and fully enquired into the matter: And he sent me this
Narrative here following.

At Brightling in Suffex.

As touching the Relation of the Brightling Story, which is in the Substance
undoubtedly true, however some Circumstances of it may vary, be pleased to take
the following Account.

On Monday was three Weeks, at, or near the House of Joseph Cruttenden of
Brightling, an old Woman about Noon came to a Servant Girl of the said
Cruttenden's tells her, sad Calamities were coming upon her Master and Dame,
their House should be Fired, and many other troubles befall them; but tells this
Girl withal, That if she spoke of what she had told her, the Devil would tear
her to pieces, otherwise she need not fear, for no hurt should come to her: The
same Night, as the Man and Woman lay in Bed, Dirt and Dust, etc. was thrown at
them, but they could not tell whence it came: They rise and Pray, during which
that Disturbance ceases; some say they went to Bed again, but finding the same
trouble they are forced to rise Tuesday about Noon, Dust, Dirt, and several
things are thrown at them again; before Night, a part of one end of their House
Fired; they rake it down, it flashes somewhat like Gunpowder; as they stopped it
there, it began in another place, and thence to another, till the whole House
was burnt down. Some say some thing like a Black Bull was seen tumbling about;
the certainty of that I aver not. The House, though it burnt down to the Ground
it flamed not: The Night was spent in carrying Goods, or one thing or other
from one place to anothe; they I think, remaining mostly without Doors.
Thursday Col. Busbridge ^whose House the former was) being acquainted with the
Man's sad Accident, bid them go into another of his Houses in the Parish
whither, when the Goods were brought, such like Disturbances were there also;
the House Fireth, endeavors are made by many to quench it, but in vain, till
the Goods are thrown out, when it ceased with little or no help. In this
condition none durst let them into their Doors; they abide under a Hut; the
Goods are thrown upside down, Peuter-dishes, Knives, Brickbrats strike them,
but hurt them not: Mr. Bennet and Mr. Bradshaw, Ministers, came to Pray with
them, when a Knife glanced by the Breast of Mr. Bennet, ^ Bowl or Dish thrown
at his Back, but while at Prayers quiet; they were without Doors, there being
very many present, a Wooden Tut came flying out of the Air, by many, and came
and struck the Man; as likewise a Horse-shoe, which was by some laid away, and
it was observed of its own accord to rise again and fly to the Man, and struck
him in the midst of a hundred People: Upon strict Examination the Man
confesses, that he had been a Thief, and did it under the color of Religion.
Sabbath Day the Girl told her Dame the former Story of the Woman's Discourse;
she is sent for, and Examined before Captain Collins, Mr. Busbridge, and she is
searched and watched 24 Hours: the Girl says, she is like the Woman, but I
think will not swear it is the same. This Woman was formerly suspected to be a
Witch, had to Maidstone about it, but got away, and has lived about Burwast
some time since; her Name I know not: Tuesday Four Ministers kept a Fast, Mr.
Bennet, Weller, Bradshaw and Golden; since I hear not of any trouble. It Is said
they are in a Barn or Alehouse; while they lay without Doors, the Woman
sending some Meal to a Neighbors to make Bread, they could not make it up into
Loaves, but it was like Butter, and so they put it into the Oven, but it would
not bake, but came out as it went in. This Relation came from Mr. Collins, who
was an Eyewitness of much of it.

XVI. About twenty Years past, when I was in the Lord Broghill's (now Earl of
Orery's) Lodgings in London, one Night he brought me the Report, that one of
Cromwell's Soldiers being on his Watch, near the Chapel of St. James's House,
something came toward him in an affrightening shape, and he calling out,
Stand, stand, or I will shoot you, at last discharging, it ran upon him, and
threw him over the way far off; and that it had been that day Examined, and
affirmed confidently; and what became of the Report of it afterward, I know
not, save that it was said to happen often. But on this occasion the Earl of
Orery (yet living) told me, as follows, That Colonel Venables (then going for
Hispaniola, with the Soldiers that were there Repulsed and took Iamaica) had a
Soldier in his Army that came out of Ireland, and was under Colonel Hill, who
was then in London, and would attest this following. viz. That this Soldier
looked pale and sad, and pined, and the cause was unknown: At last he came to
Colonel Hill with his Confession, that he had bin a Servant in England, (as I
remember, to one that carried Stockins and such ware about to sell) and for his
Money, he had Murdered his Master, and buried him in such a place: And flying
into Ireland, listed himself his Soldier, and that of a long time, when ever
he lay alone, somewhat like a headless Man, stood by his Bed, saying to him, [
Will thou yet confess?] And in this case of fear he had continued, till lately
it appeared to him when he had a Bedfellow (which it never did before) and
said as before [ Will thou yet confess] and now seeing no hope of longer
Concealing it, he Confessed: And as I remember, his going to Hispaniola was his
punishment, in stead of Death, where vengeance followed him.) This he offered
then to bring Colonel Hill to me to attest, (since the Writing of this, the
Earl of Orery is dead.)

XVI Simon Jones, a Strong and healthful Man of Kederminster (no way inclined
to Melancholy or any Fancies) has often told me, that being a Soldier for the
King in the War against the Parliament, in a clear Moonshine Night, as he
stood Sentinel in the College Green at Worcester, something like a headless
Bear, appeared to him; and so affrighted him, that he laid down his Arms soon
after, and returned home to his Trade, and while I was there afterward, which
was fourteen years, lived Honestly, Religiously, and without blame, and I think
is yet living, which minds me of that which follows, though to me not known.

XVII. When I was young, most credible and religious persons born in
Wilden-Hall near Wolver-hampton in Staffordshire, often told me (dwelling with
me in the same House) that one Richard White a Smith of Wilden-Hall, was a
profane Atheistical Man, and believing that there was no Devils, in his Cups
would wish he could once see the Devil, if there were such a thing; and that
suddenly he changed his Life, and became a professor of zeal, and strictness in
Religion, and told them, that in a clear Moonshine Night. the Devil in the
shape of a great ugly Man, stood by his Bed side, opening the Curtains, and
looking him in the Face, and at last took up the Blanket; and sometime smiled
on him, and then was more ugly, and after a while (in which he lay in great
Terror) the Apparition Vanished, and he was affrighted into the aforesaid
change of Life (as Bruno is said to be the Founder of the Order of Carthusian
Friars.

XVIII. My dear Friend Mr. Hopkins (Father to my Faithful Brother Mr. George
Hopkins Minister at Eversham, till ejected, Aug. 24 1662. and Grandfather to
Dr. Hopkins, lately Preacher at Laurences) a chief Magistrate of Bewdley, and
since a Member of the Long Parliament, often pained as he thought with the
Spleen, but not at all Meclancholy, came to me at Mr. Hanburyes, the last time
before I was driven out of the County, and as a great secrettold me, that he
was possessed (meaning, I think Bewitched): I chid him, as Fanciful and
Melancholy: But he without any show of Melancholy, affirmed, that it was
certainly true: I could not stay with him, and never saw him more. But he long
continued in pain and that Conceit, and before he dyed, a piece of Wood came
down into the rectum intestinum, which they were fain to pull out with their
Fingers His good Wife told me, it was of the length of ones finger: And that he
and they were sure that he never swallowed any such thing. The best Men it
seems may be thus Afflicted, as Job by Satan.

XVIII. There is now in London an understanding, sober, pious Man, often one of
my Hearers, who has an elder Brother, a Gentleman of considerable Rank, who
having formerly seemed pious, of late Years does often fall into the Sin of
Drunkenness: He often lodges long together here, in this his Brother's House:
And whenever he is drunken, and has slept himself sober, something knocks at
his Bed's Head, as if one knocked on a Wainscot; when they remove his Bed, it
follows him: Besides loud Noises on other Parts where he is, that all the
House hears. They have often watched, and kept his Hands, left he should do it
himself. His Brother has often told it me, and brought his Wife (a discreet
Woman) to attest it; who averreth moreover, that as she watched him, she has
seen his Shoes under the Bed taken up, and nothing visible touch them. They
brought to me the Man himself, and when we ask him how he dare so sin again,
after such a Warning, he has no Excuse. But being Persons of Quality, for some
special Reason of Worldly Interest, I must not name him.

Two things are remarkable in this Instance. 1. What a powerful thing
Temptation and Fleshly Concupiscence is, and what a hardened Heart Sin brings
Men to: If one rose from the Dead to warn such Sinners, it would not of it self
persuade them.

2. It poseth me to think what kind of Spirit this is, that has such a Care of
this Man's Soul, (which makes me hope he will recover.) Do good Spirits dwell
so near us? Or are they sent on such Messages? Or is it his Guardian Angel? Or
is it the Soul of some dead Friend, that suffers, and yet, retaining Love to
him, as Dives to his Brethren, would have him saved? God yet keeps such
things from us, in the dark.

XIX. There is now in London a Youth, (the Son of a very Godly Conforming
Minister,) who reading a Book of that called Conjuration, coming to the Words
and Actions which the Book said would cause the Devil to appear, was presently
very desirous to try, and desirous that the Apparition might be accordingly. He
came to me in Terror, having before opened his Case to a Parish-Minister, and
affirmed to me, that the Devil has appeared to him, and solicited him with a
Knife to cut his Throat, and told him, he must do it suddenly, for he would
stay no longer. I told him how safe he was, if he truly repented, and begged
Pardon through Christ, and would resolvedly renew his Baptismal Covenant, and
renounce the Devil, and live as truly devoted to God and our Redeemer: And I
have heard from him no more, but must not name him.

This shows what Power Satan gets, if Men do but consent: For I had a very
Godly Friend, that a Week ago told me, that he read Cornelius Agrip^a's Occulta
Philosophia, and read the same Words that he says will raise Devils, but with
no Desire, but a Detestation of Success, and of the Book, and nothing appeared
to him.

XX. Mr. Samuel Clark has published the Apparition to Mr. White of Dorchester,
Assessor to the Westminster-Assembly, at Lambeth. The Devil, in a light Night,
stood by his Bedside: He looked a while whether he would say or do any thing,
and then said, If thou have nothing else to do, I have; and so turned himself
to sleep. Many say it from Mr. White himself.

XXI. This following I had from one of unquestionable Credit.

Amongst other things, I called to Mind a Story sent me in a Letter from
Cambridge, that Week it was done, in 1661, or 1662. and I did verily believe,
and do still, that Mr. Illingworth sent it me, but he could not reflect it;
however, Mr. Cooper hearing it told it was a great Truth, he heard Mr.
Franklin, a Minister of Wood-Rising, in this County, twelve Miles from this
City, Father to the Child, tell it to Sir Philip Woodhouse. Mr. Franklin (his
Character, farther than that of a Minister of the Church of England, I cannot
give you) was then Minister of a Town (whose Name I know not) in the Isle of
Ely, and upon this Account which I shall tell you, removed to WoodRising in
this County.

This Man had a Child, to which a Spirit often appeared at his Father's House;
and grew so bold and free, as very ordinarily to come in whilst Company was in
the House, and Franklin in the Room, and sit down by the Boy. At due Years,
about the Year 1661, or 1662. he was bound an Apprentice to a Barber in
Cambridge, (or at least with him as a Probationer.) One Night the Spirit
appeared to him in the usual Habit of a Gentlewoman, and would have persuaded
him to go home again, asking him what he did there? etc. The Boy, after some
Treaty, replied, He would not go. Upon which, he received a great Blow on the
Ear, and grew very ill, but rose. Being and continuing ill, his Master
presently horseth, and rides to acquaint his Father. In the Forenoon of that
Day, the Boy sitting by the Kitchin-fire, his Mistress being by, suddenly cries
out, O Mistress! Look: There Is the Gentlewoman. The Woman turns to look, sees
nothing; but while her Head was turned, hears a Noise as of a great Box on the
Ear; turns, sees the Boy bending down his Neck, and he presently died. About
the same Hour, so near as they could guess, the Master was sitting at Dinner in
the Isle of Ely, with the Father: The Appearance of a Gentlewoman comes in,
looking angrily, taking a Turn or two, disappeared.

Thus I remember the Story came, in three Days after it was done, to me.

Mr. Cooper this Afternoon confirms it, as heard by him from Mr. Franklin
himself: Adding, the poor Man was so affected, that he seemed almost stupid.

XXIII. From a credible Person I had this following Account.

In the Year 1665. Elizabeth Brooker, Servant to Mrs. Hieron of Honyton, in the
County of Devon, as she was serving in Dinner one Lord's Day, suddenly felt a
pricking, as of a Pin, in her Thigh, but did not think there could be any such
thing; yet looking, ^he found indeed that a Pin was there, got within her Skin,
but without drawing any Blood, or breaking the Skin, or making any hole or sign
at all; and it was got so far within her Flesh, that she could hardly ^eel the
Head of it with her Finger, but ^et she did plainly enough perceive that it was
a Pin; so it continued the remaining part of that Day. The next Day she felt
^ut little pain: The Tuesday she was much pained, and the Pin wrought so far
into her Flesh, that she could no longer feel it with her Fingers. The
Wednesday she went to Exeter, that she might have the Advice of Mr. Anthony
Smith, a Surgeon there, of great Reputation. He, upon examining the place,
would not believe that any Pin was there, there being no Skin broken, no
Swelling, nor any other thing by which he might perceive the least Token of any
such matter. However, upon her confident and constant affirming there was a
Pin, he made an Incision; and searching with an Instrument, at length found the
Pin, and took it out: It was a little crooked, and of the larger sort of small
Pins. He presently made Applications for the Cure of the Wound, which in about
three Weeks time was effected.

The Day before this happened, the Woman had an unknown Person asked a Pin of
her, which she denied her, but did not suspect her. And another Woman, Agnes
Richardson, who was suspected, was angry with her, for blaming her about
Miscarriage in an Errand that she sent her on.

A true Relation from Honyton, in the County of Devon, concerning Witchcraft.
Kingston upon Thames, Sept. 6. 1681.
ABout nine or ten Years since, in the House of Mrs. Hieron, of Honyton, Widow,
there happened this strange Instance of Witchcraft following.

This Widow Hieron, a Person of good Quality, kept a Mercer's Shop, and (I
think) does to this day, in Honyton. She had a Maidservant, Elizabeth Brooker
by Name, who sold Small Wares in a Stall before her Mistresses Door. On
Saturday, which was their Market Day, a certain Woman of Honyton Town came to
the said Elizabeth Brooker, (selling Wares at the Stall aforesaid), and asked
her for a Pin. The Maid readily gave her a Pin from her Sleeve; but this Pin
did not satisfy, she would have a Pin of a bigger sort, out of a Paper which
hung up to sell. The Maid told her, those Pins were not hers to give, she must
ask her Mistress; and when she had Orders, she would give her her Desire. The
Woman asked her again, and again; and Elizabeth did as often deny. The Woman
went away in a great Fume and Rage, and told the Maid, she should hear farther
from her, she would ever long wish she had given her the Pin she desired; with
many threatening Speeches, which the Maid took little notice of, (though the
Woman was of an ill Report) Now, the next Day being the Lord's Day, while her
Mistress and the Family were at Dinner, and Elizabeth Brooker waiting at the
Table, on a sudden the Maid gave a very great Cry, and told them, she had a Pin
thrust into her Thigh, which few of the Family did believe, knowing there was
no Person in the Room beside her self, and the Family, who all sat at Meat,
she only standing to attend them. Her Mistress arose from Table, and Mr. Samuel
Hieron's Wife, (who was then living.) She was forced to go to Bed; they sent
for a Midwife of the Town, who had skill in Sores and Wounds: She saw there had
been some small Hurt in the Skin, but the Pin was out of sight; and feeling so
as to understand what it was, or exactly where, the Midwife applied her rare
Plaster of Venice-Turpentine all that Night, and many other things the next
Day, but the Pain was still the same. On the Tuesday they advised with Mr.
Salter, a skilful Apothecary in the Town, who advised them well, whose Counsel
they followed, but all in vain. On Wednesday, the same Week, they, with great
Trouble and Pain, brought her to Exeter, and lodged her at Mr. John Hoppin's, a
worthy Minister of the Gospel, who lived in Gaudies-Lane. They called me to
her, to advise what to do to ease her Pain. I designed a Suppurative Cataplasm,
but nothing would satisfy the Maid, but cutting of it out; which was somewhat
difficult, because it was hard to find the place exactly, where to make the
Incision; but the Courage of the Patient did greatly promote the Operation. I
made a large Incision, according to the length of the Muscles; and though I
could find no sign of the Pin upon the first Incision, yet by putting my
Incision-knife obliquely, I felt the Pin, and brought it out, near an Inch
within the Cutis; and upon that there was great Ease, and in fifteen Days the
Sore was whole. This Operation was performed in the presence of Mrs. Hoppin,
Mrs. Gold, Mrs. Ford, and many worthy Persons, of good Reputation. And I dare
presume, If this Paper be sent to Honyton, to Mr. Samuel Hieron, Minister of
the Gospel, he will have it sufficiently attested concerning the first part of
the Story, and none can tell the second part better than my self, who performed
the Operation: And the Truth of that I give under my Hand this 6th Day of
September, Anno Dom. 1681.

Anthony Smith, Chyrurgus Kingston.

XXIV. One born in the same Town, now living in London, in a Journey, Anno
1664. lodged at an Inn in Culmstock, in the same County. He went to Bed between
Ten and Eleven of the Clock, and soon fell asleep, not having any Apprehensions
concerning the House or Chamber: When he awaked, he found himself laid out in
the Floor, at some distance from the Bed, by the side of a Table, the
Bed-Cloaths, and his own Wearing Clothes, all upon him, just in the same manner
as he laid them when going to Bed; having nothing at all under him, by which he
got an extreme Cold; and besides, his Leg and Arm next the Table were sorely
bruised. Being awake, he began to think where he was, but soon recollected
himself, and by the Light of the Moon, which then shone very bright, he
discerned the Bed; and putting on the Clothes upon the Bed, laid him down
again, and slept the remaining part of the Night very quietly. Soon after his
being in Bed this second time, the Town-Clock struck Twelve. He never was out
of his Bed in his Sleep before or since; and soon after he came to understand
that the Chamber was reputed to be haunted.

Mr. Charles Hatt's Letter, concerning an House being haunted at Kinton, in
Worcestershire, in the Year 1667.
Worthy Sir,
ACcording to your Desire, and my Promise when I was with you about a Fortnight
since, with Mrs. Wilson, concerning a Man's House in Kinton (six Miles from
Worcester) being sorely troubled, about the latter end of the Year 1667. to the
best of my Remembrance, viz.

I living at Benington, near Auster, in Warwickshire, Workmen come from Kinton,
acquainted me of an House sorely haunted, naming the Person to me, (which I
have now forgot.) I being desirous to see or hear such things, went to the said
House; but finding only a Maid there a spinning, I asked for her Master. She
told me, the Spirit (to the best of my remembrance she called it so) had boxed
him about the Ears, as he sat by the Fire^ (...) against her; upon which, he
cried out, and went away to a Son's of his in the (...) Town, a little before I
came. I (...) to the said Man, desired him to come home He seemed unwilling,
telling me how he was abused by it, and that in the Night it would often pull
him out of the Bed, and did so torment him, that he was a weary of his Life.
But getting him home, he sat him down about the same place, near the Fire, and
I sat over against him, discoursing how he was troubled. He told me, several
had been with him; as the Minister of the place, (to my best remembrance.) They
bid him pray, pray: But he found no Relief. I told him, I knew no other way
than by seeking to the Lord, and not to speak slightly of Prayer. He told me, I
might hear it before I went. I had not been long, but there was a great Noise
in the said Room, of Groaning, or rather Gruntling, like a Hog, and then gave a
loud Shriek. Here it is, says the Man. I was much concerned upon the hearing
of it; so recalling my self, I desired to go to Prayer in the next Room, where
the Man used to lie. By this time many of the Towns-People came in, and were at
Duty. About the middle of Duty, the aforesaid Noise came, as I thought, louder,
and just by me; however, I then was not concerned. Afterward, having some
Discourse with the Man about a Month after, I heard from him, that it did no
more trouble him, nor to his Death. He lived, as I remember, two Years after.
This is the best and truest Account I can give. I rest,

SIR, Your Christian Friend to command, Charles Hatt's.
Gingraff, May 16. 1691. POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Spoke to my Lady Rich, concerning a Voice that Mr. Tiro heard, acquainting
him of his Death. If you remember, I told you of him, and you desired an
Account of it. He was a Nonconformist Minister, of Vnger, in Essex: My Lady
will send you the Account of it. This Mr. Tiro had an extraordinary Love for
you.

Vale, C.H.



CHAP. III.
MR. John Humphreys, brought Mr. May Hill to me, with a Bag of Irons, Nails and
Brass, vomited by the Girl. I keep some of them to show: Nails about three or
four inches long, doubled crooked at the end, and pieces of old Brass doubled,
about an Inch broad, and two or three Inches long, with crooked edges: I
desired him to give me the Case in Writing, which he has done as follows:
Any one that is incredulous, may now at Beckington receive Satisfaction from
him, and from the Maid her self.

In the Town of Beckington, by Froome in Somersetshire, lives Mary Hill, a
Maid of about Eighteen years of Age, who having lived very much in the Neglect
of her Duty to God, was some time before Michaelmas last past was Twelvemonth,
taken very ill, and being seized with violent Fits, began to Vomit up about two
hundred crooked Pins. This so Stupendous an Accident, drew a numerous Concourse
of People to see her: To whom when in her Fits, she did constantly affirm, that
she saw against the Wall of the Room: Wherein she lay, an old Woman named
Elizabeth Carrier, who thereupon being Apprehended by a Warrant from a Justice
of Peace, and Convicted by the Oaths of two Persons, was committed to the
County Goal.

About a Fortnight after, she began to Vomit up Nails, Pieces of Nails, Pieces
of Brass, Handles of Spoons, and so continued to do for the space of six Months
and upwards: And in her fits, she said there did appear to her an old Woman,
Named Margery Coombes, and one Ann More; who also by a Warrant from two
Justices of the Peace, were Apprehended and brought to the Sessions held at
Brewton for the County, and by the Bench committed to the County Goal: The
former of these dyed as soon as she came into Prison, the other two were Tried
at Taunton Assizes, by my Lord Chief Justice Holt, and for want of Evidence,
were acquitted by the Jury. The Persons bound over to give Evidence, were
Susanna Belton, and Ann Holland, who upon their Oaths Deposited, that they
hookt out of the Navel of the said Mary Hill, as she lay in a dead fit, crooked
Pins, small Nails, and small pieces of Brass, which were produced in Court
before the Judge, and from him handed to the Jury to look upon them. Whereupon
Mr. Francis Iesse, and Mr. Christopher Brewer declared, that they had seen the
said Mary Hill to Vomit up at several times Crooked Pins, Nails, and Pieces of
Brass, which they also produced in open Court, and to the end, they might be
ascertained it was no Imposture, they declared, they had searched her Mouth
with their Fingers before she did Vomit.

Upon which the Court thought fit to call for me, who am the Minister of the
Parish, to testify the Knowledge of the matter, which I did to this Effect,
that I had seen her at several times, after having given her alittle small
Beer, Vomit up Crooked Pins, Nails, and Pieces of Brass. That to prevent the
Supposition of a Cheat, I had caused her to be brought to a Window, and having
looked into her Mouth, I searched it with my Finger, as I did the Beer before she
drank it. This I did, that I might not be wanting in Circumstantial Answers, to
what my Lord and Court might propose.

I well remember, a Gentleman on a Saturday came to my House (Incognito) to
know of me the truth of the Country Report about this Maid, having seen some of
the Nails, etc. she had Vomited up. I told him it was very true, and if he
would stay in Town till the Morning, he might see it himself, for his own
Satisfaction. Which he did, and early in the Morning, was called to see her.
But because Beer was not given her when she wanted it, she lay in a very
Deplorable Condition, till past two in the Afternoon; when with much
Difficulty, she brought up a piece of Brass, which the said Gentleman took away
with him. Though before the said Piece of Brass came up, he told me he was
satisfied of the Truth of the thing, because it was impossible for any Mortal
to Counterfeit her miserable Condition. She sometimes lying in a dead Fit, with
her Tongue swelled out of her Head, and then reviving, she would fall to
Vomiting, but nothing came up till about two a Clock in the Afternoon. Nay, so
curious was he to Anticipate any Cheat, that he searched her Mouth himself, gave
her the Bear, held her up in his hand, and likewise the Basin, into which she
Vomited, and continued with her all this time, without eating and drinking,
which was about eight hours, that he might be an Eyewitness of the Truth of
it. Nay, further, he found the Maid living only with a Brother, and three poor
Sisters, all young Persons, and very honest, and the Maid kept at the Charge of
the Parish, were sufficient Testimonies they were incapable of making a Cheat
of it. The Gentleman I now mentioned, was, (as I afterward learnt) Esquire
Player of Castle-Cary.

I have often wondered how it was possible for all that Trumpery to be conveyed
into her Body, which at Intervals, she cast up. I therefore made all the
Observation I could to satisfy my self and others. I found that those things
which she brought up in the Morning, were conveyed into her Body by some
Diabolical Power, when she was in Bed at Night. What induced me easily to
believe this, was, by considering these following Circumstances.

1. That it was only in the Morning, that she Vomited up Nails, etc. and scarce
did any thing in the Afternoon.

2. I found by Enquiry, that she always slept with her Mouth open, and could
not help it, and when asleep, she could not be awakened either by calling,
jogging or pulling of her, for some considerable time; though at the same time,
she fetched such deep and painful Groans, as if she were awaked, and sensible of
her sad Condition.

3. For my Farther Satisfaction, I got some at my own Charge to sit up at
Nights with her, and watch her Mouth, and to see it was kept close shut. Whilst
this was done, the Vomiting of Nails ceased, and that for thirteen Nights
Successively; but when it was neglected, she would be sure to bring up
something of Nails, or some such stuff. I then had her lodged at a Neighbors
House, to see whether her Vomiting of Nails would totally cease, but it did
not. For coming one day to my House, to refresh her self, she had not bin there
two Hours, before she began to be ill, we immediately gave her some Beer, and
she Vomited up a great board Nail. Some time after this, she threw up a great
piece of Brass, which I saw followed with much Blood, and she being extremely
weakened with striving, and falling into a Fit, I caused a Woman to open her
Mouth, who took out as much Blood, as she could hold in the hollow of her hand.

After the Assizes aforementioned was ended, and she was turned home, she grew
worse than ever, by Vomiting of Nails, Pieces of Glass, etc. And falling one
day into a Violent Fit, she was swelled to an extraordinary bigness, some Beer
being given her, she throws up several Pieces of Bread and Butter, besmeared
with a Poisonous matter, which I judged to be white Mercury. This so much
affrighted the Neighbors, that they would come no more near her. So that one
day, she being taken desperate ill, I was sent for to pray with her, and
Compassionating the Deplorableness of her Condition, I at last resolved to take
her into my own House, where in some short time, the Vomiting ceased; though
for some space, her Distorting Fits followed her. But, blessed be God, is now,
and has been for a considerable time last past in very good health, and fit for
a Service.

May Hill Minister of Beckington, In the County of Somerset. April 4. 1691.
II. They that will read Mr. Increase Mathers Book, and especially his Sons,
Mr. Cotton Mathers Book of the Witchcrafts in New England, may see enough to
Silence any Incredulity that pretends to be Rational.

Mr. Emlin a Preacher now in Dublin, told me the Story of the Bewitching of two
Gentlewoman, Sisters to Mr. Pacy, now a Pious Justice in Lestoft in Suffolk.
He and his Sisters now Married, are all yet living: They were used much like
those in New England, mentioned by Mr. Cotton Mather, being Children then about
nine and eleven years old: But I understand that the Story is in Print, and it
is also in M.S. from Judge Hale himself, who Condemned the Witch, (which no Man
was more backward to do, without full Evidence.) A Lady of my Acquaintance,
has it under his Hand. Therefore I forbear the particulars: Only one odd
passage that Mr. Emlin told me I shall recite. A Godly Minister yet living,
sitting by to see one of the Girls in her fits, suddenly felt a force pull one
of the Hooks from his Breeches: And while he looked, with wonder what was
become of it, the Tormented Girl, Vomited it up out of her Mouth: Any that
doubts of this Story, may be satisfied of Mr. Pacy, and both his Sisters yet
living, and may know all the Evidences and Circumstances which I pass over.

CHAP. IV. Instances sent me from the Duke of Lauderdale: (More in other
Letters of his I gave away, and some Books of Foreign Wonders he sent me.)
SIR,
IT is sad that the Sadducean, or rather Atheistical denying of Spirits, or
their Apparitions should so far prevail; and sadder, that the clear Testimonies
of so many Ancient and Modern Authors should not convince them. But why should
I wonder, if those who believe not Moses and the Prophets, will not believe
though one should rise from the Dead? One great cause of the hardening of those
Infidels, is, the frequent Impostures which the Romanists obtrude on the World
in their Exorcisms and pretended Miracles. Another is the too great Credulity
of some who make every thing VVitchcraft which they do not understand: And a
third may be the Ignorance of some Judges and Juries, who condemn Silly
Melancholy People upon their own Confession, and perhaps, slender Proofs. None
of these three can be denied, but it is impertinent arguing to conclude, that
because there have been Cheats in the World, because there are some too
credulous, and some have been put to Death for Witches, and were not, therefore
all Men are deceived. There is so much written, both at home and abroad, so
convincingly, and by so unquestionable Authors, that I have not the Vanity to
add any thing, especially to you: But because you have desired me to tell you
the Story of the Nuns at Loudun and some others, I shall first tell you of a
^eal Possession near the place I was born in; ^ext of disquietings by Spirits
(both which ^ had from unquestionable Testimonies) and ^hen I shall tell you
what I saw at Loudun, ^oncerning that which I do not doubt to ^all a Pretended
Possession, sure I am a Cheat. About 30 Years ago, when I was ^ Boy at School,
there was a poor Woman ^enerally believed to be really possessed. ^he lived
near the Town of Duns in the Mers; and Mr. John Weems then Minister of Duns (a
Man known by his Works to be a Learned Man, and I knew him to be a Godly Honest
Man) was persuaded she was ^ossessed; I have heard him many times ^peak with my
Father about it, and both of ^em concluded it a real Possession. Mr. ^eems
visited her often, and being convinced ^f the truth of the thing, he, with some
Neighbor Ministers, applied themselves to the King's Privy Council for a
Warrant to keep Days of Humiliation for her. But the Bishops being then in
Power would not allow any Fasts to be kept. I will not trouble you with many
Circumstances, one I shall only tell you, which I think will evince a real
Possession. The Report being spread in the Country, a Knight of the Name of
Forbes, who lived in the North of Scotland, being come to Edenborough, meeting
there with a Minister of the North, and both of them desirous to see the Woman,
the Northern Minister invited the Knight to my Father's House (which was within
Ten or Twelve Miles of the Woman) whither they came, and next Morning went to
see the Woman. They found her a poor ignorant Creature, and seeing nothing
extraordinary, the Minister says in Latin to the Knight, Nondum audivimus
Spiritum loquentem; presently a Voice comes out of the VVomans Mouth, Aud^
loquentem, audis loquentem: This put the Minister into some amazement (which I
think made him not mind his own Latin) he took off his Hat, and said,
Misereatur Deus peccatoris; the Voice presently out of the VVomans Mouth said,
Dic peccatricis, dic peccatricis; whereupon both of them came ou^ of the House
fully satisfied, took Horse immediately and returned to my Father^ House at
Thirlestane Castle in Lauderdal^ where they related this passage. This I do
exactly remember. Many more Particulars might be got in that Country, but this
Latin Criticism in a most Illiterate Ignorant Woman, where there was no
pretense to dispossessing, is Evidence enough, I think.

Within these 30 or 40 Years there was an unquestionable Possession in the
United Provinces, a Wench that spoke all Languages, of which I have heard many
Particulars when I lived in the Low Countries, but that being Foreign I will
not insist on it.

As to Houses disquieted with Noises, I shall tell you one that happened since
I was a Married Man, and hint at more, which if you please, I can get you
authentically attested.

Within four Miles of Edenborough, there lived an Aged Godly Minister, one that
was esteemed a Puritan; his Son now Minister of the same place, and then
ordained his Assistant. Their House was extraordinarily troubled with noises,
which they, and their Family, and many Neighbors (who for diverse Weeks used to
go watch with them) did ordinarily hear. It troubled them most on the Saturday
Night, and the Night before their weekly Lectureday. Sometimes they would hear
all the Locks of the House, on Doors and Chests to fly open; yea, their Clothes
which were at Night locked up into Trunks and Chests, they found in the Morning
all hanging about the Walls. Once they found their best Linen taken out, the
Table covered with it, Napkins, as if they had been used, yea and Liquor in
their Cups, as if Company had been there at Meat. The rumbling was
extraordinary: The good old Man commonly called his Family to Prayer when it
was most troublesome; and immediately it was converted into gentle knocking,
like the modest knock of a Finger: But as soon as Prayer was done, they should
hear excessive knocking, as if a Beam had been heaved by strength of many Men
against the Floor. Never was there Voice nor Apparition, but one thing was
remarkable: (You must know, that it is ordinary in Scotland to have a half
Cannon Bullet in the Chimney-corner, on which they break their great Coals.) A
merry Maid in the House, being accustomed to the Rumblings, and so her Fear
gone, told her fellow Maidservant, That if the Devil troubled them that Night,
she would brain him; so she took the Half-Cannon Bullet into Bed: The Noise did
not fail to awake her, nor did she fail in her design, but took up the great
Bullet, and with a threatening, threw it as she thought, on the Floor, but the
Bullet was never more seen; the Minister turned her away for meddling and
talking to it. All these Particulars I have had from the Mouth of the Minister
now living, he is an Honest Man, of good Natural Parts, well bred both in
Learning and by Travel into Foreign Parts in his Youth. I was not in the
Country my self during the time, but I have it from many other Witnesses, and
my Father's Steward lived then in a House of mine within a Mile of the place,
and sent his Servants constantly thither; his Son now serves me, who knows it.

I could tell you an ancienter Story before my time, in the House of one
Burnet, in the North of Scotland, where strange things were seen, which I can
get sufficiently attested. Also in the Southwest Border of Scotland, in
Annandale there is a House called Powdine, belonging to a Gentleman called
Iohnston, that House has been haunted these 50 or 60 Years. At my coming to
Worcester 1651 I spoke with the Gentleman (being my self quartered within two
Miles of the House) he told me many extraordinary Relations consisting in his
own Knowledge: And I carried him to my Master, to whom he made the same
Relations: Noises and Apparitions, Drums and Trumpets heard before the last
War; yea, he said, some English Soldiers quartering in his House, were soundly
beaten by that then irresistible Inhabitant: (This last I wondered at, for I
rather expected he should have been a Remonstrator, and opposed the
Resistance:) And within this Fortnight Mr. James Sharp was with me (him you
know, and he is now at London) he tells me, that Spirit now speaks, and appears
frequently in the shape of a Naked Arm; But other Discourse took me off from
further inquiry. These things I tell you in obedience to your desire, but as I
said before, I desire them not to be Printed. Atheists are not to be convinced
by Stories: Their own Senses will no more convert them than Sense will convert
a Papist from Transubstantiation; and Scottish Stories would make the
disaffected jeer Scotland, which is the object of Scorn enough already.

When I was in Dorsetshire Prisoner, one Mr. Io. Hodder, Minister of
Hauke-Church in that County, told me of strange Apparitions, and unquestionable
Evidences of the actings of Spirits in a House, yea, a Religious House of that
Country, of which he was himself an Ear and Eye Witness.

In Dorchester also, the Son of Reverend Mr. Io. White (who was Assessor to the
Assembly at Westminster) told me many Particulars of that House in Lambeth
where his Father lived in the time of the Assembly, which then was
unquestionably haunted with Spirits. I do well remember, I dined with old Mr.
White then one day, and at Dinner he told us much of it, and that that Morning
the Spirit called up the Maid to lay the Beef to the Fire. Of the two last you
may be satisfied when you please; and at this present, I am told, there is a
House at FolieIohn-Park not three miles from the place haunted with Spirits.

But I must leave room for my Loudun Nuns, and not write a Book; In the Year
1637, being at Paris in the Spring, the City was so full of the possession of a
whole Cloister of Nuns, and some Laick Wenches at Loudun, Books Printed, and
strange Stories told, that few doubted it; and I, who was persuaded such a
thing might be, and that it was not impossible the Devil could possess a Nun as
well as another, doubted it as little as any body. So coming into that Country,
I went a days Journey out of my way to satisfy my Curiosity. Into the Chapel
I came in the Morning of a Holy Day, and with as little prejudice as any could
have, for I believed verily to have seen some strange sights; but when I had
seen Exorcising enough of three or four of them in the Chapel, and could hear
nothing but wanton Wenches singing baudy Songs in French, I begun to suspect a
Fourbe, and in great Gravity went to a Jesuit, and told him, I had come a
great way in hope to see some strange thing, and was sorry to be disappointed.
He commended my Holy Curiosity, and after he had thought a while, he desired me
to go to the Castle, and from thence, at such an Hour, to the Parish Church,
and I should be satisfied. I wondered at his Correspondence, yet gravely went
where he directed me. In the Castle I saw little, but in the Parish Church I
saw a great many people gazing, and a Wench pretty well taught to play Tricks,
yet nothing so much as I have seen twenty Tumblers and Rope-dancers do. Back I
came to the Nuns Chapel, where I saw the Jesuits still hard at work at several
Altars, and one poor Capuchin, who was an Object of Pity, for he was possessed
indeed with a Melancholy Fancy, that Devils were running about his Head, and
constantly was applying Relics. I saw the Mother Superior exorcised, and saw
that Hand on which they would have made us believe, The names I. H. S. MARIA,
JOSEPH, were written by Miracles; (but it was apparent to me it was done with
Aqua Fortis) then my Patience was quite spent, and I went to a Jesuit and told
him my Mind freely. He still maintained a real Possession, and I desired for a
trial to speak a strange Language: He asked what Language? I told him I would
not tell; but neither he nor all those Devils should understand me. He asked if
I would be converted upon the Trial, (for I had discovered I was no Papist) I
told him that was not the Question, nor could all the Devils in Hell pervert
me; but the Question was, If that was a real Possession, and if any could
understand me I shall confess it under my Hand: His answer was, These Devils
have not traveled; and this I replied to with a loud Laughter, Nor could I get
any more Satisfaction. Only in the Town I heard enough that it was a Cheat
invented to burn a Curate (his name, as I take it, was Cupif) and the Man had
been really burnt to Ashes, as a Witch, but the People said it was for his
Conversion from them. At my coming to Saumur next day, my Countryman, Dr.
Duncan, Principal of the College at Saumur, told me how he had made a clearer
Discovery of the Cheat in presence of the Bishop of Poitiers, and of all the
Country, how he had held fast one of the pretended possessed Nuns Arms in spite
of all the Power of their Exorcisms, and challenged all the Devils in Hell to
take it out of his Hand. This, with many more Circumstances, he told me, and he
printed them to the World; but this is already too tedious. One more Journey I
made to see Possessed Women exorcised near Antwerp, Anno 1649. but saw only
some great Holland Wenches hear Exorcism patiently, and belch most abominably.
So if those were Devils, they were windy Devils; but I thought they were only
possessed with a Mornings Draught of too new Beer. Some of the Loudun Nuns,
after great Resistance and Squeeking, did on great importunity adore their
Host, and the Jesuits did desire us to see the power of Church, where, all I
wondered at, was his Blasphemy, in saying to the pretended Devil, Prostratum
ador abis creatorem tuum quem digitis teneo. But my Paper, as well as my
Discretion calls for an End. Your Desire and my Obedience is all I can plead
for your receiving so long a Rabble from,

Sir, Your most faithful Friend and Servant, Lauderdaile.
Windsor-Castle, March 12. 1659.
CHAP. V. More Examples.
I. ALexander Benedictus, lib. 7. Pract. cap. 25. recited by Skenkius, Lib. 7.
Obs. 33. says, that he saw two Women, Neighbors and Companions, bewitched,
that were both taken with Vomiting the same Day: One vomited a Head-Bodkin,
crooked like a Hook, and a deal of Woman's Hair, and Parings of Nails, and died
the next Night. The other vomited much Woman's Hair, and pieces of Nitre, and
three Lumps of Dog's Hair dried, the quantity of a Dog's Tail.

II. Benivenius, cap. 8. says, he saw and had in Cure a Woman tormented with a
swolen Belly, tossed up and down, who he thought had been hysterical. But at
last she vomited long, crooked Nails, and brass Needles, and Wax, and Lumps of
Hair, and bigger Lumps of Meat than any one can swallow; and she doted, and
prophesied, and did other things above natural Power.

III. Langius, Lib. 1. Epist. 38. names Vlricus Neusessor, a Husbandman, who
was tormented in one of his Sides, and at last felt a Nail of Iron under the
whole Skin, which the Surgeon cut out, but his Pain still increased, so that
in Impatience he cut his Throat, and died. He names the Persons who were
present when he was opened, and they found in his Stomach a long, round piece
of Wood, and four Knives of Steel, partly sharp, and partly toothed like Saws,
and two sharp pieces of Iron, every one above a Span long, and a Ball of Hair.

IV. Cornelius Gemma, of Lovain, De Nature. Charact. Div. lib. 2. cap. 4. has a
long and mavelous Story of a Girl of Fifteen Years old, called Catherine
Gualter, suspected to be bewitched; who fell ill, Ian. 1571. and after diverse
Months Pain, and Fevers and Convulsions like the Hysterical, and three or four
Men could hardly hold her. He and Bernard a Physician were sent for in August:
She avoided a living Eel by Stool; it lay as dead in the Excrements at first,
but put into Water, revived: When it was dead, and laid up to keep, it vanished
away. Then the Maid began to vomit watery Humor, (which he saw,) like Urine:
For fourteen Days she vomited the quantity of four and twenty Pound in a Day;
which he saw himself, and handled; and yet she had never the less passage of
Urine, and she had no Swelling, and drunk scarce one Cup of Beer or Wine.
Afterward she vomited abundance of Hair, some longer, and some short, like
Dog's Hair, and this with great difficulty and pain. Strong Jactations,
Convulsions, and beating her self continued daily many Hours; sometimes
laughing, sometimes weeping, as Hysterical: Then she vomited great flocks of
Hair, with filthy Matter, such as is in Ulcers, and sometimes like the Dung of
Doves and Geese, and in them pieces of Wood, and those like new Chips lately
cut off an old Tree, and abundance of Skins like Parchment-Shavings: And
afterward, two or three Pounds a Day, like Ink and Coals together, with long,
white, hard Hair mixed, for a Week together: Afterward short black and red
Hair, and a virulent Humor like Dirt. In September she vomited Membranes, like
pieces of her Stomach, of a fleshy thick Coat, with the marks of Veins,
afterward thin black ones; and after that, various Membranes of two hands
breadth, like a Viper's Slough, (in the description of which, he is too large
for me to repeat, as in various shapes and figures.) After this, she vomited
innumerable Stones, some like Walnuts, like pieces broken out of old Walls,
with some of the Lime on them: In his presence she vomited one as big as two
Chestnuts, which first stuck in her Throat, and swelled a quarter of an Hour, so
that she seemed dead, without Breath and Pulse; and after that, a piece of Wood
of the length and thickness of his Finger, and Hair; after that she vomited a
triangular Bone, whole without, and hollow within; and after that, many
Joint-Bones; and last of all, Hair, with pieces of Glass and Brass. Recited by
Mar. Don. Hist. Mir. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. and Skenkius, Lib. 7. Obs. 48. That she
was cured by the Priests Means, does not render the Story incredible, though
there be many Deceits.

More such you may read in Skenkius, and of two Whelps vomited up, ibid. Obs.
42, 41, 40, 43. And Sidelius by Scholtzius sent him the Narrative of a Girl of
Eleven Years old, that vomited Chestnuts, lumps of Hair, and of raw Flesh, and a
Hen's Bone of the Leg, after long, terrible Fits; between which, she played,
and was well: And by public and private Prayer was cured.

VI. Wolphius wrote to Skenkius, that near Zurick the Devil vexed a melancholy
Woman, and solicited her to drown her self: She went and sat long on the
Flood-gate of a Pond; at last, by his importunity, she yielded, saying, [ If it
must be so, on God's Name let it be so,] and cast her self into the Water,
where she lay three Hours on her Back, and could not sink; and being found, and
brought home, her Body was as light as Straw, and she recovered her Health.

VII. Sebastian Brand I.C. wrote to Skenkius, the Narrative of one, that after
horrid Torments, vomited in one Year four hundred Earthen Chamber-pots full of
Blood, besides what went by Stool, and fifty times let blood that Year; so that
she lost a thousand Pounds of Blood, as this Man (a Councillor of State)
professed he knew by true Report, and his own Eyesight. And the Blood burst
through the Skin, and with it she vomited a thousand and two hundred Worms,
some as long as ones Finger, and some longer.

I have elsewhere cited out of Fernelius, the Narrative of such as had the like
symptoms as some of these, and spoke Latin, Greek and Hebrew, which they never
learnt.

VIII. Honest Fabritius Hildanus, l. 2. Obs. 43. p. 202. tells us of a young
Man that none of the Physicians could cure, or find out his Disease; and his
Parents going to a Conjurer, he gave him a Vomit, which brought up Pins, Nails.
Points of Knives, and many other pieces of Iron, which Hildanus himself saw
with Admiration, and the young Man presently recovered: ( In pago quodam prope
Urbem Metim.)

IX. Faelix Platerus, an excellent pious Protestant Doctor at Basil, in his
Observations, lib. 1. p. 20. says, [ A certain Exorcist Priest, 1560. got
wealth by exorcising, by conjuring the Possessed, in a City of Helvetia; into
whose House coming on some Business, I was desired by a Parent, that was his
Countryman, to turn him from this ungodly practice: And even then one was
brought in, a robust Man, with torn Hose, who they said was possessed of a
Devil, and carried on their Shoulders; they cast him down on the Pavement of
the Chamber, who prostrate on the Ground, his Feet drawn together, his Hands
contorted, and, which is strange, his Neck turned about, so that his Face
looked to his back, he lay dumb and deaf like a Block. They told me that he had
remained in this posture and form, without Meat, Drink, o^ any Excretion many
Days. I being struck with this terribly, went my ways. Bu^ this same Exorcist
(Priest) that same Yea^ was brought to me, to Basil, to be cured having a pain
in his Hip, that he could no^ walk, and he lodged with us. But wh^^ many things
were used in Vain, at last h^ confessed to me, that this befell him. by the
Devil: Whom when he by his Exorcisms would have cast out of one possessed, the
Devil then, as he had done often before threathed him in these words, in the
German, Tongue [ Psaff ich will dir noch den thou geben dase du mich alses
verit eist.] And at once, thrust him so violently up to the Chimney, that his
Hip hurt, has been in this Case ever since.

It would be tedious to cite Learned Credible Physicians, that have written
with full Evidence, Demoniacal effects on their Patients.

X. The Case elsewhere mentioned; which convinced Hollerius, an extraordinary
Physician, who before, derided it as Melancholy, is undeniable: Of a Girl, that
while People looked on, would by somewhat invisible, be suddenly bound to a Post
or Bed-stead, or her Hands tied together with Cords, Hemp, or Horse-hair: Which
Hollerius seeing, and that the band couldnot be untyed, but must be cut, he
confessed it was by an invisible or supernatural Power. One can scarce name a
Man unlikelier to be deceived, than Hollerius.

XI. The Histories that Pet. Forestus gives us, of his own Patients and
Knowledge, having mentioned elsewhere, I here forbear to recite, and many
others mentioned in the second part of my Saints Rest.

XII. Scribonius, a Learned Pious Marpurg Doctor of Physic, says in Physiol.
Sagarum, p. 53, etc. One of the Witches burnt at Lemgovia, confessed, that she
made Lame one of the Citizens, (whom I will not name, being well known.) And
another, with her own Mouth witnessed, that she killed the Consuls first Wife,
by putting Poisonous things under the Door, on which she fell Sick the next
day, and dyed.

I will add (says Scribonius) an Example which I saw my self, and observed.
For we must believe, that which Experience by Example shows us. In this
present year 1585. in the Summer, a Witch was apprehended at Waldecia, who is
in a Town of the Illustrious Princess Barbara, Countess of Waldecia, etc. to a
Servant Maid to one of her Neighbors, for whom she was to prepare a Coat (or
Gown) in one of the doubles of it, sowed a certain Root, which caused as soon
as she put it on, that in her Loins, which the extremities of the Coat touched,
she was presently the same hour greatly troubled, and straightway tormented
grievously in all her Body. And a few days after, she Vomited Bones like the
great Teeth of a Horse, and small Cockleshells. I saw all the Bones, I saw
aCockle-shell, and with my Knife I cut them, and I brake them; so that I shall
never be made believe, that this was any Deception of the sight.

Another Testimony I will add, which by a Credible Man, was sent me, Anno 1573.
Nov. 14. from the Town of Hallensted in the Duchy of Brunswick, Stephen Ralen
accused of Witchcraft, by two of his Kindred, freely, and without Bonds
confessed, that from his first Wife that was burnt with other Witches in the
City of Ratelburg, he learned the Art of killing Men by Poison; And that after
being Angry with his second Wife, for the Suspicion of Adultery in her
Childbed, he had given her those Poisons. And that by the help of his first
Wife, he had given one Rhetobbs Poison, which killed him in eight days, having
fallen out with him in his Drinking Frolicks. And another he killed with a
Poison drawn from three named Animals: And he freely confessed, that to
another, he laid the said Poison under the Door, and as he went out over them,
he presently had a pain in his right Arm, and after in the rest of his Body,
with which, he was grievously Tortured. And he after told them, that once his
Hat falling, and lost in the Water, being angry with God Almighty, and
Renouncing him ( like our Dammee Tories) he gave himself to the Devil, and
called him to him, to come to him; and said, I Will be thine, and commit my self
to thee: Come to me Satan, who presently came. He was burnt, November the 20th.

XIII. The Concubitus of the Devils with Witches (Males and Females) has so
full Testimonies, as is not to be denied. St. Austin says, De Civit. Dei, lib.
15. cap. 23. and Sup. Genesis lib. 1. q. 3. It is a most common Report, and many
whose Credit is not to be doubted of, say and confirm, that by their own, or
other such, they have heard it, that Sylvani and Fauni have been naught with
Women. And that many Devils which the French call Ducii, do daily attempt this
Uncleanness, and effect it, is reported by so many, that it is Impudence to deny
it. Yea, some Women, counted honest, defend the practice. Near Witeberg, a
Merchant's Wife, that passed for an honest Woman, was used to admit one
peculiar Concubine: And once, her Husband being from home, her Lover came to
her in the Night; and having pleased his Lust, in the Morning he arose, and
fate on the top of the Door, in the shape of a Magpye, and said to her this
Farewell; Hitherto this has been thy Sweetheart, and vanished with the Words.]
Scribon. page 79.

I rather think that this was a Man-Witch, than a Devil.

The Story of Magdalena Crucia (cited elsewhere by me, and by Dr. H. More) was,
says Bodin, famous through the World, cited by many; who being suspected, to
save her Life, went to the Pope himself ( Paul III.) asa Penitent, and
confessed her Sin, that at Twelve Years old the Devil solicited her, and lay
with her, and that he had layen with her thirty Years; yet she was made the
Abbess of a Monastery, and counted a Saint. And she confessed that the Devil,
among all the People, brought Christ's Body (the Wafer) to her Mouth, none
seeing what carried it; whereby she was taken for a Saint, as done by some good
Spirit.

And says Scribonius, St. Bernard's History testifies, that there was a
Witch, with whom the Devil often was naught, and her Husband never perceived it.

And, says he, many Witches in these Countries have of late Years confessed
the same.

And, ibid. Bodin says of Men, [One Benet, a Witch at Berne, a Priest of
Eighty Years old, said, that for Forty Years he had been unclean with the Devil
in the shape of a Woman, and that unseen she was his Companion, and named her
Hermione; and so he was burnt.

And another Priest of Seventy Years old confessed, that he had used Venery
with the Devil in the shape of a Woman Fifty Years, and so he was burnt.

And, Anno 1573. November. 14. in our Neighborhood, the Duchy of Brunswick,
Stephen Ralen (beforementioned) confessed, that he had for Seven Years been
unclean with the Devil, whom he took for his Miss, named Rolstruchse.

XIV. Abundance of credible Histories tell us of Men and Women struck and hurt
by the Devil, says Scribonius, page 82, 83. I will add one Example: At
Marpurg, (where he dwelt,) Anno 1678. a young Rustic that had a Devil, was by
the Council of Divines brought into the Temple at the time of public Prayers,
that they might try whether they could cast out the Devil. And when Prayers
were ended, and he was brought again into the Hospital, (their Bedlam,) a
certain Citizen, well known to me, standing alone by his own Chimney-fire, and
seeing the Demoniack Man pass by in the Street, by the noise of the Company, he
earnestly prayed to God for him: In the very Moment of his praying, by some
invisible Genius, he had suddenly such a Stroke on his Neck, as cast him down
on his Face, on the Ground; I think, because that malignant Spirit would not
that Men should pray for him that he had possessed. He professed that he did
sensibly perceive something like the Hand of a strong Man strike him, his Face
being toward the Fire. The Man revealed it to me the same Day, but secretly,
left it should cast his Wife or Children into a Fright.] Scribonius, ibid. page
83.

XV. The raising of Storms by Witches is attested by so many, that I think it
needless to recite them. Paracelsus says, That Devils can do it by mere
Natural Causes; and says, that if much Aluminous Matter and Salt Peter (not
thoroughly prepared) be mixed, they will send up a Cloud of Smoke, even to the
middle Region of the Air, which will come down as Rain in Drops.

XVI. Erasmus and others tell us of a Witch at a Town near them, (or rather, as
Devil, that appeared and threatened to burn their Houses, and on the top of a
Chimney, holding a Pot of Ashes, scattered them abroad, and presently the Town
was burnt.

XVII. The felling of Winds in the Northern Seas toward Lapland and Iseland,
is so commonly asserted by Mariners and Historians, that I shall omit
particular Instances; Olaus Magnus, and others, will tell the Reader of that,
and more, in those cold parts.

XVIII. What shall we say to the many certain Histories of the fresh bleeding
of Murdered Bodies, when the Murderer is brought to it, or at least, when he
touches it; whether it be by the Soul of the Dead, or by a good Spirit that
hates Murder, or by the Devil appointed for Revenge; it seems plainly to be
by an invisible Spirit's Operation. I have heard persons so Credible give
Instances of it, seen by themselves, that (though it be not a constant Event)
it is surely Credible.

The aforesaid Scribonius ubi supra, p. 123. etc. faith, [This is done so
manifestly, and in so many places, that to deny it is but open Lies.] And he
answers them that refer it to other Causes only; and says, [I'll testify what
I have seen, when James ab Aquaria, Patricius of Arles was dead; Vateriola, a
Physician of great Experience, citing some Verses of Lucretius, of mad Love
says, In this Verse Lucretius thinks that the Blood of a Man affected and
wounded by a Beam from the Eyes, does pass into wounded, as the Blood of one
slain by a a Man's Sword, falls into him that falls. But says Scribonius,
I had rather Valeriola had said, It is done by the Secret Judgment of God.

XIX. Scribonius, p 126. For the strangeness of the thing (says he) I will
bring but one Example: In the County of Lippia at Vftenia, a Woman that had
killed her Child, cast it into the next River Secretly; the Child after 3 weeks
was found there by 2 Maids, and by the Command of the Magistrates it was put
into the Lap or Bosom of the Mother, being in Prison, to try whether the
Carcass would sweat Blood: Hereupon the dead Infant presently opened the left
Eye, and weeping much, looked on the Mother; and that Eye being shut, Blood
flowed out of it: This Example is certainly a stupendous sign of God's
Judgment: It was seen of very many most Grave Men, and is not doubted of by the
Inhabitants of that place.

XX. A Godly Minister, Mr. Farnworth, that came hither from New England (being
a Nonconformist, and extreme poor, dyed, as all about him said, of mere
Poverty, for want of warm Clothes, Fire, and Food, when the Act of Uniformity
had beggered many into extreme necessity) he testified, that in America,
hearing of a Sacrifice to the Devil that the Savages used to keep, by offering
a Man to him, he went to see them perform it; and he found a great number about
a dry Pit, and they brought an old Man bound, and by many ugly Ceremonies
devoted him: And he saw the Man carried up into the Air, and quickly thrown
down again dead among them.

XXI. Ludov. Vives de Verit. fidei, lib. 1. says, That in America, it is a
common thing to see Spirits appear to Men in various Shapes day and night.

So Olaus Magnus says of the Iselanders.

XXII. I know none that has written better de Angelis and de Potentia
Daemonum, than Zanchy, who, Tom. 3. c. 4 de Pot. Them. says, [He wonders that
any should deny, that there are such Spirits as are called Hags or Fairies, as
exercise Familiarity with Men, and without hurting them, come to them, and
trouble them, as playing with them. I could (says he) bring many Examples of
persons yet living, that have had Experience of them on themselves: But hence
it appears, that there are such Spirits in the Air, and that when God permits
them, they use their Power on us, for sport or hurt.] Read him there further.

XXIII. I have elsewhere cited the most Credible Melanchthon, saying he had
seen some, and that many persons of his Acquaintance, had seen and talked with
them; and that the Devil appeared to his own Aunt in the likeness of her dead
Husband, with a Franciscan Friar, and told her, she must hire some Masses to be
said for him; and took her by the Hand, saying, he would not hurt her; but it
so burnt her Hand, that it remained black ever after.

See Fernelius de abditis rerum Causis, lib. 2. c. 16. of many things that he
saw himself, that are convincing.

XXIV. Dr. Henricus ab Here, Observe. viii. A little Girl in the ninth year of
her Age, for Beauty, Education, or Birth inferior to none where she lived,
having innocently put into her Mouth a Sorrel Leaf, which was given her by a
Witch that begged at the Door, to whom she had first given a piece of Bread,
and then some Beer, it was scarce swallowed by her, when she began to be
Tortured in her Bowels, to Tremble all over, and then to be convulst, and in
fine, to swoon away, and fall as one dead. The Doctor and Doctress being called
(for at Vtrecht, where this thing happened in May, 1625. it is Customary for
both Sexes to practice Physic) though they for many days Experimented the
Remedies usual in this case, the Child found no Relief, but was still Afflicted
with very frequent and most terrible paroxysms. Whereupon, as the Custom of the
Country is, they Consult the Exorcists. The Priest appointed for that work, a
Capuchin had scarce laid his hand on the Ritual, when the Child was Transformed
by the Demon into such Shapes, as a Man that has not beheld it with his Eyes,
will hardly be brought to imagine. It began first to roll it self about, and
next to Vomit Horse-dung, Needles, Pins, Hairs, Feathers, Bottoms of Thread,
Pieces of glass Windows, Nails drawn out of Cart or Coach Wheels, an Iron Knife
above a Span long, Egg and Fish Shells. In the mean while, her Parents and
those of the Neighborhood, observe that whenever the Witch came near the
House, or so much as turned her Eye toward it, even at the Distance of two
hundred paces the poor Child was in much greater Torment than before, insomuch,
that she could by no means be eased of her Fit, or show one sign of Life, until
she was at a very great Distance from her. This Witch was soon after
apprehended, and confessed both this, and infinite other the like Feats, for
which she was Strangled and Burnt. Being desired by a Father Jesuit, who
Assisted her in her last Agony, and at that Moment, on which depends Eternity,
when the Executioner had now sitted the Rope to her Neck, that she would
dissolve the the Spell, and ease the Child, she said, it was not in her Power;
Because the Ember Weeks were past, since she had Bewithtced her; adding, that
should she undo the Villainies she had perpetrated, the Child would not so
quickly recover: For the two other Witches, whom she named, had also given her
their Mortal Infections, from the Effects whereof, she could not without
Difficulty, and much time, be delivered. The Mother then, as in a Desperate
case, brought her Daughter to me about the middle of September, and I had her
with me for some weeks. What I then saw, heard and handled, because I know many
Physicians, those especially that are Averse to the Roman Persuasion, will
hardly believe it upon my Narrative, so may God help me, as I shall most truly
Relate what I saw. The day after this Unfortunate Child came into my House, I
took care to send for Modestus a Capuchin, who still lives at Liege: While he
was yet fifty paces from my Chamber, the Girl fell down, as one deprived of
Life; I took her for Dead: For she had not so much as the least Breath. Her
Fingers and Toes, which if I had not seen it my self, I could not have believed
it, were so Writhen and Convulst, that the Exterior or third joint stuck so
hard unto the second, a thing which is scarce possible Naturally, that they
might seem to have been fastened together with the stiffest Glue. I endeavored
to thrust a Golden Bodkin betwixt them, and after an Iron Nail, a wooden
Spindle, etc. but all in Vain. The Mother seeing the Child's fall, for she would
never go one step from her, said the Capuchines were coming. She had no sooner
said this; but they knocked at the Door: When they were come in, and had
lighted the Consecrated Taper, and the Exorcist had put on his Habit, as soon
as ever he had read the first words of the Exorcism taken out of the Gospels,
the Girl which hitherto had lain more immovable than any dead Corpse, fell a
shaking all over, her Fingers and Toes continuing as they were, with that
Violence, that she could not be held still by six of us, by no means we could
use. My self, who with all my Strength, essayed to hold her Head, observed it
both by my sight and feeling, to be Writhen, as by an Opisthotonick Convulsion,
together with her Neck toward her Shoulders. In the mean time, her Belly was
raised up to a prodigious bigness, and was nearer her Throat, than her Thighs,
and that with so great a Noise, and grumbling of her Bowels, that all present
could hear it at above ten paces distance. The sound was the nearest to that
which is caused by Tempestuous waves under the prow of a Ship. All this while,
the Child Vomited several of the above mentioned things. I begged the Exorcist,
out of Compassion to her, to forbear his Reading: He had scarce pronounced the
last Syllable, when in an instant, she lay as quiet as possible. And after he
had quitted the House, and was at a considerable Distance off, she undid her
Fingers and Toes, and opened her Eyes, and straightway stood up. And when she
had wept a little, and chid her Mother for sending for the Capuchines, though
she never saw them, nor as she said, heard them, she presently began to eat,
drink, and play with her equals, just as if nothing ailed her, until, upon the
Capuchines returning to do his Office, she was as formerly. I saw her this
while cast up Feathers, Bundles of Straw, above the bigness of my Thumb, with
Pins stuck across the Straws, Points wove of Thread of several Colors, and a
Row of Pins stuck in a blew Paper, as fresh and new, as any are sold on the
Pedlars Stall: In fine, every thing as the Innocent Child Affirmed, which she
had seen in the Witches basket, when she beged, which savours plainly of
Devilism, and which all the Philosophers in the World, are not able to solve.
For by what Operation, could every thing she had seen in the basket, be
Conveyed in the same kind and tale, into the Bowels of the Child, except the
Devil himself was assisting? But when I saw all she had cast up, was perfectly
dry, and without the least wet, I told the Capuchines, and several Philosophers
present (for I had called many out of a desire of being the better informed)
that surely our Eyes were enchanted: For that these things could not possibly
come out of her Body. For how could it be, that the pricking of so many Pins,
should bring up no Blood? How could a sharp knife come up the narrow Throat of
a young Child, without cutting the passage? I added, that it was my Opinion,
that those things must be conveyed privately some how, from some other place,
and then by the Malicious Demon, that took pleasure to deceive us, dropped from
the Child's, Lips, into our Hands, and that I was brought to mind of a Verse in
Ovid, which I never understood, but now less than ever: It is this.

Devovet absentes simulacraque cerea fingit,
Et miserum tenues in jecur urget acus.
Curses the absent, then forms waxen shapes
Runs into the Liver needles. --
The words are spoken of Medea a Witch. But the Child her self being immixt
with us in our Debates, and of a Capacity above her years, soon resolved this
Difficulty for me. Doubt not, said she, but that these things come out of me,
and with that she, caught my Hand, and put it to her Throat.

Feel, Sir, said she, a Pin without a Head a coming up, and which will come out
presently. I felt, and immediately when I thought verily I held it fast betwixt
the fingers of my left Hand within her Throat, I perceived it to be forced
Violently from me, and presently seeing the Child a bowing to spit, I received
it in my right Hand; and I have showed it since to several incredulous Persons,
and still keep it by me, to show to the Curious, with Points, Feathers, Thread,
Straw, and other like Materials. In like manner, I have frequently at other
times, felt the ends of Points, while they were yet in the very Orifice of her
Stomach, and while they were coming up, and ready to come out of her Mouth, all
who were Curious to make Experiments, imagined they could hold the end of the
point in the middle of her Throat; but the crafty Demon, Defeated all their
Attempts. After she had been exorcised at Liege for some weeks to no purpose,
her Mother had a great desire to carry her to Hus, to a Chapel newly Built and
Consecrated to the Honor of the Blessed Virgin, and believed by the vulgar, to
be very Famous for Miracles. While her Mother and Friends which Accompanied
her, employed their time at the usual Solemnities there, daily confessing, and
receiving the Blessed Sacrament; but with no effect, they bring the Child back
to my House, not one ^ot the better, but the worse by a Hydrophobia, or as I
would rather call it, a Stygrophobia, or fearfulness of moist things, so
called, very sad and Disconsolate, and Despairing of her Life, yea, praying for
her Death. She came back to me, about the midst of Autumn, refusing not only
Wine, Beer, Mead, and all Water; but also boiled Meat, and Bread steep in
Broth or Wine, and at last, all White and Wheaten Bread: I believe, because the
one was made with Milk, and the other with Water, as is usual with us. For
which Reason, for forty days time, she lived on nothing but Apples, Raisins,
Nuts, Almonds, and other Fruits proper to the Season, yet for all this, the
rosy blush in her Cheeks was not Diminished, nor the Milky snow of her
Forehead. At last for fifteen Days and Nights together, she took neither Meat
nor Drink. How she could pass so many Days without either Meat or Drink: I
confess my self ignorant; but that so it was, I do avow, and all my Family are
ready with me, most Solemnly to Depose upon Oath. On the sixteenth day, when
she had of her own accord, asked for some Drink, and taken it, she no longer
refused Food. I thought it then seasonable to have Recourse to Natural Means,
not Omitting Divine Exorcisms, and I prepared the Decoction. Ex fuga Damonum of
Southern Wood, Mugwort, Vervene, etc. and after I had used her a while to that
Drink, I sent her Home. In the interim, tumbling over all the Books, I could
find at last I light on Bartholomew Carrichters, Secrets, who in the twelfth
Chapter of his second Book, Describes a certain Medicine, proper to this
Malady. Finding this mightily Recommended in Horstius his Medicinal Epistles,
Epist. 1. Sect. vij. in Hector Schlands Letter to Gregory Horstius, dated in
the year 1612. I Write both to him, and to the Francford Apothecary, in whose
Shops he says it is sold, promising any Rate for the unguent and prescription.
But receiving no Advice from them, and being Day and Night Sollicitous for the
Child's Recovery, I took Carrichter again into my Hand, and having much ado to
understand him, by reason of a mistake of the Printers, who had Printed in one
word, Holtz bletter beer, which should have been in three, I at last, almost a
Twelvemonth after, for want of necessary Materials, caused the following
Unguent to be made: Take of Dogs Grease well Dissolved and Cleansed, four
Ounces; of Bears Grease, eight Ounces; of Capons Grease, four and twenty
Ounces; three Trunks of Misletoe of the Hasle while Green, cut it into pieces,
and pound it small; till they become moist; bruise together the Wood, Leaves
and Berries, mix all in a Vial, after you have exposed it to the Sun, for nine
Weeks, you shall extract a green Balsam, wherewith, if you anoint the Bodies of
the Bewitched, especially the parts most affected, and the Joints, they will
certainly be Cured, as has been proved by this Child, who has been now three
years perfectly well, only on the days of the Ember-weeks, do what she can, she
is seized with a certain Transient Melancholy. And this is the Reason why I
have ingenuosly Communicated to the World in the Latin Tongue, the
abovementioned prescription, concealed by others, and published in Dutch, by
Carrichter faultily.

XXV. Mer. Casaubon in Credulity and Incredulity in things Natural.

It cannot be denied, because I see Learned Physicians are of that Opinion, and
visible Effects do evince it, but that the Devil does immiscere se in several
Diseases; whereof Sir Theod. Mayern (whom I think, for strange and even
miraculous Cures, I may call the AEsculapius of his time; and to do no body
wrong, he gave me a notable Instance concerning a Maid in his House, that had
been bitten by a Mad Dog, which also died of it; to whom, when he came in a
Morning with a Looking-Glass (to make a Trial of what he had read, but not yet
experienced himself) under his Gown, before he was in the Room, she began to
cry out, and told him what it was he had about him.

XXVI. Fernelius de Abdit. rerum causis, Page 65. says, I saw one that by
certain words would make Shapes (Specter) appear in a Looking-Glass, which,
whatever he commanded them, would presently by Writing or by true Images so
clearly express, that all might be quickly and easily understood by those that
sat by. They heard a few Sacred words, but filthily contaminated by obscure
names, such as the power of the Elements, the horrid and unheard of names of
certain Princes of the East, West, etc.

And P. 124, 125. he tells you how many ways, by Characters, Spells, Ceremonies
they work (too long to recite) and tells you how the Bewitched are Distorted,
Tormented, speak unlearnt Languages, tell the bystanders their Secrets, etc.
and says, [A few Years ago, a young Man, a Knights Son, labored of a
Concussion and a Convulsion of his Body by Fits, which did so exagitate
sometime the Left-Arm, sometime the Right; sometimes one Finger, sometimes one
Leg, sometimes the other, sometimes both; sometimes the whole Trunk of his Body
that four Servant-men could scarcely hold him, but his Head remained unshaken,
his Tongue and Speech free, his Mind sound, and all his Senses entire, even in
the fierceness of his Convulsions: He was taken at least ten times a Day, sound
in the intervals, but broken with Labor. Had he not had his Understanding and
Senses sound, it would have been taken for an Epilepsie. The most skilful
Physicians judged it a Convulsion kin to an Epilepsie, from a malignant
venomous Vapor impact in the Marrow of the Back, etc. They used all Remedies --
but we were all mistaken in Ignorance of the true Cause; for in the third Month
a Demon was found to be the Author of all, showing himself by Voice and unusual
Words and Sentences, Latin and Greek, though he was ignorant of the Greek
Tongue. He detected many of the Secrets of the by-sitters, and especially of
the Physicians, deriding them, that he had by great Peril cheated them, and
that by their vain Medicines they had almost killed the Man. If his Father (a
Knight of the Order of St. Michael, that wore that Image in a Gold Chain) was
coming to see him, he would far off, bid them, Let him not in, or take off his
Chain. If Divine and Sacred words were read, he would toss him and shake him
most fiercely.] See the rest.

And Page 127. [I saw one that would stop Blood flowing from any part of the
Body, by touching the part, and muttering a few words] So far the great
Fernelius: He next names many Diseases that they use Spells to Cure.

XXVII. The greatest Physician of England to diverse Kings (and the chief that I
have my self used, and knew him to be an Honest Credible Man.) Sir Theodore
Meyerne, confirms the thing in question, but goes the true middle way
between Ignorant Credulity and Incredulity, in his late published Praxis, Page
57. in a Letter to Dr. Castle, about one seeming possessed, saying, [ That
Melancholy is the Seat, the Bath, and the Kingdom of the Devil, I well know;
and that that Prince of Darkness lurking under the thick Cloudiness of that
black Humor, immixeth himself in diverse Diseases, and that he exciteth cruel
Troubles (or Storms) in diverse Subjects, I HAVE BY MANIFOLD EXPERIENCE FOUND;
but I am not of so facile a Mind, as to be struck at the meeting of every
Phantasm, though portentous; nor is my Reason like Wax to receive every
Impression. By two signs I can know Demoniacks. He might have named more.
If a person untaught, and without Philosophy, speak in diverse and strange
Tongues, and nervously and solidly dispute of Sciences and Arts never studied:
And if a weighty Body rapt up on high, hang long in the Air, Which is proved of
many Witches.
and fall not with their weight. Black Choler in the Spleen, Brain, Womb, may
move a thousand Symptoms, which by the Ignorant, pass for Miracles.] There
lives in this City, an Irishman, who with unmoved Lips makes a long Oration,
and deceives those near him, as if one spoke to them far of.]

I my self discovered a notable Cheat in a Servant in my own House, and many
such are detected, by which the Ignorant, Undiscerning and Incredulous, are
drawn to disbelieve those that are most fully proved. Read of Cheats, De Loier,
a Frenchman.

XXVIII. The Learned and Judicious Gerh. Vossius says, de Samuele in
Beverovicii Epist. Page 203. [I know there were many fabulous stories, and of
Fraud, etc. but by Men both Learned, and Quick-sighted, and Grave, and Honest,
in many Ages past, there are reported, and at this Day remembered and told
innumerable Instances, in which it is not possible but that with the endeavor
of man there concurred, the Illusion or Force of the Devil, a malignant Spirit
supplying that which was beyond the power of Man.

XXIX. Lavater de Spectris, is a Book so common and well known, (by him a
Learned Godly Protestant Divines) that I will suppose the Learned Reader to
have read it, and will not recite what is therein.

XXX. Pious and Peaceable Bishop Ios. Hall says, Soliloq. 15. P. 53, 54.
[Satan's Prevalency in this Age is most clear in the marvelous number of
Witches abounding in all places. Now hundreds are discovered in one Shire;
Suffolk and Essex.
and if Fame deceive us not, in a Village of 14 Houses in the North, are found
so many of this Damned brood. Heretofore only barbarous deserts had them, but
now the Civilest and Religious Parts are frequently pestered with them:
Heretofore some silly ignorant old Women, etc. now we have known those of both
Sexes, who professed much Knowledge, Holiness and Devotion drawn into this
damnable Practice.

XXXI. I have elsewhere cited diverse Passages to this use out of Holy Cyprian;
but that in the Epistle of Finnilianus to Cyprian, Ep. 75. Page 238. seems
strange (like that of Magdalena Crucia and others among the Papists). A Woman
pretending to have the Holy Ghost, proved a Witch, and did many Wonders: She
had a Gift of Prayer, and did Baptize, and Administer the Lords Supper in the
ordinary way, etc.

XXXII. This is so like to the well known Case of Mrs. Hutchinson, and Mrs.
Dyer in New England, with Mr. Wheeler, and the rest, in the time of Sir Henry
Vane's Government, detected by the Wondrous Monsters, that I entreat the Reader
to get the History of all, in Mr. Tho. Weld's Book (one of their Ministers)
called, The rise and fall of Antinomianism and Familism in New England. Though
I find no proof of Witchcraft in their Case, there is much of Satanical
Delusion, joined with Humane Self-conceit and Pride.

XXXIII. I have before mentioned Zanchy's Judgment, and his excellent Books, de
Deo, de Angelis, and de potentia Daemonum; than whom no Man has given us a
more full Testimony in general, of Diabolical Operations: I shall here only
repeat his Opinion of the Manner of Satan's Working. He thinks ( Tom. 3. l 4.
c. 10. p. 188.) that it is the very Substance of the Devil that enters into
Men, and that they have Bodies more Subtle than the Air.

The doubt is, 1. Whether it be only other Causes that enter by this moving of
them by Devils: 2. Or whether they Operate and enter only Virtute, by some
force sent from their Substance; 3. Or Operate by Contiguity of their Substance
it self in Men.

1. The first way, no doubt they work as by moving Winds, and Fire, and Water,
and our Blood and Humors, and our Tempters and Enemies, etc. but not that way
alone.

2. What Energy or Force he can send, that is neither his own Substance nor any
other Substance, I cannot conceive.

3. That his very Substance enters into the Possessed, I see no cause to
doubt; for he can penetrate any part of our Bodies, as he is a Spirit: And if
we knew that he Operate only in some Body or Vehicle, Air, or Air and Fire
mixed; yet what part of our Bodies cannot Air and Fire penetrate: (And this
Supposition would countenance Dr. More's Opinion, that all Spirits are the the
Souls of some Bodies). And Scripture says so much of Devils entering into Men,
and being in them, and being cast out of them, that I see not how we can deny
it to be their Substance.

And how else should they move us (besides by Instruments) Is it any more
wonder that Devils (permitted) can enter, than Air: Or how else work they on
Men's Souls. I must say it to humble us, that I fear, that in most Temptations
that solicit our Thoughts, and our Wills, and Affections and Passions, if not
sometimes our Tongues and Hands, it is the very present Substance of Evil
Spirits, that by Contiguity move us, even true Christians when they Sin: And
that it is no unseemly thing to pray God to cast Satan out of our Thoughts and
Hearts. Oh that we better knew what cause we have to fear letting him in, and
by yielding and custom to give him advantages to tempt and rule us.

But yet his Substantial Presence, and his Operations are to be distinguished.
He hurts not all that he is present with; but those that he has Power to
work upon, and that are prepared to receive his Operations. God himself does
not work Life or Grace on all that he is present with; and that what he does,
he does it by his Substantial Presence, or his Essence.

XXXIV. I have elsewhere cited Luther's Testimony, and how the Devil appeared
to himself at Coburge: And Melancthon's and Peter Martyr's I have cited here
and elsewhere. See Pet. Martyr Loc. Com. Clas. I. c. 9. and cap. 8.. 8. page
39, 40.

XXXV. The most Judicious Credible Melanchthon, in his Epistle to Hubert
Languetus (the Author of Iunius Brutu's Vind. con. Tyran.) Epistolar. l. 2. p.
550, 551. says, [ Though there be sometimes Natural Causes of Madness, yet it
is most certain, that Devils enter into the Bodies of some, and cause Madness
and Torments to them, either with Natural Causes or without them; for it is
manifest, that such persons are often delivered without Natural Remedies. And
these Diabolical Spectacles are often Prodigies and Significations of future
things: Twelve Years ago there was a Woman in Saxony, that never learnt
Letters, and yet when she was acted by the Devil, after Torment she spoke Greek
and Latin of the future Saxon War.

Sixteen Years ago there was in the Mark, a Girl, that when she pulled Hairs
from Clothes, they were turned into Mark-Money, which the Girl devoured with
long and loud gnashing of Teeth; and those Figures (or Shapes) of Money
sometimes suddenly snatched out of her Hands, were true Money, which are yet
kept by some; and after the Girl felt great Torment: But she was delivered from
all that Disease after some Months, and yet lives in Health: But frequent
Prayers of Godly Persons were made for her, and other Ceremonies were purposely
omitted.] Thus Melanchthon.

CHAP. VI. Mr. Jo. Lewis, a Learned Justice of Peace in Cardigan-shire, with
the Testimony of Dr. Ellis, and Mr. John Davis, about the Dead Men's Lights, the
Knockers and Apparitions.
MR. I. Lewis being a Justice of Peace, and a Man of Learning, at the time,
when under Cromwell and Harrison the Reading and weak Parsons were cast out,
and Itinerant Preachers set up, that turned four or five Parishes into one of
their Circuits, and did little but Preach, and shut up the Doors where they
came not, and by ignorant decrying Superstition, Forms and Ceremonies, set up
Error, Anabaptistry and unjust Separations: He being greatly grieved for these
Confusions wrote largely to me about them, whereupon, and on more such
Instances I wrote my five Disputations of Church Government, Liturgy, and
Ceremonies. And Mr. Lewis joined with me in a design to have begged Money in
Pity to Wales, to have set up a Welsh College at Shrewsbury; and his Notices
about Apparitions came in but on the by, at my request: But though I dismember
his Letters with regret, by casting away the main part that was well worth the
reading, (and all my Answers to them) yet it would be so unsuitable to insert
such Matters in a History of Spirits, that if any of his acquaintance blame me
for it, they must accept of this Excuse: He is known by published Books of his
own.

Part of Mr. John Lewis's First Letter, relating to Spirits and Witches.
Most Worthy Sir,
I Have now another Motion to you, as to that passage in your Vureasonablenese
of Infidelity, where you show the meaning of the Spirit, as to Humane Learning,
etc. and those 29 Considerations (for the page I cannot cite, because I have
not the Book at this very instant) because it is in the midst of the Book, and
not so discernable to all Readers; I could humbly beg of you, to get your
Printer and Stationer to print them apart in a few small Leaves, for there is
nothing generally that is more mistaken among us than that, and I see the
publishing here but so much of them in this kind would do infinite good here;
and I would my self be at charge of buying and dispersing many scores of them.
And because of that Copious Satisfaction you give of Spirits, than which there
cannot be greater convincements against Infidelity and Atheism, I could afford
you several strange Instances from these parts, but I shall trouble you only
with two. Since the time I received your Letter, there happened in my
Neighborhood this following; A Man and his Family being all in Bed, about
after Midnight, awake in Bed, he could perceive a Light entering a little Room,
where he lay, and one after another, of some a Dozen in the shape of Men, and
two or three Women with small Children in their Arms entering in, and they
seemed to Dance, and the Room to be far lighter and wider than formerly; they
did seem to eat Bread and Cheese all about a kind of a Tick upon the Ground;
they offered him Meat, and would smile upon him; he could perceive no Voice,
but he once calling to God to bless him, he could perceive the whisper of a
Voice in Welsh, bidding him hold his peace, being about four Hours thus, he did
what he could to awake his Wife, and could not ^ they went out into another
Room, and after some Dancing departed, and then he arose; yet being but a very
small Room he could not find the Door, nor the way to Bed, until crying out,
his Wife and Family awaked. Being within about two Miles of me, I sent for the
Man, who is an honest poor Husbandman, and of good Report: And I made him
believe I would put him to his Oath for the truth of this Relation, who was
very ready to take it.

2. The Second (if you have not formerly heard) the strange and usual
appearance of Lights (called in Welsh, Dead Men's Candles) before Mortality:
This is ordinary in most of our Counties, that I never scarce heard of any
sort, Young or Old, but this is seen before Death, and often observed to part
from the very Bodies of the persons all along the way to the place of Burial*
and infallibly Death will ensue. Now, Sir, it is worth your Resolution, whether
this may proceed from God or no; it is commonly imputed to the Igneous Air of
the Counties: But that Evil Spirits can come by so much Knowledge, as to be
always so Infallible (though herein I confess them very vast) and be so
favorable and officious unto Man, as to be such seasonable Monitors of his
Dissolution, and to give so much discovery of Spiritual Essences, and the
Immortality; I doubt whether they mind us so much good as this: Some Wiles I
confess they may have by such Appearances, but it carries the Benefits
mentioned with it, whereas their Disappearance makes more for Infidelity and
Atheism: But this I leave to your Judgment, begging Pardon for this Boldness in
diverting you from your far better Thoughts; and seeing it is my Happiness to
have this little Invisible Acquaintance with you, I shall omit no Opportunity
of troubling you with such poor Thoughts as the Lord shall give unto me of the
best Things, humbly wishing (as for the making up the sad Differences of
Religion among us) the Lord would give those in Authority to weigh that Pious
and Wise Course you have proposed, as to those four great Parties in the
Dedication of your Saints Rest, with my unfeigned Prayers for your Health and
Happiness,

Sir, Your very thankful Friend and Servant in Christ, John Lewis.
Glaskerigg near ^laubadarnevour or Aberystwith in Gardiganshire, October. 20.
1656.
Mr. John Lewis's Second Letter.
AS for Apparitions, I am stored with so many Instances, that require rather a
Volume: There is that Evidence for the Candles, that scarce I know any of Age,
but has seen them, and will depose it: There is here a talk, whereof yet I
have not certainty, that a Daughter of the Man mentioned in the last, fetching
Water at a Well, had a blow given her, and a Boy coming toward her, she
charged him with the blow, who denied he was so near her; but bid her look upon
her Father, that stood not far off, and with that, he could see her Father
fling a Stone at her, which passed with a mighty Violence by her Face, and the
Stone was found with prints of Fingers in it; but no such thing is the Father
there, neither was he at home ^ince the Night before; but certain it is, that
Living Men's Ghosts, are Ordinarily seen in these parts, and unawares to the
parties. We have in this County, several ^ilver and Leaden Mines, and nothing
more ^rdinary than some Subterranean Spirits, ^alled Knockers (where a good
Vein is) ^oth heard, and after seen, little Statured, about half a yard long;
this very instant, ^ere are Miners upon a Discovery of a Vein upon my own
Lands, upon this score, and two offered Oath, they heard them in the Daytime.
Lieutenant Colonel Bowen I hear, is upon Discovery, that what you heard, was
Witchcraft; but he holds canting Tenants, all which minds us the more to admire
the King of Spirits, our Lord God Almighty, and that our Eyes behold but the
least part of his Secrets, and Marvels; to whose Arms and Blessings, I commit
and leave you.

Sir, I pray Pardon this Trouble of Your very Thankful Servant, John Lewis.
Glaskerigg the 28 of November. 1656.
Mr. John Lewis Third Letter.
AS for the Candles, all the parts I know of Wales, as our Neighboring
Counties (as I hear) have Experience of them; but whether so frequently as
here, I will learn. I scarce know any Gentleman or Minister of any standing;
but has seen them, and a Neighbor of mine, will shortly be at Worcester
abiding (who has seen them often, and I will direct some to acquaint you, and
upon Oath, if need be) a very Credible Aged person: For my part, I never saw
the Candles; but those of my House have, and on a Time, some years past, it was
told me by them, that two Candles was seen, one little, and a great one passing
the Church way, under my House, my Wife was then great with Child, and near her
time, and she feared of it, and it begot some fear in us about her; but just
about a week after, her self first came to me (as something joyed that the fear
might be over) and said (as true it was) an old Man, and a Child of the
Neighborhood passed that same way to be Buried: This she and I can depose,
and truly my self especially, heard some uncouth warning, before my first
Child's Death, new Born, which is too large to relate: Such warnings and noises,
are also here very common, and I do think there is scarce any (and I know it by
my self) but before some Remarkable Occurrences of Life, will have some
warnings, at least by Dreams; of which there is a kind that may be ranked with
these Apparitions, and it was not for naught, that the Stoics of old held
Sleep, familiare and domesticum or aculum: You shall learn more of me hereafter
about the certainty of Candles and the Knockers.

Sir, I put you to your Penance, by these under Lines, they show I can hardly
part with you, I pray God continue, and grant you Health and Happiness
answerable to the use you are of, for his Glory among us.

Sir, Your very Thankful Servant. John Lewis.
The 14 of Feb. 1656.
Mr. Davis's Letter, concerning the Corps-Candles in Wales.
Venerable Sir,
FOr your Worth, has purchased you that Style. With all due Respects, you
shall hereby understand that I am one, who sincerely blesses himself, to have
been much Edified by you, as being Confirmed in some points, and informed in
others, by a piece of your Learned and Judicious Works, Termed by your self a
Supplement, which proved to me a Complement, and which was Communicated to be
by my Worthy Friend, and special Encourager, John Lewis Esquire, at whose Request,
I am to give you the best Satisfaction I can, touching those fiery Apparitions,
which do as it were, mark out the way for Corpses to their (...), and that
sometimes before the parties themselves fall sick, and sometimes in their
sickness of these, I could never hear in England, they are common in these
three Counties, Cardigan, Caermarthen and Pembrook, and as I hear, in some
other part of Wales.

These (...) in our Language, we call Canhwyllau Cyrth (i) Corps-Candles; and
Candles we call them, not that we do see any thing else besides the Light: But
because that Light does as much Resemble a Material Candlelight, as Eggs do
Eggs, saving, that in their Journey, these Candles be modo apparentes, modo
disparentes, especially, when one comes near them; and if one come on the way
against them, unto him they vanish; but presently appear behind him, and hold
on their Course. If it be a little Candle, pale or bluish, then follows the
Corpse either of an Abortive, or some Infant, if a big one, then the Corpse of
some one come to Age, if there be seen two or three, or more, some big, some
small together, then so many, and such Corpses together. If two Candles come
from Diverse places, and be seen to meet, the Corpses will the like, if any of
these Candles be seen to turn sometimes a little out of the way, or Path, that
leads unto the Church, the following Corpse will be found to turn in that very
place, for the avoiding of some dirty Lane, or Plash, etc. Now let us fall to
Evidence; Being about the Age of fifteen, dwelling at Lanylar, late at Night,
some Neighbors saw one of these Candles hovering up and down along the River
bank, until they were weary in beholding, at last they left it so, and went to
Bed, a few Weeks after came a proper Damsel from Montgomery Shire, to see her
Friends, who dwells on the other side of that River ^^twyth, and thought to
Ford the River at that very place, where the Light was seen; but being
dissuaded by some lookers on, (some it is most like of those that saw the Light)
to adventure on the Water, which was high, by reason of a Flood: She walked up
and down along the River Bank, even where, and even as the foresaid Candle did,
waiting for the falling of the Water, which at last she took; but too soon for
her, for she was drowned therein.

Of late, my Sextons Wife, an Aged Understanding Woman, saw from her Bed, a
little bluish Candle upon her Tables end: Within two or three days after,
comes a fellow in, enquiring for her Husband, and taking something from under
his Cloak, claps it down directly upon the Tables end, where she had seen the
Candle, and what was it, but a Dead-born Child? Another time, the same Woman,
saw such another Candle upon the other end of the self same Table, within few
days after, a weak Child by my self, newly Christened, was brought into the
Sextons House, where presently he died: And when the Sextons Wife, who was then
abroad, came home, she found the Woman shrouding of the Child, on that other
end of the Table, where she had seen the Candle. On a time my self, and a
Kinsman coming from our School in England, and being three or four hours
benighted, ere we could reach home, were first of all Saluted by such a Light,
or Candle, which coming from a House, which we well knew, held his Course (but
not directly) the Highway to Church; shortly after, the Eldest Son in that
House Deceased, and Steered the same Course. My self, and my Wife in an
Evening, saw such a Light, or Candle coming to the Church, from her Mid-Wifes
House, and within a Month, she her self did follow: At which time, my Wife did
tell me a Story of her own Mother, Mrs. Catharine Wyat, an Eminent Woman in the
Town of Tenby, that in an Evening, being in her Bedchamber, she saw two little
Lights just upon her Belly, which she assayed to strike off with her Hand, but
could not; within a while they vanished of themselves. Not long after, she was
Delivered of two Dead-born Children: Long sithence there happened, the like in
mine own House; but to a Neighbors Wife, whom my Wife did sometimes call for,
to do some work or other and (as I credibly heard within these three days) to
some good Gentlewoman also in this very Parish; where also not long since, a
Neighbors Wife of mine, being great with Child, and coming in at her own Door,
met two Candles, a little, and a bigg one, and within a little after, falling
in Labor, she and her Child both dyed.

Somethirty four, or thirty five years bygone, one Jane Wyat my Wifes Sister,
being Nurse to Baronet Rudds three Eldest Children, and (the Lady Mistress being
Deceased) the Lady Controuler of that House, going late into a Chamber where
the Maidservants lay, saw there no less then five of these Lights together. It
happened a while after, the Chamber being newly Plaistered, and a great grate
of Coalfire therein, kindled to hasten the drying up of the Plaistering: That
five of the Maidservants went there to Bed, as they were wont; but (as it fell
out) too soon, for in the Morning, they were all dead, being Suffocated (I
conceive) in their Sleep with the Steem of the New-tempered Lime and Coal. This
was at Llangathen in Carmarthenshire.

Some thirty three, or thirty four years ago, upon a Tuesday coming toward
home from Cardigan, where I had been enjoined to Preach the Session Sermon:
Incipiente adhuc crepusculo, and as Light as Noon, and having as yet, nine long
Miles to Ride, there seemd twice or thrice from behind me, on my Right side,
and between my Shoulder and my Hat, to fly a little whitish thing, about the
bigness of a Walnut, and that per intervalla, once in seventy or eighty Paces:
At first I took no notice of it, thinking it had been but the glimpsing of my
little Ruff; for such then I wore, by Degrees it waxed reddish, and as the
Night drew on, redder and redder, at last not ignis fatuus, (for that I partly
knew) but purus putus ignis, both for Light and Color. At length I turned my
Horse twice or thrice, to see from whence it came, and whether it would flash
into my Face, then nothing I could see; but when I turned homewards, it flashed
as before, until I came to a Village called Llanrislid, where as yet I did not
intend to Lodge, though there were four Lodgings, and one of them (save one)
the next House in my way, which, when I passed by close, being just against the
Door, my Fire did flash again upon, or very near the Threshold, and there I
think it lodged; for I saw it no more. Home still I would go, but bethinking my
self, that so I might tempt God, and meet a worse Companion than my former: I
turned to the furthest Lodging in the Town, and there after a little Rest, in a
brown Study (because mine Host was an understanding Man, and Literate, and such
as could, and had but lately read his Neck-Verse in pure Roman Language) I
could not contain, but needs must tell him of the Vision, he the next day to
some going to the Sessions, they to others there, at last it came to the Judges
Ears, insomuch, that the greatest News, and wonder at the then Assizes was the
Preachers Vision. To come at length unto the Pitch, or Kernel, (for I have been
too long about the Husk and Shell) at that very Sessions, one John William
Lloyd, a Gentleman, who dwelt, and whose Son yet dwells within a Mile of
Glasterig, fell Sick, and in his coming homewards, was taken with such a
violent Paroxism, that he could Ride no further than the House, where I left my
Fire to entertain him, and there he lighted and Lodged, died about four Days
after. Ex abundanti, you shall understand that some Candles have been seen to
come to my Church, within these three weeks, and the Corpses not long after.
Hactenus de Candelis nostris.

Another kind of Apparition we have, which commonly we call Tan-we, or Tanwed,
because it seems Fiery. This appears to our seeming in the lower Region of
the Air, straight and long, not much unlike a Glaive, Mours or Shoots directly,
and level (as who would say I Will hit) but far more showly, than Stellae
cadentes, or Star shot lighteneth all the Air, and Ground where it passes,
lasts three or four Miles, and more for ought is known; because no Man sees
the Rising or Beginning of it; when it falls to Ground, it sparkleth, and
lightneth all about. These before their Decease, do fall upon Freeholders
Lands, and you shall scarce bury any such with us, be he but a Lord of a House
and Garden, but you shall find some one at his Burial, at least Wise in his
Neighborhood, that has seen this Fire to fall on some part of his Lands. Two
of these at several times I have seen my self, since I Studied Meteors, and
since I was a Minister, and narrowly observed, even till they were in the
(...), and began to fall; but the Interposition of Grounds, marred the
Conclusion; for where, and how they fell, I saw not; but where I did guess,
they fell, there died in the one place an aged Gentleman, in the other, a
Freeholder too, though of a Meaner Rank. To come nearer home,

My Mothers first Husband (for my Father Married her a Widow) walking about
his Ground, saw one of these Darts, or Piles aloft, which fell down hard by
him, shone far, and sparkled round about his Body, he took it for a
Warning-Piece, made his Will, and having lived in good Health, some four or
five Months after, dyed.

A little before the Decease of mine own Father, Aged Ninety six, a Son in Law
of his, who dwelled two Miles off. (but upon higher Ground) saw such another
fall in a Close behind the old Man's House, which gave such a Light, that by it,
he did clearly see the House, the Hedges, and the Oaks in the Wood adjoining.

Sir, So many of these Evidences, as I saw not my self, I received from
Understanding and Credible Persons, and such as would not lie, no, not for a
Benefice; and your self may receive the same from me, as from one that was
never too Credulous, nothing Supperstitious, and as little Ceremonious. These
Secrets, I dare not Father upon Satan, I will not Honor him so much, so much
as to Ascribe to him the Knowledge of Contingent Futures. I presume that of
himself, he cannot certainly know whether, or when a Healthy Man shall Sicken,
nor whether, or when he shall dye of his Sickness, nor whether he shall dye by
Sickness or by Fire or Water, etc. nor (in an open Country especially) which
way of two, three, or more, the Corpse shall be brought to Church, whether it
shall meet another Corpse in the way, whether it shall pass a River by the Ford,
or Bridge, how many stops, turnings, and windings it shall make, Satan can have
no certain foreknowledge of all such Circumstances, and more, but this
Candlemaker and Director of them too foresees, and foreknows them all; and
therefore must needs be the Creator, who, as according to the good pleasure of
his Will, he has Determined, and allotted to several Nations, their several
Habitations, Dispositions and Conditions, even so (as I suppose) has he
vouchsafed to each of them some peculiar signs and tokens, if none to some,
which I cannot believe, and if to some more, and more wonderful than to other
some, for my part, I can give no other Reason for it, but his Will. This with
my hearty Prayers for your self, your Pious and Learned Brethren of the
Association.

I Rest, Your Friend in all kind Offices that lie in my Power. John Davis.
Generglyn the 19. March 1656.
CHAP. VII. Containing several other Letters and Relations concerning
Apparitions and Witchcrafts.
Mr. Thomas Tilson, Minister of Aylesworth in Kent, his Letter concerning an
Apparition in Rochester, this present Year, 1691.
Reverend Sir,
BEing informed that you are writing about Witchcraft and Apparitions, I take
the freedom, though a Stranger, to send you this following Relation.

Mary, the Wife of John Goffe of Rochester, being afflicted with a long
Illness, removed to her Father's House at WestMulling, which is about nine
Miles distan^ from her own: There she died; June the 4th, this present Year,
1691.

The Day before her departure, she grew very impatiently desirous to see her
two Children, whom she had left at home, to the Care of a Nurse. She prayed her
Husband to hire a Horse, for she must go home, and die with the Children. When
they persuaded her to the contrary, telling her she was not fit to be taken out
of her Bed, nor able to sit on Horse back, she entreated them however to try:
If I cannot sit, said she, I will lie all along upon the Horse, for I must go
to see my poor Babes.

A Minister who lives in the Town was with her at Ten-a-Clock that Night, to
whom she expressed good Hopes in the Mercies of God, and a Willingness to die:
But, said she, it is my Misery that I cannot see my Children.

Between One and Two-a-Clock in the Morning she fell into a Trance. One Widow
Turner, who watched with her that Night, says, that her Eyes were open, and
fixed, and her Jaw fallen: She put her Hand upon her Mouth and Nostrils, but
could perceive no Breath; she thought her to be in a Fit, and doubted whether
she were alive or dead.

The next Day this dying Woman told her Mother, that she had been at home with
her Children. That is impossible, said the Mother, for you have been here in
Bed all the while. Yes, replied the other, but I was with them last Night, when
I was asleep.

The Nurse at Rochester, Widow Alexander by Name, affirms, and says, she will
take her Oath on it before a Magistrate, and receive the Sacrament upon it, that
a little before Two a Clock that Morning she saw the Likeness of the said Mary
Gosse come out of the next Chamber, (where the elder Child lay in a Bed by it
self, the Door being left open, and stood by her Bedside for about a quarter
of an Hour; the younger Child was there lying by her; her Eyes moved, and her
Mouth went, but she said nothing. The Nurse moreover says, that she was
perfectly awake; it was then Daylight, being one of the longest Days in the
Year. She sat up in her Bed, and looked steadfastly upon the Apparition: In
that time she heard the Bridge-Clock strike Two, and a while after said, In the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, what art thou? Thereupon the Appearance
removed, and went away; she slipped on her Clothes and followed, but what
became on it she cannot tell. Then, and not before, she began to be grievously
affrighted, and went out of Doors, and walked upon the Wharf (the House is just
by the River side) for some Hours, only going in now and then to look to the
Children. At Five a-Clock she went to a Neighbor's House, and knocked at the
Door, but they would not rise: At Six she went again, then they arose and let
her in. She related to them all that had passed: They would persuade her she
was mistaken, or dreamt: But she confidently affirmed, If ever I saw her in all
my Life, I saw her this Night.

One of those to whom she made the Relation ( Mary, the Wife of John Sweet) had
a Messenger came from Mulling that Forenoon, to let her know her Neighbor
Goffe was dying, and desired to speak with her; she went over the same day, and
found her just departing. The Mother, amongst other Discourse, Related to her
how much her Daughter had longed to see the Children, and said she had seen
them. This brought to Mrs. Sweet's mind, what the Nurse had told her that
Morning, for till then, she had not thought to mention it, but disguised it,
rather as the Woman's disturbed Imagination.

The Substance of this, I had Related to me by John Carpenter, the Father of
the Deceased, next day after her Burial: July the Second: I fully Discoursed
the Matter with the Nurse, and two Neighbors, to whose House she went that
Morning.

Two days after, I had it from the Mother, the Minister that was with her in
the Evening, and the Woman who sat up with her that last Night: They all agree
in the same Story, and every one helps to strengthen the others Testimony:

They appear to be Sober Intelligent Persons, far enough off from Designing to
impose a Cheat upon the World, or to manage a lie, and what Temptation they
should lie under for so doing, I cannot conceive.

Sir, that God would bless your pious Endeavors for the Conviction of Atheists
and Sadduces, and the promoting of true Religion and Godliness; and that this
Narrative may conduce somewhat toward the farthering of that great Work, is
the hearty Desire and Prayer of

Tour most faithful Friend, and humble Servant, Tho. Tilson, Minister of
Aylesford, nigh Maidstone in Kent.
Aylesford, July 6. 1691.
Mr. Thomas Woodcocke's Letter in relation to Witches and Apparitions;
together, with four Stories enclosed therein, all relating to the same Subject.
SIR,
I Have herein sent you those four Stories I had the remembrance off, when I
was with you last, which I have subscribed my Name to. But who can prove any
thing Rationally to them who have not so much Reason as to know their own
Souls? All of this Tribe are of that mind, to believe nothing but what they see
themselves. But as Religio Medici says, The Devil has them in too fast a
Noose, for to appear to them would be to convert them from their Error. He
rather delights to be their God than to prove himself a Devil, and so torment
their Thoughts too soon. They assert and admire the Omnipotency of Matter, but
in the mean time are insensible of the spring of Motion; they are so full of
Seconds they will not own a First Mover: It Is strange Arithmetic, that two
should not suppose one, and as bad Geometry to have Circumference without a
Center. But I fear you will but spend Arguments on them who are resolved not to
yield to any Evidence; for it is the Interest of their Lusts neither to believe
God nor a Devil. Yet I remember a story of one at Colchester, who in a Bravado,
and Defiance of the Devil, would walk in the Night to the Churchyard, where it
was reported he appeared and walked, and he met him in the shape of a Black Dog
with terrible Eyes, which brought him by Terrors into such a mind, that he was
never quiet in his Mind till he got into good Society. Coming to Mr.
Shepheard's at Coln, Mr. Harlakenden stayed him, though Mr. Shepherd was gone:
He lodged there, and when at Prayer, the Black Dog was seen by the Man as if he
would have torn Mr. Harlakenden's Throat out, but he was in his House and Duty,
and neither saw nor feared: And this Man continued long in this condition,
proved a most serious Christian, always had some appearance of this Dog, as a
Fly or a Flea, and various shapes; and even at his Death, lying long sick, had
great Peace and Victory over the fear of Death, and was so joyful and desirous
to be diss^^ved, that this Dog or Flea made no impression upon him; when had it
been a Melancholic Fancy it would have been worst at so dark an Hour, when the
Humors are up and the Spirits down. This Story I had also from Mr.
Harlakenden, but it is not to be cast before such Swine as this Epicurean Age
abounds with, who, if Christ himself was on Earth, with the Gadarens, would
rather get rid of him, than lose their Herd of Hogs. But I tire you, the Lord
support you, and give you the Joy of Faith, the Blessed prospect of Hope, and
that Cordial of Love which is stronger than Death;

I am Your worthless Brother and Servant in the Lord, T. Woodcocke.
July 17. 91.
Here follow the four Stories, mentioned in the foregoing Letter.
I. Mr. Mun, Rector of Stockerson in Leicestershire, had a Daughter married to
one Mr. Beecham, Rector of Branston in Rutland; in whose House it was
frequently observed, that a Tobacco-pipe would move it self from off a Shelf at
one end of the Room, to another Shelf at the other end of the Room, without any
Hand. Mr. Mun visiting his Son-in Law, took a Pipe of Tobacco in that Room, and
looked for some such Motion; but a great Bible, instead of a Pipe, moved it
self off from a Desk at the lower end of the Room, and cast it self into his
Lap. Whereupon he opened the Bible at Genesis 3. 15. saying, Come, Satan; I Will
show thee thy Doom: The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's Head. Avoid
Satan.

This Mr. Mun himself told me, when in the Sickness-Year, 1665. I lived in
Stockerson-Hall. I have no reason to suspect the Veracity of a sober Man, a
constant Preacher, and a good Scholar.

II. Dr. Lamb, who was killed by the Mob, for a Conjurer, about 1640. met one
Morning Sir Miles Sands and Mr. Barbor in the Street, and invited them to go
and drink their Mornings Draught at his House: Discoursing about his Art, he
told them, if they would hold their Tongues, and their Hands from meddling with
any thing, he would show them some Sport. So falling to his Practice, in the
middle of the Room springs up a Tree; soon after appeared three little Fellows,
with Axes on their Shoulders, and Baskets in their Hands, who presently fell to
work, cut down the Tree, and carried all away. But Mr. Barbor observing one
Chip to fall on his Velvet Coat, he slips it into his Pocket. That Night, when
he and his Family were in Bed, and asleep, all the Doors and Windows in the
House opened and clattered, so as to awaken and affright them all. His Wife
said, Husband, you told me you was at Dr. Lamb's this Day, and I fear you
meddled with something. He replied, I put a Chip into my Pocket. I pray you,
said ^he, fling it out, or we shall have no Quiet. He did so, and all the
Windows and Doors were presently shut, and all quiet, so they went to sleep.

Dr. Barbor and Major John Barbor, who married my only Sister, told me this
Relation, who had it again and again from their Father and Mother; and I know
no reason to doubt of the truth of it. This Mr. Barbor laid the first Stone in
building of Covent Garden.

III. When I was a Schoolboy at Oundle in Northamptonshire; about the Scots
coming into England, I heard a Well, in one Dobs's Yard, drum like any Drum
beating a March. I heard it at a distance: Then I went and put my Head into the
Mouth of the Well, and heard it distinctly, and no Body in the Well. It lasted
several Days and Nights, so as all the Country People came to hear it. And so
it drumm'd on several Changes of Times.

When King Charles the Second died, I went to the Oundle-Carrier, at the
Ram-Inn in Smithfield; who told me their Well had drumm'd, and many People came
to hear it. And I heard, it drumm'd once since.

IV. Mr. Harlakenden, who lived at ColuPriory in Essex, (where I often was, his
only Son being my Pupil,) formerly the House of the Earls of Oxford: Off from
the House was a Tomb House, with a Chamber over it; his Butler, Robert Crow,
and William, his Coach man, used to lie in that Room. At Two of the Clock in
the Morning there was always the sound of a great Bell tolling: They affirming
it so, Mr. Harlakenden slept in the Evening, so as to be awaked at One of the
Clock, and lay betwixt his two Servants to satisfy himself. At Two of the
Clock comes the usual Sound of a great Bell tolling, which put him into a
Fright and Sweat, so as he jogged his Servants; who awaking, said, Hark, Tom is
at his Sport, It revived him to hear them speak. Upon a particular Occasion,
Mr. Thomas Shepherd, (who after went to New England,) with some other
Ministers, and good People, spent a Night in Prayer, and had some respect to
the place, serving God, to cast out the Devil: And from that time, never was
any such noise heard in the Chamber.

This I had from Mr. Harlakenden's own Mouth, and his Servants, Ear-witnesses,
when I was upon the place.

Ita Testatur Tho. Woodcocke.

CHAP. VIII. Of good Angels, and some doubtful Spirits, and their notable
Actions.
THis sort of Operations is of more pleasant Consideration than the Diabolical,
and as convincing of the Agency of Superior Spirits on things below; but so
many have written of it, as makes my farther Labor needless. Let them that
would see more, read Mr. Isaac Ambrose of our Communion with Angels, the Lord
Lawrence, Mr. Samuel Clark's Mirror, Zanchy de Angelis, etc.

Bodin tells us of one of his Acquaintance, that had a good Genius that would
always give him notice when he did ill, by a stroke; and what he should do when
he omitted it. I pass by old Writers.

I will mention now but these few.

I. That of Mr. Tate in Ireland, mentioned by Mr. Clark, and Mr. Ambrose, and
confirmed to me by his near Relations that knew of it. Dr. Tate, with his Wife
and Children, being stripped, and forced to flee for their Lives, by the Irish,
when they were murdering Thousands in their Rebellion in 1641. They were
wandering in unknown places upon Commons covered with Snow; and having no Food,
and she carrying a Sucking Child, and having no Milk, she went to lay down the
Child to die; and on the Brow of a Bank she found a Suck-bottle with sweet Milk
in it, no Footsteps appearing in the Snow of any that should bring it thither,
and far from any Habitation; which preserved the Child's Life, who after became
a Blessing to the Church.

II. When Prince Rupert marched with his Army through Lancashire, to
York-Fight, where he was overthrown, the Town of Bolton made some Resistance in
his Passage, and he gave them no Quarter, but killed Men and Women. When he was
gone, those that escaped came out from the places where they lurked, and an old
Woman found in the Streets a Woman killed, and a Child by her not dead: The old
Woman took up the Child, and to still its crying, put her own Breast to the
Child, which had not given Suck, as I remember, of above twenty Years: The
Child being quieted, she presently perceived Milk to come; and continued to
give the Child sufficient Milk, till it was provided for. I had the full
Assurance of this from my worthy Friend, Mrs. Hunt, Wife to Mr. Rowland Hunt,
of Harrow on the Hill; who told me, that she her self was one that was
appointed by the Committee to make Trial of the Case, and she found it true,
and the old Woman's Breasts to give the Child Milk, as was reported. And she
told me in 1665, that the said Child was at that time alive, a Servant-woman in
London.

III. Though I lay no great stress on the Reports of those Papists who corrupt
Church History by Fabulous Mixtures, yet many Histories of the Ministry of
Angels, cited by them out of the Fathers, are credible. Those that have purged
their Legends, retain a great number. Baronius, and De la Cerda and many
others, are worth the reading by the Judicious, that can discern the different
Probabilities. But to deny all the Ejecting of Devils, and the Wonders
mentioned by Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine, Sulpitius,
Severas, those of Gregory Thaumaturgus, Martin, etc. (though some may be
over-aggravated;) besides those in Historians, Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen,
Victor Vticensis, Procopius, Nicephorus, Theodoret, etc. would be unreasonable,
and unchristian Incredulity. I have formerly mentioned the African Bishops or
Preachers, who all spoke well when their Tongues were cut out by the Command of
the Arrian King: And Victor, AEnaeas Gazaeus and Procopius (as I remember, all
three) said, they saw them, and heard them speak after. But one of them says,
that one of the Bishops was after drawn into the Sin of Fornication, and his
Speech went away again.

It Is strange if all the Stories in Caesarius should be false.

IV. De la Cerda says, that Albertine a Jesuit told him, that a young Man came
hastily to him to confess; and told him: O Sir, says he, I could not stay, so
strange a thing has befallen me! I and my Companion were resolved, in Revenge
against one that had wronged me, to go after him, into the Fields, and kill
him: And while I was setting my Pistol in order, that I might not miss, a
beautiful young Man stood by me, and asked me what I was about? And when I
denied to tell him, he told me, that he knew my purpose, and dissuaded me; and,
in short, did so open the Sufferings of Christ for his E^^mies, and what Sins
he had forgiven us, and bound us to forgive one another, that I was melted into
Tears, and my Mind changed; and the young Man vanished away. (An Angel, if
true.)

V. I Will make no Application of it to the Cause in our late War; but I knew
(...) many strange Preservations. One credib^^ Person had a Bullet shot through
the fe^ of his Hat, and stopped at the Lining, and hurt him not. Another had a
small Bible in his Pocket, and a Musket-Bullet shot into his Bible, which saved
his Life.

The Story of Sir Richard Greenvile's Executions is printed already by Mr.
Clark, and others. To confirm it, Mr. Kettleby Woodhouse, (Sister's Son to
Justice Kettleby, and to Walter Kettleby the Bookseller's Father,) a sober,
credible Man, then living in Bewdeley, often told me, that he was one of the Five
(or Seven) whose Lives were saved: Being Soldiers for the Parliament, and taken
Prisoners, Sir Richard Greenvile commanded them all to be hanged. The first Man
being turned off the Ladder, a new Hempen Rope brake: They sent for another,
and hanged him again, and that brake; and, as I remember, a third. Whereupon
Sir R. G. saved them all. And Mr. Woodhouse all the while stood by the Gallows,
expecting his Turn, and by this escaped. It Is like it was by an invisible Power.

VI. In 1662. came out diverse Books of new Prodigies, most of them as
Executions on notorious Sinners, and some as Deliverances of better Men. I read
them, and enquired after the Matter of Fact; and I found by what Policy Satan
has perverted History, and obscured the Honor of God's Works, by causing
weak-headed, factious Persons to over do. I found many of the Strange, things
there mentioned, had sufficient Proof: But the Writers dropped in many
Circumstances and Stories, by partial Credibility, that were not true. And this
frustrated the Books, and the Prodigies, by spoiling the Credit of all the rest.

VII. I know not what to impute it to, that Lightnings and Thunderbolts fall
more upon Churches, than upon Castles and City Stone Walls, or any such
Buildings. IerseyCastle indeed was torn with the Gunpowder, set on fire by
Lightning, (as Heydelberg had terribly been as a Presage of the greater Evil
following:) And what was it but an invisible Power, that there caused the
Lord's Child, that was Governor, to be blown up, and cast down again on the
Leads, without Hurt? Angels have a special Care of Infants.

The Church that my Grandmother w^ bo^ near, had a Ball of Fire, by Ligh^ning,
came in at the Belfrey-window, an^ turned up the Grave-stones, and went out a^
the Chancel-window.

The Church that I was baptized in (Hig^ Ercall, close to the Lord Newport's
House had, in such a Storm, the Leads (...) and cast on the backside of the
(...) (land in the War, was levelled (...) Ground.)

The Church of Anthony in Cornwall, near Plymouth, was torn by Lightning at the
time of Worship, on Whit-Sunday, 1640. and People hurt, and ones Brains struck
up to a Pillar. (It is in Print.)

So was used much like, the Church of Withicombe in Devonshire, near the same
time.

The Church where the present Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex,
his Ancestors Monuments were, was torn by Lightning that came in at the
Steeple, melted the Bells, and went up to the Chancel, and there tore the
Monuments in pieces. I saw pieces of the Monuments, that had some of the Golden
Letters, which a truly worthy Lady brought home, that went from
TunbridgeWaters, to see the Church.

Many and many Churches have been thus torn, proportionably so much beyond all
other Buildings, especially of Stone, that I cannot but think there is some
knowing Agent that makes the Choice, though I know not who, nor why.

Except a few Hay-Ricks, I remember not that till this Seventy sixth Year of my
Age, I have known Lightenings to have had Hurting Power on any Buildings but
Churches, save very rarely, and small, as this last Year, at Islington, it
entered a House, and killed a Woman and Child:) Nor to have torn any Wood but
Oak, (which in Trees and Buildings I have seen torn where I dwelt.) But diverse
persons have been killed and scorched by it. An Eminent Knight, that I knew, is
commonly said to have been struck dead by it in his Garden.

VIII. Though Hurricanes and Whirlwinds have Natural Causes, yet I have great
cause to think, that they are managed by some Spirits (as I said before of
Storms) Gunpowder works in Guns according to its nature; but if some Rational
Agent did not invent, make, and manage it, all its Power, would be of little
use. I have marvelled to see my own small Linen spread out by Servants to dry,
to be suddenly caught up, and carried over the Town and Steeple away, and never
more heard of. Near the time when some Reapers in the Vale of Evesham were
hurt, writhen, and one killed with a Whirlwind, I was walking in a Gravelly Way
in a Corn-field, there being a Lane besides me, between two Hedges; suddenly a
Whirlwind came up the Cart-way, casting up the Gravelly Sand directly to meet
me; when it came within Ten or Twelve Yards of me, I was about stepping out of
the way into the Corn, to escape it, but it suddenly turned out of the way to
the Right Hand, into the Lane from me, so as persuaded me, that it was a
voluntary Motion, directed by a friendly Power; for it went straight on up the
Lane, and tore the Hedges and Branches of the Trees on the side of the Lane^
But these are small effects to what other see, especially of the great
Hurricanes at Sea in the West Indies. The Spirits that Rule in the Air have
great Power of the Airy Motions.

IX. Though Porphyry, and Proclus, and Iamblicus, tell us, that bad Demons will
often speak for good Actions and against bad, in Pride and Subtilty to be thought
good; yet it is hard to think that it is not rather a good Spirit, that speaks
for some notable good Work, where no by-End is discernable. As that mentioned
by Mr. Glanvil and Dr. More of Dr. Britton's Wife, whose likeness appeared
after Death to her Servant-Maid, and showed her a parcel of Land that was as
part of her Brothers, and told her* it belonged to the Poor, and was unjustly
alienated from them; and bid her tell the Possessor, that he must restore it;
and gave her a Secret to tell him if he refused: And upon the angry refusal,
when he heard the Secret, he yielded and restored the Land to the Poor, who now
possess it.

X. The said Heathen Philosophers say, that they are all bad Spirits that seek
to be worshipped, and that to procure it, they will seem to be Religious, but
will tell many Lies for one Truth, and that lying is a chief mark to know them
by. By this I suspect that there are bad Spirits that come to speak for the
getting so many Masses to be said for them to deliver them from Purgatory, and
such Pilgrimages to be performed: And those that tempt the People to Pray to
them and to Honor them; for their Services and Prayers for them, of which
their Legends abound with Instances: De la Cerda concludes his Book of Angels
with Forms of such Prayers: And what Office has not such? De la Cerda, lib.
23. cites Miraculous Appearances of the Cross, and so do many others, which I
leave to the Readers Judgment. As also the Lady of Lauretto's Miracles, and
others such, which many write of.

XI. I think some Rational Spirit was probably the Agent of what was written by
our great Pious Credible Surgeon and Physician, Fabricius Hildanus, Obser.
Cent. 3. obs. 26. [A Noble and Virtuous Lord, Job. a Rosle, going for his
Studies to Friburg, with two Servants, on the way, rose a great Storm, with
Thunder, Lightening, and Rain: His Servant persuaded him to let him ride close
to him, and cover him with his Cloak; so joining their Horses they rode under
one Cloak: A great stroke of a Thunderbolt struck down the Master, the Servant,
and both the Horses; the Servant and two Horses immediately were dead: The
Nobleman, by God's keeping, escaped safe and sound, yet no hurt was seen on the
Horses, nor on the Servant, save on his Hat, which had a great Hole; and the
Head after swelled and turned black: But on the Nobleman himself were all these
Marvels; 1. The Thunderbolt struck him about the Left-Arm, and there made a
hole through the Sleeve of his Doublet and Shirt, and made a black mark on the
Skin which remained, but without hurt. The hole in the Sleeve was small without
and great within. 2. Thence it descended, and broke in pieces some Coral Beads
of a Bracelet which he wore on his Arm, but broke not the String. 3. Then on
his Left-side, his Sword Sheath being tied, it melted the point of his Sword as
if it had been Lead; and by melting the gilded Iron, it made a hole in the Band
for its passage out. 4. And on both his Ancles were black spots like Pitch, and
are yet visible.

Another riding a Stones cast before him, his Horse and he were cast down, but
without hurt, save the loss of his Hearing.] Hildanus saw the Clothes, Boots,
and Sword, and had all from the Man himself.

CHAP. IX.
IN my Unreasonableness of Infidelity, having many other Testimonies of Satan's
War against Christ and his Kingdom, I will here mention one, which elsewhere
also I have mentioned; and that is the Case of melancholy, distracted and
Enthusiastic Persons, which clearly prove a Diabolical War.

I. As to melancholy Persons: I think, few Men in England have had more
advantage to know their Case, than I have had. I know not how it comes to
pass, but in the Country, and in London, multitudes that are melancholy are
sent by their Friends, or of themselves come to me, imagining that I can
counsel them for Soul and Body; so that they have taken up a great part of my
time. And in almost all I perceive, besides their Disease, that a malignant
Spirit, by advantage of it, does agitate them incessantly against God and Jesus
Christ, and against themselves, as he acts Witches to do mischief to others.
I know that the Disease it self is, to the Imagination, as disquieting as a
Dislocation or Lameness is to a Joint: But there is some malignant Spirit that
drives it so importunately to Mischief. chief. They are constantly tempted to
selftormenting Thoughts, to despair and cry, Undone, undone; and to think that
the Day of Grace is past, and that they have committed the unpardonable Sin;
and any thing that may keep their Minds on a tormenting Rack.

And they are strongly at last tempted to destroy themselves: If they see a
Knife, t^^y feel as if one within them said, Now cut thy (...) or s^^b thy
self: Do it, do it. If they go by a Water they feel as if one urged them
presently to leap in. And often are they urged vehemently to hang themselves,
or to cast themselves headlong from some high place. And, alas! many do it. And
it is so in other Lands, as well as here. How many does Platerus, in his
Observations, tell us of, that near him, in Helvetia, destroyed themselves.

And it is to be noted, that unless it be God's Judgment for some heinous
Crime, it is few of the ungodly Rabble that have any such Trouble and
Temptation; for Satan holds them faster by presumptuous Unbelief, and
Carelessness, and worldly Love, and Pleasure: But those that will not be so
deceived, that he cannot torment hereafter, he would torment here. Alas! diverse
Persons have I known thus destroy themselves, who I have great reason to
believe were as really Godly as any that I have known.

But Satan's Advantage was in their Disease and Temper: As he can tempt a
Phlegmatic Man to Sloth, and a holerick Man to Anger, and a Sanguine Man to
Lust, or sinful Pleasure; so can he a Melancholy Man to Despair and
Self-destruction, and against God.

2. And they are impetuously tempted against God and Jesus Christ: They are so
haunted with blasphemous Thoughts, to think ill of God, or to deny Christ or
the Scripture, that they have no rest: And these come in at Prayer, at Sermon,
at Sacrament; and they have no more power to keep them out, or turn their
Thoughts another way, almost, than they have of the Thoughts of another. Yea,
somewhat urges them from Day to Day, to speak some ill, blasphemous word of
God, or of Christ; and if they yield to the Importunity, it presently, as it
were, says within him, Now thou art damned: There is now no Hope. And it is
much to be noted, that let the Person be Religious, or not, they usually are
all thus tempted alike: For worldly Crosses and Discontents do make bad People
sometimes melancholy; and they also have much of the same Solicitations. So
that the manner of their Trouble plainly tells us, that it is of the Devil

And yet Physic may do much to cure it, because it takes from the Devil that
Instrument, or bodily Disposition, without which he cannot do his Work.

And it is not for nothing, that in the Gospel the Distracted and Epileptick
are said to be possessed of Devils; for he may cause the Disease, and work by
it accordingly when he has done it.

I have often marvelled that the Worst are not as commonly distracted by Sadness,
as better People: But besides the Reason before given, there is a peculiar Sin
that brings this of its Nature, and so lets the Devil in; and that is,
Over-valuing some worldly thing, and then falling into Discontent and
Impatience at the loss or want of it. He that breaks down his own Hedge or
Wall, lets in the Trespasser or Thief. He that cannot take God and Heaven as
enough to content him, is better without his Idol, than to find Content in it.
It Is meet that Child be left to cry, that will cry if he may not have his Will;
and that will hurt him worse than crying. He that will add to God's
Corrections, the Self-Torment of sinful Impatience, shall find Satan ready to
farther his Work. God is disobliged, when he is not trusted: And if we consent
not that he do with us what he will, he will not do what we impose upon him:
His Wisdom, and not our Flesh and Folly, must determine of all his Way and Work.

II. And there have been many Enthusiasticks that Satan has notoriously
deluded, by pretended Angelical Revelation, for some great increase of
Knowledge: You may find many sad Instances in Epiphanius, and other Histories
of the old Heretics. And few Ages since have been without some such.

The Madness of John of Leydens Munster Rebels showed it; what Zeal and seeming
Fortitude did their deceiving Spirit inspire them with, while by Murders they
cried up their new Sion? Leo Judah witnesses, that when the Flesh was pulled
off Clipper dolling with hot Pincers, he scarce uttered a Complaint or great
regard of the pain.

Satan's Hand was notorious in the delusions of David George in Holland, and of
Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington here.

The horrid Wickedness of the Ranters here, proclaimed him to be their Teacher.

When the Quakers first rose here, their Societies began like Witches, with
Quaking, and Vomiting, and Infecting others, with breathing on them, and tying
Ribbons on their Hands. And their Actions as well as their Doctrine showed
their Master. When some, as propesying, walked through the Streets of Cities
naked; and some vainly undertook to raise the Dead (as Susan Pierson at
Worcester:) And usually they disturbed and publicly reviled the most Godly
Ministers worse than the most debauched of the Rabble did.

He that would know how manifestly Satan ruled such Enthusiasts in Germany, may
read it at large in Beckman's Exercitations, and in the Life of Paracelsus,
testified by Opporinus, that lived with him as his Servant, and others that
were affrighted with his Drunken Rage and Satanical Converse.

And how dangerous it is to desire such Converse with Angels and Spirits, as
God has not judged suitable to our Condition here in the Flesh, the case of
Jacob Behmen and Dr. Pordage here, and his Society may tell us. His chief
Proselyte, Companion and Successor (whose name I mention not for the sake of
his Worthy Kindred) condescended to open secretly to me in Writing, his
Judgment, by which I soon saw that their Guide differed much from the
Scripture. One of extraordinary Learning and Reputation, was a while distracted
by going to them, to try their Way. Some of my very much esteemed Friends have
been distracted, and overcome with Melancholy, by studying Behmen and that way.
What Dr. Pordage his Doctrine was, you may see partly in his Posthumous
Mystical Theology, published by his Friend Dr. Hooker. Mr. Fowler of Reading
accused him as a Conjurer, and he has published his Defense in Folio, (which I
may the rather mention, because in it he has made use of my name against Mr
Fowler, as speaking against me, for our difference in explaining the Doctrine
of Imputed Righteousness.) In this Defense the Dr. confesses, that the Devil
was too familiar in his House (where a Society lived with him that kept their
Exercises and Hours of singing Night and Day.) He (and his Friends) pretended
that he knew when good Spirits and when bad ones were about him, by Smells and
Gusts, and the temper of their Sense and Spirits. And he confesses, that in
his great Room, the Devil appeared to him by Night in the likeness of a Fiery
Dragon that almost filled the Room, and long conflicted with him. And that once
he made on the Brick-Wall, over his Chimney, the likeness of a Coach drawn by
Tigers, so deeply impressed, that they were fain to use a Pick-Ax to cut it out
of the Bricks: And that the like Impression was on the Glass of his Windows,
which they could not wash out. But all this he imputed to Everard that intruded
into his Society, taking him to be the Conjurer: And he says, that when he was
gone, he appeared to him in the Night, walking in his Chamber in Boots and
Spurs.

So that Diabolical Apparitions, and open Effects were confessed by him, as his
Book declares.

Among others, I think meet to add the History of some Enthusiasticks that I
have known, not as a Condemnation of their Opinions, but of the way of
receiving them.

A Country Man of Inkburrough Parish (as he said) in Worcestershire, came to me
to Acton near London, to tell me, that God had revealed to him the truth of
that thousand Years Reign of Christ on Earth; and he was possessed with a
strong Zeal to propagate it, and I must needs promote the publication of his
Papers. I examined him how he came to his knowledge of it, and I found it was
not by any hard Study, nor Zeal in Religion, nor by Reading any Book for it,
nor by Converse with any of that Opinion, for he had been no such Man, nor had
come among such: But it was by seeming Revelation, finding him Ignorant and
Enthusiastical, I displeased him, by advising him to suppress his Papers; and I
after heard that he turned distracted.

At Coventry there dwelt with me in the Governors House, Major Wilkie, a
Scottish Soldier, and a Scholar of considerable Learning; he was Engineer for
Fortification. He would drink too much, and had the signs of a heated Brain,
but no failing of his Reason perceivable. He confidently affirmed his constant
notice of Spirits good and bad about him; that he had a good Genius and an
Enemy: That one Night his Enemy said, I have torn his Liver, and that he made a
Chamber Pot full of Blood in the Morning: He was confident, that Thunder and
Lightning was the Wars of Spirits, foretelling and respecting such things
below: He pretended to know by the Thunder and Lightning which side in the Wars
should have the Victory: In 1643 or 1644, about a Year and half after the Wars
begun, he said, That it was revealed to him, that the War should endure three
Years and an half, and the Parliament should Conquer; but their own Divisions
should after keep them long unsettled. He said, that being in Paris, in a clear
Moonshine Night (many Years before) being walking in his Chamber, and repeating
Buchanan's Version of the second Psalm, Quare fremuerunt gentes, etc. suddenly
a great noise made him look out, and he saw a Constellation in the shape of a
Lion Rampant against the Moon, and while he long gazed on it, one Leg broke
off, and turned to the similitude of a Cock, and after the three other Legs
broke off. And when he was in Bed his good Spirit expounded it to him, and told
him, that the Moon was the Church here, and the Assaulting Lion was England,
Wales, and Ireland, by the King turned against the Church: that the Foot first
broken off, was Scotland, as a Cock, by crowing awakened the other three, and
that all should end in Conquest of the Assailants.

And his Genius taught him the Millenary Reign of Christ, and taught him how to
Expound many Texts for it; as drinking with them the Fruit of the Vine new,
that is, in its renewed Paradise state; and the time of Restitution of all
things, etc. And he Expounded to him many other Scriptures, as that the Devils
Contending about the Body of Moses, was, that it might be drowned in the Basket
of Bulrushes to prevent what he was to do, etc.

How much of this was true or false, I know not; but I heard credibly, that
after some time he was quite distracted, partly through want, and partly by a
hot Brain, overheated too often with drinking.

What but Diabolical Delusion and Instigation, could make Venner and his
Followers that were for the Millenary Fifth Monarchy, to arise so madly as two
days to come into such a City, and think by Arms to conquer all Opposers, at
King Charles II. his beginning of the new Prelatical way of Church Government:
Men in their Wits would not have so hasted to the Gallows.

A little after the K. Chapter II. Parliament and Bishops began the overthrowing,
dividing Works, which Bartholomew day, Aug. 24. 1662. did bring to open Birth,
a Gentlewoman of London came to me secretly with her Sister as Witness,
(Persons as commonly called of Quality and Moderation) to be resolved how to
Expound a strange thing that had befallen her, which was, That [ as she was
praying in Secret, she begged for Deliverance of the Church and Religion, and
Ministers from the dreaded Sufferings that were determined, and the sad effects
of Persecution, Division and public dangers; and it was suddenly given her, as
an Answer, that there should be a speedy Deliverance, even in a very short
time. She desired to know which way; and it was by somewhat on the King, which
I refused to hear out, whether it was Change or Death; it being set strongly on
her as a Revelation, she earnestly prayed, that if this were a true Divine
Impulse and Revelation, God would certify her by some visible sign; and she
ventured to choose the Sign her self, and laid her Hand on the outside of the
upper part of her Leg, and begged of God, that if it were a true Answer, he
would make on that place some visible mark; and there was presently the mark of
black spots, like as if a Hand had burnt it; which her Sister witnessed, she
saw presently, and after, there being no such thing before.

I told her, that she had sinfully tempted God, and gone out of his way into a
way of her own, and God might justly for it, give Satan power to deceive her:
But yet, whether it would prove a Truth or a Falsehood, it was not I, but the
Event that must tell her, and therefore that she must wait in Patience and
Innocence, and lay no stress on such a sign.

But the Woman's strange Impulse and Mark proved but a Delusion.

The Rosie-Crucians, and such as addict themselves to find the Philosopher's
Stone, have some of them seemed to be deluded by some Evil Spirit; by the
violence of their Desires, and the blind confidence of their Expectations, and
the ill Means that some have used: Histories of such are too many to be
recited. Faelix Platerus, in his Observat. l. 1. tells us of one of his
Familiars, a Person of Honor and Wealth, a Baron, and Religious, and addicted
to good Works, that was so set upon it, that he not only so spent his Time and
Study, but his Estate, reducing himself and his Family to great Poverty; and
yet would never abate his Confidence, that he was near attaining it: And though
still frustrate, he was still near it: Insomuch that he labored with the
Magistrates for their Grant and Power, that with the Gold he made he might
build a new Bridge over the River, and might build a College for the
University, etc. and though he died a poor Man, and left his Children Poor, he
believed to the last, that he was near finding out what he fought, had he had
longer life.

To such deluded by Spirits, I think I may add the Comforts of many Persons
that I have known, that long lived in doubt of their Salvation, next Despair:
And when a Deceiver has but drawn them to change their Religion from Sound
Doctrine to some Error, they have presently been delivered from their Troubles,
and lived in Peace and Confidence. It cannot be from the Nature of the New
Doctrines received; for it befalls diverse that turn to contrary Doctrines from
each other: Some that turn Papists, some that turn Quakers, some Anabaptists,
some Antinomians, some Millenaries, and are against each other, yet have sudden
Peace upon their change. I confess, that the conceit of having found out a
better way may do much; and the diversion of their thoughts to dispute may do
much: As Pet. Forestus tells us of a Melancholy Papist, that after other means
used in vain, was at last cured by eager disputing against the Protestants: But
when the Persons before had no doubt of the Doctrines of Religion, but only of
the state of their own Souls, and when they had no such Disputes to bring them
to it, but sudden hearing a Seducer, and when it is only False Doctrine that
comfort them, when sound Doctrine professed, could not, it seems to be
done by a lying Spirit that comfort Men with Evil, as God's Spirit does with
Good.

Bodin tells us of a French Baron that confessed, that he worshipped the Devil,
and prayed to him, and had Sacrificed nine Children to him, and intended to
have Sacrificed one of his own; and he asked him for what he did this? And he
said, That he promised to make him Great, and yet that he never gave him any
thing, and to make him know what he desired to know, and yet told him more Lies
than Truths: This promise of Knowledge was the old Temptation to Eve: And yet
Knowledge is the great Gift of our great Comforter, the Holy Ghost; so that
there is a true Comforting Knowledge which God gives, and deceitful shadow of
it; and a useless hurtful Knowledge by which Satan comfort the deluded: Its
true, Needful Saving Knowledge that is of God: Many Conjurers have by the
desire of knowing what vain Curiosity is pleased with, become the Devil's
Slaves.

To what sort shall we rank those Men that tell Men of things stolen and lost,
and that show Men the Face of the Thief in a Glass, and cause the Goods to be
brought back, who are commonly called White Witches: We have had so many
Credible Reports of such, as allows not Reason to doubt of it. When I lived
at Dudley, Hodges at Sedgley, two Miles off (even where famous William Fenner
preached) was long and commonly accounted such a one: And when I lived at
Kederminster, one of my Neighbors affirmed, that having his Yarn stolen, he
went to Hodges (ten Miles off) and he told him, that at such an Hour he should
have it brought home again, and put in at the Window, and so it was; and as I
remember, he showed him the Persons Face in a Glass; yet I do not think that
Hodges made any known Contract with the Devil, but thought it was an effect of
Art.

CHAP. X. Other Strange Providence observable.
I Have, in other Treatises, named some Instances of such Success of Prayer, as
has not been unprofitable to me: I will here mention some of them, and add
some more.

Only I will premise this Caution to the Reader. 1. That it is no certain sign
of the Innocence or Sanctity of the Person delivered, that it was done by a
wonderful manner upon Prayer. Nay, it is not unusual, for the Guilt of some
great Sin, to bring the Suffering, from which by Prayer they are delivered; and
God may hear others, for the deliverance of such Sinners.

2. Nor is it any certain sign of the Sanctity of those whose Prayers are so
heard, (though it be a very encouraging Mercy to them,) any more than
Prophesying, and Casting out Devils, and doing wonderful Works in the Name of
Christ, Mat. 7. was a Proof that the Agents were not rejected Workers of
Iniquity. It is the Honor of God, and the Regard which he has to the Faith
and Prayers of the Distressed, or others, and of the Souls that he would
convince; which these, and such like Instances do declare.

3. And I will omit many Instances of Persons recovered from the Jaws of Death,
just at the Hour while we have been praying for them; for, though this be much
to me, it will not be so to the Unbeliever, who will say, that it was not from
that Cause, but would have been if you had not prayed. And I must confess that
I have prayed for the Life of many a dear Friend, whom God has not recovered,
but taken away.

4. Nor will I mention any one Instance of the Success of my own Prayers, or
any others, when I joined with them; but only of some plain, poor, humble,
Godly Persons, who used that sort of fervent Prayer which some deride. For I am
a very unworthy Person my self, in comparison of many of those poor, humble,
blameless Persons, whom I then had the Oversight of.

I. In general, I may say, that I have diverse times, after long disabling
Weakness and Pain, been enabled within a Day or two to come to Church again,
and go on in my Work, when my poor Neighbors have spent a Day in Fasting and
Prayer for me.

II. When at Milborne in Darbyshire I was given up for dead, by bleeding about
an hundred and twenty Ounces at the Nose, after other Weaknesses and Bleedings
many Years, my Father and Mother-in-Law dwelling in Shrewsbury, the Report came
to them there that I was dead. My Mother-in-Law was, by the Governor, and other
Friends, exhorted to bear it patiently. She presently retired to secret Prayer;
where she professes, that a Trembling and Concussion of her Body surprising
her, she felt that which constrained her to say what she did when she came
forth, (to her Friends,) viz. [ He is not dead, but shall live for farther
Service.] And hereupon they sent a Messenger from Shrewsbury to see; who found
me alive,] and brought them the Tidings. This was in February, 1646. My
Mother-in-Law is yet living, about Ninety two Years of Age; the Daughter of Sir
Thomas Hunkes. Two of her Brothers, Sir Foulke Hunkes, and Sir Henry Hunkes,
were known Soldiers for the King; the one Governor of Shrewsbury, and the other
of Banbury-Castle a while. She is one that has spent a great part of her Life
in secret Prayer, with great Neglect of the Flesh and World, and longing to
die, and be with Christ, which she has not yet obtained, but will ere long.
(Since the Writing of this, dead, at Ninety six, in full Understanding, and
great Holiness.)

III. After long Pain and Weakness, reading a Latin Book of one Gerhard, a
Foreign Physician, I found in him, that his own Father had been cured of some
of my Distempers (as I then thought) by daily swallowing a Bullet of purest
Gold: I got one of the weight of a Twenty-Shilling-piece, and swallowed it, but
it remained in me; and hearing of a Gentleman within twelve Miles of me, that
lately did the like, and it never passed from him, but he quickly died, made me
take Clysters and Purges, but none of them stirred it. My poor praying
Neighbors (not then fearing the Canon, which strictly forbids it) set apart
a Day, to fast and pray for my Deliverance; and that Morning it came away,
after many Weeks abode, (three or four;) and they spent the rest of the Day in
Thanksgiving.

IV. In my Weakness, being under Physic with Dr. Wright, then living in
Shrewsbury, there suddenly rose upon one of the Tonsils of my Throat a round
Tumor, seeming to me as hard as a Bone, and about as big as a great Pease, or
small Button, half out of the Flesh, and half in. I feared lest it would prove
a Cancer; but the Doctor told me, he did not think so, but what it was he knew
not; but persuaded (having first tried dissolving and dissipating Means in
vain) to quiet it only with Gargarisms of hot Milk: It increased but little,
but no Means altered it, till (as I remember) about a quarter of a Year after,
my Conscience reproved me, that having had so many great Mercies upon Prayer, I
never gave God the Honor or Thanks of public mentioning them, for fear of
seeming to seek some Glory to my self; being the next Morning to preach my
Lecture, I obeyed my Conscience, and mentioned them in the Words since printed
and published in the Second Part of my Saints Everlasting Rest, being then upon
the proof of the Truth of the Scriptures: I had before constantly felt it, (and
too often looked at in the Glass.) As soon as I had preached and spoken those
Words, I felt no more of it. As I came out of the Pulpit, I put my Finger in my
Mouth to feel it, but could feel nothing: I hasted home to the Glass, and saw
that there was neither Vola, vel Vestigium, vel Cicatrix; no Cavity, Tumor,
Discoloring, nor any sign wherever it was; and I am sure I neither spit it
out, nor swallowed it; and to the last Hour it seemed as hard as a Bone.

V. Richard Cook, a Mercer in Kniver, was long a Man of a pious, unblameable
Life, and one of the chief of good old Mr. John Cross (since Minister here in
Friday-street) his Congregation: When I came to Kederminster, he removed
thither, and took a House the next Door to me; which proved old, dangerous, and
so ill a Bargain, as cast him into melancholy Doubts that he did not well to
leave his Habitation. His Father before him had long lived, and at last died in
Distraction. Taking too much hot Waters, to comfort him in his Sadness, Nature,
Trouble, and those together, prevailed to his utter Distraction. He so
continued, from 1642. to 1646. The best Means, by such as were most noted for
curing that Disease, were used, and all in vain. My Neighbors of Kederminster
resolved not easily to give over Fasting and Praying with and for him, till he
was recovered: Diverse Days all seemed in vain, but at last he amended, and has
been recovered (without any other Remedy) now from 1646, to this present time,
1678, though not altogether of so perfect strength of Brain as before, yet of
competent Understanding. About a Year or two ago I saw him in London, and I
hear he is yet alive and well, 1678.

VI. Thomas Giles, the Son of Mr. Giles of Astley, one of the then Committee in
Worcestershire, was sent to be an Apprentice in Worcester. After a Fever, (as
they told me,) he fell into a violent Epilepsie: After much Physic in
Worcester, and opening his Head, and all in vain, his Mother took him home to
her in Kederminster; where, being a Widow, she came to sojourn, purposely for
the Company of Godly People there. Mr. Iackson, the Physician of the Town, (my
dear and faithful Friend, now, 1678. a Physician in Shrewsbury,) and I
consulting, we used in vain what Means we could. His Fits were sometimes twice
or thrice a Day: We were fain to put a Key into his Mouth, lest he should bite
off his Tongue. At last, the foresaid praying Persons resolved to try the old
Remedy of Fasting and Praying, till he was recovered. The first Day they found
no Success: As I remember, it was the second Day, while they were together,
praying, he was suddenly cured; and as his Mother and they that dwelt with him,
told me, had never one Fit since. Hereupon his Mother bound him Apprentice to
Mr. John Allen, an honest Apothecary in Kederminster, whom he served seven
Years, and is now an Apothecary in Stafford; since dead; Mr. Allen, the
Physician, and almost all that prayed for him, being yet alive. I was present
at none of all these Days my self. If you ask me, Why? 1. My Weakness, and my
public Work much hindered me. 2. I was worse than they, and had not their
Faith, and Fervency, and Patience; and because we have no absolute Promise of
such Deliverances, I was afraid, lest if we fasted and prayed so long as they
resolved to do, it would have turned to some Reproach or Discouragement if we
did not prevail. 3. But I have joined with them more than once, when we have,
to our great Encouragement, prevailed. But those Instances I promised to
pretermit.

In sum, I verily believe that I have been kept alive these forty Years, but
notably these thirty eight, by the Prayers of many better than my self,
prevailing with God, through the Intercession of our great Mediator.

VII. I will add one sad Story, leaving all to the Readers Judgment, to warn
the best to avoid Temptation, and to tell them that Satan has his wiles by
Men's Sin, to blast the Glory and Comfort of Deliverances.

In Bewdley, a Sanguine strong Maid, fell into strange Histerical Fits: It
began by Stoppage of the Menstrua, I gave her Castory and Rad. Ostrutii, and
Sem. Dauci on Fo^estus Commendation, and she began to be better: But I being
driven out of the Country by War, and Mr. Robert Morton (Dr. Mortons Father)
their Pastor and Phy^itian driven after me to Coventry, she was left without
help, and grew worse than ^ver: Till at last I think by a furor uteri^us ex
corruptione Seminis, she seemed possessed by a Devil: In her Fits, many could not
hold her, she would be cast off her Bed, and upon it again, by a force far
above her strength, as the Beholders Judged: They showed Needles and Pins, and
Cords brought to her, none knew how, to kill her self: A Papist coming to Cure
her their way, she told them of his coming far off, and laughed at his Holy
Water. In her fits she would Swear, Curse, and Rage against any that were
Religious, and Hugg those that were Vicious, and be merry with them: Thus she
continued from 1642. till 1646. or 1647. When I returned home, I went to see
her, and Prayed once by her, and came to her no more. At last my praying
Neighbors encouraged by their Success, for others resolved to join with some
of Bewdley, to Fast and Pray by her, till she was recovered: While they were
Praying, she was usually in violent Rage, and after thankt them; after many
days. in the midst of the Day, while Mr. Tho. Ware of Kederminster was Praying,
she fell on the Floor like a Block, and having lain so a while, cried out, He
is gone, He is gone; The Black Dog is gone: And she never had a Fit after.

But coming to our Lecture, two Miles, she was as uncomfortabl^ ^s ever; cryi^^
to me, Oh, You know not (...) (...) I ignorantly told her, what ^om^ort (...)
Deliverance might give her: But she continued her Self-Accusing. But hear the
worst.

She being poor many good People in Charity looked to her in her Fits: But,
above all, one young Man, as far from being suspected of any Hypocrisy,
Error, or Vice, as any in Bewdeley, was more with her than the rest: And
s^eing her, in her Fits, toss her naked Body about, she being strong and
comely, his Lust was provoked, which he exercised on her; but praeterjiciendo
semen; which easing her for the time, enticed him the more to do it often, as an
Act of (Wicked) Compassion; which did but more Enrage her Disease: When
frequency had hardened him, at last after her Deliverance, it was made known:
And O the Advantage that Satan got by it! The sadness of those that Prayed for
her: So that we durst not name it as an Answer of ^rayer, lest the mention
should serve to a Reproach. For my part, I think that a Real possession was
added to the (...), in punishment of their Sin. He M^rryed her, and professed
deep R^pe^^^ce; but I advised them for all that, (...) to receive him to Church
Communion.

I have read and heard of sev^^^ Persons that have ^^d notices by ^^^^ciation,
when ^^y (...) die: I (...) ^^ve here but one Instance, of an excellent young
Man, Mr. Tyro; but I must confess, that one of his Acquaintance affirmed to me,
that having been formerly of a Jocund Merry Temper, he became so very serious
in Religion, and so fervent a Preacher in Vngar, and so Zealous for his own and
other Men's Salvation, that he thought Melancholy might deceive his Imagination,
as to the Voice he was confident he heard. I lay no great stress on the
Instance; but he professed the contrary himself; and Mr. Brand extols him, and
Colonel Rich and his Lady, (well known by Mr. Strong's Books which she
published, taking them in short Characters, then called the Lady Elizabeth
Carre) did both believe him; as you may see by the two following Letters. And
Mr. Lewis in the foregoing Letters, and Mr. Davis telling me how common the
forwarnings of Death, are in their Country, makes it the easier to me to
believe the words of so good and sober a Man as Mr. Tyro.

Colonel Rich of Stondon-Hall in Essex his Letter in relation to Mr. Tyro;
together, with his Ladies relating to the same person.
SIR,
OUR Neighbor, Mr. Hatt, informing your desire to know from my self and Wife,
the Relation of a Providence more than ordinary, with which Mr. Tyro was
exercised before he came a Sick-Resident under my Roof, I must therefore refer
you to the Account, which my Wife herewith gives you, the Truth whereof I am
fully satisfied, which was from Mr. Tyro's own Mouth to her only, when I was at
London, the Narrative of which, she gave me at large the same Night I returned
Home, though I was confirmed in my Belief of it by some Discourse I had with
him afterward, during his Sickness, before which he and I perused several of
your Tractates made public, with a joynt-pleasing Approbation; especially,
that which is entitled, The dying Thoughts; also another, viz. The Crucifying
the World by the Cross of Christ; we having a mutual satisfaction in each
others Converse; his Natural Parts, Gifts and Grace together, with his Holy
Life, constrained my desire and endeavors to accommodate him to his last
Breath, for I found him a true Disciple of Christ our Lord and Master, in whom
I would also be found,

SIR, Your affectionate Servant, Nath. Rich.
Stondon-Hall near Ungar in Essex, May 16. 1691.
The Lady Rich's Letter.
SIR,
IN Obedience to your desire by Mr. Hatt, to have it under my Hand, what he
told you of Mr. Tyro, who was sent by Mr. Brand at Bishops Hall near London, to
Preach at Vngar in Essex; and to prevent mistakes, I think fit, in order to
your Satisfaction, to give you this Account of him; and therein take occasion
to let you know, how great an Honor and Esteem he had for you. Sir, I believe,
had you known him, you would have ranked him among those Worthies that you have
helped to Heaven, for he followed you as you follow Christ. About seven Weeks
before his Death, when there was hope of recovery, he told me, he had something
to tell me, that he had not imparted to any Body, and expressed it thus, When I
was one Evening returning to my Lodging, then at Vngar, from this House, being
then in a good degree of Health, and in a serious frame, meditating by the way,
I heard a voice say, You shall die, and not pass your five and thirtieth Year
of Age, which Voice astonished me greatly, and looking round about me, seeing
no body, put me into great Consternation and Sweat all over me, such as I never
felt (though I dare not compare it to drops of Blood) yet I cannot express how
dreadful it was. You know, Madam, my Principles, and that I am no Enthusiast*
and how cautious I am as to Revelations But I am sure this was no Melancholy
Fancy, but an auricular Voice. After I had a little recovered my self; I begged
of God to discover to me, if this were from him, or a Delusion from Satan, but
still the Impression remained, though I sought God by Prayer most part of that
Night; and you may remember, in my next Visit, I told you, I should die
shortly, but I did not tell you of the Voice I heard. And then he added, This
is my five and thirtieth Year of Age; in July next I shall be so old. And many
other Expressions he added, which is too much for a Letter; but he died in
January 1690. I cannot omit, Sir, to let you know, how much he desired the
happiness of a personal Converse with you; though he did write to you formerly,
when he was under great trouble of Conscience, and you were pleased to write to
him again, though his Name was unknown to you, and God made you instrumental to
his Relief and Comfort: He told me, whenever he heard you preach, there was
such a Presence of God accompanied your Ministry, that he felt both Fear, and
Trembling, and Joy possess him at once. He reading some Book of yours, daily,
whilst he was in my House, especially your Dying Thoughts, which on his
Deathbed, he sent, as the best token of his Love, to his Schoolmaster at
Hackney, Mr. Odely, and shed many Tears upon it, calling it, The sweet and dear
Companion of his Life, charging the Messenger to bid his Master read it, and
prepare to follow him shortly.

I beg your Pardon for this long trouble, I could do no less than express this
Kindness to the Dead, who yet speaks out your great Worth to me, desiring your
Prayers, that his loss to so dark a Corner as ours is, may be Sanctified: And
that your Life may be prolonged in time, and you may have a full Reward in
Eternity, is the Prayer of*

SIR, Your obliged and affectionate Servant, Eliz. Rich.
Stondon-Hall near Ungar in Essex, May 13, 1691.
But it is not my Business to mention all things that are strange and unusual,
but such as prove the Operations of Spirits. Lycosthenes de Prodigiis vel
Mirabilibus, will tell you in Folio of Wonders.

The Falling or Raining of a Grain at Bridge^orth, like a dried Rye-Corn, in a
thin, whitish Husk, about 1639. And of a Grain at Shrewsbury, almost like a
small Parsnip-Seed, about three or four Years ago, seem strange. But
Exhalations might raise them from Sea or Land, though the Marvel lies in the
strangeness of the Grains, neither of them being such as are here known by any
that I showed them to. I had the last from Dr. Iackson, a Physician in
Shrewsbury, (my dear Friend, now with Christ,) who told me that it fell there
in many places, especially about St. Mary's Church. The former (coming to live
at Bridgenorth, 1640.) I had of Mr. Madstard the Minister, and old Mrs. Gray of
Envile, a Godly Woman; who assured me that much of it sell in the Churchyard,
and on the Leads of the Steeple. I kept both long.

The former I once before mentioned; whence the Author of the Second Part of
The Mischiefs of Separation, seconding Dr. Sti^ingsteet's First Part, (samed
commonly to be Mr. Long of Exeter, a Member of the Convocation,) took occasion
to feign me to say, that it rained Maenna at Bridgenorth when I came thither.]
Men and Books of such Veracity are they, that poor England and the Christian
World suffers by; and, I fear, is yet like to suffer more by, while Demons are
so powerful.

There are many things that Ignorance causes Multitudes to take for Prodigies.
I have had many discreet Friends that have been affrighted with the Noise
called a Death-Watch, whereas I have since, near threescore Years ago, often
found by trial, that it is a Noise made upon Paper, by a little, nimble,
running Worm, just like a Louse, but whiter and quicker: And it is most usually
behind a Paper pasted to a Wall, especially to Wainscot; and is rarely, if ever
heard, but in the Heat of Summer.

But who can deny it to be a Prodigy, which is recorded by Melch. Adamus, of a
great and good Man, who had a ClockWatch that had layen in a Chest many Years
unused; and when he lay dying, at Eleven a-Clock, of it self, in that Chest, it
struck Eleven, in the hearing of many.

Because many have spoken and written of a Thorn at Glastenbury in
Sommersetshire, that flowreth just on Christmass-Day, I thought it a thing
worthy my best Enquiries: And lest Men proceed to think that there is more in
it than there is, I annex these following Letters, from credible Persons that
were well known in that Country:

Mr. William Thomas's Letter concerning the Glaston-Thorn: Together with two
other Enclosed Letters to the same purpose.
SIR,
UNderstanding by my Son, your Desire to enquire about Glaston. Thorn, I did
immediately (being not able to travel my self in such a Season) send to such as
I thought might best inform me; whose Information you have in the two enclosed
Letters; the one from the Minister of Glaston, the other from Mr. Che^wind,
Pastor at Wells; both of them understanding and Godly Men. I was not satisfied
with Mr. Winney's Letter, because he wrote not of the Graff taken from this
Thorn, now growing, (when the old Thorn is gone.) Something it seems there was
in the nature of the Plant, for that Graff shoots forth much sooner than any
other Thorn, and about that time, though i^ do not the Feat in blossoming just
on the Day, but after it; which may be because the Soil is not so suitable to
it, as that was to the other. -- I should have thought this had been all the
Wonder, viz. the natural, rare and rath Blossoming of that Thorn, got perhaps
from Foreign Parts,) made (by Fame) to cry Christmas; but that the Information
in the first Letter (and Testimony) is so punctual, that it seems to evince
more. But (howsoever) that which we call Christmass-Day is not to gain its
Estimation from such a Providence, but from Scripture, from Reason, at least,
from a due Demonstration that that was (indeed) the Day of Christ's Birth;
which (perhaps) nothing will prove, unless it be the Thorn. I speak not against
the Custom of the Church, in remembering the Birth of Christ, though I conceive
Christ's own Day is better for it than any other; I mean, the Lord's Day; unto
which, when Men's Days be added, the Lord's Day, and the Lord of that Day,
suffer by their justling with it. A Subordination will not serve, but it
arises to a Coordination and Competition; yea, a Prelation.

But that I speak of is, the Nobilitating of an uncertain Day, upon
insufficient Evidence. -- If I should say, the Thorn might so blossom (by
Providence) as a just Hardening of the wilfully superstitious, (a great part of
whose Religion it is, to put a Crown upon Christmass-Day, caring little for
Christ,) or as a Trial of the truly Conscientious, to see whether they will
build their Religion upon a famous Thorn, and be so tamed by it, as to close
with the Superstition and Profaneness of that time. -- I say, if I should speak
thus, it might be thought a Paradox, (and yet I remember your Lights in Wales,
which show (I think) what God: gives the Devil leave to do.) I shall content my
self therefore with sending you the Relation, and leave you and others (better
able than my self) to consider of it. -- Only this I may say, that such a
Providential Rarity is too low a thing to put a Divinity upon that Day: And
yet, to make it a Divine Testimony is (I think) the meaning of those that are
willing to make the most of it; I do not say, the best of it.

Sir, I am much engaged to you, for your great Pains with my Son; having lately
received from him your good Answers to his Assembly-Queries, with his Replies:
For Reason is restless; and it is the Misery of those who set it up too high,
that it can so far (I do not say so well, f^r ^is all naugh^ as far as
Scripture and it j^rr) thist for it self; and they are apt to think they are
sound, if they be not silenced, when E^^our in Practice has much to s^y for it
self, and Error in Opinion mu^^ ^ore.

Having betaken himself to Dr. Hammond, I did not command him thence, thinking
(he being a learned Man) he might get something from him, especially in the
matter of Original Sin; about which, the Doctor has given him good
Animadversions, (though something in them has not so good an Aspect,) and he
answers them also; and so there is no End, till God humble the Heart. It Is one
Symptom of the Hereditary Disease of Original Sin, that that Sin is no more
acknowledged, and lamented.

God that raises such Alterations in Nations, and has done so strange things
of late, can alter our Relations, and make them contrary to themselves, that
they may be conformable to him: And upon that Ground alone I can build, that To
God all things are possible.

With all loving and thankful Respects,

I Rest, Your obliged Friend and Brother, Will. Thomas.
Obley, Feb. 29. 1659.
Mr. John Chetwind's enclosed Letter.
Reverend and much Honored Sir,
IN answer to your Letter, these are to inform you, That the old Thorn in the
times of the War, was rooted up, and is utterly gone; and as for Mr. Gallop's
Graff, I have enquired of a Gentleman, that was his Patient, and lived diverse
Years in Mr. Gallop's House, and observed the Budding and blossoming of it, who
informed me, that it does shoot forth and Bud and Blossom near about that time,
but not upon the day but in some space after it, much rather than other Thorns
usually do. This is all the Account I can give you of it. I have no more to
add, but mine and my Wife's kindest Respects to your self and good Wife, and
that I am

Your most respectful Friend, John Chetwind.
Wells, Feb. 25. 1659.
Mr. Winney's Enclosed Letter concerning the Glaston-Thorn.
Worthy Sir,
REal Love and Thanks prescribed, etc. These are to acquaint you, that I
Received a Letter from you, wherein Mr. Thomas's Request to you, is, that the
exactest and most punctual Account, of the usual Story of the Blossoming of
GlastonburyThorn on Christmas Day, might be found out; I have upon your Request
searched more of it, than ever I thought to trouble my self to do, and have
conversed with the most Ancient that I knew, and was directed to, and think
those that are Credible, they offer to aver it upon Oath, what they tell me:
Thus one Ancient Man tells me, that he has gone on the Eve to it, and he has
found it like another dead Thorn, without any Blossom, or likelihood to have a
sudden forwardness to it, only some Evidence of the Appearance of the breaking
out the Buds, and but an Appearance perceivable, and he has gone on
Christmas Day, and found the Blossoms as though it was the midst of May, and
gathered them, and sent them many Miles, and had good Rewards; this the Man
will depose upon his Oath. At the same time this Man was at my House, there
came occasionally, an ancient Woman, a Neighbor, whose Testimony I believe fit
to be received, who earnestly affirmed this, that in the time of Queen Ann, she
lived with one Sir Tho. Hughes, in Wells, a Justice of Peace, who purposely
sent his men (two of them) to know the Truth, that he might satisfy any that
might make enquiry, and on the Eve, toward Night, they found it as another
Thorn, only the breaking out of the beginning of Buds, and staying in
Glastonbury all Night, to observe, as near as might be, the time when they
began to sprout forth into a perfect Blossom, they have gone again toward the
turn of the Night, and have found the perfect Blossom about two or three of the
Clock, so that at Morning they have returned to their Master with them, which
she told me, she saw when they brought it home: And another Man tells me the
same Story as the first, only with this variation, His Father (and Godfather
living at Bath went the Eve's Eve, and found nothing but Buds, and on
Christmas Day in the Morning found the Blossoms, and his Father sent them to
Bath to his Godfather, because he went thither home to keep his Christmas And a
Woman at the same time told me something much like the Second, that she has
gone the Eve, late at Night, and wit^ a Lanthorn and Candle with her Company
stayed four Hours, to see, if it might be, the manner of the sprouting out of
it; and in that space saw that it Blossomed, the Green-boughs, the length of
half the Forefinger to the middle Joint; what Mr. Gallop's Graft of this old
Tree does, I shall leave you to him to be certified. Both our Loves to your
self and good Wife. Mr. Stuks and his Wife, desiring one Favor in the Close,
that you would be pleased to take pains, to begin our Lecture the next Tuesday.
I have not had but one Assistant I think, this seven or eight Weeks: I shall be
absent my self; I intend, if please God, to be at Bristol Fair, where I have
some Business, and pray send the word of it, that I may be assured,

I rest, Yours, In all Bonds of Love, Sam. Winney.
Glaston, Ian. 21. 16^^.
I have often wondered at the commonly believed Gift of the Kings of England and
France, to heal the Struma: All my doubt has still been of the Matter of Fact,
whether it be such a real Gift of Healing, or not: For if it be, I will not be
so bold as to ask God a Reason of it: Or why he gives it to these Kings,
rather than to others: Nor will I dishonor his Gift, as if it were not his,
because I know not his Reason; no more than Christ did the Miracle done at the
Pool in Jerusalem, upon the Angel's moving the Water; or, with Naaman, say, Are
not Abanah and Pharphar as good Water as Jordan? I have long enquired of all
the Physicians, and others, that I could, of the Reality of the Success;
whether it be not the Gold, the Change of Air, or the Conceit: And I never
heard so much, as to put me past all doubt. But many credible Physicians say,
as Mr. Wiseman (a Surgeon that had much Opportunity of knowing) does in his
Book of Surgery, [ That though all are not cured, yet more are cured by it,
than by all the Physicians in England.]

I know, the true Original of it also, and its Occasion is much in the dark;
but I leave this to other Men's Enquiry: Only I say, if the Matter of Fact
prove certain, there can be no great doubt, but it proves the Governing Agency
of Invisible, Intellectual Powers.

If it be miraculous, it seems to be entailed on the Kingdoms of England and
France, rather than to be any Approbation of the Religion or Piety of the
Kings; because if any have this Gift, Kings of contraery Religions have it; and
the worst, as well as the best; and Usurpers, as well as Rightful Kings. And I
hear of no other that pretend to it, but the kings of England and France: And
will the King of France take it for his Glory, to heal a few Persons of a Sore,
and to kill many thousand Innocents by the Sword, and burn their Cities?

CHAP. XI.
MR. Emlin, (before mentioned about Mr. Pacy's Sisters,) now a worthy Preacher
in Dublin, having told me this by Word of Mouth, I desired him to send it
sufficiently attested; which he does, as follows.

Mr. Emlin's Letter concerning an Apparition at Belfast in Ireland.
Reverend Sir,
I Have been very uneasy to think that I should so long delay the Answer of
your Desire about the Affair related underneath: The distance of the Place in
which it was transacted, with the slowness of my Correspondent in Replies, has
made me incapable of giving you so full and quick Satisfaction, as might else
have been. All that I can relate at present is briefly this, viz.

There having been a long Contest between Lemuel Matthews, Archdeacon in the
County of Down, and Claudius Gilbert, Minister of Belfast, about their Right to
Drumbeg, a small Parish within four Miles of Belfast, it proved very
troublesome to the Parishioners, who generally paid their Dues to Mr. Gilbert
the Incumbent in Possession; but the Archdeacon claimed the same to be paid to
him also, for which he procured a Warrant; and in the Execution of it by his
Servants, at the House of one Charles Loftin, one of the Parishioners, they
offered some Violence to his Wife, who refused Entrance to them, who died
within a few Weeks after the Injury received; but she being otherwise an infirm
Woman, little notice was taken of her Death, till that some time after, by her
strange Appearance to one Thomas Donelson, (a Spectator of the Violence done to
her,) she affrighted him into a Prosecution of Robert Eccleson, the Criminal.
She appeared diverse times, but chiefly upon one Lord's Day-Evening, when she
fetched him, with a strange Force, out of his House, into the Yard, and Fields
adjacent. Before her last Coming, (for she did so three times that Day,)
several Neighbors were called in, to whom he gave notice that she was again
coming, and becken'd to him to come out; upon which, they went to shut the
Door, but he forbad it, saying, that she looked with a terrible Aspect upon
him, when they offered it: But his Friends laid hold on him, and embraced him,
that he might not again go out; notwithstanding which, (a plain Evidence of
some invisible Power,) he was drawn out of their Hands in a surprising manner,
and carried abroad into the Field and Yard, as before, she charging him to
prosecute Justice; which Voice, as also Donelson's Reply, the People heard,
though they saw no shape. There are many Witnesses of all this yet alive,
particularly Sarah, the Wife of Charles Lof^in, Son to the deceased Woman; and
one William Holyday and his Wife, etc.

Upon this, the said Donelson deposed what he knew of the aforesaid Violence,
before Mr. Randal Brice, a Neighbour-Justice, and confirmed all at the Assizes
at Down, in the Year 1685. (as I remember;) where the several Witnesses were
heard and sworn, and their Examinations were entered into the Records of that
Assizes, to the Amazement and Satisfaction of all the Country, and of the
Judges, whom I have heard speak of it at that time with much Wonder; insomuch
that the said Eccleson hardly escaped with his Life, but was Burnt in the Hand.

The said Donelson is yet living in the same place, with the other Witnesses.

I could learn many more Circumstances, but that you are in haste; and all this
I heard spoken of my self, with universal Amazement, at the time when
transacted, living in Belfast at that time; and I should not have been beholden
to any to have believed this Relation, that had been there, and at the Trial at
Down.

T. Em. With Mr. Bois's Respects, I remain, A Reverencer of you, Tho. Emlin.

CHAP. XII. A Dublin-Instance, attested by Mr. Daniel Williams, now in London.
ABout the Year 1678. I knew a young Woman who was Niece to Alderman Arundel,
in Dublin.

In her said Uncle's House she was pursued with very terrible Noises; as by
violent Strokes on the Wainscots and Chests, in what Chambers she frequented.

The Blows were heard throughout the House, and were so troublesome, as to
occasion the Removal of the young Woman to an House near Smithfield in Dublin,
not without Hopes that the Disturbance might thereby cease: But the Noise
pursued her thither, and was no more heard in her former Dwelling.

Here she continued as long as the Owner of that House would bear the Resort of
People, and Terror of those sudden and frequent Claps.

From this place, she was removed to a little House in Patrick-street, near the
Gate. Here she met with the same Exercise, and the Noise was generally about
Twoa-Clock in the Morning greater than at other Times.

Several Nights were spent in Prayer with her, by Ministers; as, Mr. Cox, Dr.
Roles, Mr. Chambers, Mr. Keys, etc. who all, with many others, assured me, they
heard the said Blows in the Room where they prayed, sometimes on a great Chest
there, sometimes on the Wall, etc.

Mr. Chambers and Mr. Keys were employed there the Night before I had promised
to be with her.

The next Night, Mr. Cox, having often heard the said Noises, and often prayed with
the Woman, was desirous to accompany me. There were many People (as usual) sat
up with us: I preached from Heb. 2. 18. and contrived to be at Prayer at that
Time when the Noise used to be greatest.

When I was at Prayer, the Woman, kneeling by me, catched violently at my Arm,
and afterward told us, she saw a terrible Sight: But it pleased God, there was
no Noise at all. And from that Time, God graciously freed her from all that
Disturbance.

I examined this Person, and could find nothing in her Circumstances, fit to
induce one to any satisfactory Judgment of her Case.

These Noises lasted about three Months, and she was much enfeebled in Body,
and almost distracted thereby; but soon recovered upon the Removal thereof.

Attested by me, Daniel Williams.
Aug. 2^. 169^
The CONCLUSION: Concerning Angels.
While I consider these unquestionable Evidences of the certainty of Spirits,
and how much they have to do with Men: I cannot but think that we have also
much to do with them; with the bad, to resist them as our Enemies, and the
Enemies of the Gospel, and the Church of God, against whom we must continually
Watch and Pray, lest we fall into the Snares of their Temptations: And with the
good, that we may be meet for their Preserving and Comforting Ministry.

But in all our Histories it is observable, that bad Spirits Apparitions and
Actions, are far more frequent, and more Sensible than good ones; which may
perhaps to some seem strange. Concerning which I consider;

1. That Corporeal Crassitude is an abasement, and therefore fittest for the
more Ignoble sort of Spirits: We that dwell here in Bodies, are of a lower
Order, than those of the more high and invisible Regions.

2. And the bad Spirits as they have a baser Consistence, have also a more base
and Terrene Inclination. And therefore it is the less wonder, that they mind
matters of Money and Lands: And no doubt but the Souls of wicked Men carry with
them much of the Vicious Habits, in which they lived here: That is, of
Covetousness and Revenge; And they that tell us, that such as Dives retain no
Love to their Brethren on Earth, speak more than they can prove; and are not so
Credible as Christ that seems to say the contrary. Some make a state of
departed Souls, Good and Bad, out of their own Inventions, which it is very
likely Death will Confute.

3. And it is far greater things than Visible Appearances, that we constantly
receive from Angels, more suitable to their Nature and Dignity, and to our good.
Some Men have long Labored to attain a Visible or Sensible Communion with
them, and think they have attained it: But while they presumptuously desire to
pervert the Order of Gods Household and Government, it is no wonder if in stead
of Angels, they Converse with Devils that are Transformed into seeming Angels
of Light, that by Delusion, they may Transform such Men into Ministers of
Righteousness.

It is a doleful Instance, of the effect of a perverse kind of opposition to
Popery, and running from one Extreme to another, to note how little Sense most
Protestants show of the great Benefits that we receive by Angels: How seldom we
hear them in public or private, give thanks to God for their Ministry and
Helps? And more seldom pray for it? When hear we any Ministers Teach Believers,
what Love and what Thanks they owe to Angels, whereas the Excellency and
Holiness of their Natures obliges us to love them, and their Love and Care of
us, bespeaketh Thankfulness: Yea, we have Teachers that would persuade Men that
this Savoureth of Popery, and does Derogate from Christ: And yet if the People
Love and Honor and maintain them, they take this to be no Derogation from
Christ. As if they were more Amiable then Angels, or Christ may not use the
Ministry of Angels as well as their's. The Lord pity the distracted divided
Societies of Christians, who in all Countries are fallen into Uncharitable
Sects, that on pretense of saving the Truth, and the Church from the Errors of
each other, do corrupt both by the Addition of contrary Errors; so that it is
hard to find out many Errors of Popery or Ancient Heresy; which has not been
avoided by contrary faults, in the Corruption of Doctrine, Charity or Concord.

Devils have a greater Game to play invisibly, than by Apparitions. O happy
World, if they did not do a hundred thousand times more hurt, by the Baits of
Pleasure, Lust and Honor, and by Pride, and love of Money and Sensuality, than
they do by Witches! O! that they did not more dangerously Hant the Houses and
Souls of Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Lustful Youths! Who can Conjure them
out of Universities and Pulpits, out of a Malignant Sclanderous Clergy and
Laity, out of Worldly self-seeking Carnal Men? I have before told you of the
Witch Magdalen Crucia, who got the Reputation of a Saint, by having the
Sacramental Bread brought to her Mouth in the sight of all the People, by an
Invisible Carryer; Bodin, and many others Record the Story, and how to get
Pardon, she went to the Pope himself, and confessed how from twelve years old
the Devil had lain with her thirty years, and made her the Abbess of a
Monastery: I fear lest the visible Hand of some Priest do play this Devils
part, and give the Sacrament to such as more openly serve the Devil all the
week, and are forced to receive it to escape a jail, or do it as a Sacrifice to
expiate the guilt of an Ungodly Life.

If the Devil can get People (perhaps Lords and Ladies) to spend the Day (their
precious Hours) in Cards and Dice, and Feastings, and Stage Plays, and Masks
and Music, and perhaps filthy Lust, he will let you say your Prayers at Night,
and cry God Mercy, and perhaps tell him that you Repent, that you may Sin on
the more boldly the next day: And it is like he will provide you a Ghostly
Father, as bad as your selves, that shall give you the Sacrament as a sealed
Pardon, and pronounce you absolved, and that as in the name of Christ.

All these effects of Devils, the World abounds with; but the effects of Angels
are observed, but by very few. Because even as the Sadduces, think that all
these Vices and Confusions are only the effects of Men's own pravity, and not of
Devils, not knowing that all such Births have a Father and a Mother (the Devil
and Men's own Hearts) so most good people look so much to God and to Ministers,
in all that is done on them, that they take little notice of Angels that are
Gods greater Ministers, as if they had little to do with us.

By this, 1. We give not to God the due Honor of the Order of his Works: 2. We
are guilty of Unrighteousness, in denying their Due Love and Gratitude to such
Noble Agents. 3. We lose the Comfortable Remembrance of our own Communion with
them. 4. We lose some helps to a Heavenly Mind and Conversation, when as it
would make the thoughts of Heaven more Familiar and Pleasant to us, to think of
such a Holy and Amiable Society, and would make us the willinger to die.

As to them that say, that it is enough to know that Christ is all to us, and
we must take heed of ascribing any thing to Creatures; I Answer, is Christ the
less all to us, for giving us his Mercies? For giving us the Ministry of
Angels? Is he the less All to us, for giving Gifts to Men, for giving
Comforters and Merciful Relievers to the poor? For giving to Children the Love
and Care of Parents? Or for giving Men good Princes and Magistrates to Rule
them? Or for giving them Soldiers to fight for them? Or for giving you
Ministers to Teach you? Who more praises their Teachers, than such Objectors?
Will you be unthankful to your Benefactors, for fear of ascribing to Creatures?
Will you not praise a Godly Man above a Wicked? Will you not praise and admire
the Glory of the Sun and Stars, and the Frame of Heaven and Earth, for fear of
ascribing to Creatures? Is the praising of a Work, a wrong to the Workman?

Indeed this agrees with their Doctrine, who because ^aul counted all his
Mosaical Legal Righteousness as loss and Dung, in Comparison of the
Righteousness that God gave him in and by christ, do therefore ^^y, that we
must count all that Righteousness as Dung, which christ himself works in us
by his Spirit, even Faith it se^^ which is imputed or reckoned to us for
Righteousness. This enticeth Men to be out of Love with Christian
Righteousness, when Christ has made it our own, if it be no better than Dung?
And to fear that some such Men have no better. But they say, they account Faith
and Love to Christ to be Dung, only as to Justification: As if God did not make
all Men just, whom he justifies by Esteem and Sentence: Or, as if that were
Righteousness that does in no part or degree make a Man Righteous: Or, as if
any but Christians, as such, are justified: Or any Man were a Christian before
he accepts Christ by a Loving and Thankful Consent or Trust, as his Savior
and his Teacher, and his Lord and Ruler: But this is a Digression, which Men's
talk against ascribing to Angels led me to.

We are not for ascribing to Angels (nor to Faith and Love and Holiness) the
least part of the Honor proper to God, or to Jesus Christ: They do none of the
Work of our Redeemer for us (nor can we do the least of it for our selves
unless as the Work of his Instruments and Agents, may be called Christ's Work:
They save us indeed, but it is but as Timothy was taught by Paul, how to save
himself, and those that heard him; and we are bid to save our selves. Christ
teaches us, and Ministers teach us. Christ Feeds us, and we Feed our selves;
yea, he faith that we feed him: And that he will for so doing, say, Come ye
Blessed, inherit the Kingdom. Angels and Men do Christ's Commanded Work: But no
Creature does the least part of Christ's own proper undertaken Work.

Objection. But these high Thoughts of Angels have draw^ the Papists to
Idolatry, in Praying to them, and Worshipping them.

Answer. It is your denying them the Honor that is due to them, which is a
Temptation that hardneth Papists in their Excess.

Must we not Love and Honor Kings, Ministers and Saints, though some herein
run into Extremes. We have many Reasons against Praying to Angels, or offering
them Visible Corporeal Worship; Because we know not just when they are present:
And because it may Countenance the Heathens Demon Worship and Idolatry; And
because God has appointed us no such sort of Worship. But God having largely
told us of their Love to us, and their constant eminent Service for us, he
thereby obliges us to answerable Regard, Affections and Acknowledgment.

I have said so much in a small Discourse in Mr. Isaac Ambro^e his Book of
Communion with Angels (at his request, who is now with Angels) that I will not
here Recite very many particular Texts of Scripture about this Subject: But if
you will but look in your Concordance, you may see what abundant mention of
Angels there is throughout all the Scripture, while we hear so little of them
in our Books or Pulpits. It Is true, that in the Old Testament time, they ofter
Visibly appeared, than they do now: But that is no Derogation to our Gospel
State; As it is more Spiritual than theirs, that needed more Visible means, so
our Spiritual Benefits by them before named, are greater than theirs were.

1. How Familiar were Angels with Abraham, who entertained them as Men, till
they made themselves better known to him: They were the Messengers of the great
promise to him of the Numerous and the Holy Seed. They Reproved Sarah for her
Unbelief, that they might comfort her by the promised Seed.

How Familiar were they with Lot, when they came into his House, and took him
in, and blinded his Enemies, and told him their Message concerning Sodom, and
when they carried him while he delayed to depart? And when they saved Zoar for
his sake?

How Familiar were they with Jacob, in his Travels, and his Return; when he saw
them as by a Ladder, ascending and descending; And when one of them wrestled
with him, and Blessed him, though he made him halt?

I know that many excellent Divines do that one of these called Angels, was
Christ. To which I say, 1. If it were so, that does not deny, but confirm what
I am pleading for: If Christ appearing, made Angels his Companions, it was the
more for their Honor.

2. But if this be true, either Christ had a Body, yea many Bodies before his
Incarnation by Mary, or not. If not, what were all these Similitudes of Men
that did eat and drink, and talk, and act? Were they mere ^hadows and
Delusions? How then could they speak, and act so Potently? If yea, then was the
pure God head Hypostatically united to these many appearing Bodies; Or not: Who
can prove a difference save as to the Matter and Duration, between his union
with these, and with his last assumed Flesh. And yet the Scripture
appropriateth Christ's Inca^^^tion, and coming in the Body to the Fun^^^ of Time
and to those last days. I am ^^th to say without proof, that Christ (...)
Bodies, lest any should infer that there have been many Christ's: But if this
(...) be held, it will introduce Peter Sterr^ Doctrine as most probable, that
Christ as the Eternal Word (...), God first (...) the Noblest re^ted Nature
ab^^e (...) (or as Dr ^^ore calls it, an Eternal (...), or as he and John
Turner a p^ime Created ^e in the pri^^e Matter) and did unite ^^^^lf to this
(...) lical Nature, and by it cause all the rest: And that this second Nature
appeared to the Fathers by such Temporary assumed Bodies, and at last assumed
the Body of a Man: being, say some, it self a Soul to it; but as others,
assuming both a Human Soul and Body: And so, that Christ has three Natures, a
Divine, a Superangelical, and a Humane: But of this often elsewhere. This opinion
is reconciling as to the Artans, who have affirmed Christ to be a Creature
above Angels: And if God made such a Creature, methinks it should be easy to
persuade them, that he that is as the Center, and more than a Soul, makes all
the World to be One (though of unlike parts) does primarily unite himself with
the first and Noblest of his productions.

Objection. But Scripture says, that Abraham called one of these Lord.

Answer. That Name both Adonai and Elohun, are often given to Creatures. And if
the Name of Jehovah be sometimes used as to Angels, it is only meant to God,
speaking by them whom Abraham knew to be present, though Invisible, and to know
all that was said.

Yet further, it was an Angel that appeared to M^ses in the burning the Bush,
and so that sent him on his work to deliver the Israelites from Egypt, and
Fortified him with power of Miracles, and made him his great promises of
Success: And yet no doubt it was God; and the Text is true, that affirms
both: Therefore it must be God speaking and acting by the Ministry of an Angel,
Commissioned to use his Name.

It was Angels that gave M^ses the Law in the Mount Sinai: For so says the
Scripture. But it was God by them, who were his Voice and Finger that made and
wrote the Tables, and spoke all the words; these were all Great and Wonderful
Ministrations.

God promised Moses, that his Angels should go before the Israelites, to
conquer their Enemies, and bring them into the promised Land: And he charge
them not to provoke him, for Gods Name was upon him; and he would not forgive
their Iniquities. What greater things could be said, than that an Angel shall
bear Gods Name, and be their Captain, and Conquer their Enemies, and be their
Governor, and not forgive their wilful Sins.

In Ioshuahs War at Jericho, an Angel appears, and professes himself the
Captain of the Lords Hosts, Josh. 5. 14, 15. and Joshua fell on his face to the
Earth, and Worshipped him, and prayed to him to tell him his Message. If Angels
be not the Generals or Captains of our Armies, we are unlike to Conquer.

It was by an Angel, that God brought the Israelites out of Egypt, Numb. 20.
16. It was an Angel that chose a Wife for Isaac, Genesis 24. 7. 40. The Angel of
Gods Presence saved the Israelites, Isa. 63. 9. An Angel delivered the three
Men, Dan. 3. from the Fire, and Daniel from the Lions: Dan. 6. Angels Preached
Christ to the Shepherds. An Angel made the pool in Jerusalem healing. Io. 5. 4.
An Angel Preaches to Cornelius. An Angel delivers Peter, Act. 12. The Angel
of the Lord Encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them, Ps.
34. 7. God gives his Angels charge over us, to keep us in all our ways: They
bear us up in their Hands, lest we dash our Foot against a Stone. Psalm. 91. 11,
12. Rev. 1. Tells us, that God first Reveals his Will to Christ, and Christ
to Angels, and Angels to John, and John to the Churches, and the Churches to
Posterity. Yea, Angels Ministered to Christ himself, when he was hungry, Mat. 4.
11. And appeared in his Agony, strengthening him. Luke 22. 43. Legions of
Angels are at his Service: And all the Holy Angels will come with him at
Judgment; and they will be the Reapers at the end of the World.

Above 260 times are Angels mentioned in Scripture, and yet how little notice
do we take of their help?

But is it only our Bodies that they help? Can they reach or help our Souls?
Answ. If Devils can touch our Souls with their Temptations, are Angels farther
from us, or less able to move us to our Duty?

But are they ordinarily present, or know our Case? Answ. They rejoice in our
Conversion, and therefore know it: They are present in our Assemblies, as Paul
intimareth, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Say not before the Angel, that it was an Error,
Eccl. 5. 6. which intimates the Angels Presence. Every Believer has his Angel
beholding the Face of our Father in Heaven, Matthew. 13 10 and they are not
Strangers to their Charge. We feel that the Devil is present with us by his
Temptations continually, in all our Duties molesting or hindering us: And are
Angels less intent upon their Work? It is Michael and his Angels, that fight
against the Dragon and his Angels, to save the Church.

While such Texts make the Papists think that Angels are always, or ordinarily
present, if they give them not Divine Worship but such as we would do a Prince,
though I have said before why I approve not of their Doings, I dare not, as
some late Expositors of the Revelation, judge the Catholic Church to have
become AntiChristian Idolaters, as soon as they gave too much Worship to
Angels, and to Saints. We are come to the New Jerusalem, to the Innumerable
Angels, Heb. 12. and must honor them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. And we know
that we are translated from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren: And is
it so damnable Idolatry to love and honor Angels and Saints a little too much
while they give them nothing proper to God? I blame their Irregularities, but I
dare not judge so hardly of them, and the ancient Church, for this, as some do;
nor think them much better, that love and honor Angels and Saints as much too
little.

Some now would call a Man an Idolater, that should say as Jacob, Genesis 48. 16.
The Angel which redeemed me from all Evil bless the Lads. They say. This Angel
was Christ. Answ. Scripture says it was an Angel: Hos. 12 4. says, He had
power over the Angel. I dare not call God an Angel, though Angels may be called
Gods, as Princes be. If Christ had then no Nature but the Divine, I should
suspect it is Arianism to call him an Angel, or Messenger of God. If he had a
Body, then was it Ubiquitary: Or had he infinite numbers of Bodies? Or could he
be but with one in the World at once?

For my part, I have had many Deliverances so mavelous, as convinces me of
the Ministry of Angels in them, (not here to be recited.) But I am satisfied,
that there is no less of the Presence and Efficacy of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, when he uses and honors any Instruments, Angels, or Men, than if he
used no Means at all. As I will not desire so to alter the stated Government
and Order of God, as to expect here visible Communion with Angels, nor will
offer them any unrequired Worship; so I would not unthankfully forget how much
we receive by them, from Christ, and how much we are beholden to them, and to
God and our Redeemer for them. And I hope they will shortly be a Convoy to the
Soul of this poor Lazarus, to Abraham's Bosom, or to the Paradise where I hope
to be with Christ, Amen.

One thing more I think meet to mind the Reader of, that he may not lose the
Benefit of these Histories: That is, How to discern a good Spirit from a bad.
The Scripture telling us that three things are the Characters of Devils, Lying,
Malignity and Hurtfulness, ( Ioh. 8.) which include all Uncharitableness,
Revenge and Division, we may certainly gather, that it is a Diabolical Spirit
that promoteth these, whatever the Pretenses are.

1. The Antichristian Error, called Antinomian, that would set Christ against
Christ, and make Men believe that his Death has made all our Obedience to his
Government a thing that shall never do us any good, (being called Works,) and
all our Sins against his Grace to be so harmless, that we ought not to think
that we shall be ever the worse for them; and that the Elect that live in
Perjury, and Murder, and Adultery, or any other Sin, are not perjured,
Murderers, Adulterers, because now they are Christ's Sins, and not theirs,
(with many such Reproaches of Christ, called by the Crispians, the Exalting of
him.) These certainly are from Devils, and God does notably disown them, as the
fore mentioned Instances of the Ranters, and those in New England, mentioned by
Mr. Weld, do show. And the doleful Form of Mr. Davies Congregation, about Rowel
in Northamptonshire, of the Madness, Blasphemies, Barkings and Beastility
there, I leave to the Enquiry of sober Persons: Though I am no Witness of it,
the Reports are such as are not meet to be silenced.

Mr. Samuel Crispe has published this Week a Book, as against me, in defense
of his Father; telling the World, that he understands not what he writes of,
and ignorantly defending what I affirm, and confuting his Father, thinking it a
Defense of him.

I deny not but a Crispian may be a Christian, while, through Ignorance, he
believes not his own Words. But he that will but read the Scripture, and
particularly, the Texts cited by me in my Confession of Faith, shall see how
fully Christ has confuted Crispe, and vindicated his Mediatorial Office

II. And all those Principles, Passions and Practices that are against the Love
and Concord of Christians, whatever pretense of an Angel of Light, or other
Ministers of Righteousness, may be their Cloak, are undoubtedly from the
dividing Devil.

III. And more evident is it that it is no better Spirit that inspireth all the
Slanderers, Silencers and Persecuters of the faithful Ministers of Christ; and
those that make and execute the Laws for the imprisoning and ruining of the
most cons^ionable Christians, for their avoiding notorious Sin, or, at least,
for doubtful Infirmities, incomparably less than these Persecuters (Clergy or
Laity) are guilty of. By their Fruits you may know what Spirit ac^^ ^eth these
Men. Wolves, Thorns and Thistles are known by Hartfulness Christ's Miracles
were, Doing Good, and Healing: But Devil's Work is Hurting, and Destroying.

And let those Men and Women think of it, that cannot forgive, but are set upon
Revenge. Mark whether Revenge be not the most ordinary Business of Witches, and
of Devilized Souls; most of these Histories tell it you: Therefore Christ
tells us, that if we forgive not, we shall not be forgiven; so contrary is he
to the Diabolical Spirit of Revenge, though yet he has just and punishing
Governors.

Were but the Histories of Witches and Apparitions well considered, it would
help Men to understand, that Devils make no small number of the Laws and Rulers
that are made in the World and have no small number of honored Servants, and
are the Authors of most of the Wars in the World: So that the Phrase, Rev. 3.
The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison,] should not seem strange. And I
would I had no Cause to say, that this Mark of Lying, Malignity and Hurtfulness
tells us, that many Sermons are made by Devils, and too many of the Books
written by them, that adorn the Libraries of many learned Men.

And though Demons do good in order to do hurt, yet, by this Rule of Judging of
Spirits by their Fruits, I cannot but think that (though there was a Mixture of
Good and Bad) there was more of the good Spirit, than of the Bad, in most of
the ancient Monks and Hermites, that lived so strict and mortified Lives. And,
as I find, not only by Erasmus, but by the Complaint of Protestant Divines,
that it was a Desire of Liberty from the Papists Austerities, that prevailed
with most of the Vulgar to cast off Popery; so the Case of many Monasteries,
their Mortification and Devotion, (though ignorant,) does make me hope that in
many such Monasteries there is more of the Spirit of God, than among the common
worldly, sensual sort of Protestants. I that must say so of our well-meaning
Separatists here, must say so of such Papists: For I find by the multitude of
Instances in Caesarius and others, that just as deep Repentance for former Sin,
does now bring many to think it safest to join with the Congregations, which
they think are most strict: So before Luther's time, it was ordinary, when God
humbled any deeply for their Sin, to think that they must presently join with
such as renounced the World and fleshly Pleasures, and minded nothing but
Religion and Salvation. And thence it came to pass, that among the Papists, the
Monasticks were called Religious, in distinction from Secular, and other sorts
of Men. And as our separating religious Protestants do now demand of such as
they admit to their Communion, an Account of some special Experiences of God's
Work on their Hearts, in their Conversion: So did the Monasteries by such as
they received. The aforesaid Author Caesarius will tell you of multitudes of
Instances how God converted Sinners, and brought them into their Religious
Houses.

What can one think of all this, but that, as all that we here do is imperfect
and faulty, and yet pardoned through Christ, to the Sincere; so among Papists,
and honest Sectaries, there is much that is of God, and shall be accepted,
though Satan, by their Ignorance and his Subtilty, do obscure and maculate the
Luster of it, and turn it into Scandal. For such is his Warfare against Christ
and his Kingdom in this World.

God is good, and does good; and will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice: And his
Justice does hurt, for a greater Good.

The Devil is a Do-Evil: And if he do Good it is to greater Hurt.

And Oh that I could get my own, and all Readers Hearts sufficiently affected
with this Observation! That as all our Life is carried on in a Warfare, and
Satan's Malice is both against Christ and us; so his great Work is, to draw us
into some Sins which shall cloud the Glory both of the Grace and the Miracles
of Christ, and damp the Comfort which we might have received by all his Mercies.

If he see an honest Christian zealously affected, dra^ him by Temptation of
the Flesh into some Scandal, or by Ignorance into some false Opinions, and that
Glory of all his Zeal is presently turned into Reproach. If he do but fail out
with some of his Neighbors, and by Passion, or for Worldly Interest, offend
them, all his Piety goes not only for Hypocrisy, but for a Reproach to Piety
it self. Yea, if they fall but into Melancholy, and Impatience, and Discontent,
the Devil sets them to affright Men from Religion, as we set up Mawkins in our
Corn and Orchards, to affright the Birds.

The sad Bewdley-Story, before related, is an Instance that was sad to me. The
African Story, beforementioned, is more tremendous; of the Bishops whose
Tongues were cut out by Hunnerichus the Arrian King's Command, and they spoke
well when their Tongues were cut out: Victor Vticensis, Gazaeus and Procopius,
that all then lived, witness it; and some, if not all of them, I remember, say,
that they saw and heard them: And yet (say some of them) the Devil after
overcame some of these same Bishops to commit Fornication with Women, and then
the Miracle ceased, and they could speak no more.

Oh, how amiable would a holy and heavenly Life appear, were it not
conspurcated with the Mixture of its Contraries? How beautiful would the Wisdom
of a Saint appear, were it not dishonored by the Mixture of Ignorance and
Error? How joyfully and thankfully could I review all the Wonders of Mercy
that have filled up my Life, to this present Hour, had I not mixed those many
Transgressions that must not be remembered without Grief and Sha^e, though
through Christ they be forgiven? Though I can say that Pride, Ambition, and
Covetousness, and Worldly Preferments, have not been strong enough to cloud my
Comforts, yet, alas! what a multitude of Faults; by Carelessness, Incogitancy,
Rashness, Passion, and Want of due Watchfulness and Tenderness of Conscience,
have done it! Oh, with what joyful Praise to God could I peruse all the History
of my Pilgrimage, did not this woeful Mixture of my Sins damp and allay my
Comforts; and by Indignation against my self, abate my Peace! I believe
Forgiveness and Safety from Hell: But if (besides my near sixty Years
Castigatory Pains) I did suspect, with Augustine, that there were a Purgatory
hereafter, I should fear it; not out of any Doubt of the Sufficiency of
Christ's Satisfaction, Righteousness and Merits to their proper Ends, but
because I believe that he is my Governor, though by a Law of Grace and Faith,
and that he is a Judge, and that he is not indifferent whether we obey him, or
disobey him. If I believe not Christ, I am no Christian: And if I believe
Christ's constant Doctrine, particularly, Matthew. 5. and 6. and 7. and 25. I can
no easier be made a CHRISPIAN, than I can believe the grossest Contradiction.
And I now think this distinguishing Name as useful as was the Name of
Nicolaitans. Rev. 2. and 3.

One thing more I desire to be observed, about the warfare between Christ and
Devils; That both sides make great use of Human Instruments, especially of
Princes and Pastors or Teachers, and Parents. These are the three great Organes
(under Angels) appointed by God, for the Moral, Free Agency in promoting the
Kingdom of Christ on Earth: And where these three are Faithful, O! How great a
Blessing are they? Therefore it is the grand design of Devils, to Corrupt these
three, and to make them Traitors to Christ, that is their Rightful Lord, and
Enemies to his Work, and him whom they should Represent. No deadlyer Enemies to
Children, then ungodly Parents. No deadlyer Enemies to the Worshippers of
Christ, than Malignant, Proud, Ignorant, Worldly Clergymen? No such Powerful
Enemies to Kingdoms, as Ungodly, Ignorant Kings and Magistrates. O! How much
Good, or Mischief may One King, ^^ Supreme Power do, by the great Advantage
that God the Institutor of Government has given them? Asia, Africa, America
and Europe, are doleful Monuments of the Success of Devils, by making Princes,
Priests and Parents their Instruments, corrupting them by Ignorance, and by
worldly fleshly Baits! Mr. Cotton Mather in the Life of Mr. Eliot the
New England Evangelist, Recites this Account of his ( p. 93.) why the Lyn
Indians were all naught, save one, Because their Sachim (or King) was naught:
For they and the Powvowes or (wizards) like Priests, did with Malice,
Threatening and Persecution, drive the People from receiving the Gospel, and
praying to God. What a dangerous case through Mutual Hostility, and cruel^
Persecution, has sometimes one Law, Political or Ecclesiastical, brought a
Nation into, by locking the Church Doors against Unity, Concord, and Mutual
Love, and by Stoning the Dissenters from such dividing Snares? And what a
Blessing has one good Prince; yea, one Reforming or Healing Law or
Proclamation been to a Land?

What a Blessing to the Church, were such Bishops as Ignatius, Cyprian, Basil,
the three or four Gregory's, Chrysostom, Proclus, Atticus, Augustine, and such
as they: And what Scandals and tearers were the contrary minded: Who by their
Ignorance and Pride on pretense of Uniting, cut the Church and Empire into the
Shreds, that yet continue, and were a grief to Constantine, and more to
Theodosius; 2. To Anastasius, and to many a Worthy Emperor? And when they grew
stronger, deposed their true Rulers the Eastern Emperors, and such as Ludovicus
Pius, and kept up bloody Wars against Emperors in the West, till they deprived
most Kings of half their Government.

The God that fixes the Course of Nature, so as that he will not for the
Prayers of any make the Sun alter a Minute of its rising and setting time, nor
alter the Spring and Fall, Summer and Winter, etc. Has settled also a
Subordinate order of Free-agents for Moral Government, and though he dispose of
the Events of all Men's Acts, without causing their Sin, yet will he not usually
violate that free order. It Is Mavelous the Devils have so much power over
Children and Men, as I have here proved, if but a silly wretched Witch consent;
And how much more mischief may he do to Church and Kingdom, if he can but get
Bishops, Priests and Princes, and Lawmakers to consent.

Therefore above all other Resistance of Devils: O! Pray hard for Wise and
Godly Kings and Magistrates, and for Wise and Humble and Faithful Teachers, and
next for Family Piety. And if ever the Kingdoms, Churches and People be reduced
to Wisdom, Unity and Sobriety, this must be the means according to Gods
Established way.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
1. HAving since received from Mr. Gilbert, the reverend Minister of the Place,
a fuller Narrative of the strange Story near Belfast, I will insert his Letter.

Mr. Gilbert's Letter concerning the Apparition near Belfast, in Ireland.
Dear Sir,
YOur Last, of July the 6th, I received; and since that, I have again and again
enquired farther into that Business of the Apparition of Magdalen Loflin, which
died about November. 1. 1685. of the Hurt she had received a Month before. And
she appeared to Thomas Donelson, a Neighbor, four Weeks after her Death, in
the House of William Holiday, near her own House. There were then present in
the said House, William Holiday, and Helen his Wife; as also Sarah Lofnam,
Daughter in Law to the said Defunct; and some Servants and Children in the
House; besides Charles Loflin and Helen Loflin, Children to the said Defunct;
which are now all alive: And most of them were summoned to the following
Assizes at Down Patrick, and there deposed solemnly before the Bench, the
several Circumstantials of the said Apparition. Which Apparition was thrice
repeated, in the same Evening, to the said Thomas Donelson: And how he was
horribly frighted thereby, and violently drawn out of the said House, before
their Eyes, though they struggled Hard to detain him: And that he was carried
up and down, over Neighboring Hedges and Ditches: And that her last Words to
him were, That she would trouble him no more, if he did faithfully prosecute
the Cause of her Death; which she still ascribed to the Blows which she
received from the said R. Eccleston and K. Higgison.

The said Thomas Donelson did accordingly repair to his Landlord, the next
Justice, Mr. Randal Brice; who brought their several Examinations to Sir
William Franklin, in Belfast-Castle, where was also present the Earl of
Longford: Which said Depositions were carried to Dublin, and there recommended
to the special Care of Judge John Lindon, who was to come down the next Assizes
of Down: And the said Trial and Examination of the Witnesses, were then
managed at the said Assizes, by Mr. James Macartny, Counselor, in the behalf
of Charles Loflin, the Plaintiff, to the Admiration of all the Bench, and of
the Company there, in my Sight and Audience. So that the Matter was most
notoriously known and believed, through the whole Country. Nor was there any
Cause of suspecting any Fraud therein, they being all plain, honest Neighbors,
well known to me, and my Parishioners, in the Parish of Dru^nbeg, in the County
of Down, and in the Province of Vlster.

When you send to Mr. Baxter, pray, send my best Respects, desiring both his
Prayers and yours, as we most heartily recommend his continual Labors, and
yours, to the Blessing of the Most High: In whom

I Rest Your Cordially Affectionate, Cl. Gilbert.
Belfast. Aug. 24. 1691.

. II. Whereas many wonder that the Devil can get down and up Childrens Throats,
such great things as the Nails and pieces of Iron and Brass (as I have to
show,) a rude Story of that Pious and Excellent Physician, Foelix Platerus,
makes me think it possible. Two rude fellows had at meat a Custard before them,
he that first tasted it, found it Scalding hot, and dissembled it, to draw the
other to it, who presently so scalded his Mouth with it, that in Wrath and
Revenge, the next Spoonful that the other did eat, he forced the Spoon down his
Throat: Which being in his Stomach; cast him into fear: But they both being
shortly after again together eating, he felt a great pain in the rectum
intestinum; and put his Hand to his Fundament, and pulled out the Spoon, and
put it into his Companions Dish. The passage of this Spoon through all the
intestines, seems harder than most of the Witchcrafts mentitioned.

This confirms my Suspicion, that my Dear Friend Mr. William Hopkins case
before mentioned, was but a Mistake, and not a Witchcraft; and that he might
have swallowed in his Meat a piece of a Flesh-prick, and think it was a Bone,
and forgot it; though I could not persuade his Wife and Neighbors to believe
it. I rather think the conceit, than Witchcraft, shortened the good Man's Life.

. III. And I will not spare my self, while I mention my Friend, though some
will deride it, it may profit others, to tell you a small Story of the Devils
power on my self. When I lived in Ludlow Castle at 16 and 17 years of Age (the
Chaplain to the Council, being my Tutor) I that had been ensnared before in the
pleasure of old Romances, was strongly tempted to the Love of Cards and Dice.
The first overcame me a few Months: Having no skill at Tables, I agreed with
the best Gamester in the House (Mr. Richard Harrison, Clerk of the Kitchen, who
died old, not many years ago in Barbican, at the Earl of Bridgwaters) to teach
me for a price: When I did but know when the Game was lost by the loss of all
my Men, after a Game or two, they told me my Game was lost: And laughed at me
for not giving it up (other Skilful Gamesters looking on) I told them I would
see the end first: They derided me, and Mr. Harrison said, I will lay you ten
Shillings to Sixpence: I laid down my SixPence; and he his ten Shillings: When
I had cast the Dice ten times, I had wone the Game. They stood amazed, and told
me, that if I had not had the same cast of the Dice all the ten times that I
had, no other could have got my Game. An Atheist will laugh at this as
Fortuitous: But I perceived that it was the Devils Temptation to draw me to be
a Gamester: And I gave Mr. Harrison his Ten Shillings again, and never played
more.

I mention this, to tell some Ladies and others of great Note, that are
Ensnared in the Love of that vile Time-wasting Sin of Cards and Dice (and
Stage Plays,) that the Devil has great power in ruling that which they call
Chance: And that it is a greater Sin so to waste precious Time than they are
aware of; Besides the vile corrupting of their Affections.

Books Printed for, and sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns
at the lower End of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
THE English Nonconformity, as under K. Charles II. and K. James II. trul,
stated and argued. In Quarto.

A Treatise of Knowledge and Love compared: In two Parts: 1. Of falsely
pretended Knowledge. 2. Of true saving Knowledge and Love In Quarto.

The Glorious Kingdom of Christ a^scribed, and clearly vindicated, against the
bold Asserters of a future Calling and Reign of the Jews, and a thousand Years
before the Conflagration, and the Assertors of the thousand Years Kingdom after
the Conflagration. Being an Answer to Mr. Tho. Beverley. In Quarto.

A Reply to Mr. Tho Beverley's Answer to my Reasons against his Doctrine of a
Thousand Years Middle Kingdom, and of the Conversion of the Jews. In Quarto.

Of National Churches: Their Description Institution, Use, Preservation,
Danger, Maladies and Cure: Partly applied to England. In Quarto

Church Concord: Containing, 1. A Dissuasive from unnecessary Division and
Separation, and the real Concord of the moderate Independ^nts with the
Presbyterians, instanced in ten seeming Differences. 2. The Terms necessary for
Concord among all Churches and Christians. In Quarto.

Against the Revolt to a Foreign Jurisdiction, which would be to England its
Perjury, Church-Ruin and Slavery. In two Parts. In Octavo.

Mr. Richard Baxter's penitent Confession, and his necessary Vindication. In
Answer to a Book called, The Second Part of the M^schiefs of Separation:
Written by an unnamed Author. With a Preface to Mr. Cantianus de Minimis, etc.
In Quarto.

The Scripture-Gospel defended, and Christ, Grace and free Justification
vindicated, against the Libertines, etc. In two Books etc. In Octavo.

Cain and Abel-Malignity; that is, Enmity to serious Godliness; that is, to an
holy and heavenly state of Heart and Life, etc. All by Mr. Richard Baxter.

Books Printed for, and Sold by John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
AN End of Doctrinal Controversies, which have lately troubled the Churches, by
Reconciling Explication, without much Disputing. By Richard Baxter. In Octavo.

A Rational Defense of Nonconformity: Wherein the Practice of Nonconformists is
vindicated from promoting Popery, and ruining the Church; imputed to them by
Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Unreasonableness of Separation. Also his Arguments
from the Principles and Way of the Reformers, and first Dissenters, are
answered; and the Case of the present Separation truly stated, and the Blame of
it laid where it ought to be: And the Way to Union among Protestants is pointed
at. By Gilbert Rule, Minister of the Gospel. In Quarto.

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. By W. Bates, D.D.

The Duty and Blessing of a Tender Conscience plainly stated, and earnestly
recommended to all that regard Acceptance with God, and the Prosperity of their
Souls. Whereunto is added two Sermons, opening the Nature of Participation
with, and demonstrating the Necessity of Purification by Christ. By T. Cruso.
In Twelves.


