THE Sovereign and Final HAPPINESS OF MAN, WITH The Effectual Means to obtain
it.

By WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

Prudentes and arbitri aequitatis institutiones civilis juris compositas
ediderunt, quibus civium dissidentium lites contentionesque sopirent. Quanto
melius nos and rectius divinas institutiones literis persequemur, in quibus non
destillicidiis, aut aquis arcendis, aut de manu conserenda, sed de spe, de
vita, de salute, de immortalitate, de Deo loquimur? Lactan. de falls. Relig.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. For Brabazon Aylmen, at the three Pigeons, over
against the Royal Exchange, in Cornhil, 1680.

THE PREFACE.
THE Argument before us recommends it self as from its Nature and Quality, for
true Happiness is the first and last in the order of things desirable; the
first for its attractive Excellence, the last in its consummate Fruition; so
upon this most valuable account, that it nearly concerns every Person. For
Happiness is not restrained to any peculiar rank of Men, but may equally and
perpetually be possessed by all that sincerely apply themselves to obtain it. If
in the very different States of Life here, there were any incapable of Eternal
Life, or that have another Object for their last end, there might be some
reason why they should not feel their desires inflamed, and Spirits moved
toward Celestial Felicity, and to justify their sole Pretensions to the things
of Time, whereto their Interests are confined. But the offer of Heaven
comprehends all that upon God's Terms will accept it. The most sensible
inequality that Riches, Dignity, or any other Temporal Accident makes between
Men here, is so true a Nothing in comparison of Eternal Glory, that it makes no
difference of one from another as to the obtaining of it.

Besides the universal respect wherein the Doctrine of Eternal Salvation
concerns all Men as capable of it, it is also of admirable use to their various
Conditions Temporal and Spiritual. For the prosperous or afflicted in the
World; the Strangers to serious Religion, or the experienced in the Affairs of
the Soul; the newly entered into a state of Grace, or the greatest Proficients,
may find what is suitable to them in the consideration of it. As the quickening
Influences of Heaven are appropriated to the diverse Qualities of Fruits, with
that discreet Operation, that the hard are softened, the small acquire growth
and substance, the Green are colored and made beautiful, the harsh become
pleasant, and receive their fragrancy and full maturity* Thus the virtue of the
Celestial Reward is powerful to reform the obstinate in Evil, and to encourage
the irresolute in Good, to produce the first Life of Holiness, and to cherish
and strengthen it till it comes to perfection. Happiness is the Spring and
Crown of our Obedience.

I shall only add this, That no Argument has more exercised the Minds of the
wisest and best Men, than the last End and highest Good of Man: and that in the
managing of this most necessary Subjest, I have selected some things from their
Writings, that were proper to my Design, which I acknowledge with that candor as
if I had particularly named them.

ERRATA.
PAge 34. Line 24. for that because he was debased, read because he that was
debased. P. 97. l. 17. f. is discovered, when it is clear and entire, r. is
discovered, first when it is clear and entire. P. 203. l. 7. f. The Heart
filled, r. Moreover, the Heart filled. P. 206. l. 17. f. that reflecting upon
his Birthday and the Age of his Life, r. that on his Birthday, reflecting
upon the Age of his Life. P. 233. l. 29. f. warn the Heart, r. warm the Heart.
P. 238. l. 3. f. as it must so be, r. as it must be so. P. 239. l. 18. f. that
avoid the one, r. that to avoid the one. P. 247. l. 8. f. that Blood of Vipers,
r. that Brood of Vipers.

CHAP. I.
The generality of Men pursue a false Happiness. The causes of their mistake.
Rules to direct in the search after the blessed End of Man. The Wisdom and
Goodness of the Creator, the frame of Man's Nature, and the Holy Scriptures
discover it. The things of the World are defective, in all the essential
Conditions requisite to Man's Felicity. God alone who is a spiritual infinite
eternal Good, can make him perfectly blessed.
THAT the Inclination to Happiness is as universal as the Human Nature, we have
the clearest testimony from the experience of all Men. This inclination is
neither cold nor barren, but vigorously exerts it self in motions of flight,
and aversation from what is apprehended as Evil, and in the pursuit of what is
conceived under the appearance of Good. From hence proceeds the unwearied
Industry of Men in using means to accomplish their general End. Some waste
their Time and Strength in an eager pursuit of sensual Pleasures, and Riches,
and Dignities; Others in acquiring the more valuable Treasures of Knowledge, or
in purchasing an honorable Reputation, as if the obtaining of these things
were the cure of their distempered Desires. But the concurrence of all
particular Goods that enrich the Soul within the Sphere of Nature, or that
preserve and delight the Body, cannot afford true Content. The Heart still
remains empty, and languishes for Satisfaction. It Is therefore a just cause of
wonder, that an intelligent Creature finding the product of all his Diligence
unanswerable to his Hopes, should vainly seek for Happiness where it is not to
be found; and after innumerable disappointments fly at an impossibility. An
Error in the first enquiry might have some color of excuse, but that having
been so often deceived with painted Grapes for the Fruits of Paradise, Men
should still seek for substantial Blessedness to fill the Soul, in vain shows
that can only feed the Eye, is Madness exceeding all Admiration. What powerful
charm obstructs their true judging of things? What Spirit of Error possess
them? The only Account that can be given of it is this: Man being fallen from
the Holiness and Perfection of his Original State, the Affections are vitiously
inclined to sensible things, and the fumes arising from carnal Lusts cloud and
overshade the Mind, and hinder its clear discovery of that universal
comprehensive Good in whose Fruition true Happiness consists, therefore he
earnestly applies himself to please the lower Faculties, allured by present
Delights, and the facility of obtaining them.

And from hence we may understand, that the only way of their recovery is by
clearing the Mind from Ignorance and Folly, that it may discern the sole proper
object of the rational Appetite in its true Beauty and Goodness, and by that
sight the Will may feel its ravishing Power, and be drawn to a free and firm
choice of it. And that the Soul may not faint under the apprehension of
insuperable difficulties interposing between it and the obtaining of its
Happiness, and therefore content it self with easy Vanities, to propound such
means that sincerely used will be effectual, and offer it that assistance that
will make it finally victorious over all opposition.

Thus the two leading Faculties being turned from the Creature to God, the
inferior Wheels will follow their motion, and the Conversation be entirely
changed. In order to this happy work the following Discourses were composed;
wherein are represented those reasons from the Dignity, Capacity, and
Immortality of Man's Soul, and from the essential conditions of his Felicity;
that impartially considered by the Men of the World, who prefer Earth before
Heaven, will discover the vanity of their Designs, and check the fury of their
Prosecutions, and turn their Aims and endeavors to that that is infinitely
more worthy of them. But the real effecting this belongss solely to his Divine
Power, who purchased Heaven for us.

O thou Sun and Life of Souls, shed abroad thy Light and Vital Heat, the belief
of the Truth of unseen things, and the love of their superlative Goodness in
the Minds and Hearts of Men, that they may not frame to themselves an imaginary
Happiness in the enjoyments of this perishing Life, but with that zeal and
vigor in their Affections and Actions seek after the real Blessedness of the
future Life, as becomes an Object so glorious and eternal.

In treating of this Subject, our first inquiry is, What is the blessed End for
which Man was created? This we may clearly discover; by considering three
things.

1. The Wisdom and Goodness of the Creator, who made all things in order to
some End worthy his Perfections.

2. The Human Nature in its highest Faculties, and their utmost Capacities.

3. The Revelation of it in God's Word. Natural Light gives a real
signification of God's Intention by the two first: but the most clear and full
is in the Holy Scriptures.

I will treat of them in their order.

First, The working of God is always Now the last Period wherein all his Works
determine, is his own Glory, that being the chiefest Good. He made great
variety of Creatures, and bountiful Provisions for their Happiness, ultimately
for his own Pleasure. According to his Wisdom and most free Goodness, he was
pleased that the World should not only be filled with material and sensitive
Beings, that objectively glorify him, by the reflex of the Divine Perfections
appearing in them, but to frame a higher rank of Creatures, wherein the Image
of his Excellencies was more conspicuous, and that might actively glorify him,
by understanding and magnifying, by loving and obeying Him. And as the several
kinds of things have degrees of Excellency, they are subordinate in their use:
the simple to the compounded, the dead to the living, the lower Natures to the
more Noble. By this we may take an estimate of their Dignity and Order. Now for
whom was this vast Fabric raised, and furnished with as many Miracles as
Creatures? for whose use were the Lights of Heaven, and the innumerable Forms
of lower Beings, Plants, and Beasts on the Earth? If we regard their
Operations, it is evident they were intended for the benefit of Man. He that
understands himself, and will not forfeit the Prerogative of the reasonable
Nature, must readily acknowledge that the Preservation and Comfort of Man, was
their final Rule in the mind of the Creator, and their mutual usefulness to one
another is referred to his advantage. He is the Center of the Universe, wherein
the several Orders of visible Beings, as Lines drawn in a Circle, unite. And is
Man alone left without an end worthy his excellent Nature? It Is not to be
conceived without vile Thoughts, even the casting an imputation on the Wisdom
of his Maker.

Secondly, The Frame of Man's Nature, must consider him with respect to the
Soul that is capable of nobler Operations, and higher enjoyments than the Body
is; for the true notion of Happiness consists in the perfection and
satisfaction of his principal and most receptive Faculties, the Understanding,
Will and Affections, and consequently both in Action and Fruition with respect
to the most excellent Objects. Hence it necessarily follows that he is made for
a more worthy purpose than the pursuit and enjoyment of sensible things, that
please the inferior Part, and only content the natural Appetites. To make this
evident it is requisite to discover the defects and undervalues of all Worldly
Things, how miserably they fail in the essential conditions of Felicity that is
proper to Man, and this will convincingly prove that the divine Maker, who is
infinitely Wise and Good, endowed him with intellectual and immortal Powers, to
advance and enjoy his Glory, wherein the entire Blessedness of the reasonable
Creature consists.

1. Worldly Things are not perfective of his highest Faculties. Man is but one
degree lower than the Angels, and carries the Image of God indelibly engraven
in his Spiritual Immortal Soul; And accordingly the order of things in the
visible World is established. Thou have set him over the Works of thy Hands,
and put all things under his Feet. By Nobility of Nature, and the condition of
his state, he is incomparably above them. And can inferior things make him
better? can Gold be more precious by incorporating with a baser Metal? or Light
more resplendent by mixing with Clouds and Smoke? All the Bona adventitia, the
good things of this World, Honors, Riches, Pleasure, cannot denominate him
truly Wise and Holy, cannot add the least intellectual or moral Good, wherein
the rectitude and brightest excellence of Man is truly placed.

Nay they are consistent with all those sordid Lusts, that blemish and defame
the humane Nature, and sink it below it self. External Honor is no Character
of real Desert, and considered absolutely, confers no more to Virtue than to
Vice. As Varnish in Painting serves only to give Luster and Vavacity to the
Colors, whether the Design be regular or ill, the Picture deformed or
beautiful, and makes the Beauty or Deformity more visible. Splendour of
Extraction renders the good or bad qualities of a Person more conspicuous.
Folly set in high Degree is more observed than in a low Condition. And usually
Titles of Honor are an occasion of absurd Pride to ignorant Souls, that
understand not, that Virtue incomparably excells Nobility, as the Light is more
glorious and radiant where it springs, than where it is reflected. Riches are
often joined with habitual Vices in the Possessors, and indifferently serve for
bad or good uses. The greedy pursuit of them blasts all true worth of Spirit,
and turns the Soul to Earth and Corruption. And sensual Pleasures are so far
from advancing Man, that the luxurious enjoyment of them, by the lowest
degradement makes him like the Beasts, in all things but Innocence. In short,
all the admired things of the World are of so little value, that they debase
and inslave him by an overprising and affecting them. It Is his true perfection
from consciousness of his native worth, and through Royality of Mind, to
despise them.

2. The sensible World cannot give complete satisfaction to Man. Felicity is
the complacence and test of the Soul in the enjoyment of a suitable Object,
commensurate to its real capacity and duration. Such an Object must be a
Spiritual Good, Beatitudo est bonorum omnium complexio, secretis omnibus malis.
Cicer.
pure without Alloys, infinite and eternal. Now all things in the World are in
every respect insufficient to satisfy our Desires.

1. They are not a convenient Good to the Soul. What proportion is there
between a spiritual Nature and carnal Sensualities, between the divine
Offspring, and the low voluptuousness of Flesh? What are Treasures of Gold and
Pearls, but shining Dust and the froth of the Sea, and can these enrich a
Heavenly Being? What is Honor and Reputation? an invisible imagination formed
in a few Heads: What is Praise, a favorable sound from a few Mouths? And can a
Fancy, a Breath be the solid Good of the Soul? As well may an empty Dream
afford substantial Nourishment to the Body.

Hence the Expectation is far above the Fruition of earthly Things. Whilst seen
by the false Beams of Fancy and the Passions, they promise fair, but upon trial
are found to be a mere Illusion, that has nothing real but the bitterness that
attends them. And from hence there is a perpetual generation of Desires in the
Breasts of Men, the Quicquid illis congesseris, non finis erit cupiditatum sed
gradus. Sen.
end of one is the beginning of another, as Fuel increases the Fire. The
wanting Soul becomes more ardent by failing in what it expected, and makes
endless inquiries for matter of satisfaction. Seneca observed an image of this
in Nature, and gives the Moral of it. Nullum tormentum sentit resupinata
testudo, inquieta est tamen desiderio naturalis status, nec aut ea desinit
niti, and quatere se quam in pedes constitit. Ergo omnibus constitutionis suae
sensus est.
A Tortoise if turned on the Back, though it suffer no pain, is violent in
Motion till it recovers its natural Posture. Thus Man, though free from
external Troubles, yet is in restless changes, always casting about till he
obtains the Happiness for which he was made, that is adequate to his Capacity.
Who will show us any Good? is the voice of Mankind chasing several Hopes, and
engaged in infinite errors in the search of Felicity here below. But the
confluence of all worldly things cannot quiet the ravings of their misguided
Appetites. The Persian Kings with all their Royalties, and Revenues and
Delights, Athen.
were so unsatisfied, that they proclaimed a Reward to any that invented a new
Pleasure. The sweetest Enjoyments are not without secret distastes. The most
pleasurable Heights are infinitely distant from Felicity. Therefore the most
prosperous in the World are fain to borrow the Opinions of others, who blindly
admire what they never had experience of, to conceit themselves Happy. For
their real inward Sense is perfectly contrary to the vain Fancies of those
below them.

Nay, suppose a Man possessed of all the Varieties that compound earthly
Felicity, the more full the less satisfied he is: for his desires being
unquencht, when all things are ready that promised to appease them, and no lure
of Hope remaining, the disappointment in a mistaken Object, and despair of ever
finding satisfaction here, necessarily involves him in a double Misery. Of this
we have the certain Testimony of Solomon himself, who after a curious and
earnest search for Happiness, declares that all, even the most valued things
below, are Vanity, pompous Names without sense and reality, and therefore
vexation of Spirit. Media de font teporum surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipsis
floribus angat. Lucret.
Now what a poor Happiness is the World when the fullest possession of it is so
far from enriching a Man with true content, that it makes his Poverty desperate.

2. The Things of the World are temporal, not commensurate to the duration of
the Soul. Blessedness signifies an unchangeable State, not a transient Passage:
The Object must be firm as the Center, and the Fruition of it without end or
interruption. The fear that arises from the naked possibility of losing it,
dashes our Joy, how much more the certainty. Now suppose the whole World were
the Portion of a Man, can he joyfully acquiesce in it? The fear, nay certainty
of parting with all these things, are inseparable Properties of our possessing
them. Fear, upon the account of their transitory condition, certainty, from
Death that is inevitable to all Men.

1. Fear of losing them. Such is the instability of worldly Things through
vicissitudes of Times, disasters of Chance, decays of Nature, that we cannot be
secure of them a day. Nec unquam placidam sceptra quietem, certumve sui tenuere
Diem. S. n.
Honor is a casual Happiness, depending on the uncertain Opinions of Men that
rise and fall every Hour. Riches are deceitful, not only because they do not
supply our greatest Wants, but fly from us when we think our hold is fastest.
They are a Quicksilver no Art can fix. Forma bonum fragile est, quantumque
accedit ad annos, Fit minor, and spatio carpitur illa suo. Ovid.
Beauty is a fading Flower often blasted, while the stalk remains. All things
under the Sun are Vanity. What ever is measured by Time, is in a continual Flux
like a Torrent, one part is present to the Eye, because another is swiftly past
away. So that it is evident they are insufficient to make a Man happy. For who
can possess them without a just jealousy lest they should slip away, or by
violence be ravished from him. As the Inhabitants of Campania, the most fruitful
and delicious part of Italy, but near Vesuvius that always flames, or smoaks
and scatters Ashes abroad, are in frequent apprehensions lest a sudden deluge
of Fire should break forth and devour their Palaces and Gardens, and Vineyards,
and change that natural Paradise into a Scene of Horror, an accidental Hell.
Now the very suspicion of losing what is our Happiness is perfectly
irreconcilable to it.

2. There is a certainty of losing all earthly things at Death. Other Evils may
surprise us unexpected, or not come when feared. And this relieves Mankind in
the present state that is liable to innumerable Evils, that many may be
prevented. But the last evil is inevitable. Though Men are distinguished in the
condition of Living, yet all are equal in the necessity of Dying. Human
Greatness in every kind, Nobility, Riches, Empires cannot protect from the
sovereign and sudden hand of Death that overthrows all. The expressions of
Scripture concerning the frailty of Man are often precisely and literally
verified; He is like Grass, in the Morning it flourishes and grows up, in
the Evening it is cut down and withers.

Now suppose the World constant and faithful to you till the last hour of your
Lives, will it not fail you then? And can that be the Happiness of a Man that
attends him for a time and leaves him for ever? The most conspicuous difference
of Men in this World is that of the Victorious over the Vanquished prostrate at
his Feet. But Death makes them equal. Then the wretched Captive shall upbraid
the proud Conqueror, Art thou become weak as we? art thou become like us? It Is
no wonder then that the wise Preacher despises all the States of the present
Life as Vanity. For the Fabric cannot be more solid than the Foundation, nor
the Accident more real than the Being on which it depends. On every side Death
is in our view, and the Shadow of it approaching darkens our brightest Days.
It Is no wonder then that he equals the Fool with the Wise. For all that Wisdom
that is confined to mortal things dies with them. Nay he confounds Man with the
Beast. One thing befalls them: as the one dies so dies the other, yea they
have all one Breath, so that Man has no preeminence above them. While we regard
him only with the Eye of Sense, what shall we see in his Life, but Folly mixed
with Anxieties and Cares? and what in his Death, but wasted Spirits, the
Springs of Motion disordered, and at last the living Frame dissolved into the
Earth from whence it came?

But if we consider the Soul, that carries in it the clear marks of its
Original from God; by the same reason that every thing shall be reunited to its
Principle, that shall return to God that gave it, and remain for ever. The
Felicity therefore to which it naturally aspires, must be parallel to its
duration. From these Considerations it is above all doubt that Man was designed
by his Maker for a higher End than the enjoyment of the present World.

2. The consummate Happiness of Man is in his Communion with God. For God is a
Spiritual Good suitable to the Nature of his better and divine part, and
communicates Himself to the Spiritual Faculties, the Understanding and Will,
the principles of Man's eminent Operations, and most capable of enjoying
Felicity: God is an infinite Good, and can so fully appease all the rational
Appetites, that nothing is wanting to his entire Blessedness. God is an
unchangeable Good, not to be lost with this Life, but may be securely enjoyed
to Eternity. In the Knowledge and Love, in the Imitation and Enjoyment of his
Excellencies, the highest elevation, and complete satisfaction of the rational
Nature consists. As Man by applying himself to unworthy things is degraded into
a lower Order, and his Thoughts and Affections that are Spiritual in respect of
their Principles, are Sensual and Perishing in respect of their Object: so when
the noble Faculties are exercised in a perfect manner on their Sovereign Good,
he is advanced to an equality of Perfection and Joy with the Angels.

The more refined Vid. Plat* Symp. and Phoed.
Heathens had a glimpse of this Happiness, some streaks of it run through their
Philosophy. But till God was pleased to reveal it, the World sat in Darkness,
and slept securely in the shadow of Death, unconcerned for an invisible future
Felicity. It Is necessary therefore to inquire into his Word what that blessed
State is wherein the final Happiness of Man consists.

CHAP. II.
The clear Revelation of Man's final Happiness by the Gospel. It Is set forth by
sensible Representations to make it more intelligible. It includes an exemption
from all Evils sinful and penal. The concurrence of all positive Excellencies
to entire Blessedness. The Body shall be raised in Glory. The Soul shall be
made perfect. The Understanding shall clearly contemplate the most excellent
Objects. The Will be inflamed with the perfect Love of God. The highest
Satisfaction arises from Union with God by Knowledge and Love. The full Joy of
Heaven shall be perpetual.
It Is the peculiar honor of the Gospel that by it Life and Immortality are
brought to Light. 'Twas not wholly concealed from Men that only saw the Creator
in his visible Works. 'Twas more fully discovered by the Law; but with
incomparable more Clearness by the Gospel. The Nature of it is now revealed:
It Is a pure and holy Felicity in everlasting Communion with the blessed God.
The subject of it is the entire Man; for this End the Body shall be awakened
out of its dead sleep and quickened to an Immortal Life. The place is the
highest Heavens, framed by the Divine Hand for the seat of his Majesty, the
Kingdom of his Love, wherein the glorious Communications of himself are to his
Favorites. The causes of it are the infinite Mercy of God, and the meritorious
Obedience of his Son in Man's Nature. The Means whereby it is obtained are a
lively purifying Faith that unites us to Christ, and entitles us to an
Inheritance purchased by his most precious Blood. And to confirm our Hopes of
this Supernatural Happiness. Our Savior exhibited a perfect example of this in
himself, rising from the Grave, crowned with Immortality, and in the presence
of his Apostles ascending to Heaven, where he sits at the right Hand of God;
the Head of the Church, from whom Glory will descend to his Members.

To make this supernatural Blessedness more easy and intelligible to us, the
Scripture describes it by sensible Representations. For while the Soul is
clothed with Flesh, Fancy has such a Dominion, that we can conceive of nothing
but by Comparisons and Images taken from material Things. It Is therefore set
forth by a Feast, and a Kingdom, to signify the Joy and Glory of that State.
But to prevent all gross conceits; it tells us that the Bodies of the Saints
shall be spiritual, not capable of hunger and thirst, nor consequently of any
refreshment that is caused by the satisfaction of those Appetites. The Objects
of the most noble Senses, Seeing and Hearing, the pleasure of which is mixed
with Reason, and not common to the Brutes, are more frequently made use of to
reconcile that glorious State to the proportion of our Minds. Thus sometimes
the Blessed are represented placed on Thrones with Crowns on their Heads;
sometimes clothed in White, with Palms in their Hands; sometimes singing Songs
of triumph to Him that sits on the Throne, and to their Savior. But the
reality of this Blessedness infinitely exceeds all those faint Metaphors.
Heaven is lessened by Comparisons from earthly things. The Apostle who was
dignified with the revelation of the Successes that shall happen to the Church
till Time shall be no more, tells us, It does not appear what we shall be in
Eternity. The things that God has prepared for those that love him, are far
more above the highest ascent of our Thoughts, than the Marriage Feast of a
great Prince exceeds in splendour and magnificence the imagination of one that
has always lived in an obscure Village, and never saw any Ornaments of State,
nor tasted Wine in his Life. We can think of those things but according to the
poverty of our Understandings. But so much we know that is able to sweeten all
the bitterness, and render insipid all the sweetness of this World.

This will appear by considering that whatever is requisite to constitute the
perfect Blessedness of Man, is fully enjoyed in the Divine Presence.

1. An exemption from all evils, is the first condition of perfect Blessedness.
The sentence of wise Solon is true in another sense than he intended, --
Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
No Man can be named happy whilst in this valley of Tears. But upon the
entrance into Heaven, all those evils that by their number, variety, or weight
disquiet and oppress us, are at an end,

Sin, of all Evils the most hateful, shall be abolisht; and all Temptations
that surround us, and endanger our innocence, shall cease. Here the best Men
lament the weakness of the flesh, and sometimes the violent assaults of
spiritual Enemies. St. Paul himself breaks forth into a mournful Complaint, O
wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of Death? And when
harrass'd with the buffets of Satan, renews his most earnest addresses to God
to be freed from them. Here our Purity is not absolute, we must be always
cleansing our selves from the relics of that deep defilement that cleaves to
our nature. Here our peace is preserved with the Sword in our hand, by a
continual Warfare against Satan and the World. But in Heaven no ignorance
darkens the Mind, no passions rebel against the sanctified Will, no inherent
pollution remains. The Church is without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.
And all Temptations that war against the Soul, shall then cease. The Tempter
was cast out of Heaven, and none of his poisoned Arrows can reach that Purified
Company. Glorious Liberty! here ardently desired, but fully enjoyed by the Sons
of God above.

And as Sin, so all the penal consequences of it are quite taken away. The
present Life is an incurable disease, and sometimes attended with that sharp
sense, that Death is desired as a remedy, and accepted as a benefit. And though
the Saints have reviving Cordials, yet their joys are mixed with sorrows, nay,
caused by sorrows. The tears of Repentance are their sweetest refreshment. Here
the living Stones are cut and wounded, and made fit by Sufferings for a Temple
unto God in the New Jerusalem. But, as in the building of Solomon's Temple, the
noise of a Hammer was not heard, for all the parts were framed before with that
exact design and correspondence, that they firmly combined together. They were
hew'n in another place, and nothing remained but the putting them one upon
another in the Temple; and then, as sacred, they were inviolable. So God, the
wise Architect, having prepared the Saints here by many cutting Afflictions,
places them in the Eternal Building, where no voice of Sorrow is heard. Of the
innumerable Company above, is there any Eye that weeps, any Breast that sighs,
any Tongue that complains, or appearance of Grief? The Heavenly State is called
Life, as only worthy of that Title. There is no infirmity of Body, no Poverty,
no Disgrace, no Treachery of Friends, no Persecution of Enemies. There is no
more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Crying, Rev. 21. 4.
nor shall there be any more Pain: for former things are past away. God will
wipe away all Tears from the Eyes of his People. Their Salvation is complete in
all degrees. Pure Joy is the Privilege of Heaven, unmixed Sorrows the
punishment of Hell.

A concurrence of all positive Excellencies is requisite to Blessedness. And
these are to be considered with respect to the entire Man.

1. The Body shall be awaked out of its dead sleep, and quickened into a
glorious immortal Life. The Soul and Body are the essential parts of Man; and
though the inequality be great in their operations that respect Holiness, yet
their concourse is necessary. Good Actions are designed by the Counsel and
Resolution of the Spirit, but performed by the Ministry of the Flesh. Every
Grace expresses it self in visible actions by the Body. In the sorrows of
Repentance it supplies tears, in Fastings its appetites are restrained, in
Thanksgivings the Tongue breaks forth into the joyful praises of God. All the
victories over sensible pleasure and pain are obtained by the Soul in
conjunction with the Body. Now it is most becoming the Divine Goodness not to
deal so differently, that the Soul should be everlastingly happy, and the Body
lost in forgetfulness; the one glorified in Heaven, the other remain in the
dust. From their first setting out in the World to the Grave they ran the same
Race, and shall enjoy the same Reward. Here the Body is the Consort of the Soul
in obedience and sufferings, hereafter in fruition. When the Crown of Purity,
or Palm of Martyrdom shall be given by the great Judge in the view of all, they
shall both partake in the honor. Of this we have an earnest in the
Resurrection of Christ in his true Body, who is the first fruits of them that
sleep. 1 Cor. 15.
He shall change our vile Bodies, Phil. 3. 1.
that they may be fashioned like to his glorious Body, according to the working
of his Power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. A substantial
unfading Glory will shine in them infinitely above the perishing Pride of this
World, that is but in appearance, like the false colors painted on the
feathers of a Dove by reflection of the Light, which presently vanish, when it
changes its posture, or the Light is withdrawn. Indeed what can be more
glorious than to be conformed to the Humanity of Christ, the seat of all Beauty
and Perfection. This Conformity shall be the work of his own hands. And when
Omnipotence interposes, nothing is difficult. The raising the Body to an
unchangeable state of Glory, is as easy to the Divine Power, as the forming it
at first in the Womb. As the Sun labors no more in the Mines in the forming
Gold and Silver, the most precious and durable Metals, than in the production
of a poor short-lived Flower.

II. The Soul shall have perfection and satisfaction in all its Faculties.

1. The Understanding shall clearly see the most excellent Objects. 1 Cor. 13.
Now we know but in part. The naked beauty of Divine Things is veiled, and of
impossible discovery. And the weakness of the mind is not proportionable to
their dazzling brightness. But when that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be done away. In that enlightened state, the glorious
manifestation of the objects shall as much exceed the clearest revealing of
them here, as the Sun in its full luster, one beam of Light strained through a
crevice in the Wall. And the Understanding shall be prepared to take a full
view of them. Therefore the Apostle compares the several Periods of the Church
in respect of the degrees of Knowledge, to the several Ages of this Life. When I
was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child:
but when I became a Man, I put away childish things. In Children the organs,
either from an excess of moisture, or their smalness, are indisposed for the
vigorous exercise of the Mind: some strictures of Reason appear, a presaging
sign what will be, but mixed with much obscurity. But when the organs are come
to their just proportion and temperament, the Soul displays its strength and
activity.

All things of a supernatural order shall then be clearly discovered. The
contrivance of our Salvation, the ways of conducting us to Blessedness, which
are objects of a sublime nature, will afford an exquisite pleasure to the
Understanding. All the secrets of our Redemption shall be unsealed. The great
Mystery of Godliness, the Incarnation of the Eternal Son, and his according
Justice with Mercy, shall then be apparent. The Divine Counsels in governing
the World, are now only visible in their wonderful effects either of Mercy or
of Justice, and those most dreadful; but the Reasons of them are past finding
out. But what our Savior said to Peter, What I do, thou know not now, but
shall know hereafter, is applicable to these impenetrable dispensations. All
the original Fountains of Wisdom, as clear as deep, shall then be opened. We
shall then see the beauty of Providence in disposing temporal things in order
to our eternal felicity. We now see as it were the rough part, and Knots of
that curious Embroidery: but then the whole Work shall be unfolded, the
sweetness of the Colors, and proportion of the Figures appear. There we shall
be able to expound the perplexing Riddle, How out of the Eater came meat, and
out of the Strong came sweetness. For we shall know as we are known.

We shall see God. Our Savior tells us, This is Life Eternal to know thee, the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. The beginning and
perfection of our Happiness consists in this knowledge. The Deity is spiritual
and invisible to the Eye of the Body, infinite and incomprehensible to the
Soul. But we shall then so clearly understand the Divine Perfections, that our
present knowledge compared to that, is but as the seeing a dark resemblance in a
Glass, to the clear view of a Person in the native beauty of his Face. God is
most gloriously present in Heaven. For according to the degrees of excellence
in the Work, such are the impressions and discoveries of the Virtues of the
Cause. Now all sensible things in the low order of Nature, are but weak
resultances from his Perfections, in comparison of their illustrious Effects in
the Divine World. The Glories of the Place, and of the Inhabitants, the Angels
and Saints, clearly express his Majesty, Goodness and Power. But in a
transcendent manner he exhibits himself in the glorified Mediator. He is styled
the brightness of the Father's Glory* and the express image of his Person; not
only for his equal Perfections in respect of the unity of their Nature, but to
signify that God in the Person of the incarnate Mediator is so fully
represented to us, that by the sight of him we see God himself in his
unchangeable Excellencies. This appears by the following words, that having
purged us from our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
for they respect the Son of God as united to the humane Nature, in which he
performed the Office of the Priesthood, and took possession of his glorious
Kingdom. During his humble state, the Divine Virtues, Wisdom, Goodness,
Holiness, Power, were so visible in his Person, Life, Revelations, and
miraculous Works, that when Philip so longed for the sight of the Father as the
only consummate Blessedness, Show us the Father, and it suffices; He told him,
He that has seen me, has seen the Father also. But how brightly do they appear
in his triumphant Exaltation. 'Twas his Prayer on Earth; Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold
my Glory. Inestimable Felicity! whether we consider him in the respect of an
Object, that incomparably transcends all the created Glory of Heaven, or in the
relation of our Head, on a double account; partly that because he was debased
into the form of a Servant, and suffered all Indignities and Cruelties of
Sinners for us, has received the Recompense of his Meritorious Sufferings, the
triumph of his Victory, being glorified with the Father with the Glory he had
before the World was; and partly because every Member shall be conformed to him
in his Glory; we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And all
Felicity and Glory is comprised in that Promise. The sight of the Face of Moses
when radiant, had no transforming efficacy; for the light of it was not in him
as its source, but by derivation. But God is Light essentially, and the sight
of his Perfections will be productive of his Likeness in us, so far as it may
be in a restrained subject. When our Savior was upon the holy Mount, and one
vanishing Beam of Glory appeared in his Transfiguration, Peter was so
transported at the sight, that he forgot the World and himself. How ravishing
then will the sight of him be in his triumphant Majesty, when we shall be
transfigured our selves?

2. As they shall behold God's Face, know his most amiable Excellencies; so
they shall love him as perfectly as they know him. To the illustrations of the
Mind, there are correspondent impressions on the Heart. In the present state
our Love is imperfect, and as Fire out of its sphere, dies away, by our neglect
to feed it with proper materials, enamouring considerations of God. But it is
not so in Heaven: there the Divine Sun attracts every Eye with the light of its
beauty, and inflames every Heart with the heat of his Love. The continual
Presence of God is in different respects the Cause and Effect of our Love to
him. For there is no more powerful Attractive to love him, than to see him; And
Love keeps the thoughts undivided from him. God is Love, and will kindle in us
a pure Affection that Eternity shall never lessen.

Our Affections that are now scattered on many things, wherein some small
Reflections of his Goodness appear, shall join in one full Current in Heaven,
where God is all in all. We shall then understand the riches of his Love, that
God who is infinitely happy in himself, should make Man for such a Glory, and
such a Glory for Man. And that when for his Rebellion he was justly expelled
from Paradise, and under a sentence of Eternal Death, God should please to
restore him to his Favor, and give him a better state than was forfeited. We
shall then understand our infinite Obligations to the Son of God, who descended
from the Heaven of Heavens to our Earth; and which is more, from the Majesty
wherein he there reigned, from the Glory wherein he was visible to the
Angelical Minds, and became Man for Men, Redemption for the Lost, to purchase
Immortal Life for those who were dead to that blessed Life. In short, then God
will express his Love to us in the highest degrees that a finite Creature is
capable to receive from Love it self, and we shall love him with all the
strength of our glorified powers.

3. Complete satisfaction flows from union with God by Knowledge and Love. In
his Presence is fullness of Joy, at his Right Hand are Pleasures for ever. The
Causes and Excellencies of the Heavenly Life are in those words expressed. The
Causes are the influxive Presence of God, the revelation of his attractive
Perfections, the beholding his Face, the declaration of his peculiar Favor.
This our blessed Lord himself had a respect to, as the complete Reward of his
Sufferings: Thou shall make me full of Joy with thy Countenance. And his
Right Hand, his Bounty that dispenses, and Power that secures that Felicity.
The Excellencies of this state are fullness of Joy, and that without diminution,
or end.

When the Soul opens its eyes to the clear discoveries of the first Truth, and
its breast to the dear and intimate embraces of the Supreme Good, beyond which
nothing remains to be known, nothing to be enjoyed, what a deluge of the purest
Pleasures will overflow it? We cannot ascend in our thoughts so high, as to
conceive the excess of Joy that attends those operations of the glorified Soul
upon its proper object. But something we may conjecture.

Those who are possessed with a noble Passion for Knowledge, how do they despise
all lower Pleasures in comparison of it? How do they forget themselves, neglect
the Body, and retire into the Mind, the highest part of Man, and nearest to
God? The bare apprehension of such things that by their internal nature have no
attractive influence upon the Affections, is pleasant to the Understanding. As
the appearance of Light, though not attended with any other visible beauties,
refreshes the Eye after long darkness: so the clear discovery of Truths, how
abstract so ever, that were before unknown, is grateful to the intellective
Faculty. Thus some have been strangely transported with the pleasure of a
Mathematical Demonstration, when the evidence, not the importance of the thing
was so ravishing; for what is more dry and barren of delight than the
speculation of Figures and Numbers? Solon when near his end, and some of his
Friends that visited him were speaking softly of a Point of Philosophy, by that
sound of Wisdom was awakened from the sleep of Death that was just seizing on
him, and opening his eyes, and raising his head to give attention; being asked
the reason of it? answered, That when Vt cum istud quicquid est de quo
disputatis percepero, mortar. Val. Max.
I understand what you are discoursing of, I may die. Such was his delight in
Knowledge, that a little of it made his Agony insensible. But here are many
Imperfections that lessen this intellectual Pleasure, which shall cease in
Heaven. Here the acquisition of Knowledge is often with the expense of Health:
the flower of the Spirits, necessary for Natural Operations, is wasted by
intense thoughts. How often are the Learned sickly? As the Flint when it is
struck, gives not a spark without consuming it self; So Knowledge is obtained by
Studies that wast our faint sensitive faculties. But then our Knowledge shall be
a free emanation from the spring of Truth, without our labor and pains. Here
we learn by circuit, and discern by comparing things; our Ignorance is
dispelled by a gradual succession of Light: But then Universal Knowledge shall
be infused in a moment. Here after all our labor and toil, how little Knowledge
do we gain? Every Question is a Labyrinth out of which the nimblest and most
searching Minds cannot extricate themselves. How many specious Errors impose
upon our Understandings? We look on things by false Lights, through deceiving
Spectacles: But then our Knowledge shall be certain and complete. There is no
forbidden Tree in the Celestial Paradise, as no inordinate Affection. But
suppose that all things in the compass of the World were known, yet still there
would be emptiness and anguish in the Mind: for the most comprehensive knowledge
of things that are insufficient to make us happy, cannot afford true
Satisfaction. But then we shall see God in all his Excellencies, the supreme
Object and End, the only Felicity of the Soul. How will the sight of his Glory
personally shining in our Redeemer, in the first moment quench our extreme
thirst, and fill us with joy and admiration? It Is not as the naked conception
of Treasures, that only makes rich in ideas, but that Divine sight gives a real
Interest in him. The Angels are so ravished with the Beauties and Wonders of
his Face, that they never divert a moment from the contemplation of it.

2. The pure Love of the Saints to God is then fully satisfied. Love considered
as an affection of Friendship is always attended with two desires; to be
assured of Reciprocal Love, and to enjoy the Conversation of the Person
beloved, the testimony of his esteem and good will. This kind of Aristot*
affection seems to be inconsistent with that infinite distance that is between
God and the Creature. But though it is disproportionable to the Divine Majesty,
it is proportionable to his Goodness. Accordingly our Savior promises, He that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my
self unto him. And to confirm our belief of this astonishing Condescension,
repeats it, If a Man love me, my Father will love him, and we will come to him,
and make our abode with him. In the present state, the signs of God's special
Favor are exhibited to his Friends. Now he bestows on them the honor of being
his Sons, the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit, the precious Earnests of his
Love, and Seal of their Redemption. But in eminency of degrees, the effects of
his Love are incomparably more glorious in Heaven. Here the Saints are adopted,
there crowned. There he opens all the bright Treasures of his Wisdom, the
Riches of his Goodness, the Beauties of his Holiness, the Glories of his Power,
and by the intimate application of his Presence makes his Love most sensible to
them. O the mutual delights between God and glorified Souls! God looks on them
with an engaged Eye, as his own by many dear titles, and is well pleased in his
own Goodness to them, and ravished with the Reflex of his own Excellencies
shining in them. As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, ('it is the language
of Divine Love) so their God rejoices over thom. And what a blessed Rest do
they find in the complete fruition of their Beloved? All their desires quietly
expire in his Bosom. What triumphs of Joy follow? Can we frame a fuller
Conception of Happiness than to be perfectly loved by infinite Goodness, and
perfectly to love him?

3. The supreme Joy of the Saints is for the Felicity and Glory of God himself.
For as the holy Soul feels no more powerful motive to love God, than because he
is most worthy of it, as he is God, a Being of infinite Excellencies, and
therefore to be loved above the dearest Persons and Things, even it self; so
the highest Joy it partakes of is from this consideration, that God is
infinitely blessed and glorious. For in this the supreme desire of love is
accomplished, that the most beloved Object is perfectly honored and pleased In
Heaven the Love of the Saints to God is in its highest Perfection, and they see
his Glory in the most perfect manner, which causes a transcendent Joy to them.
And this is one reason why the Saints though shining with unequal degrees of
Glory, are equally content. For their most ardent Love being set on God, that
he is pleased to glorify himself by such various communications of his
Goodness, is full satisfaction to their desires. Besides, in those different
degrees of Glory, every one is so content with his own, Sic itaque habebit
donum aliud aelio minus, ut hic quoque donum habeat, ne velit amplius. Aug.
that there is no possible desire of being but what he is.

4. The full joy of Heaven shall continue without diminution, or end. The
number of Possessors cannot lessen it. The Divine Presence is an unwasted
Spring of Pleasure, equally full and open to all, and abundantly sufficient to
satisfy the immensity of their desires. Envy reigns in this World, because
earthly things are so imperfect in their nature, and so peculiar in their
possession, that they cannot suffice, nor be enjoyed by all. But in Heaven none
is touched with that low base passion: for God contains all that is precious
and desirable in the highest degrees of Perfection, and all partake of the
influence of his universal Goodness without intercepting one another. In the
Kingdom above there is no cause for the elder Brother to repine at the Father's
Bounty to the younger, nor for the younger to supplant the elder, to obtain the
Birthright. The Heirs of God are all raised to Sovereign Glory. Every one
enjoys him as entirely and fully, as if solely his felicity. God is a Good as
indivisible as infinite, and not diminished by the most liberal communications
of Himself. We may illustrate this by comparing the Price of our Redemption,
and the Reward. The Death of Christ is a universal benefit to all the Saints,
yet it is so applied to every Believer for his perfect Redemption, as if our
Savior in all his Agonies and Sufferings had no other in his Eye and Heart; as
if all his Prayers, his Tears, his Blood were offered up to his Father only for
that Person. The common respect of it the Apostle declares in those admirable
words, that signify such an excess of God's Love to us, He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? But to imagine that the Et totum se dedit universis, et
totum singulis. Ac per hoc quicquid passione sua Salvator praestitit, sicut
totum ei debent universi, sic singuli; nisiquod prope hoc plus singuli quam
universi, quod totum acceperunt singuli, quantum universi. Salvian.
propriety of every Believer is thereby prejudiced, is not only false, but
extremely injurious to the Merit and Dignity, and to the infinite Love of
Christ. Therefore the same Apostle tells us, The Life which I now live in the
Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God; who loved me, and gave himself
for me: as if he were the sole Object of Christ's Love, the End and Reward of
his Sufferings. And this appropriating of it to himself, is no prejudice to the
Rights of all others. St. John describes himself by that truly glorious Title,
The Disciple whom Jesus loved. Could he speak this of himself without the
injury and indignation of the other Disciples? Certainly he might. For if we
consider that incomprehensible Love of Christ, expressed to them all at his last
Supper, after Judas was gone forth; As the Father has loved me, so I have
loved you; we may easily understand, that every one of them might justly
believe that he was singularly beloved of Christ. They were all received in the
Heart, though (with John) they did not all lean on the Breast of their Divine
Master. Thus in Heaven God is the universal Treasure of all the Saints, and the
peculiar Portion of every one, not engrost by possessing, nor wasted by
enjoying. Si audiaet multitudo silens, non inter se particulatim comminuunt
sonos, tanquam cibos: sed omne quod sonat and omnibus totum est, and singulis
totum. August. in Epist. ad Volusan.
As by his Essence he equally fills the whole World, and every part of it; and
by his Providence equally regards all and every partitular Creature; so in
Heaven he dispenses the Riches of his Love to all, that they cannot desire
more, if every one of them, were (if I may so express it) the only begotten of
the only begotten himself, the sole Heir of all the Merits of his Son. Every
Saint may with the inflamed Spouse break forth in that Triumph of Love; My
Beloved is mine, and I am his.

Nay, the great number of the glorified Saints, is so far from lessening their
Joy, that it unspeakably increases it. The innumerable Company of Angels, and
the General Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, next of the happiness of
enjoying God, are a chief part of Heaven. An unfeigned ardent Affection unites
that pure society. Our Love is now kindled either from a relation in Nature, or
a civil account, or some visible Excellencies that render a Person worthy of
our choice and friendship: but in Heaven the Reasons are greater, and the
degrees of Love incomparably more fervent. All Carnal Alliances and Respects
cease in that supernatural state. The Apostle tells us, If I have known Christ
after the Flesh, I know him so no more. By the Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ he was transported into another World, and had communion with him as an
Heavenly King, without low regards to the temporal Privilege of conversing with
him on Earth. The Spiritual relation is more near and permanent than the
strictest band of Nature. The Saints have all relation to the same Heavenly
Father, and to Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, and Head of that happy
Fraternity. The principal motives of Love here are the inherent Excellencies of
a Person. Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness, Fidelity are mighty Attractives, and
produce a more worthy Affection, a more intimate Confederacy of Souls, than
propinquity in Nature, or any carnal respects. Virtue is amiable in an old
Person, though wrinkled and deformed: Vice is hateful in a young Person though
beautiful. There are clearer Eyes than those of Flesh, a purer Light than what
is sensible, a diviner Beauty than what is Corporeal, and a nobler Love than
what is sensual. David declares that all his delight was in the Excellent. But
there are allays of this Spiritual Love here. For,

1. There are relics of Frailty in the best Men on Earth, some Blemishes that
render them less amiable when discovered. Here their Graces are mixed with
Infirmities, and but ascending to Glory. Accordingly our Love to them must be
regular, and serene; not clouded with Error, mistaking defects for amiable
qualities. But in Heaven, the Image of God is complete, by the union of all the
glorious Virtues requisite to its perfection. Every Saint there exactly agrees
with the first Exemplar, is transformed according to the primitive beauty of
Holiness. No spot or wrinkle remains, nor any such thing, that may cast the
least aspect of deformity upon them.

2. In the present state the least part of the Saints Worth is visible. As the
Earth is fruitful in Plants and Flowers, but its riches are in Mines of
precious Metals, the veins of Marble hidden in its bosom. True Grace appears in
sensible Actions, but its Glory is Within. O si animum boni viri liceret
inspicere, ex magnifico placidoque fulgentem! nonne veluti numinis occurs^
obstupefacti essemus? Senec.
The sincerity of Aims, the purity of Affections, the impresses of the Spirit
on the Heart, the interior beauties of Holiness, are only seen by God.
Besides, such is the humility of eminent Saints, that the more they abound in
spiritual treasures, the less they show. As the Heavenly Bodies when in nearest
conjunction with the Sun, and fullest of light, make the least appearance to
our sight. But all their Excellencies shall then be in view. The Glory of God
shall be revealed in them. And how attractive is the Divine Likeness to an holy
Eye? How will it ravish the Saints to behold an immortal Loveliness shining in
one another? Their Love is mutual and reflexive, proportionable to the cause of
it. An equal, constant Flame is preserved by pure Materials. Every one is
perfectly amiable, and perfectly enamored with all. Now can we frame a fuller
conception of Happiness, than such a State of Love, wherein whatever is
pleasant in Friendship is in perfection, and whatever is distastful by Men's
folly and weakness is abolished? The Psalmist breaks out in a Rapture, Behold
how good and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Love is
the Beauty and Strength of Societies, the Pleasure of Life. How excellent is
the Joy of the Blessed, when the Prayer of Christ shall be accomplished, that
they all may be one; as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us. God is absolutely One in his glorious Nature and Will, and
therefore unalterably Happy; And their inviolable Union in Love, is a Ray of
the Essential Unity between the sacred Persons. There are no Divisions of Heart
and Tongues, as in this Babel; but the most perfect and sweetest Concord, an
Eternal Agreement in Tempers and Inclinations. There are no envious
Comparisons; for Love that affectively transforms one into another, causes the
Glory of every Saint to redound to the Joy of all. Every one takes his share in
the Felicity of all, and adds to it. Such is the power of that Celestial Fire
wherein they all burn, that it melts and mixes Souls in such an entire Union,
that by Complacence and an intimate Joy, the Blessedness of all is, as it were,
proper to every one; as if every one were placed in the Hearts of all, and all
in the Heart of every one. If in the Church of the firstborn Christians in the
earthly Jerusalem, the Band of Charity was so strict that it is said, the
Multitude of Believers were of one Heart, and one Soul; How much more intimate
and inseparable is the Union of the Saints in Jerusalem above, where every one
loves another as himself? It Is recorded of Alexander, that entering with
Hephestion his Favorite, into the Pavilion of Darius his Mother, then his
Priour, she bowed to the Favorite, as having a greater appearance of Majesty,
thinking him to be Alexander: but advised of her Error, she humbly begged his
Pardon: To whom the generous King replied, Non errati Matter, nam hic Alexander
est* Curt. lib. 3.
You did not err, Mother, this is also Alexander: Such was their Affection,
that whoever was taken of them, the other was taken in him; the less ascending
in the greater, without degrading the greater in the less. This is a Copy of
the holy Love of the Blessed; but with the same difference, as between the
Description of a Star with a Coal, and its Beauty in its proper Aspect. And
where all is Love, all is Delight. O how do they enjoy and triumph in the
Happiness of one another? With what an unimaginable Tenderness do they embrace?
What Reciprocations of Endearments are between them? O their ravishing
Conversation, and sweet Intercourse! for their Presence together in Heaven is
not a silent Show. In the Transfiguration, Moses and Elias talked with Christ.
With what excellent discourses do they entertain one another? If David felt
such inward Pleasure from the sense of God's favors, that he could not
restrain the expression of it, but invites the Saints, Come and hear, all ye
that fear the Lord, and, I will tell you what he has done for my Soul.
Certainly in Heaven, the blessed with overflowing affections recount the Divine
Benefits: the admirable Methods, whereby the Life of Grace was begun, preserved
and carried on in the midst of Temptations; the continual Succession of Mercies
in the time of their Hopes, and the Consummation of all in the time of their
Enjoyment. How joyfully do they concur in their thanksgivings to God for the
goodness of Creation: in making them reasonable Creatures, capable to know,
love and enjoy Him, when they might have been of the lowest Order in the
wholesphere of Beings: for his compassionate care and providence over them in
this World: But especially for his sovereign and singular Mercy in electing
them to be vessels of honor: for his powerful Grace, in rescuing them from the
cruel and ignominious bondage of Sin: for his most free Love, that justified
them from all their guilt by the Death of his only Son, and glorified them with
himself. They are never weary in this delightful exercise, but continually
bless him for his Mercy that endures for ever. We may judge by the Saints here,
when they are in a fit disposition to praise God, what fervours they feel in
their united Praises of him in Heaven. The Psalmist in an Ecstasy calls to all
the parts of the World to join with him; The Lord reigns, let the Heavens
rejoice, and the Earth be glad; let the Sea roar, let the Fields be joyful, and
all that dwell therein. He desires that Nature should be elevated above it
self, that the dead parts be inspired with Life, the insensible feel Motions of
Joy, and those that want a Voice break forth in praises, to adorn the Divine
Triumph. With what Life and Alacrity will the Saints in their blessed Communion
celebrate the Object of their Love and Praises? The Seraphims about the Throne
cried to one another, to express their Zeal and Joy, in celebrating his Eternal
Purity and Power, and the Glory of his Goodness. O the unspeakable Pleasure of
this Concert! when every Soul is harmonious, and contributes his part to the
full Music of Heaven. O could we hear but some Echo of those Songs wherewith
the Heaven of Heavens resounds, some remains of those Voices wherewith the
Saints above triumph in the Praises, in the solemn Adoration of the King of
Spirits, how would it inflame our desires to be joined with them? Blessed are
those that are in thy House, they always praise thee.

2. The fullness of Joy in Heaven is undecaying; for the causes of it are always
equal. And those are the Beatifick Object revealed, and the uninterrupted
Contemplation of it. Whilst we are here below, the Sun of Righteousness, as to
our perception and sense, has ascensions and declinations, accesses and
recesses. And our Earth is not so purified, but some Vapors arise that
intercept his cheerful refreshing Light. From hence there are alternate
successions of Spiritual Comforts and Sorrows, of Doubts and filial Confidence
in the Saints. It Is a rare favor of Heaven, when an humble Believer in his
whole course is so circumspect as not to provoke God to appear displeased
against him: When a Christian (as those tutelar Angels spoken of in the Gospel)
always beholds the face of his Heavenly Father, and converses with him with an
holy Liberty. And what a torment the hiding of God's Face is to a deserted
Soul, only they know who feel it. External troubles are many times attended
with more Consolations to the Spirit, than Afflictions to Sense; but to love
God with a transcendent Affection, and to fear he is our Enemy, no Punishment
exceeds, or is equal to it. As his Loving Kindness in their esteem is better
than Life, so his Displeasure is worse than Death. How do they wrestle with God
by Prayers and Tears, and offer, as it were, a holy Violence to the King of
Heaven, to recover their first serenity of Mind, the lost Peace of Heart? How
passionately do they cry out with Job, in the Book of his Patience, O that I
were as in months past, Job 29. 2, 3, 4.
as in the days when God preserved me: when his Candle shined upon my head, and
when by his Light I walked through darkness: As I was in the days of my youth,
when the Secret of God was upon my Tabernacle. And sometimes God delays the
revealing himself even to his dearest Children; not that he does not see their
Necessities, and hears their Prayers, or is so hard that till their Extremities
he is not moved with Compassion, but for wise and holy Reasons; Either that
they may not return to folly, if by any presumptuous Sin they forfeited their
Peace; or if they have been careful to please him, yet he may deprive them of
Spiritual Comforts for a time, to keep them humble, and that with an obedient
resignation to his Sovereign Pleasure they may wait for his reviving Presence.
And then Joy returns greater than before. For thus God usually renders with
interest what he suspended only for trial. But the Saints above are for ever
enlightened with the vital splendour, and dear regards of his Countenance, always
enjoy his beamy smiles. A continual effusion of Glory illustrates Heaven and
all its blessed Inhabitants.

And their Contemplation of God is fixed. If the Object, though extraordinary
glorious, were transient, or the Eye so weak that it could only see it but by
glances, the height of Joy would not be perpetual. But the mind is prepared
with supernatural vigor, to see the brightness of God's Face, and by the most
attentive application always converses with that blessed Object; so that the
Joy of Heaven is never intermitted for a moment. They always see, and love, and
rejoice, and praise him.

It Is possible a carnal suspicion may arise in some, as if the uniform
perpetual vision of the same Glory might lose its perfect delightfulness. For
those who seek for happiness in the vanity of the Creatures, are always
desirous of change, and have their Judgments so corrupted, that while they
languish with a secret desire after an unchangeable Good, yet they conceive no
Good as desirable, that is not changed.

But to correct this gross error of Fancy, let us a little enquire into the
causes of Dissatisfaction, that make the constant fruition of the same thing
here to be tedious.

Sensible things are of such a limited Goodness, that not any of them can
supply all our present wants, so that it is necessary to leave one for another.
And the most of them are Remedies of our diseased Appetites, and if not
temperately used, are destructive Evils. Eating and Drinking are to extinguish
Hunger and Thirst, but continued beyond just measure, become nauseous. Besides,
the Insufficiency of their Objects, the Senses themselves cannot be satisfied
all at once. The Ear cannot attend to delightful Sounds, and the Eye be intent
on beautiful Colors at the same time. The Satisfaction of one Sense defeats
another of enjoying its proper good; therefore the same Object is not
constantly pleasant, but the Heart is distempered from as many Causes, as there
are desires unaccomplish'd. Add farther, all things under the Sun afford only a
superficial delight, and miserably deceive the Expectations raised of them: and
many times there is a mixture of some evil in them, that is more offensive,
than the good is delightful. The Honey is attended with a Sting, so that often
those very things we sigh after through vehement desire, when they are
obtained, we sigh for grief. Now all these Causes of dissatisfaction cease in
Heaven; for Vitae nos taedium tenet timor mortis, natat omne consilium, nec
implere nos ulla faelicitas potest. Causae autem est, quod non pervenimus ad
illud bonum immensum and insuperabile, ubi necesse est, consistat nobis
voluntas nostra, quia ultra summum non est locus. Senec. epist. 74.
God is an infinite Good, and whatever is truly desirable and precious, is in
Him in all degrees of Perfection. And in his Presence all the Powers of the
Soul are drawn out in their most pleasant exercise, and always enjoy their
entire happiness. The fruition of him exceeds our most raised hopes, as much as
he is more glorious in Himself than in any borrowed Representations. God will
be to us incomparably above what we can ask or think. The compass of our
thoughts, the depth of our desires are imperfect measures of his Perfections.
And as he is a Pure Good in Himself, so he is prevalent over all Evil. It Is
evident therefore that nothing can allay the Joys of Saints when they are in
God's presence.

2. Novelty is not requisite to ingratiate every Good, and make it perfectly
delightful. (...) Arist. Eth. l. 7. c. ult.
God is infinitely happy, to whom no Good was ever new. It Is indeed the Sauce
that gives a delicious taste to inferior things. For Men relish only what is
eminent; and the good things of this World are so truly mean, that they are
feign to borrow a show of Greatness by comparison with a worse estate
preceding. But an infinite Good produces always the same pure equal complete
Joy, because it arises from its intrinsic perfection, that wants no Foil to
commend it. The Psalmist breaks forth, Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? This is
no vanishing Rapture, but a constant joyful height of Affection. God, the
essential happiness of the Saints, is always perfectly lovely and delightful to
them.

3. The glorified Saints in every period of their happy state, have as lively a
perception of it as in the beginning. To make this evident, we must consider
that the pleasure of Novelty springs from a quick sense of the opposite terms,
between our condition in the want of some desired Good, and after our obtaining
it. Now the Mind is more intense on the advantage, and more strongly affected
at first. One newly freed from the torments of a sharp disease, feels a greater
pleasure than from a constant tenor of health. Those who are raised from a low
state to eminent Dignity, are transported with their first change, but in tract
of time the remembrance of their mean condition is so weakened and spent, that
it is like the shadow of a Dream, and proportionably their Joy is lessened.
Honors like Perfumes, by custom are less sensible to those that carry them.
But the Saints above always consider and feel the excellent difference between
their suffering and triumphant state. They never lose that ravishing part of
felicity, the vivid sense of past evils. Their reflections are always as strong
on the Misery from whence they were raised to the pitch of Happiness, as in
their first glorious Translation. In what an Ecstasy of wonder and pleasure will
they be, from the fresh memory of what they were, and the joyful sense of what
they are? I was (says the admiring Soul) poor, blind, and naked; but O
miraculous and happy Alteration! I am full of Light, enriched with the
Treasures of Heaven, adorned with Divine Glory. I was under the tyrannous power
of Satan, but he is bruised under my feet. I was sentenced to an everlasting
separation from the Presence of God, my only Life and Joy; but now am possessed
of my supreme Good. O how transporting is the comparison of these wide and
contrary extremes? How beautiful and pleasant is the Day of Eternity, after
such a dark tempestuous Night? How does the remembrance of such Evils produce a
more lively and feeling fruition of such Happiness? How strangely and mightily
does Salvation with Eternal Glory affect the Soul? This gives a spritely accent
to their everlasting Hallelujahs. This preserves an affectionate Heat in their
Thanksgivings to their Victorious Deliverer. And thus their Happiness is always
the same, and always new. Their pleasure is continued in its perfection.

Lastly, The Blessedness of the Saints is without end. This makes Heaven to be
it self. There is no satiety of the present, no solicitude for the future. Were
there a possibility, or the least suspicion of losing that happy state, it
would cast an aspersion of bitterness upon all their delights: they could not
enjoy one moments repose; but the more excellent their Happiness is, the more
stinging would their fear be of parting with it. But the Inheritance reserved
in Heaven, is immortal, undefiled, and fades not away. And the tenure of their
Possession is infinitely firm by the Divine Power, the true Support of their
everlasting Duration. With God is the Fountain of Life. They enjoy a better
Immortality, than the Tree of Life could have preserved in Adam. The
Revolutions of the Heavens, and Ages, are under their Feet, and cannot in the
least alter or determine their Happiness. After the passing of millions of
Years, still an entire Eternity remains of their enjoying God. O most
desirable State! where Blessedness and Eternity are inseparably united. O
joyful Harmony! when the full Chorus of Heaven shall sing, This God is our God
for ever and ever. This adds an infinite weight to their Glory. This redoubles
their unspeakable Joys with infinite sweetness and security. They repose
themselves in the complete Fruition of their Happiness. God reigns in the
Saints, and they live in him for ever.

CHAP. III.
The Mercy of God the Original Cause of his designing and preparing Heaven for
his People. The Obedience of Christ, the meritorious Cause. Some Qualifications
are required in those that shall possess it. The holy Change of Man's Nature
indispensibly requisite in order to his Reception into Heaven. The Reasons of
it specified.
HAving such a Revelation of Heaven in the Gospel, that all the Kingdoms of the
World, and the Glory of them, in comparison, are but as a Glowworm to the
Light of the Sun, with what inflamed desires should we seek, and strive for
that unchangeable Happiness? In order to this we shall consider the causes of
it, and the means whereby it is obtained.

The Original moving Cause is the pure rich Mercy of God that prepared it for
his People, and prepares them for it. The procuring Cause is the meritorious
efficacy of Christ's Obedience and Sufferings. This is expressly declared by the
Apostle; The wages of Sin is Death, but the gift of God is eternal Life through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

I. The designing, the preparation, and actual bestowing of the Heavenly Glory
is from the Mercy of God. This will appear by considering,

1. That it is absolutely impossible that a mere Creature, though perfect,
should deserve any thing from God. For enjoying its being and powers of working
from his Goodness, the product of all is entirely due to him. And the payment
of a Debt acquires no Title to a Reward. He is the Proprietary and Lord of all
by Creation. Hence it is clear that in the order of distributive Justice nothing
can be challenged from him.

2. Besides, such is the infinite Perfection of God in Himself, that no benefit
can redound to him by the service of the Creature. When you have done all, say
you are unprofitable Servants, for we have done what we ought to do. The
neglect of our duty justly exposes to punishment, but the performance of it
deserves no Reward, because no advantage accrues to God by it. Who has first
given unto him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? He challenges all
Creatures even of the highest order. To speak strictly therefore, When God
crowns the Angels with Glory, he gives what is merely his own, and does not
render what is theirs. If he should leave them in their pure Nature, or deprive
them of their Being, he were no loser, nor injurious to them. For what Law
binds him to enrich them with Immortal Glory, who are no ways profitable to
him, or to preserve that being they had from his unexcited Goodness. No
Creature can give to him, therefore none can receive from him by way of
valuable Consideration.

3. There is no proportion between the best works of Men, and the excellency of
the Reward, much less an equivalence. 'Twas the just and humble acknowledgment
of Jacob to God, I am less than the least of all thy Mercies, those that common
Providence dispenses for the support and refreshment of this temporal Life. But
how much less than the glorious Excellencies of the supernatural Divine Life,
wherein the Saints reign with God for ever? The most costly, the most difficult
and hazardous Services, are equally nothing in point of Merit, with the giving
but a Cup of cold Water to a Disciple of Christ, there being no correspondence
in value between them and the Kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle tells us, I count
the Sufferings of the present Life are not to be compared to the Glory that
shall be revealed in us. And suffering is more than doing. God rewards his
faithful Servants not according to the dignity of their Works, but his own
Liberality and Magnificence. As Alexander having ordered fifty Talents of Gold
to be given to a Gentleman in Poverty to supply his want, and he surprised with
that immense Bounty, modestly said, ten were enough; He replied, If fifty are
too much for you to receive, ten are too little for me to give; therefore do
you receive as Poor, I will give as a King. Thus God in the dispensing his
Favors does not respect the meanness of our Persons or Services, but gives to
us as a God. And the clearest Notion of the Deity is that he is a Being
infinite in all Perfections, therefore all-sufficient and most willing to make
his Creatures completely happy.

4. If a Creature perfectly Holy that never sinned is incapable to merit any
thing from God, much less can those who are born in a sinful State, and guilty
of innumerable actual Transgressions, pretend to deserve any Reward for their
Works. This were presumption inspired by prodigious Vanity. For,

1. By his most free Grace they are restored in conversion to that Spiritual
Power by which they serve him. The Chaos was not a deader Lump before the
Spirit of God moved on the Face of the Waters, than the best of Men were before
the vital influences of the Spirit wrought upon them. And for this they are so
deeply obliged to God, that if a thousand times more for his Glory were
performed, yet they cannot discharge what they owe.

2. The continuance and increase of the powerful supplies of Grace to the
Saints, who even since their holy calling by many lapses have justly deserved
that God should withdraw his grieved Spirit, are new Obligations to
Thankfulness: and the more Grace the less Merit.

3. The best Works of Men are imperfect, allayed with the mixtures of
Infirmities, and not of full weight in the Divine Balance. If God should
strictly examine our Righteousness, 'twill be found neither pure nor perfect in
his Eyes, and without Favor and Indulgence would be rejected. And that which
wants Pardon, cannot deserve Praise and Glory. He shows Mercy to thousands that
love him, and keep his Commandments. If Obedience were meritorious, it were
strict justice to reward them. The Apostle prays for Onesiphorus, who had
exposed himself to great danger for his love to the Gospel, The Lord grant he
may find Mercy in that day. The Divine Mercy gives the Crown of Life to the
Faithful in the day of eternal Recompenses.

II. The meritorious Cause of our obtaining Heaven, is the Obedience of Jesus
Christ comprehending all that he did and suffered to reconcile God to us. From
him as the eternal Word we have all benefits in the order of Nature, for all
things were made by him; and for him, as the incarnate Word, all good things in
the order of Grace. What we enjoy in Time, and expect in Eternity, is by him.
To show what influence his Mediation has to make us happy, we must consider;

1. Man by his Rebellion justly forfeited his Happiness, and the Law exacts
precisely the forfeiture. Pure Justice requires the Crime should be punished
according to its Quality, much less will it suffer the guilty to enjoy the
favor of God. For Sin is not to be considered as an Offense and Injury to a
private Person, but the violation of a Law, and a disturbance in the order of
Government, so that to preserve the honor of governing Justice, an equivalent
reparation was necessary. Till Sin was expiated by a proper Sacrifice, the
Divine Goodness was a sealed Spring, and its blessed effects restrained from
the guilty Creature. Now the Son of God in our assumed Nature offered up
himself a Sacrifice in our stead, to satisfy Divine Justice, and removed the
Bar, that Mercy might be glorified in our Salvation. The Apostle gives this
account of it; Heb. 10. 19, 20.
We have boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the Blood of Christ, by a new
and living way which he has consecrated for us, through the Veil, that is to
say, his Flesh.

2. Such were the most precious Merits of his Obedience, that it was not only
sufficient to free the guilty contaminated race of Mankind from Hell, but to
purchase for them the Kingdom of Heaven. If we consider his Human Nature, all
Graces were born with him, as Rays with the Sun, and shined in the whole course
of his Life in the excellence of perfection. And the dignity of his divine
Person derived an immense value to all he performed as Mediator. One act of his
Obedience was more honorable to God than all the Lives of the Saints, the
Deaths of the Martyrs, and the Service of the Angels. God was more pleased in
the Obedience of his Beloved Son, than he was provoked by the Rebellion of his
Servants. Therefore, as the just recompense of it, he constituted him to be
Universal Head of the Church, supreme Judge of the World; invested him with
Divine Glory, and with Power to communicate it to his faithful Servants. He is
the Prince of Life. In short, it is as much upon the account of Christ's
Sufferings that we are glorified, as that we are forgiven. The Wounds he
received in his Body, the Characters of Ignominy, and Footsteps of Death, are
the Fountains of our Glory. His Abasement is the cause of our Exaltation.

If it be said, this seems to lessen the freeness of this Gift. The answer is
clear;

This was due to Christ, but undeserved by us. Besides, the appointing his Son
to be our Mediator in the way of our ransom, was the most glorious work of his
Goodness.

2. The means of our obtaining Heaven are to be considered. Though the Divine
Goodness be free in its Acts, and there can be nothing in the Creature of
Merit, or Inducement to prevail upon God in the nature of a cause, yet he
requires qualifications in all those who shall enjoy that blessed unchangeable
Kingdom. The Apostle expressly declares, It Is not of him that wills, Romans 9. 16.
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy. But we must distinguish
the Effects of this Mercy, which are dispensed in that order the Gospel lays
down. The first Mercy is the powerful calling the Sinner from his corrupt and
wretched State; a second Mercy is the pardoning his Sins; the last and most
eminent is the glorifying him in Heaven. Now it is clear that in this place, the
showing of Mercy, signifies the preventing Grace of God in Conversion, for in
the 18 th verse, it is said, God shows Mercy to whom he will, and whom he will
he hardens. Where it is evident that showing Mercy is opposed not to condemning,
but to hardening, and consequently the intent of the Words is this, That Divine
Grace overcomes the Rebellious Will, softens the stiff and stubborn Heart, and
makes it pliant to Obedience. This flows from his pure good Will and Pleasure,
without the least motive from the inclinations or endeavors of sinful Men. But
the other Effects of God's Mercy require Conditions in the Subjects that
receive them: for he pardons only penitent Believers, and glorifies none but
persevering Saints.

To make this clear it is worthy of Observation, The Gospel has several
Denominations. It Is called a Law, a Covenant, and a Testament. It Is called the
Law of Faith, and the Law of the Spiritual Life. As a Law it signifies a new
Right that God has most freely established in favor of lost Man, that commands
certain Duties, and sets before them Eternal Life as the reward of Obedience,
and Eternal Death the punishment of Disobedience. According to this the trial
and decision of Men's everlasting States shall be, which is the Character of a
true Law. This Law of Grace, is very different from the Law of Nature, that
required entire innocence, and for the least omission, or accusing act, past an
irrevokable doom upon the Offender: for that strictness and severity is
mollified by the Gospel, which accepts of sincere persevering Obedience though
imperfect; accordingly it is called the Law of Liberty. James 2.
But the Law of Faith is unalterable, and admits of no dispensation from the
duties required in order to our being everlastingly happy.

2. The Gospel is styled a Covenant, and that imports a reciprocal engagement
between parties for the performance of the matter contained in it. The Covenant
of Grace includes the promise of pardoning and rewarding Mercy on God's part,
and the Conditions on Man's with respect to which it is to be performed. There
is an inviolable dependence between them. He will be our God, Heb. 9.
to make us happy, but we must be his People to yield unreserved Obedience to
him. 2 Cor.
He will be our Father, and we shall be his Sons and Daughters, but it is upon
the terms of purifying our selves from all pollutions of Flesh and Spirit, and
unfeigned endeavors to perfect Holiness in his fear. It Is astonishing Goodness
that he is pleased to condescend to such a treaty with fallen Creatures: by a
voluntary promise he encourages them, but though most free in making, it is
conditional in the performance. The constancy of his holy Nature obliges him to
fulfill his Word, but it is if we do not fail on our part by carelessness of our
Duty A Presumer may seal assurance to himself, and be deceived in this great
matter, but God will not be mocked. If we prove false in the Covenant, he will
be faithful, and exclude those from Heaven that were neglectful of the
Conditions to which it is promised.

3. The Gospel is styled a Testament sealed in the Blood of Christ, confirmed
by his Death. The donation of eternal blessings in it is not absolute and
irrespective, but the Heirs are admitted to the Possession of the Inheritance
according to the Will of the rich liberal and wise Testator. There can be no
regular title or claim made out without performing what is required. And this
is the Will of God and Christ our Sanctification, without which we cannot enjoy
it.

Now from hence we may see the admirable agreement between these two Notions,
that Heaven is a Gift and a Reward. It Is a Reward in the order of giving it,
not due to the Work, but from the Bounty of the Giver. God gives Heaven to
those that faithfully serve him. But their Service was due to God, of no worth
in respect of Heaven, so that Man's Work is no Merit, and God's Reward is a
Gift. Our everlasting Glory must be ascribed to his most free Grace, as much as
the pardon of our Sins.

I shall now proceed to consider, what the Gospel declares to be indispensibly
requisite in order to our obtaining of Heaven: this is comprised in the holy
change of Man's Nature, which I will briefly unfold, and show how necessary it
is to qualify us for Celestial Glory.

1. This holy Change is expressed in Scripture by the new Birth. Our Savior with
a solemn repeated Asseveration tells Nicodemus; John 3. 3.
Verily, Verily, except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
Sin is natural to Man from his Conception and Birth, and infects with its
contagion all his Faculties. This is fomented and cherisht by temptations that
easily encompass him. The Understanding is polluted with evil Principles, full
of strong Prejudices, and lofty Imaginations against the supernatural Mysteries
of Salvation. It Is full of Ignorance and Folly, and from hence either rejects
them as incredible, or despises them as impertinent or unprofitable. The Will
is depraved and perverse, full of unruly and unhallowed Affections. The Senses
are luxurious and rebellious. In short Man, is so viciously and sensually
inclined, so alienated from the Life of God, as if he had no diviner part
within him, that should aspire to a Spiritual Blessedness, that should regulate
and control the excess of the inferior Appetites. This is the unhappy
Character Satan impressed on him in his Fall, and without renovation upon an
infinite account he is incapable of seeing God. This renovation consists not in
the change of his substance, as the Water was miraculously turned into Wine at
the Marriage in Cana of Galilee: the same Soul with its essential Powers, the
same Body with its natural Senses, the Work of the Creator remains; but in the
cleansing of his stained nature, in the sanctifying his Faculties that are the
Springs of his Actions. The whole Man is quickened into a Divine Life, and
enabled to act in conformity to it. And of this the new Birth is a convenient
Illustration. An active Principle of Holiness is planted in him that springs up
into visible Actions. The Apostle particularly expresses it in his earnest
Prayer for the Thessalonians, The very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and
preserve your whole Spirit, Soul and Body blameless till the coming of Jesus
Christ. Every Faculty is renewed, and every Grace infused that constitutes the
Divine Image. The Mind is renewed by Spiritual Light, to believe the Truth and
Goodness of unseen things promised, the reality and dreadfulness of things
threatened in the Word of God. It sees the truest Beauty in Holiness, the
highest Honor in Obedience to God, the greatest Equity and Excellence in his
Service. The Will is renewed by holy Love, a purifying Flame, and feels the
attractive virtue of our blessed End, before all desirable things on Earth,
and determins to pursue it in the vigorous use of proper means. The Body is
made a holy instrument fit for the renewed Soul. In short, the natural Man
becomes spiritual in his Perceptions, Resolutions and Actions. All things are
become New. There is a firm assent, an inviolable adherence to those most
precious Objects revealed in the Scripture, and a sincere chosen constant
Obedience flows from the renewed Faculties. And from hence we may distinguish
between regenerating Grace, and formal Hypocrisy in some, and the proficiency
of Nature, and power of common Grace in others. A Hypocrite in Religion is
acted from without, by mercenary base respects, and his Conscience being
cauteris'd, handles sacred things without feeling: a regenerate Person is moved
by an internal living Principle, and performs his Duties with lively
Affections. Natural Conscience under the compulsion of Fear, may lay a
restraint upon the outward acts of Sin, without an inward consent to the
sanctity of the Law. Renewing Grace cleanses the Fountain, and the current is
pure. It reconciles the Affections to the most holy Commands. I love thy Law
because it is pure, says the Psalmist.

A moral Principle may induce one to abstain from many Sins, and to perform
many praiseworthy things in conformity to Reason. But this is neither
sanctifying nor saving: for it only prunes Sin as if it were a good Plant, and
does not root it up; it compounds with it, and does not destroy it. There may
be still an impure indulgence to the secret lustings of the Heart,
notwithstanding the restraint upon their Exercise. And many Duties may be done
on lower motives, without a divine respect to the Commands and Glory of God.

But renewing Grace subjects the Soul to the whole Royalty of the Law,
uniformly inclines it to express Obedience to all its Precepts, because they
are pure, and derived from the eternal Spring of Purity. It mortifies
Concupiscence, and quickens to every good Work, from a Principle of Love to
God, and in this is distinguished from the most refined unregenerate Morality.
In short, there may be a superficial tincture of Religion from common Grace, a
transient Esteem, vanishing Affections, and earnest Endeavors for a time after
Spiritual Things, and yet a Person remain in a state of unregeneracy. But
renewing Grace is a permanent solid Principle, that makes a Man partaker of the
Divine Nature, and elevates him above himself.

This holy Change is wrought by Divine Power. Our Savior tells Nicodemus,
Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God. The Analogy of a new Birth signifies, that it is entirely the work of
the sanctifying Spirit, that conveys a Principle of Life in order to the
Functions of it. It Is the living impression of God, the sole Efficient and
Exemplar of it, the Fruit and Image of the Divine Virtues. It Is expressed by the
new Creature. The production of it is attributed to God's power displaying it
self in a peculiar excellent way, even in that precise manner, as in making the
World. For as in the first Creation all things were made originally of nothing,
so in the second, the habit of Grace is infused into the Soul that was utterly
void of it, and in which there was as little preparation for true Holiness, as
of nothing to produce this great and regular World. And although there is not
only an absolute privation of Grace, but a fierce resistance against it, yet
creating invincible Power does as infallibly and certainly produce its effect
in forming the new Creature, as in making the World. From hence it appears that
preventing renewing Grace is so entirely the Work of God; as his forming the
human Body from the Dust of Earth at first. But with this difference, the first
Creation was done without any sense in the Subject, of the efficiency of the
Divine Power in produceing it: but in the new Creation, Man feels the vital
influence of the Spirit, applying it self to all his Faculties, reforming and
enabling them to act according to the quality of their nature.

And by the way we may observe the admirable Grace showed to Man in the
renovation of his corrupted Nature. In the composition of his Being are united
a Spirit like the Angels, and a Body like terrestrial Animals, by which he
partakes of the spiritual and natural Life: but he has peculiar Favors
conferred upon him. For, whereas his Soul sinned with the Angels, and his Body
dies with the Beasts, yet God is pleased to restore them by his glorious Power.
An Angel after Sin never repents, and is therefore incapable of Pardon, and
irrecoverably disinherited of Heaven: a Beast after Death never revives: but
though Man sins and dies, yet his Soul may be renewed by Divine Grace, and his
Body shall be raised in an incorruptible Glory.

Now the indispensible necessity of this holy Change is evident from the Words
of our Savior, for he speaks universally, Except a Man be born again he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. He does not simply declare that an unregenerate Man
shall not, but with the greatest Emphasis, cannot, to signify an absolute
impossibility of it. The Jews highly presumed of the privilege of their carnal
Birth, they sprang from the pure and noble Blood of Abraham, God's Friend; they
had the Seal of the Holy Covenant marked in their Flesh: and hence it was
proverbial among them, that every Israelite should have a part in the World to
come. But our Savior overthrows this vain conceit, and tells them that the
supernatural Birth entitles to the supernatural Inheritance. Circumcision then,
and Baptism now, without real Grace is an ineffectual sign, of no avail to
Salvation. Romans 8. 17.
In the quality of Sons, we are Heirs of God's Kingdom. And that honorable
Relation we have upon a double account; Gal. 4. 7.
by Adoption and Regeneration. Divine Adoption is not a mere change of our
state, a naked Declaration that one shall be dignified with the Title of God's
Son, but a holy Nature is always infused into the Person, whereby he is made
like to God in his Excellencies. In this it differs from humane Adoption, that
gives the Name, and Arms, the Honor and Estate of the Adopter to a Person,
without conveying any of his intellectual or moral Endowments. Whom God adopts
he begets to a Divine Life. Besides, our Savior purchased this high privilege
for us: God sent his Son made of a Woman, under the Law, to redeem them that
were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. By Union with
him we receive the investiture of this Dignity. Now whoever is in Christ is a
new Creature. For the quickening Spirit, that is to the Soul what the Soul is to
the Body, the principle of Life and Strength, of Beauty and Motion, and an
active purifying Faith that is influential upon all other Graces, are the band
of that vital Union: So that as all in Adam are universally corrupt by the
first Birth, all that are in Christ are made holy by a new Birth. But of this I
shall speak in the next Chapter more fully, under a distinct Head. Briefly, the
Spirit of Grace that sanctifies, is the Spirit of Adoption that seals our Right
to that Kingdom.

Now the reasons why this Change must be in order to our obtaining of Heaven,
are these:

1. There is an exquisite Wisdom shines in all God's works, in disposing them
for the ends to which they are appointed: and is it not monstrously absurd to
imagine, he will admit into his Presence and Kingdom, those that are absolutely
unqualified for its Blessedness, and opposite to its Purity?

2. His invariable Justice excludes for ever all unholy Persons from Heaven.
For in the last Judgment God will be glorified as a Governor, in the
distribution of Rewards with respect to the Obedience and Disobedience of Men.
It Is worthy of observation, that the Actions of God on the reasonable Creatures
are of two sorts. Some proceed from his sovereign good Pleasure, of which there
is no motive or reason in the Subjects on which they are terminated. Thus by a
free and insuperable Decree (when all Mankind, lapst and miserable, was in his
view) he chose some to be Vessels of Mercy, and by privilege separated them
from the rest that finally perish. Now what induc't him to place a singular
Love on the Elect? There was nothing in them to incline his Compassion, being
equally guilty and depraved with the rest of the Progeny of Adam. This
difference therefore is to be resolved into his unaccountable and adorable
Will, as the sole cause of it. Thus God declares it to be his glorious
Prerogative, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy, and I will have
Compassion on whom I will have Compassion. And this is no unjust acceptance of
Persons: For as a Benefactor, he may dispense his own Favors as he pleases. A
Gift from mere and arbitrary Bounty may be bestowed on some, and not on others
without injustice. But there are other actions of God for which there is an
evident reason in Men on whom they are terminated. Thus as the supreme Judge,
without respect of Persons, 1 Pet. 1. 17.
he will judge and reward every Man according to his Works. The Evangelical Law
(as was touched Romans 2. 16.
on before) is the rule of eternal Judgment, Acts 26. 18.
and gives a right from the gracious Promise of God, to all penitent Believers
in the Kingdom of Heaven, and excludes all impenitent Infidels. Divine Justice
will illustriously appear then in distinguishing Believers from Unbelievers by
their Works, the proper Fruits either of Faith or Infidelity. All the thick
Clouds of Disgraces, Calumnies, Persecutions, that often oppress the most
sincere Christians here, shall not then darken their Holiness, and all the
specious appearances of Piety, which the most artificial Hypocrites make use of
to deceive others, shall not conceal their Wickedness. And accordingly the one
shall be absolved and glorified, the others condemned and punished for ever. In
short, without violation of his own righteous establishment in the Gospel, Heb.
1^. 14.
God cannot receive the unholy into his Glory.

3. Besides the Legal Bar that excludes unsanctified Persons from the beatifick
vision of God, there is a moral incapacity. Suppose that Justice should allow
Omnipotence to translate such a Sinner to Heaven, would the Place make him
happy? Can two incongruous Natures delight in one another? The happiness of
Sense is by an impression of Pleasure from a suitable Object: The happiness of
intellectual Beings arises from an entire conformity of dispositions. So that
unless God recede from his Holiness, which is absolutely impossible, or Man be
purified, and changed into his likeness, there can be no sweet Communion
between them. Our Savior assigns this Reason of the necessity of Regeneration
in order to our admission into Heaven: That which is born of the flesh, is
flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is spirit. According to the
quality of the Principle, such is what proceeds from it. The Flesh is a corrupt
Principle, and accordingly the Natural Man is wholly carnal in his propensions,
operations, and end. The Disease is turned into his Constitution. He is dead to
the Spiritual Life, to the actions and enjoyments that are proper to it: Nay,
there is in him a surviving Principle of Enmity to that Life: not only a mortal
coldness to God, but a stiff aversation from him, a perpetual resistance and
impatience of the Divine Presence, that would disturb his voluptuous
enjoyments. The Exercises of Heaven would be as the Torments of Hell to him,
while in the midst of those pure Joys his inward inclinations vehemently run
into the lowest Lees of Sensuality. And therefore till this contrariety, so
deep and predomanant in an unholy Person, be removed, it is utterly impossible
he should enjoy God with satisfaction. As it was necessary that God should
become like Man on Earth, to purchase that Felicity for him, so Man must be
like God in Heaven before he can possess it. Holiness alone prepares Men for
Celestial Happiness; that is against the corruption and above the perfection of
mere Nature.

CHAP. IV.
Faith in the Redemer is required of all that will obtain Salvation. The choice
of Supernatural Happiness previous to our obtaining it. The choice must be
sincere, early, and constant. The sincerity of the Heavenly Choice declared by
its Qualities and Effects.
I Shall now proceed to consider more particularly what is requisite in order
to our obtaining of Heaven.

1. Faith in the Redeemer is absolutely required of all that will partake of
the Salvation purchased by him. Joh. 3. 16.
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoever
believes in him, should not perish but have Eternal Life. This is the Spirit
and Substance of the Gospel, therefore I will briefly unfold it. The Son of God
having assumed the human Nature, and performed what was necessary for the
expiation of Sin, Phil. 2. 8, 9.
the Father was so pleased with his Obedience, that from his lowest State he
raised him to Divine Glory, and gave him supreme Authority, and all-sufficient
Power to communicate that Glory to others. Thus our Savior declares; Thou have
given him (i. e. the Son) power over all Flesh, Joh. 17. 2.
that he should give Eternal Life to as many as thou have given him. And he
exhorts the People, Labor for that Meat that endures unto Eternal Life, Joh. 6.
which the Son of Man shall give unto you, for him has God the Father sealed.
Now this glorious Life is not given to all, but only to those who are united to
him. As Adam the principle of the carnal corrupt Nature, derives Guilt and
Death to all his Progeny, so Jesus Christ (who is opposed to him) the Head and
Prince of the renewed State, communicates Life and Glory to his People. The
Apostle expresses it, 1 Cor. 15. 22.
As in Adam all dye, his natural Descendants are involved in his Condemnation,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive: that is, all that are spiritually
united to him shall partake of his glorious Resurrection. And St. John tells
us, 1 John 5. 12.
He that has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son has not Life.
The having the Son, upon which our right to Eternal Life depends, is believing
in him. Faith has a principal Efficiency in receiving Christ, therefore it is
expressed by that Act; Joh. 1. 12.
But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God,
(and consequently Heirs of Glory) to as many as believed on his Name. And
Christ is said to dwell in our Hearts by Faith. Ephesians. 3. 17.
This is not a mere assent to the Doctrines of the Gospel concerning the
Dignity of his Person, that he is in so high and glorious a Relation of being
the Eternal Son of God, and the infinite value of his Merits, whereby he is
able to save all that come unto God by him, and his merciful compassionate
Nature to embrace returning Sinners, and the excellency of the benefits
purchased by him, but such a Belief as sways the Will and Affections to receive
him upon God's terms for our Salvation. Faith is seated in the whole Soul, in
the Mind and Heart, and accepts of Christ entirely as Prophet, Priest and King.
The parts of the Mediator's Office, are inseparably connected, and all the
Effects of them are communicated to the same Persons. Jesus Christ is made of
God to Believers, 1 Cor. 1.
Wisdom, to cure their Ignorance and Folly, Righteousness to abolish their
Guilt, Sanctification to renew their Natures, and Redemption to free them at
last, from the Grave and bring them to Glory. From hence it is clear, that the
Faith, which is justifying and saving, includes in its Nature, as dependence
and trust in Christ as a powerful and merciful Mediator, that is able and
willing to reconcile us to God, and make us for ever happy in his Favor; so a
sincere resolution of Obedience and Subjection to all his holy Commands, even
to the plucking out of the right Eye, and the cutting off the right hand, the
parting with the most pleasing or profitable Sins. For the Promises of God that
are the Rule of Faith, make an offer of Christ upon these Conditions to us: Him
has God exalted with his right hand, Acts 5. 31.
to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness
of Sins. And only the Justified shall be glorified. Romans 8.
Those therefore who desire a partial interest in him as a Savior, out of
absolute necessity, to escape Hell, and will not out of Love submit to him as
their Prince, have not that Faith that is unfeigned, and gives a title to
Eternal Life by the Promises of the Gospel.

2. We must choose Heaven as our supreme Happiness, and regard it as the main
end of our Lives. Man fell from his Duty and Felicity by preferring sensual
Pleasure before the Favor of God, and became guilty of the greatest
Disobedience and Dishonor to his Maker, and is restored by the holy change of
his Will, the setting his Affections on a pure Spiritual Blessedness. This
subliming the Will, and turning its Love and Choice from the Creatures to God,
is the effect of Divine Grace, and wrought in a rational way. For Man is not
moved as artificial Engines by force, nor as Brutes from necessity, their
Faculties being determined by the outward application of Objects: he is not
drawn up to Heaven by such a natural impression, as Steel by the Lodestone,
nor forced by a violent motion as a Stone ascends, but as an understanding free
Agent, by the direction of the enlightened Mind, and the consent of the Will, an
elective unconstrained Faculty. And herein the Wisdom, Goodness and Equity of
God's Transactions with Man appears. His Wisdom, in that as he has ordered in
the whole sphere of Nature, that the active Powers of every Creature, be drawn
forth into exercise for their preservation, and accordingly he is pleased to
work in and by them, so the Understanding and Will, the Principles of Operation
in Man, are to deliberate and choose in order to his Happiness. Otherwise the
rational Faculties would be in vain. His Goodness and Equity, in that he sets
before them Eternal Life as the Reward of Obedience. God will be glorified by
him as a Lawgiver and a Benefactor, and has ordained in the Gospel, that all
who choose and diligently seek the Kingdom of Heaven shall infallibly obtain it,
and none be deprived of it, but for their neglect. The Decree of a final state
of Misery, though not in time, yet is consequent in the order of causes to the
obstinate reluctance of Sinners against restoring Grace, and the wilful
forsaking their own Mercies. Therefore God vindicates the Equity of his
Proceedings with Men by their own Principles, and with tender pity
expostulates, Why will ye dye? The corrupt Will declining from God, and
adhering to the Creature as its Happiness, is the true cause of Man's ruin. This
will infinitely clear the Wisdom and Justice, the Purity and Goodness of God
from all Imputation.

The choice of Heaven for our Felicity is primarily to be determined, for it is
from the prospect of it, that all holy Counsels derive their Life and Vigor.
As in drawing the Picture of a Man, the first work is to delineate the Head,
not only as the part that in dignity and eminence is above the rest, but as it
regulates the drawing of the other parts, and gives a just proportion and
correspondence between them, without which the whole Figure becomes disordered
and monstrous. Thus in the moral consideration of Man, that which is primarily
to be considered is the Soul, and its final Felicity, as incomparably more
excellent than the Body and its Pleasures: for this will have a powerful
influence upon the whole Life, directing to avoid what is inconsistent and
impertinent, and to do what is conducive to it.

Now this being a matter of unspeakable importance, I will first show what the
regular choice of Heaven includes, as to its Qualities and Effects. Secondly,
direct how to make this Choice. Thirdly, present some powerful Motives to
excite us to it.

The Qualities of this Choice are three. First, it must be sincere and cordial.
Secondly, early, in our first and best days. Thirdly, firm and constant.

1. It must be sincere and cordial. The most essential and active desire in
human Nature is to Happiness, but there being two kinds of good things
presented to the Will, that solicit the Affections, the pleasures of Sense, and
spiritual Joys, from hence it is that that which makes Men happy is the object
of Election. And although there is nothing more uniform and inviolable than the
natural inclination to Happiness, yet the great distinction of Mankind arises
from this source, the regular or perverse use of this inclination, the wise or
mistaking choice of Happiness. Now the Sincerity of our Choice is discovered,
when it is clear and entire, arising from a transcendent esteem of the favor
and enjoyment of God as our chief Good, and absolutely requisite for us. The
Choice of true Happiness, necessarily includes the despising and rejecting of
the false Happiness that stands in competition with it. There cannot be two
reigning Principles in the Soul: for it cannot vigorously apply it self to two
Objects at the same time. Our Savior has decided it, No Man can serve two
Masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or hold to the
one, and despise the other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon. The Masters are
irreconcilable, and their commands are directly opposite. It was as possible
to place upon the same Altar the Ark of God, and the Idol of the Philistines, as
that Heaven and the World should compound and take equal shares in our
Affections. Indeed if the conceptions in the Mind are but faint and floating of
the universal satisfying Goodness of the Object proposed to make us happy, the
Will remains in suspense; but when it is clearly and strongly represented, the
Heart is drawn entirely to embrace it. Divine Grace by the illumination of the
Understanding purifies and changes the depraved Will, and heals the distempered
Affections. The wise Merchant that had a discerning Eye saw reason enough to
part with all, that he might gain the Pearl of Price, the Grace and Glory of
the Kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle declares his resolute contempt of the
concurrence of all the Prerogatives either the Law or the World could afford
him, that he might have an Interest in Christ, the Reconciler and Restorer of
Man to the Favor and Fellowship of God. But what things were gain to me, those
I counted loss for Christ; yea doubtless I count all things but loss for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I might win Christ.
The glorious Gospel is the brightest and most pleasant Light that ever shone
upon the World, a revelation of the deepest Wisdom and most admirable Love,
wherein the combination of God's holy and wonderful Counsels for our Salvation
is unfolded, and accordingly St. Paul, with the greatest Life of Affection sets
forth his value of it, and by full and most vilifying Expressions rejects all
things in comparison of it.

2. The Sincerity of the Heavenly Choice is discovered by a zealous observance
of the means requisite in order to it. Inanimate things incline to rest in
their Center, the rational intend and pursue it. The blessed End when valued
and respected according to its worth, excites and directs the Affections and
Endeavors in that order and measure as is proportionable to its Excellency;
and the difficulties of obtaining it. There may be a naked estimation, and some
desires of Eternal Happiness simply considered, yet the Will remain incomplete
and undetermined in its choice: for the End in conjunction with the Means is
propounded to us, and the carnal Man will not consent to the Means. He dislikes
the Holiness of Religion, and will rather forfeit Heaven than submit to such
strict terms. Though with Balaam, in a fit of Devotion he says, O that I might
die the death of the Righteous, and that my last end might be like his, yet
from Indulgence to his sensual Inclinations, he will not live as the righteous.
All his wishes of true Happiness are soon strangled by the predominant love of
some Vanity. It Is said of the Israelites, they despised the pleasant Land,
Psalm. 106. 14.
not absolutely in it self, for it was the Glory of all Lands, abounding with
things for the support and delight of Man, but considering its distance, a
Wilderness waste and wild interposing, and the Enemies to be encountered, they
did not think it worthy of undergoing such hazards and difficulties. The Land
of Canaan was a Type of Heaven, both with respect to its pleasantness, and the
manner of the Israelites obtaining it. Their Title to it was derived from the
rich Bounty of God, therefore it is called the Land of Promise; but it was to be
possessed by Conquest. Thus the Celestial Canaan is the pure gift of God, but the
actual enjoyment of it is obtained by victorious resistance, against the
Enemies of our Salvation. And carnal Men despise this pleasant Land, the
Promise being inseparably joined with Precepts of Duty and Obedience, from
which they are averse. But he that chooses sincerely, is joyful and vigorous in
the use of means for acquiring his most desired good. Ardent Affections, like
Elijah's Chariot of Fire, ravish the Soul above this sensible World, to the
place where God dwells in Glory. Zeal animates his endeavors, as the Motion of
the Heart diffuses the Spirits into the Arteries, to convey Life to all parts
of the Body. One thing (says the inflamed Psalmist) have I desired of the
Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the
days of my Life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire into his
Temple. The sensual Man is ranging abroad for satisfaction, and shoots all the
Game that crosses his Eye; but the Soul that has a discovering light, and
feeling heat of the Divine Beauty, unites all its desires in God, and with
affection to an ecstasy longs for the enjoyment of him, and the endeavors are
in some proportion to the desires. Our Savior tells us, That from the days of
John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force. Some previous rays of the Sun of Righteousness
appeared in his Ministry, and produced such a holy ardency in those Converts,
that with all resolution, diligence and earnestness they sought to be partakers
of the Blessedness revealed. Lazy Desires, easy Prosecutions, sluggish
Attempts, discover that the Heart is not througly engaged for the spiritual
Eternal Good. When the End is truly designed it will give Law to the Actions.
This is visible in Men who are wholly led by Sense, how sagacious, how
sollicitous are they to accomplish their Ends and base Designs? They try all
ways either by fine Dissimulation, or toilsome Industry to obtain their
Desires. No time is too much in their gainful Affairs, or voluptuous
Enjoyments. They transform the Night to lengthen out the Day for their Profit,
they vail the Day to lengthen out the Night for their Ease and Pleasure. But
alas, Heaven is only regarded by the By; as if the intellectual Soul were only
given to dwell with the Body on Earth, the place of its Banishment, and direct
Affairs here below, and not to lead in the way to Heaven, the place of its
Nativity, and prepare for another World. The work of Salvation is followed with
that remiss degree of Affection, as if it were a slight matter whether
performed or neglected. These Persons carry their Conviction in their Bosoms;
for they are ardent and active to obtain inferior and infinitely less
concerning Ends, but with that cold application mind the superior nobler End of
Man, that it is wholly frustrate, which plainly shows it was never seriously
intended by them.

3. The sincerity of our Heavenly choice declares it self, in the temper and
frame of our Hearts with respect to all temporal things in this World. For our
main and happy End being established, that it consists not in secular Riches,
and Honors, and the Pleasures of Sense, but in the clear vision of God, the
blessedness of the Spirit; it follows that all present things are in our use so
far good or evil, and to be desired or not, as they are profitable or
prejudicial to our obtaining Salvation, as they conduct or divert us from
Heaven. A wise Christian looks on temporal things not through the Glass of
disordered Passions, that are impetuous and impatient for what is grateful to
them, but with reference to his future Happiness. He considers the train of
Temptations that attend an exalted condition, and desires such a portion of
these things, as may redound to the Glory of the Giver, and be improved for his
own Salvation. This Purity of Affections our Savior teaches us: For in his
divine form of Prayer, the true directory of our desires, are set down in an
admirable order all things we are to pray for. And they respect the End, or the
Means. The End is the primary object of our desires, accordingly the two first
Petitions concern our blessed End, as it respects God and our selves. We pray,
hallowed be thy Name, that is, by the reverence and adoration of all his
Subjects: and, thy Kingdom come, that is, for the manifestation of his Eternal
Glory in the next World, that we may reign with him. The Means in order to this
End are of two sorts. Some conduct to it by themselves, those are the good
things desired in the third and fourth Petitions; and some lead to it by
accident, and those are the freedom from evils expressed in the last Petition.
The good things desired either have a direct influence upon our obtaining
Happiness; and they are sum'd up in our universal obedience to God's Will,
expressed in the third Petition, let thy Will be done on Earth as it is in
Heaven; or they are such as by way of subserviency promote our Happiness, and
those we pray for in the fourth Petition, Give us this day our daily Bread. And
it is observable there is but one Petition for Temporal Blessings, and it is the
last in the Order of those that concern good things. And that single Petition
is so restrained, that, it is evident by its Tenor, that earthly things are not
absolutely good to be desired for themselves, but relatively and subordinately
to our eternal Good. Daily Bread we must ask of our heavenly Father, the
necessary support of the present Life, without which we cannot exercise our
internal or external Powers and Faculties in his Service, but not Delicacies
and Abundance for the luxurious Appetite.

The difference of Conditions in the present World is very great: as in
Pharaoh's Dream, some Ears of Corn were so full and weighty that they bended
with their weight, others so thin and blasted, that they were as Stubble for
the Fire. Thus some abound in all Felicities possible in this Life, others are
chastened every Morning, under various and continual Afflictions. Now this
infallible Principle being planted in the Heart, that all present things are to
be improved with respect to our future Happiness, will moderate the Affections
in Prosperity, so to use the World that we may enjoy God, and make us not only
patient but pleased in Adversities, as they are preparatory for Heaven.

The Original of all the Sins and Misery of Men, Frui est amore alicujus rei
inhaerere propter seipsam, uti autem, quod in usum venerit, ad id quod amas
obtinendum refer. Aug. de Doct. Christ.
is their perverse abuse of things, by turning the Means into the End, setting
their Affections of Love, Desire, and Joy upon sensible things, as their proper
Happiness, with inconsiderate neglect of the spiritual eternal state, to which
all other things should be subservient. As if one diseased and sickly in a
Foreign Country, that could not possibly recover Health but in his Native Air,
in his return thither, invited by the pleasantness of the way, should take up
his residence in it, and never arrive to his own Country. Among the West
Indians some are Acosta.
reported to be so swift in running, that no Horse can keep pace with them, and
they have a constant rule in their Diet, to eat of no Beast, or Bird, or Fish
that is slow in motion, fancying it would transfuse a sluggishness in them. The
Christian Life is by the Apostle compared to a Race, and earthly things by an
inseparable property of Nature load and depress the Soul, that it cannot with
vigor run the race set before it. The Believer therefore who intends for the
high price of his Calling, and is true to his end, will be temperate in all
things. Nay he will not only be circumspect lest they should check with his
great Design, but wisely manages them in subserviency to it. St. Paul, charges
them that are rich in this World, Tim. 6. 18, 19.
to do good, to be rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying in store for themselves a good Foundation against the time
to come, that they may lay hold of eternal Life.

And the fixed aim at Heaven as our Felicity, will reconcile an afflicted state
to us. When temporal Evils are effectual means to promote our everlasting
Happiness, the amiableness and excellency of the End changes their Nature, and
makes those Calamities that in themselves are intolerable, to become light and
easy. The Poor, the Mourners, the Persecuted are blessed now, because theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle, though under variety of sharp troubles, yet
expresses his sense with that mitigation, as but lightly touched with them: as
sorrowful, but always rejoicing. From hence he tells us, that with unfainting
courage he prosecuted his glorious End. For our light afflictions that are but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding weight of Glory. This
seriously believed and considered, will make us understand the Harmony and
Consent of the most discordant parts of God's Providence. This will reconcile
the severity and roughness of his Hand, with the tender Compassions of his
Heart toward his Servants. This will dry up Rivers of unprofitable Tears that
flow from the afflicted, and make the Cross of Christ a light burden. For
their heaviest Afflictions are not only consistent with his Love, but the
Effects of it, being influential upon their Happiness. Whereas the prosperity
of Fools shall slay them, and their good things here aggravate their Miseries
hereafter.

4. The sincere choice of Heaven as our final Happiness, will make us aspire to
the greatest height of Holiness we are capable of in the present state. For the
End has always a powerful virtue to transform a Man into its likeness: and
Heaven is a state of perfect conformity to the Holy God. This difference is
observable between the Understanding and the Will in their Operations: The
Understanding in forming Conceptions of things, draws the Object to it self.
The Will is drawn by the Object it chooses, and is always fashioning and
framing the Soul into an entire conformity to it. Thus carnal Objects when
propounded as the End of a Man, secretly imprint on him their likeness, his
Thoughts, Affections, and whole Conversation is carnal. As the Psalmist speaks
of the Worshippers of Idols, Psalm. 115. 8.
they that make them are like unto them, so is every one that trusts in them:
whatever we adore and esteem, we are changed into its Image. Idolaters are as
stupid and senceless, as the Idols to which they pay Homage. Thus when God is
chosen as our supreme Good and last End, by conversing with him the Image of
his glorious Holiness is derived on the Soul, and it becomes Godly: the Heart
is drawn by his attractive excellencies, and the Life directed to him. This
being a point of great importance, I shall further prove and illustrate it.
There is no deliberating about the degrees of that which is loved for it self
as our End. More or less may respect the Means that are valued and used to
obtain it, but the love of the End is vast and unlimited. A Physician
endeavors to recover his Patient to sound and perfect Health, that being the
End of his Art. He that seeks for Honor or Riches, is not content with a
mediocrity of Success, but drives on his Affairs to the full period of his
Desires. An ardent Lover of Learning with a noble jealousy strives to excel
others in Knowledge. In short, no Man designs and longs for a thing as his
Happiness, but will use all diligence to gain the present and full Possession
of it. Therefore it cannot be imagined that any Person sincerely propounds the
enjoyment of Heaven as his End, but Love will make him fervent and industrious
to be as Heavenly as is possible here. He will strive by blessed and glorious
Gradations to ascend to the perfection of his aims and desires, to be holy as
God is holy in all manner of Conversation, to be pure as Christ is pure. We
have an admirable instance of this in St Paul who declares, Phil. 3. 13, 14.
Brethren, I count not my self, to have apprehended: but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, I press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. His Progress was great, yet that did not make him slack in
the prosecution of his End. He labored to attain the President of our Savior,
to feel the Power of his Death and Life, to apprehend Christ entirely and
perfectly as Christ had apprehended him. He was very diligent to improve the
Divine Image in his Heart and Life.

From hence we may discover the vanity of their Hopes, that are of lukewarm
Affections in Religion, (the abhorred character of Laodicea) who esteem it a
prudent Principle, as convenient for their carnal ease and interest, not to be
earnest in following Holiness. Vices in mediocrity are tolerable with them,
only the excess is condemned. They content themselves with a mediocrity in
Religion, and are presumptuous and secure, as the Church that said, I am rich,
and have need of nothing. They boast as if they had found out the temperate
Region between the burning Line and the frozen Pole. They account all that is
above their degrees in Religion, to be furious or indiscreet Zeal, and all
below to be dead, cold Profaneness. They censure those for Hypocrisy or
unnecessary Strictness, who are visibly better, and stand upon proud
comparisons with those who are visibly worse. And thus set off themselves by
taxing others. But how easily do Men deceive and damn themselves? Can we have
too much of Heaven upon the Earth? Can we become too like God, when a perfect
conformity to him is our Duty and Felicity? Indeed Moral Virtue consists in a
Mediocrity, not of the habitual Quality, but of the Affections and Actions
between the vicious extremities. Fortitude consists in the mean between
Cowardice, and rash Boldness, but how much the more confirmed the courageous
Habit is, so much the more a Man excells in that Virtue. Liberality consists
between an indiscreet Profuseness, and sordid Avarice. Patience between a soft
Delicacy, and stupid Insensibility. Thus Philosophic Virtue glories in its
Beauty as pure and entire, between two vicious Deformities. And the Religion of
many is Paganism dressed up in a Christian Fashion. But this mediocrity only
belongs to inferior Virtues, that respect things of created limited goodness,
and is determined according to the worth of their Nature. But divine Graces
respect an object supreamly Good, and their perfection consists in their most
excellent degrees, and the most intense Affections and Operations that are
leading to it. Faith in its Obedience, Hope in its Assurance, Love in its
Ardour can never exceed. When the Object is Infinite, a mediocrity is vicious.
Humility can never descend too low, nor Love ascend too high: for reflecting
upon our natural and moral Imperfections, that we were raised from nothing,
that we are defiled and debased with Sin, we cannot have too low thoughts of
our selves. And since God the Sovereign Being, infinite in Perfections, and
infinitely amiable is the Object, no bounds or measure must be set to our
Affections, but with all our united Powers, all the Heart, and with all the
Soul, and with all the Mind, and with all the Strength, we must love him, and
please him, and endeavor to be beloved of him.

There are others will acknowledge their defects, and tell you they do not
pretend to eminent Sanctity, to the Graces of the Apostles and Martyrs, nor
aspire to their degrees in Glory, they are content with a lower place in
Heaven, and less strict Religion is sufficient for their purpose. This deceit
is strengthened by Popery, that enervates and dissolves many of our Savior's
Precepts, by teaching they are not Laws obliging all Christans to Obedience,
that will attain to eternal Life, but Counsels of Perfection: if they are not
done it is no Sin, and the performance of them meritoriously intitles to a
richer Crown. And though Men by impure Indulgencies please their sensual
Affections, yet by tasting Purgatory in the way, they may come to Heaven on
easier terms than a universal respect to God's Commands, and an equal care to
observe them. But Death will confute all these feeble wretched Pretenses, for
though the Saints above shine with an unequal brightness, as the Stars differ
in Glory: yet none are there but Saints. And those who do not mourn under their
Imperfections, and unfeinedly desire and endeavor to be better were never
really good. The sloathful Servant that did not waste but neglect to improve
his Talent, was cast into outer darkness. There are different degrees of
punishments in Hell, but the least miserable there are miserable for ever. In
short it is a perfect contradiction, a Prodigy, for any Man to think he is
sincere in his Choice, and prepared in his Affections for the pure glorious
Felicity in Heaven, that does not labor to cleanse himself from all pollutions
of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of God.

CHAP. V.
The Choice of Heaven must be early. The Pretenses of Men's delaying Repentance.
The infinite danger of it.
Secondly. THe choice of Eternal Felicity must be early in the prime of our
days. The rule of our Duty, and Reason binds us to remember our Creator in our
Youth, to pay to him the first fruits of our Time and Strength. When we are
surrounded with enticing Objects, and the Sense are entire and most capable to
enjoy them, when the electing Powers are it their vigor, then it is just we
should live to God, obey him as our Lawgiver and prefer the fruition of him in
Heaven, the reward of Obedience, before as the pleasures of Vanity. It Is very
honorable and pleasing to God to give the Heart to him, when the Flesh and the
World strongly solicit to withdraw it. It Is a high endearment of the So^ to
him, when his excellencies are prevalent in the Esteem and Affections above all
the charms of the Creatures. And it is an unspeakable satisfaction to the Spirit
of a Man, to declare the Truth and Strength of his love to God, by despising
all Temptations when they are most inviting, and he is most receptive of them.
But alas! how many neglect their Duty and defer their Happiness? They think it
too soon to live for Heaven before the evil days come wherein they shall have
no Pleasure, when they cannot Sin, and fondly presume they can Repent. The
infinite danger of this I will briefly lay open.

The Devil is a Sophister in perfection, and his ordinary and successful
Artifice to elude the force of present conviction, and wrap Men in Sin and
Damnation, is to induce them to delay the great work of the Soul till
afterward. He is not so foolish to tell them as he did our first Parents, ye
shall not die, for the Temptation is so palpable that it could deceive none.
Though the evidence and certainty of supernatural Truths that disturb the
security of Sinners is sometimes obscured by affected doubts, yet there is no
artifice that can resist the full and strong conviction in Mankind, That Death
is inevitable. Though Nature recoils from it with abhorrence, yet this sad
Truth is so visible that it forces an assent from all. Those who are titular
Gods are not so vain as to pretend to an exemption by privilege from that fatal
necessity, not to fancy that they may be imbalm'd alive, and Nature made
incorruptible by Art. The Palace is as near the Grave as the Cottage.
Therefore the Devil cherishes in Men fond hopes of long Life. As some Optic
Glasses deceive the sight, and make a superficial representation in Colors on
a Wall but two or three steps distance, appear a long deep Gallery. Thus the
Tempter by a dangerous artifice presents to the imagination the fatal term at a
great distance, and since he cannot weaken the certainty of Death in Men's
Belief, he removes the Image of it out of their Memories, to lessen the
impression that it is capable to make on their Spirits. They dare not venture
to die as they live careless of Salvation, and unprepared for their accounts
with God; therefore to suspend the workings of Conscience by a seeming
compliance, the Tempter insinuates, there will be a long interval between the
present time and the last hour, that shall decide their state for ever, that it
will be a convenient season to prepare for the other World when they have done
with this, as if Repentance were best at last, when there are no Temptations,
and therefore no danger of retracting it.

And the Heart of Man is a great Flatterer, very subtle to deceive and ruin
him with vain resolutions of a devout retirement, and becoming seriously
Religious hereafter, and thus by an easy permission he gratifies the present
desires of the Flesh, and goes in a Circuit from one Vanity to another, till
Death surprise the Presumer. It Is very applicable to this purpose what is
related of Alcaeus the Poet, Athen. l. 20. c. 9.
who from every season of the Year took Arguments to give a new title to his
intemperance. The Spring required liberal drinking in sign of Joy for the
renovation of Nature; The Summer to temper the heat, and refresh our draught;
'Twas due to Autumn as dedicated to the Vintage; and Winter required it to
expel the Cold, that would congeal the Blood and Spirits. Thus he pleaded for
the allowance of his Excess. And thus Men in the several Ages of Life, (which
are correspondent to the seasons of the Year) have some Excuses to delay
Repentance, and give some color to their contumacy in neglecting Salvation.
The Vanity of Childhood, the Pleasures of Youth, the Business of Middle Age,
the Infirmities of old Age are plausible pretenses to put off the seeking the
Kingdom of Heaven and the Righteousness thereof. Now to excite us to a present
choice and pursuit of eternal Happiness, Let us consider,

1. This Life is the only season allowed us for preparation in order to
Immortallity. As we improve or neglect it, we shall be for ever. It Is observed
concerning the Straights where the Sea is but a few miles broad, Tam modico ore
tam immensa aequorum vastitas panditur. Plin.
yet from thence it pours it self into the vast Ocean that extends to both the
Indies. So this Life that is confined within the straits of Time, issues it
self into a boundless Eternity of Good or Evil. From a few years, well or ill
spent here, tam immensa soeculorum vastitas panditur, Millions of Ages follow
of Happiness or Misery. If Men now set their affections on things above, and
earnestly seek them, they shall joyfully ascend to the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light: for the preparation for Happiness is here, the perfection of
it hereafter. But if they are carnally minded, and the main design of their
lives be to enjoy the present World, when the parting hour is come, and Death
shall make a separation between them and it, their Misery is irrecoverable as
the Grave. Indeed if we had two lives in succession allowed us for trial, and
having erred in our choice of Happiness in the first, might correct our error
in a second Life, there were some pretense for security: but since immediately
after Death a private judgment passes upon the Soul, without appeal to a more
favorable Tribunal, since then the error is unpardonable for ever, there is
no stupidity equals the present neglect of Salvation.

2. Let us consider the desperate uncertainties upon which Men build their
Hopes of a future Repentance and Divine Acceptance.

1. Men are flattered with the Presumption of long Life. But what is more
uncertain? It Is the Wisdom and Goodness of God to keep concealed in his own
Counsels the time of our sojourning here; for if Men though liable to Death
every hour, and therefore should be under a just fear lest it surprise them
unprepared, yet against so strong a curb run with that exorbitant vehemence
after the Vanities of the World, how much more licentious would they be, if
secured from sudden Death? But none can promise to himself one day: Death comes
not according to the order of Nature but the Divine Decree. How many in the
flower of their Youth and Strength, thought themselves at as great a distance
from Death as the East is from the West, when there was but a step between them
and Death, between them and Hell. The Lamp suddenly expires by a blast of Wind,
when there is plenty of Oil to feed it. The rich Man pleased himself with
designs of sensual enjoyments for many Years, yet did not see the dawning of
the next Morning. Thou Fool this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee: This
Sentence is now pronounced in Heaven against thousands that are alive this day,
conversant in the Vanities and Businesses of the World, Eating and Drinking,
Playing and Trading, and all unconcerned as to Dying, yet shall breath their
last before to Morrow, and their unwilling Souls be rent from the embraces of
the Body. In various manners Men die suddenly from inward and outward causes.
An Nos corpus tam putre sortiti nihilo minus aeterna proponimus: and in quantum
potest aetas humana protendi, tantum occupamus; nulla contenti pecunia, nulla
potentia. Quid hac re fieri impudentius, quid stultius potest? Nihil satis est
morituris, nihil morientibus. Sen. Epist. 120.
Apoplexy, an Imposthume, a Flux of Rhume, stopping Respiration, kills the Body
without any presaging signs of Death. As if the Roof and all the Chambers
should fall within the House, whiles the Walls are standing. And how many
unforseen Accidents, and therefore inevitable, put a sudden period to Life? Is
it not then the truest Wisdom to be early in our work for Heaven, when the
season is certainly short, and uncertainly continued, and the omission is
irreparable? Therefore the Gospel represents the coming of our Judge under
different images of surprisal; of a Thief, that by the favor of the Night
breaks into the House; of a Master that returns from abroad unexpected, to call
his Servants to an account: Of a Bridegroom that makes his Nuptial entrance, at
an unthought of hour, when the wise and foolish Virgins were asleep, Conscience
was slumbred in the Good and stupefied in the Bad, to keep us always vigilant
and prepared for that hour, that is the end of Time, and beginning of Eternity.

2. Suppose Life be continued, yet Sinners can have no rational hopes that they
shall sincerely repent. For,

1. Saving Repentance is the Gift of God. And is it likely that those who have
been insensible of the loud and earnest calls of the Word, that have been
inflexible to the gracious methods of Providence leading them to repentance,
should at last obtain converting Grace? The gales of the Spirit are very
transient and blow where he pleases, and can it be expected that those who have
wilfully and often resisted his pure Motions, should by an exuberant Favor
receive afterward more powerful Grace to overrule their stubborn Wills and
make them obedient? Our Savior tells us, To him that has shall be given, but
to him that neglects the improving spiritual Treasures, that which he has
shall be taken away. There are special seasons of Grace, as the passing of
Christ in the way where the blind men sat, which neglected, are irrecoverably
lost. God has threatened that his Spirit shall not always strive with rebellious
Sinners, and then their state is remediless. This may be the case of many even
in this Life who are insensible of their Misery. As Consumptive Persons decline
by degrees, lose their Appetite, Color and Strength, till at last they are
hopeless, so the withdrawings of the Spirit are gradual, his motions are not so
frequent nor strong, and upon the continued provocations of Sinners finally
leaves them under that most fearful doom; He that is filthy let him be filthy
still; He that is unrighteous let him be unrighteous still, and thus punishes
them on this side Hell, as he does the damned, by giving them over to Sin.
Nothing therefore is more dangerous than the usual excuses for the delays of
Repentance. It Is written as with a Sun beam, that God will graciously pardon
repenting Sinners, but it is no where Nemo ergo sibi promittat, quod Evangelium
non promittit. Aug.
promised, that he will give repentance to those who securely break his Laws
upon a corrupt confidence they will repent at last. It Is a bloody adventure to
indulge their carnal Affections, as if they had infallible assurance, the word
of God confirmed by his Oath, that they should not dye in an impenitent state.

2. Supposing the Holy Spirit be not totally withdrawn, yet by every days
continuance in an evil course the Heart is more hardened against the
impressions of Grace, and more incapable of returning to God. It Is therefore
the subtilty of the old Serpent to make the entrance of Sin easy, for he knows
that after sometime it will plead a right by prescription, and with difficulty
be ejected. Custom is a second Nature, and has a mighty power either in that
which is good or evil. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, can the Leopard
change his spots, then may you who are accustomed to do evil, do good. If Sin
in its infancy can make such resistance that the Spirit of Grace is foiled in
his Motions to rescue the Soul from its bondage, how much more when it is grown
into a confirmed habit? Therefore the Apostle urges so emphatically, to day,
while it is called to day, hear the voice of God, lest any be hardened through
the deceitfulness of Sin.

3. How uncertain is it whether God will accept the Addresses of such at last?
We are commanded to seek the Lord while he maybe found, and to call upon him
while he is near. The limitation implies if the season be neglected, he will
hide his Face for ever. Now in cases of great moment and hazard what diligence,
what caution should be used?

1. How derogatory is it to his Majesty to offer to him the dregs of our Age,
the relics of a licentious careless Life spent in the works of Vanity? Is
this to give Glory to God? Jer. 13. 16.
Contempt provokes Superiors as much as actual Injuries. And how vilifying is
it of his excellent Greatness, that Men lavishly wast the best of their time
upon their Lusts and the World, and when through weakness of Age, or the
violence of a Disease they can no more relish the pleasures of Sin, then only
to seek his favor, and presume upon it, as if he could not be happy without
them, and it were his interest to receive them. If ye offer the blind for a
Sacrifice is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and the sick is it not evil?
Offer it now to thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee to accept thy
Person? says the Lord of Hosts.

2. Consider what Sincerity or moral Value is in Religion that merely proceeds
from bitter constraint? It Is a rule in Law, falsum est eam peperisse, cui
mortuae Filius extractus est. It Is not a natural Birth when the Child is
extracted from the dead Mother. It Is not Genuine Piety that is only extorted by
the Rack, whilst the Heart full of aversion and reluctance does not truly
consent. Pure Religion flows uncompell'd from love to God. It Is the Dreggs that
come forth with pressing. It Is observed of the Israelites that when God slew
them they sought him, Psalm. 78. 34, 36.
and returned and enquired early after God. But it is added, Nevertheless they
did flatter him with their Mouths, and they lied to him with their Tongues, for
their Hearts were not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant.

When Sinners are plunged in deep distress, when the shadow of Death sits upon
their Eyelids, they may with plentiful effusions of Prayers and Tears desire
God to receive them to Heaven, not to serve him there, not to enjoy the Divine
Presence, but as a Sanctuary from revenging Justice, as a Refuge from Hell. And
will such Desires prevail? what swells the Confidence of Sinners, but unworthy
Notions of God, as if a forced and formal Expression to him were sufficient to
reconcile his offended Majesty?

3. There is nothing renders Men more unworthy of Mercy than continuance in Sin
upon presumption of an easy Pardon at last. This is the most common deceitful
Principle upon which they build their Hopes, as their Actions that bear the
image of their Minds clearly manifest. They think that God is so gracious, such
a lover of Souls, so easy to be entreated, that upon their dying Prayer, Lord,
remember me in thy Kingdom, the answer will be, To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

Now this presumptuous Indulgence gives the deepest grain to their Sins, and
makes them more incapable of Pardon. Chrysostom observes that Judas was
encouraged to betray his Master, presuming on his Lenity, Goodness and
Benignity, which Consideration intolerably aggravated his Treason, and
confounded his Hopes. There is a dreadful threatening against those who reject
the invitations of Grace in their Prosperity, and when the righteous Judge comes
to Sentence and Execution, are earnest Suppliants for Mercy. Prove. 1.
Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my Hands, and no
Man regarded: But ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my
Reproof: I will also laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your fear comes:
when your fear comes as a Desolation, and your destruction as a Whirlwind, when
distress and anguish come upon you, then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer, they shall seek me early, but shall not find me; for they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. A doleful case beyond all
possible expression, when the sinful Creature, forsaken of all Comforts below,
addresses to Heaven for Relief, and meets with Derision and Fury, Scorn and
Indignation. The foolish Virgins careless to prepare for the Bridegrooms
coming, in vain at last discovered their want of Oil, in vain solicited the
wise Virgins for a supply, in vain knocked at the door crying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us: the answer was severe and peremptory, I know you not, and they were
for ever excluded from Spiritual Joys.

3. I will add further how incongruous it is to delay the solemn work of
Reconciliation with God till the time of Sickness. This is an affair wherein
our transcendent interest is concerned, and should be performed in our most
calm and sensible condition, when we are most capable of reflecting upon our
ways, and making an exact trial of our selves, and returning to God by a holy
Change of our Lives. Now that the time of Sickness is not a convenient season
for this Work, is sadly evident. For some Diseases are stupifying, and all the
Powers of the Spirit are benumbed in a dull Captivity, so that the sick Man
only perceives with his animal Faculties. Some Diseases are tormenting, and
cause a great disorder in the Soul, and wholly distract the Thoughts from
considering his spiritual State. When the Storm is at the highest, and the
Pilot so sick that he can give no Directions, the Ship is left to the fury of
the Winds, and escapes by Maracle. When there is a Tempest in the humors of
the Body, and the Soul by sympathy is so discomposed, that it cannot apply it
self seriously to prepare for the Divine Tribunal, what danger of being lost,
and passing from a short Agony to everlasting Pains? Besides, suppose the
Sickness more tolerable, yet how unfit is a Person weak and languishing, Male
cum his agitur, quibus necessitas belli incumbit and morbi. Veget.
when Sense and Conscience are both afflicted, to encounter with the cruel
Enemy of Souls? All that truly seek Peace with God must expect fierce Anger and
War from Satan; therefore it is a point of necessary Wisdom while we are possessed
of Health and Strength, to be in a heavenly preparation against his Assaults.

4. Consider how uncomfortable it is to delay Repentance till Age and Sickness,
when the Fruits of it are not so evident and acceptable. In evil days and the
approaches of Death, it is very hard to discover the sincerity of the Heart,
whether Repentance proceed from holy Principles, whether the sorrow then
expressed be Godly for Sin, or merely natural for Punishment; whether the good
resolutions be the effects of a permanent Fidelity, or of violent Fear, that
will vanish, the cause being removed. When the invitations to Sin cease, there
may remain a secret undiscerned love to it in the Heart, which is the center of
Corruption, and root of Apostasy. The Snake that seemed dead in the cold,
revived by the Fire. The inordinate Affection that seemed mortified, when the
sensitive Faculties were disabled for carnal Enjoyments, may have inward Life,
and will soon be active and vigorous in the presence of Temptations. And that a
Deathbed Repentance is usually deceitful, appears from hence, that not one of
a thousand who recover from dangerous Diseases, are faithful in performance of
their most sacred Vows to God. How many having a Sentence of Death in
themselves, and under the terrors of the Lord, have expressed the greatest
detestation of their Lusts, and resolved (as they thought sincerely) that if
God would spare them, to reform their ways, to become new refined Creatures,
exemplary in all holy Conversation: yet the danger being over, their heats of
devotion expire as they revive, and their lusts recover strength with their
Bodies, and having been suppressed only by fear, are more fierce in their return.
Their Hearts were as Marbles that in rainy Weather seems dissolved into Water,
but it is only from the moisture of the Air, and remain as hard as ever. All
their promises of Reformation are ineffective, as violent and void. Now if
these Persons had died before this visible trial and discovery, they had past
into another World with the reputation of true Penitents, deceiving others with
their Prayers and Tears, and liberal Promises, the outward signs of Repentance,
and deceived themselves by the inward workings of an alarmed Conscience.
Therefore Ministers ought to be very circumspect in applying the Promises of
Mercy to Persons in such a state: for an error in that kind has fearful
Consequences. A little opiate Divinity may quiet the Mind for a time, but the
virtue of it will be soon spent, and the Presumer perishes for ever.

But suppose a dying Person with true Tears and unfeined persevering Affections
returns to God, can he have a comfortable assurance of his Sincerity? Indeed
the Searcher and Judge of Hearts will accept him, but how doubtful and wavering
are his Hopes, what anxious Fears are in his Breast, lest he builds upon a
sandy Foundation? And how dreadful is it to appear before the Tribunal of God,
and expect an uncertain Sentence?

But Sinners still please themselves in this, That God has effectually called
some at the last hour, and they may find the same favor with others. To this I
answer.

1. It Is true we have some rare admirable instances of God's Mercy and Grace;
the dying Thief, and some others, which show it is possible with God to abolish
the most vicious confirmed habits in a short time, and by a swift Conversion to
prepare a Sinner for Heaven. But these Examples are not to be drawn into
Consequence, for the encouragement of any in their Sins. A Prince will not
endure that his Quod alicui gratiose conceditur, trahi non debet ab aliis in
exemplum. Plut. Symp.
free Favors should be made a Law to him, and the special Privilege of some be
extended to all. As Thales said, an old Mariner that has escapt the various
dangers of the Seas, was a new Miracle; so that one who has lived an obstinate
Sinner dies a penitent Believer is very rare and extraordinary. What our
Savior said concerning the Salvation of rich Men, is justly applicable in this
case, that it was as easy for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, as for
a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This so astonished the Apostles,
that they cried, who then can be saved? To mitigate the difficulty, he
remembers them of the Divine Omnipotence, All things are possible with God.
Thus for one that has been fitting himself for Hell, and hardened in a constant
course of Sin, to be at last suddenly prepared and received into the pure and
glorious Society above, is possible, but possible only as Miracles are, by the
efficacy of infinite Power, and we cannot reasonably expect such Miracles. And
are Heaven and Hell such trivial things as to be left to an uncertainty? Are
not Men concerned in an other manner in the Affairs of the World? How careful
to prevent the sentence of Death, of Imprisonment or Banishment? How diligent
to obtain some temporal Advantage? yet how neglectful in things of the highest
importance? It may be, says the secure Wretch, God will give me Repentance at
last as he did to others. Remember you speak of the (...).
Soul, and dare you hang the weight of an immortal Soul upon a naked
possibility of receiving Grace. Chrysostom.
What reasonable Person would neglect a Disease that may prove deadly, and rely
on extreme Remedies? And can you be guilty of such a cruel indifference, such a
desperate carelessness, as to leave eternal Salvation or Damnation to a
peradventure? Vix dici potest quantos haec inanis spei umbra deceperit.


2. Aug.
Consider how many thousands have dyed in their Sins that cherisht fallacious
hopes of repenting at last. Diagoras the Atheist that denied a governing
Providence of things in this lower World, the Sphere of mutability, when one
for his conviction showed him in the Temple of Neptune, many votive Tables,
containing the grateful acknowledgments of those who by addresses to the Gods
in dangerous Storms, had arrived safe at their Port, and asked him Tu qui Deos
putas humana negligere, nonne animadvertisti ex tot tabulis pictis, quam multi
vim tempestatis effugerint, in portumque salutis pervenerint?
Whether he had observed those numerous testimonies for divine Providence; Tull.
he replied, I see them, but how many have invocated Neptune yet perished in the
Ocean, and never came to pay their Vows for Deliverance. 'Twas impiety in him
to argue so against God's disposing Providence: but it may justly be said to
those who neglect their present Duty, presuming upon some Examples of his
Glorious Goodness in those who were converted and saved in their approaches to
Death, how many have finally miscarried in shooting that Gulf, to one that has
arrived safe at Heaven? How many when Sick, hope either by the vigor of
Nature, or the virtue of Remedies to overcome their Disease, and never see
Death till they feel it, and delay Repentance till their time is irrecoverably
gone? How many are blinded with vain presumptions to the last, that God is
reconciled to them? and a false Tranquillity is more terrible than the storms
of a troubled Spirit, for those who hope upon deceitful grounds are in the most
hopeless state, neglecting what is requisite in order to Salvation. And thus
innumerable pass in a cloud of Ignorance to the Kingdom of Darkness. And how
many who have lived in a deluding Dream, sensual and secure, yet at the last
when by some sharp affliction or the present fear of divine Judgment Conscience
is awakened, and looks into the depth of their Guilt, fall into the other
extreme and dye despairing? The Devil makes his advantage of the timorous
Conscience as well as of the Obdurate. Solitude is his Scene as well as the
noisy Theater, and by contrary ways, either presumption or despair brings
Sinners to the same end. He changes his methods according to their
Dispositions; the Tempter turns Accuser, and then such who had a dim-sight of
Sin before, have an overquick sight of it, and are swallowed up in an abyss of
Confusion. The condition of such is extremely miserable. It Is observed of
Miserrimum morbi genus, in que aeger and siti and aquae metu cruciatur, quorum
spes in angusto est. Cells.
those who are bit with a mad Dog, that being tormented with thirst, yet so
fearful of Water, that the sight of it sometimes causes sudden Convulsions and
Death; their Cure is extreme difficult, if not impossible. This is a
significant emblem of a despairing Soul. For when the enraged Conscience bites
to the quick, the Sinner filled with estuations and terrors, ardently thirsts
for Pardon, yet fearfully forsakes his own Mercies. What ever is propounded to
encourage Faith in the Divine Promises, he turns to justify his Infidelity.
Represent to him the infinite Mercies of God, the unvaluable Merits of Christ
sufficient to redeem the lost World, it hightens his despair, because he has
perversely abused those Mercies, and neglected those Merits. The most precious
Promises in the Gospel are killing terrors to him: as the sweet Title of
Friend, wherewith our Savior received Judas when he betrayed him, was the most
stinging reproach of his perfidious Villainy. Thus it appears how dangerous it
is to delay our Repentance and Reconciliation with God till Sickness and a
Deathbed, when the remembrance or forgetfulness of Sin, the sense or security
of Conscience may be equally destructive.

I would not from what has been said, discourage any who have lived in a course
of Sin, from earnest seeking to God for his Mercy in their last hours. Even
then they are not utterly destitute of hope. The Gospel sets forth the Mercy of
God to returning Sinners in various forms, and expressions of incomparable
Tenderness. When the lost Sheep was recovered, there was Joy, as if a Treasure
had been found. The Prodigal had wasted his Estate in Lust and Luxury, and by a
harsh reduction came to himself, reflected with shame upon his Folly and
Rebellion, and the sense of his Misery (not a more ingenuous or noble principle
at first) compelled him to go to his Father, to try what his Affection would
do. And it was not a vain Presumption, for he found the effects of his
compassionate Love. When he was a great way off, his Father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran and fell on his Neck and kissed him. And the Sun said,
Father, I have sinned against Heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son. But the Father said to his Servants, Bring out the best
Robe, and put a Ring on his Finger, and Shoes on his Feet, and bring hither the
fatted Calf, and kill it, let us eat and be merry: for this my Son was dead,
and is alive again; was lost, and is found. The design of Christ was to
represent his heavenly Father in that Parable, and to wounded Spirits that feel
the intolerable weight of Sin, the Mercy and mildness of the Gospel is to be
shown. God is rich in Mercy to all that call upon him in Truth. But to tell
Sinners who securely proceed in an habitual course of evil, that they may be
saved at last, and notwithstanding their presumptuous repulses of Gods calls to
his Service, yet they may come into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, and be
rewarded, is to give countenance and protection to Sin, and to harden them to
Destruction. Poison is not cured by giving Food, but Antidotes, that put Nature
into a Passion till it be expelled. The Terrors of the Lord can only prove
medicinal to such depraved Souls.

To conclude this Discourse; Let us seriously consider the Revelation God has
made of himself in the Gospel as a Father and a Judge: that Justice and
Holiness, as well as Mercy, are essential to his Nature, that our Affections
may be accordingly moved toward him. If ye call on the Father, who without
respect of Persons judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear Presumption and Despair are very dishonorable to God,
and pernicious to the Soul: the one destroys the Fear, the other the Love of
God. But Hope contemper'd with fear has an excellent influence in the
Christian Life. As the Ballast and the Wind are both necessary that the Ship
may go safely and regularly: without the Winds the Ship can make no way, and
without Ballast it is in danger of oversetting by every gust. Thus Hope and Fear
are very useful to bring us safely to Eternal Felicity. Fear without Hope
stupifies the vigor and alacrity of the Soul, that it cannot come to God, and
Hope without Fear makes it vain and careless of its Duty, and liable to be
overthrown by every pleasing temptation. Briefly, let us rightly understand the
tenor of Evangelical Promises of Pardon and Grace: they are conditional and
applicable only to penitent Believers. And unfeigned Faith, the condition of
our Justification, purifies the Heart, works by Love, and is the living
Principle of universal Obedience. And Repentance unto Life is productive of all
good Fruits in their Season. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, as a Man Sows
so shall he Reap. He that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption. He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
Everlasting.

CHAP. VI.
Our Choice must be Constant. Perseverance in a holy Life absolutely required
in order to attaining the Reward. The various Temptations that assault
Christians, to divert them from the pursuit of Heaven. The Reason why
Perseverance is necessary. Cautions against Presumption, and a vicious
dejection of Spirit.
I Shall proceed next to consider that our Choice must be firm and lasting,
victorious over all Temptations.

The two principal Rules of the Spiritual Life are to begin and end well: to
fix and establish the main design for Everlasting Happiness, and from a
determinate Resolution and ratified purpose of Heart to pursue it with firmness
and constancy: to live for Heaven, and with readiness and courage to dye for
it, if the Glory of God so require. Perseverance is indispensably necessary in
all that will obtain the Eternal Reward.

For the clearing this most important Point, I will first represent from
Scripture the Idea of Perseverance, that is attended with Salvation. Secondly,
Confider why it is so strictly required.

I. Saving Perseverance includes the permanent residence of Grace in the Soul:
It Is composed of the whole Chain of Graces, the union of holy habits that are
at first infused into a Christian by the sanctifying Spirit. When Eternal Life
is promised to Faith, or Love, or Hope, it is upon supposal that those Graces
being planted in the Heart shall finally prosper. Rev. 2.
He that is faithful to the Death, shall inherit the Crown of Life. 1 Cor. 13.
It Is Love that never fails that shall enter into Heaven. It Is hope firm unto
the end that shall be accomplished in a glorious Fruition. If Grace be
disseised by a usurping Lust, Apostasy will follow, and the forfeiture of our
right in the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. Grace must be continually drawn forth into exercise according to our
several states and duties, and the various occasions that happen in our course
through the World. Those who are light in the Lord are commanded to walk as
Children of the Light; to signify the excellency and purity of the Christian
Life. Those who live in the Spirit must walk in the Spirit; that is, by a
conspicuous course of Holiness declare the vigor and efficacy of the divine
principle that is communicated to them. Paulum sepultae distat inertiae celata
virtus: Virtue that breaks not forth into visible Actions is not worthy of the
Name. The mere abstaining from evil is not sufficient, but all the positive
acts of the holy Life are to be constantly done. In discharging both these
parts of our Duty, complete Religion is expressed, and the power of Grace
consists.

3. Perseverance includes not only continuance in well-doing, but fervor and
progress toward Perfection. There are two fixed States, the one in Heaven, the
other in Hell. The blessed Spirits above are arrived to the height of Holiness.
The Devil and damned Spirits are sunck to the lowest extremity of Sin. But in
the middle state here, Grace in the Saints is a rising growing Light, and Sin
in the Wicked improves every day, like Poison in a Serpent that becomes more
deadly by his Age. We are injoined not to remain in our first Imperfections,
but to follow Holiness to the utmost issue of our Lives, to its entire
consummation. For this end all the dispensations of Providence must be improved
whether prosperous or afflicting. And the Ordinances of the Gospel were
appointed that in the use of them we may be changed into the divine Image from
Glory to Glory.

4. Perseverance is required notwithstanding all Temptations that may allure or
terrify us from our Duties; what ever affects us one way or other, while we are
clothed with frail Flesh. It Is the fundamental Principle of Christianity
declared by our Savior, If any Man will come after me, that is, be my
Disciple, and Servant, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow
me; even to be crucified with him, rather than wilfully forfeit his Integrity
and Loyalty to Christ. He must by a Natator amnem interpositum superaturus,
exuitur, nec tamen hoc tanto apparatu, quod se dispoliaverit, transnatabit,
nisi totius Corporis nisu torrentis impetum scindat, and laborem natationis
exhauriat. Paulin. Romans 2. Mat. 10. 22*
sacred fixed resolution divest himself of all things, even the most valued and
desirable in the present World, and actually forsake them, nay entertain what
is most distasteful, and resist unto Blood rather than desert his Duty.

1. He must with unfainting Patience continue in doing his Duty,
notwithstanding all Miseries and Calamities, Losses, Disgraces, Torments or
Death it self, which wicked Men, and greater Enemies, the Powers of Darkness,
can inflict upon us. To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for
Glory, Honor and Immortality, Eternal Life is promised. He that endures to the
End (notwithstanding the most terrible Sufferings to which he is exposed for
Christ's sake) shall be saved. In this a Christian must be the express image of
his Savior, who for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross;
despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of God. Disgrace and Pain
are Evils that humane Nature has a most tender sense of, yet the Son of God
with a divine generosity and constancy endured them in the highest degrees. He
was scorned as a feigned King, and a false Prophet. He suffered a bloody Death,
and by the Cross ascended to Glory. And we must follow him, if we desire to be
where he is.

2. But this is not the only trial of a Christian. Prosperity is a more
dangerous Enemy to the Soul, though Adversity be more rigorous.

Saevior armis
Incumbit luxuria:
For the Spirit is excited by Perils and Difficulties to seek to God for
Strength, Juven.
and with vigilant resolute* Thoughts unites all its Powers to oppose them; but
it is made weak and careless by what is grateful to the sensual Inclinations. It
keeps close the Spiritual Armor in the open encounter of Dangers that threaten
its ruin, but is enticed to put it off by the caresses and blandishments of the
World. It does not see its Enemies under the disguise of a pleasant Temptation.
Thus Sin insinuates its self, and by stealing steps gets into the Throne
without observation. A Man is wounded with a pleasant Temptation as with the
Plague, that flies in the dark, and Grace is insensibly weakened. From hence it
is that Adversity often reforms the Vicious, and Prosperity corrupts the
Virtuous. Now Perseverance must be of proof against Fire and Water, against
what ever may terrify or allure us from our duty.

5. Saving Perseverance excludes not all Sins, but total Apostasy, and final
impenitency, which are fatal and deadly under the New Covenant. If the
Righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits Iniquity, Eze.
18. 24*
and does according to all the Abominations that the wicked Man does, shall he
live? all his Righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, in his
Trespass that he has trespassed, and in his Sin that he has sinned he shall
die. If any Man draw back, Heb. 10. 38*
my Soul shall have no pleasure in him, says the Lord. These Threatenings
imply, there is a possibility of the Saints falling away considered in
themselves, but not that they are ever totally deserted by the Holy Spirit, and
left under the reigning Power of Sin. The Threatenings are intended to awaken
their Care, and are Preservatives of them from Ruin, and have a singular
Influence on their Perseverance. A vigilant and cautious Fear establishes the
certainty of their Hope. Indeed from the Relics of weakness and corruption in
the Saints, they sometimes actually fall into presumptuous Sins, and by
rebellious relapses wound Conscience, and let out much of the vital Spirits,
their Graces and Comforts. But though the divine Nature in them is miserably
wasted by such Sins, yet it is not abolisht. As after the Creation of Light,
there was never pure and total Darkness in the World. Grace does not consist in
a Point, but is capable of Degrees. The new Creature may decline in Beauty and
Strength, yet Life remain. Between a lively and a dead Faith there may be a
fainting Faith; as in St. Peter, for certainly our Savior was heard in his
Prayer for him, that his Faith should not fail in his dreadful Temptation. The
Saints do not by a particular fall extinguish the first living Principles of
Obedience, Faith and Love; nor change their last end by an entire turning from
God to the World. In short, a single act of Wickedness does not reduce them
into a state of Unregeneracy: for it is not the matter of the Sin singly
considered, but the disposition of the Sinner that denominates him. If Grace in
the Saints should utterly perish, as some boldly assert, their recovery would
be impossible. For the Apostle tells us, that if those who were enlightened, and
had tasted of the Heavenly Gift, that had been under some common Workings and
lower Operations of the Spirit, if such fall away universally, and live in a
course of Sin opposite to their former illuminations and resolutions, it is
impossible to renew them by Repentance; how much more then if those who were
truly sanctified by the holy Spirit, should entirely lose all those gracious
habits planted in them in their Regeneration? But David, though guilty of
Adultery and Murder, Sins of so foul a Nature as would dishonor Paganism it
self, and made the Enemies of God to blaspheme, was restored by Repentance. The
Gospel propounds a remedy not only for Sins committed before Conversion, but
after it. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. God does not revoke the Adoption, nor reverse the Justification of a
Believer: but upon scandalous disorders, a Pardon is not granted with respect
to the new contracted Guilt, till there be sincere and actual Repentance. He is
not disinherited, but his right to the Kingdom of Heaven is eclipsed as to the
comfortable sense of it, nay suspended, till by renovation he is qualified and
made fit for the enjoyment of that pure Inheritance. For those Sins which are a
just cause of excommunicating an Offender from the Church on Earth, would
exclude him from the Kingdom of Heaven without Repentance. Our Savior tells
us, what is bound on Earth is ratified in Heaven. And the Apostle expressly
declares of those kinds of Sin for which Professors must be removed from the
Communion of Saints here, that they are an exclusive bar from the Kingdom of
Heaven. But I have written to you, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
not to keep Company, if any that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or
Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner: with
such a one, no not to eat. And know ye not that the Unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Be not deceived: neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. If one that is truly a Child of God fall into any
of these Sins, till by an extraordinary Repentance he is prepared for Pardon he
cannot obtain it, nor have a comfortable hope of entering into Heaven. For only
those who are justified are glorified. Indeed it is not imaginable where the
Seed of God remains, the vital principle of Grace as it does in all that are
born of God, but that notorious Sins that cannot be concealed from the view of
Conscience, will cause stings and sorrows proportionable to their malignity,
and consequently a hatred and forsaking of them. Now Perseverance principally
respects the end of our course. There may be interruptions in the way for a
time, but if with renewed Zeal and Diligence we prosecute our blessed End we
shall not fall short of it.

2. I come now to consider the second thing propounded, The reason why
Perseverance is requisite in all that will obtain Eternal Life, and it is this,
That their Sincerity may be discovered by constancy in Obedience under all
Trials. Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation, for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him. The Law required unsinning Obedience as the condition of Life, the Gospel
accepts of Sincerity, but if that be wanting, there is no Promise that gives
right to the Reward. Now Sincerity implies such an entire Love of God, as makes
a Person submit to all Duties commanded in his Law, and all Trials appointed by
his Providence. A high Example we have of this in Abraham, when he was
commanded to offer up his only Son Isaac, and by his own Hands, for a burnt
Offering. This was to kill a double Sacrifice at one blow, for the Life of
Abraham* was bound up in Isaac: he lived in him more dearly than in himself;
all his Joy, all his Posterity by Sarah had dyed in Isaac. What resentments,
what resistance of Nature did he suffer? yet presently he addressed himself to
perform his Duty. Who ever saw a more glorious Victory over all the tender and
powerful Passions of human Nature? O unexampled Obedience! being an Original
without any Precedent to imitate, and without a Copy to succeed it. After this
clear infallible Testimony of his Sincerity, the Angel declared from Heaven,
Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine
only Son from me. And it is said concerning the Followers of the Lamb that they
loved not their Lives unto the Death. The Love of Christ that animated them in
all their Sufferings, was sweeter than Life, and stronger than Death.

Indeed there was a wonderful difference in the Behavior of the Martyrs under
Sufferings, but in all the same Persevering Grace was evident, though working
variously. Some in the most beautiful Flower of their Age encountered Fire and
Sword, Tormentors and Torments, with that sensible Joy, with those Songs of
Praise to Christ, as if they saw the Heavens open with St. Stephen, and their
Savior ready to receive and crown them. But many others as Homil. 6. de laud.
Paul.
Chrysostom testifies, went to the Tribunals, to the Theaters, to Death, with
many Appearances of Fear. Upon hearing the wild Beasts roar, they were struck
with horror, at the sight of the Executioners and the Instruments of Torment
they were pale and trembling. The Flesh seemed to cry out, O let this Cup pass
from me, yet weak and faint, it followed the Spirit, that corrected the natural
desire, with not my will, but thine be done. As the Moon in Eclipse, though
obscure, yet goes on in a regular course, as when it is full of Light by the
reflection of the Sun: So those desolate Martyrs, though as it were forsaken,
and deprived of the bright Beams of Comfort, yet persever'd in their Profession
of the Truth. When one word to renounce Christianity would have saved them, no
Torments could force it from them, but they patiently endured all. Now in these
the Combat of Nature was visible, and the admirable Power of Grace. They first
overcame their own Fears, the reluctance of the carnal part, their Affections
to what ever is desirable in the World, which is the noblest Victory, and then
the Cruelty of their Persecutors. In them was verified the Testimony of the
Spirit, Here is the patience of the Saints, Here are they that keep the Command
of God and the Faith of Jesus.

But how many appear faithful while their Faith is not to be showed by
difficult Works, and proved by Sufferings. The Seed that fell on the stony
Ground, sprang up as hopeful as the Seed in the good Ground at first; but when
Tribulation came, it withered away wanting the Root of Sincerity. And that
which was sown among Thorns, was choakt by the Cares and Pleasures of the
World. Some Lust in the Heart interweaves with the Affections and causes
Apostasy. How many from glorious Beginnings have made a lamentable End? not
only Mercenaries in Religion, whose Zeal is a foraign Complexion, not springing
from an inward Principle of Life and Health, relinquish even the profession of
Godliness, when their gain ceases, but some who have thought themselves
sincere, yet in times of danger their resolutions like sick Feathers dropped
away. As the foolish Builder that computed not the charges of his designed
Work, began to raise a magnificent Structure, but unable to finish it, laid the
Foundation in his own Shame. They repented their choice of Heaven, when they
saw what it must cost them, and would save the World with the loss of their
Souls.

Others that began in the Spirit, and with raised Affections set out in the
ways of Godliness, yet by the allurements of sensual Lusts and Temptations,
(and therefore with greater Quae justior venia in omnibus causis, quam
voluntarius, an quam invitus peccator implorat? Negationem quanta compellunt,
ingenia carnificum, and genera poenarum? Quis magis negavit, qui Christum
vexatus, an qui delectatus amisit? Qui quum amitteret doluit, an qui quum
amitteret lusit? Tert. de pudicit.
Guilt) leave their first Love, and end in the Flesh. They fall from high
Professions, but received by soft Pleasures feel not the fall. These were never
sincere, and never had a right to Heaven. They took up sudden Resolutions, not
grounded in serious and deep Thoughts, and for a Flash were hot and active, but
with great levity return to their former Lusts. The Apostle tells us of such,
it had been better for them they had not known the way of Righteousness, than
to turn back and voluntarily to forsake it. It Is observed that boiling Water
taken off from the Fire, congeals more strongly than that which was never
heated: because the subtle parts being evaporated by the Fire, the more
terrestrial parts remaining are more capable of Cold. So those who have felt
the power of the Word in their Affections, and afterward lose that holy heat,
become more hardened in their Sins. God justly withdraws his Grace, and the
evil Spirit that was expelled for a time returns with seven worse, and
aggravates his Tyranny.

To conclude; Since the certainty of Salvation is conditional, if we persevere
in a holy State, let us beware of a corrupt Confidence, and a vicious Dejection
of Spirit, the trusting in our selves, or distrusting God. To prevent the
trusting in our selves, Consider,

1. The most excellent Creatures are by the instability of Nature liable to
defection, subject to a corruptive change. Of this the fallen Angels are a
dreadful Example, who of their own motion, untempted, sinned in Heaven.

2. The danger is greater of falling away, when they are urged and solicited by
a violent or grateful Temptation. Thus our first Parents fell, and lost more
Grace in an Hour, then can be recovered by their Posterity in all Ages to the
end of the World.

3. When there is supervenient Corruption in the Creature, that inclines them
with earnest propensity to forbidden Things, and takes Flame from every Spark,
the danger is extreme. Like a besieged City that is in great hazard of taking,
by Assaults from without and Conspiracies from within. Let us therefore be very
watchful over our Hearts and Senses, and keep as much as is possible at a safe
distance from Temptations. And be very diligent in the use of all holy means to
confirm and fortify our resolutions for Heaven. God promised to Hezekiah 15
years, but not to preserve his Life by Miracle, he was obliged to repair the
wastings of Nature by daily Food, and to abstain from what was noxious and
destructive to his Body. The Apostle excites Christians, to work out their own
Salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in them to will and
to do of his good Pleasure. Let him that stands take heed lest he fall. None
are a more easy Conquest to the Tempter then those who presume upon their own
Strength. We should be always jealous of ourselves, from the sad Examples of
Apostasy in every Age. Denique saepe cognovimus, quoniam quem formidolosa
carnificum pompa non terruit, nec divisi lateris sulcus infregit, nec ardentes
laminae a triumphalis fortitudinis vigore abducere potuerunt, eum inter sacra
praemia constitutum, Vxor tenerae prolis oblatione, miserabilis unius lachrymae
miseratione decepit.
St. Ambrose testifies from his own knowledge, that many after the courageous
enduring of cruel Torments for Religion, the tearing open their Sides that
their Bowels appeared, and the burning of some parts of their Bodies, yet when
led forth to finish the Victory of Faith, to be a triumphant Spectacle to
Angels and Men, when the blessed Rewarder was ready to put the Martyrs Crown on
their Heads, at the sight of their mourning Wives and Children in the way, were
overcome by Pity the weakest Affection, and failed in the last act of Christian
Fortitude. We must pray to be strengthened with all Might, according to his
glorious Power, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness. For some
may vigorously resist one sort of Temptation, and render themselves to others.
And if finally vanquished by one of those Enemies we lose our Victory and Crown.

And as Presumption betrays the Soul into the Devils Snares, so a vicious
dejection of Spirit from a distrust of Relief from God in our Difficulties, and
his assistance with our unfeigned endeavors for Salvation is very pernicious.
For this damps Industry, and causes either a total neglect, or uncomfortable
use of Means for that End. Many Christians considering their Graces are weak,
their Nature fickle and apt to revolt, are ready (as David said, One day I
shall perish by the hand of Saul) to conclude sadly of the issue of their
Condition. To encourage such let them consider, that Perseverance is not only a
Coudition, but a Privilege of the Covenant of Grace. For that affords supply of
spiritual Strength to the sincere Believer for performing the condition it
requires. Indeed if Grace were the mere product of Free Will, the most fervent
Resolutions would vanish into a Lie, upon the Assault of an overpowering
Temptation. As Hezekiah acknowledged, that the Assyrian Kings, had destroyed
the Gods of the Nations that were no Gods, but Idols the work of Men's Hands.
But sanctifying Grace is the effect of the Holy Spirit, and he that begins that
good work in the Saints, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. He that
inclined them joyfully to choose the Spiritual Eternal Good, will bind their
unconstant Hearts, that by a faithful adherence they shall cleave to their Duty
and Felicity. God has most graciously declared, I will put my Spirit into their
Hearts, that they shall never depart from me. The Promise is founded in the
unchangeable Love of God to his People. Were God as Man subject to Variation,
there might be Jealousies in Believers lest they should lose his good Will. As
those who depend on Princes, are suspicious lest from the natural inconstancy
of the human Will, a new Favorite should supplant them. But whom God loves he
loves to the end. The Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, that God would
preserve them blameless till unto the coming of Christ, by this Consideration,
faithful is he that calls you, he will do it. He speaks of the Internal Call,
that opens the Heart and overpowers all Resistance. As when the Angel came with
a Light shining in the Prison to St. Peter, and struck him on the Side, bid him
arise quickly loosed his Chains, and led him through the Guards, opened the
Doors, and restored him to Liberty. The effectual calling of a Sinner, is the
visible and infallible effect of electing Mercy, and God is unchangeable in his
own purpose, and faithful to his Promises of bringing all such by
Sanctification to Glory. The same Apostle tells the Saints at Corinth. That the
Redeemer would confirm them to the End: God is faithful by whom ye are called.
Grace that was at first inspired, is continually actuated by the Spirit, who is
styled the earnest of the Saints Inheritance. So that whereas the Angels that
excelled in Strength kept not their first State of Purity and Glory, but are
sunk into Corruption and Misery, yet true humble Believers though weak, and
encompast with many Difficulties, shall be preserved from destructive Evil, and
raised to an unchangeable Estate of Perfection. This is as truly admirable, as
if the Stars should fall from Heaven, and Clods of Earth ascend and shine in
the Firmament. The Apostle who acknowledged his insufficiency of himself to
think a good Thought, yet triumphantly declares, I can do all things (within
the compass of his Duty) through Christ that strengthens me. The Love, Fidelity
and Power of God are a sure Fountain of Assistance to every Christian, that
sincerely resolves and endeavors to prosecute his last and blessed End.

CHAP. VII.
An Account how Men are induc't to choose a false Happiness, and reject the
true. Directions for the regulating our Choice. The Senses and Passions are the
worst Counselors. The Example of the multitude is contagious.
I Shall now come to the Directions how to fix our Choice aright.

This is a matter of everlasting Consequence, it therefore becoms us with the
most intense application of Mind to consider it, and according to the advice of
Wisdom, to keep the Heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of
Life.

Indeed the choice were not difficult between lying Vanities and substantial
Blessedness, if uncorrupted reason had the Superior sway: but in this lapsed
state of Nature, the Understanding and Willare so depraved, that present things
pleasing to sense, ravish the Heart into a Compliance. Men are deceived, not
compelled into ruin: the subtle Seducer prevails by fair Temptations. This
will be evident by reflecting upon the frame and composition of Man, as he
consists of Spirit Soul and Body, and the manner of his acting. The Spirit is
the intellective discerning Faculty, the Seat of Reason, capable to compare and
judge of the qualities of things, and foresee their issues. The Body includes
the lower Faculties, the Senses Fancy and Passions, that are coversant about
present things. The Soul is the Will, the principle of Election, in the midst
of the other, as the Center to which all their Addresses flow. Now upon the
proposal of the spiritual and carnal Good in order to Choice, the Will is to be
directed by the Mind, and by its own Authority to rule the lower Passions. But
alas! the Mind has lost its primitive Light and Purity, Vigilance and
Integrity, neglects its Duty, and from Ignorance, Error and carnal Prejudices
often pleads for the Flesh: and the Will, the rational Appetite, is voluntarily
subordinate and inslaved by the Sensitive. From hence it is that in the
competition, Heaven with all its Glory is despised, and the present World
embraced. To open this more particularly, Consider.

1. The Senses can only taste and enjoy grosser dreggy Pleasures.

2. The Fancy that depends upon them in its Operations, and is guided by their
report, conceives of Felicity only under the notion of sensitive Pleasure. We
may illustrate this by the practice of Flagitio insigni, semper alicujus
foeminae amore flagrans and ob id Deas pingens sub dilectarum imagine. Itaque
scorta ejus venerabantur. Plin
Aretius a Painter recorded with Infamy, who being often employed to Paint the
Goddesses to be set in the Pagan Temples, always drew their Pictures by the
Faces and Complexions of his Harlots, that the Objects of his impure Love might
have Veneration and a Divinity attributed to them, under the Titles, and
Pretense of Minerva, Juno, Diana, and the other Goddesses adored by the
Heathens. This Impiety in an Idolater is resembled by Men, who fancy Happiness,
(that is a spiritual divine Perfection enjoyed in the glorious Vision of God)
to be a carnal Fruition, and having with sensible Colors and Lineaments
represented it agreeable to their brutish Faculties, place it in their Hearts,
and Sacrifice all their Thoughts Affections, and Service to it.

The Fancy is very powerful in Men upon a double account.

1. The Understanding naturally receives the notions of things by Phantasms
that are still mixing in its Contemplations. While the Soul is confined to a
Tabernacle of Flesh, it apprehends no Object without the precedent excitation
of the Senses. From whence it is impossible, that a Person absolutely deprived
of Sight from his Birth, should have an Idea of Light or Colors, or that is
born deaf, should conceive what Sound is, the Sense never having imparted an
account of it to them. And the Image of the Object is not immediately
transmitted from the Sense to the Mind, but first to the Imagination, that
prepares it for its view. And from hence the sensual Fancy is so predominant in
sweying the Judgment, and inclining the Will. As those Counselors of state
that have the Ear of the Prince, and are continually with him, by specious
Informations, and disguising Truth, influence him to approve or reject Persons
and Things according to the various Aspects given by them. The same Object
propounded in a dark confused manner, weakly moves us, but varnisht and
beautified with lively and pleasant Colors by the Imagsnation, is armed with
such Power that ravishes the esteem of the Mind, and consent of the Will. Now
Celestial Happiness being purely Spiritual, such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, though some discoveries
be made of it by Revelation, yet the Imagination makes such an obscure
detracting Idea of it, that it affects no more, than a dead shadow drawn in
some imperfect Lines of an exquisite Beauty: but when the Fancy is warned and
enlivened by the presence of sensible Objects, it makes a vigorous impression
of them upon the Mind, and that represents the Pictures of Pleasure as very
lovely and delightful to the Will, which presently embraces them.

2. The Fancy has a mavelous force upon the sensitive Appetite, that eagerly
desires what is represented as pleasant, though the enlightened Mind sees
through the Temptation, and knows it is a mere Dream that brings neither solid
nor durable Joy. One in a Fever is pleased by imagining Fountains and Streams
though he knows that imaginary Waters cannot quench his Thirst, nor afford the
least real Refreshment. Now the sensitive Appetite being inflamed by the Fancy,
imparts a contagious Fire to the Will, and that induces the Mind, either to
concur with it, and palliate the deceit, and to judge favorably according to
its Inclinations, or makes it slack or remiss in its Office, diverting the
Thoughts from what might control the Appetite, or if the Understanding still
contradicts yet it is in so cold and speculative a manner, that the Law of the
Members rebels against the Superior Light, and is too strong for the Law of the
Mind, and that Saying is verified, Video meliora proboque Deteriora sequor. I
see what is worthy to be chosen, but pursue what is to be abhorred. Thus
miserably weak are the rational guiding Powers in Man since his Fall, thus
imperious and violent the brutish Faculties. In short, illusion and
concupiscence are the principal causes why the most noble and divine Good is
undervalued and rejected in comparison of inferior transitory Vanities. O the
cheap Damnation of beguiled Souls! A Mess of Pottage was more valuable to Esau,
than the Birthright that had annexed to it the Regal and Priestly Dignity.
Unwise and unhappy Wretches! that follow lying Vanities, and forsake their own
Mercies.

Thus I have briefly set down the process of men's foolish choice in this
degenerate state. Now that we may with a free uncorrupted Judgment compare
things in order to a wise choice of true Felicity, it follows from what has
been said, that as the Apostle in obeying his Heavenly Commission, conferred
not with Flesh and Blood; We must not in this matter of infinite importance,
attend

1. To the suggestions and desires of the Senses and carnal Appetite, which are
the worst Counselors, as being incapable of judging what is our proper
Happiness, deceitful and importunate.

First, They are incapable of apprehending Spiritual Eternal Things, which
alone bring fit and complete satisfaction to the Soul: and cannot look forward
to the end of sinful Pleasures, and balance the terrible Evils they leave at
parting, with the slight vanishing content that springs from their Presence.
Therefore as blind Persons lay hold on things they feel, so the sensitive
Faculties adhere to gross present enjoyment, not understanding the pure
spotless Felicity that is to come, and despising what they do not understand.
Now who would in an Affair upon which his All depends, advise with Children and
Fools, whose Judgment of things is without Counsel, their Counsel without
Discourse, their Discourse without Reason? There is nothing more contrary to
the order of Nature, than for Men that should affect with Judgment, to judge by
their Affections.

2. The carnal Appetite with its Lusts are very deceitful, a Party within
holding correspondence with our Spiritual Enemies, the Armies of evil Angels,
so active and assiduous in conspiring and accomplishing the Damnation of Men.
The Devil in Scripture is called the Tempter by way of eminence, who manages
and improves all Temptations, and his pernicious design is by the Objects of
Sense ordered and made more alluring and killing by his various Arts, to engage
the Affections into a compliance and so to gain the Will. Now our great danger
is not so much from Satan the Enemy without, as from the carnal Appetite, the
Traitor within, that gives him the first and easy entrance into the Soul. He
can only entice by representing what is amiable to Sense, but the corrupt
Appetite inclines to the closing with it. He tempted Jesus Christ but was
repelled with shame, having found nothing within him to work upon. The perfect
regularity of Faculties in our Blessed Savior was not in the least disordered
neither by his fairest Insinuations, or most furious Assaults. And we might
preserve our innocence inviolable notwithstanding all his Attempts, did not
some corrupt Affection cherished in our Bosoms lay us naked and open to his
poisoned Darts. The Apostle Peter who had a Spiritual Eye, and discerned
wherein the strength of our great Enemy lies, admonishes Christians, Dearly
Beloved I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts,
that war against the Soul. And we are told by him, That the Corruption that is
in the World, is through Lust. The outward Objects are useful and beneficial in
their kind, the abuse of them is from Lust. The Poison is not in the Flower,
but in the Spider. It Is therefore infinitely dangerous to consult, or trust our
carnal Faculties in this matter, for they are bribed and corrupted, and will
commend temporal things to our choice.

3. The sensual Affections are so numerous and clamorous, so vehement and
hasty, that if they are admitted to counsel and give the decisive Vote, the
Voice of Conscience will not be heard or regarded. In concernments of a lower
Nature, it is constantly seen, that nothing more disturbs Reason, and makes Men
improvident and pecipitant in their Determinations, than a disordered Passion.
From hence, it is a prudent Rule, That as it is not fit to eat in the height of a
Fever, because the Meat feeds the Disease, by increasing the feverish not the
vital heat: so it is not good to deliberate in the heat of any Affection. For
then the Thoughts strongly blow up the Passion, and smother Reason, and the
Mind is rather a Party than a Judge: but after the declination of that Fever
in the Soul, in a quiet enterval, it is seasonable to consider. Now if any
simple Passion when moved, transports and confounds the Mind, and makes it
incapable of judging aright, much more the love of the World, an universal
Passion that reigns in Men, and has so many swarming desires answerable to the
variety of sensible things, and therefore is more unruly, lasting and dangerous
then any particular Passion. In short, sensual Affections captivate the Mind,
and hinder its due considering the folly and obliquity of the carnal choice,
and when incenst (as distracted Persons whose Strength grows with their Fury)
violently break all the restraints the understanding can apply from reason and
revelation.

2. In order to make a right choice, we must be very watchful lest the general
Example of Men taint our Reason, and cause an immoderate esteem of temporal
things. The whole World lies in Wickedness* in a sensual Sty, without
Conscience of its Misery, or care of regaining its Happiness, deceived and
pleased with shows of Felicity. The way to Hell is broad as the inclinations of
the licentious Appetite, pleasant as the delights of Sense, so plain and easy
that Men go to it Bion.
blindfold, and so frequented that it would force Tears from any considering
Person, to see Men so hasty to meet with Damnation. When Calisto the Harlot
reproacht Socrates that there were more followers of her Beauty than his
Wisdom, the (...). Aelian. l. 13. c. 32.
Philosopher replied, that was not strange, because it was much easier to draw
them in the way of Pleasure, that is steep and slippery, than to constrain them
to ascend to Virtue, seated on a Hill, where the ascent is slow, and with toil
and difficulty. Now there is nothing more contagious than Example. We blindly
consent with the Multitude, and are possessed with foolish Wonder, and carnal
admiring of worldly Greatness, Treasures and Delights, neglecting to make a due
estimation of things. It Is the ordinary Artifice of the Devil to render
temporal things more valuable and attractive to particular Persons, from the
common practice of Men who greedily pursue them as their Happiness. As some
crafty Merchants, by false reports raise the exchange, to advance the price of
their own Wares. The Men of the World are under the direction of Sense, and
think them only to be wise and happy that shine in Pomp, abound in Riches, and
overflow in Pleasures. The Psalmist tells us of the prosperous Worldling, that
while he lives, he blesses his Soul; and Men will praise thee when thou do
well to thy self. By vicious imitation our Judgments are more corrupted, and
our Passions raised to higher degrees for painted Vanities. The Affections in
the pursuit of earthly things are inflamed by the contention of others. And
when holy Desires and Resolutions spring up in Men, yet so powerful is the
custom of the World, that they often become ineffectual. As a Ship whose Sails
are filled with a fair Wind, but makes no way, stopped by the force of the
Current. Now to fortify us against the pernicious influence of Example,
Consider,

1. It Is most unreasonable in this Affair of so vast moment to be under the
direction of the Multitude. For the most are sottish and sensual, governed by
the uncertain motions of a giddy voluble Fancy, and roving impetuous Passions,
so that to be led by their example, and disregard the solid immortal rules of
heavenly Wisdom, is as perfect madness as for one to follow a herd of Swine
through the Mire, and leave a clean Path that lies before him. If there were
but few in an Age or Country, that were deluded with false Appearances, it
would be a disgrace to imitate the practice of the Foolish: and shall the great
numbers of the Earthly-minded give Reputation and Credit to their Error. He
were a strange Fool indeed, that should refuse a single piece of counterfeit
Money, and receive a great heap in payment, as if the number added a real value
to them. It Is therefore a necessary point of Wisdom to divest all Nunquam de
vita judicatur, semper creditur, sanabimur, si modo separemur a coetu. Sen. de
vit. Beat.
vulgar Prejudices, to separate our selves from the Multitude, that we may see
the vanity of things that dazzle inferior Minds.

2. Consider the universal judgment even of the worldly Men in their last and
serious Hours, when the Prospect of Eternal Things is open before them. How
vastly different are their Apprehensions of temporal Things in the review, from
what they were in their vicious Desires? How often do they break forth in the
sorrowful Words of the Apostle, We have been toiling all Night and caught
nothing? When there are but a few remaining Sands in the Glass of Time, and
Death shakes the Glass before them, how powerfully do they preach of the
emptiness and uncertainty of things below, and sigh out in Solomon's phrase,
All is Vanity? And this is more singularly observable in those who have had the
fullest enjoyment of earthly things. How do they complain of the vain World,
and their vainer Hearts, when Experience has convinced them of their woeful
Folly? Solomon who was among other Princes, as the Sun in the midst of the
Planets, that obscures them by his illustrious Brightness, He that had surveyed
this Continent of Vanity, to make an Experiment whether any satisfaction could
be found in it, at last sadly declares, that all things here below are but
several kinds and ranks of Vanities, as ineffectual to make Men happy, as
counterfeit Jewels of several Colors are to enrich the Possessor. Nay they are
not only Vanity, but Vexation, an empty show that has nothing real, but the
vexation of disappointment. And shall we not value the judgment of Men when
they are best instructed, and give credit to their Testimony when they are
sincere? Certainly in their Approaches to the Divine Judgment they are most
considerate and serious, they have the truest and justest thoughts of Things,
and most freely declare them. O the astonishing Folly of Men! the will not be
convinced of the error of their ways, till they come to the end of them, and
the Sun is set, and no time remains for their returning into the way of Life.

CHAP. VIII.
The steadfast belief of Eternal Things requisite to direct our Choice. The
power of Faith illustrated. Infidelity, total or partial, the cause of Men's
neglecting Eternal Salvation.
I Shall proceed to show further what is necessary to direct us in our choice,
that we may not fall into the double Misery, of being deceived with a false
Happiness for a little time, and deprived of true Happiness for ever. Three
things are requisite for this.

1. A sound and steadfast belief of unseen Eternal Things.

2. Serious Consideration of the vast difference between things that are the
objects of Sight, and that are the objects of Faith.

3. Humble and ardent Prayer to God, that he would turn away our Eyes and
Hearts from Vanity, to the solid durable Good.

First, The sound and steadfast belief of Eternal Things is requisite to direct
our choice aright. Heb. 11. ^
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.
It assures us of their reality and worth as if they were before our Eyes, and
in our actual Possession. This Divine Light governs and conducts the Will to
choose wisely, and excites all the practick Powers for the prevening the
greatest Evils, and the obtaining perfect Felicity. When the Devil, the deadly
Flatterer, by inviting representations of the World intices the Heart, the
serious belief of the future reward so glorious and eternal, disgraces the most
splendid Temptations, and makes them ineffectual. This is the Victory that
overcomes the World, even our Faith. If tempted to Lasciviousness by the
allurements of an earthly Beauty, Faith represents the angelical luster of the
Saints, when they shall come with the unspotted Lamb in his glorious
appearance, and this unbinds the Charm, and makes the tempting Person an object
not of Desire, but Aversation. If tempted with Honor to a sinful compliance,
Faith represents so convincingly the Glory which all those who preserve their
Conscience and Integrity inviolable, shall receive at the universal Judgment,
in the presence of God, and the holy Angels, (as our Savior has promised, He
that serves me, him will my Father honor) and the confusion wherein the most
honorable Sinners shall then be covered, that with a generous disdain all
secular honors will be despised. And it is as powerful to enervate the
Temptation of temporal Profit. We read of Moses, that by Faith, when he was
come to Years, (and therefore more capable to understand and enjoy what
Felicity the brightest Honors and greatest Riches could afford) refused to be
called the Son of Pharaoh' s Daughter; choosing rather to suffer Affliction with
the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season; esteeming
the reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt: for he had
respect to the recompense of Reward. And all the Evils which a wicked World,
inspired with rage from Satan, can threaten to fright us from our Duty,
Poverty, Disgrace, Banishment, nay Torments and Death, those terribles visu
formae, so heightened by the carnal Fancy, are easily overcome by a sincere and
strong Believer. Thus some who were urged by such motives to renounce their
Religion, told the Persecutors, that Life was not sweet to them if they might
not live Christians, nor Death bitter if they must die for Christ. A lively
firm persuasion of the excellence and eternity of the Reward, Nec vereamu
occidi, quos constat, quando occidim^ coronari. Cyp.
what miraculous effects would it produce? Nothing would be impossible within
the compass of our Duty, either to do or suffer in order to a glorious
Immortality. Faith has a celestial Power, a magnetic Virtue to draw up the
Heart from the Earth, and fastens it to things above. It is not imaginable that
a clear sighted Soul, that sees a Good infinitely great, should reject it for
mean things to please the lower Desires. We may as probably imagine, that a
skilful Jeweller would part with the richest Oriental Pearls, for Cherry Stones
to play with Children.

From hence we may discover the true cause of the neglect of the great
Salvation offered in the Gospel, the Word preached does not profit, not being
mixed with Faith in them that hear it. It is astonishing to consider that Earth
should contend with Heaven for our Affections, and prevail against it; that
Vanity should turn the Scale against the exceeding and eternal weight of Glory;
that Men should pursue fleeting Shadows, and neglect the most excellent
Realities, as if they could be happy here, and continue for ever, and hereafter
there were neither Happiness nor Eternity. But this releases the wonder, that
all Men have not Faith. Eternal Things are not of conspicuous moment in the
carnal Balance. Some are Infidels in Profession, openly declaring themselves
to be without Religion, without God, and have the same credit of the Heaven and
Hell discovered in the Gospel, as of the Elysian Fields, and Stygian Lake, the
Fables of the Poets. These live as if they should never die, and die as if they
should never live in the other World, as if Death caused so deep a sleep, that
the Voice of the Son of God could not awaken them at the last day. Their
unbelief is not from reason, but vicious opposite Affections; for the truth of
the Eternal State is so clearly revealed, and strongly established in the
Gospel, that the sincere Mind must readily assent to it. But the Wicked cannot
delight in the discovery of that for which they are unprepared, and therefore
try all ways to elude the force of the most satisfying Arguments. They do not
fear Hell, but are afraid they should be fearful of it. This is such a piece of
Folly as that of the West Indians, who at the first Invasion by the Spaniards,
were so terrified with the glittering of their Swords that they presently fled,
and very advisedly resolved to hide themselves in the day, and assault their
Enemies in the night. They were fearful to see their Danger, and rash to
encounter it, and fighting in the dark were killed in the dark. The Threatenings
of Eternal Death are the brandishings of God's glittering Sword before he
strikes, and sensual Infidels are afraid lest the belief of those terrible
Truths should enter into their Breasts; therefore are utterly careless of what
may convince them of their danger, and will not foresee what they shall
certainly suffer. This is obstinate, and the most incurable Infidelity. An
instance whereof we have in the Pharisees, who rejected our Savior. Though all
the Characters of the Messiah were conspicuous in his Person, though his
Doctrines were confirmed by Miracles, yet they would not yield up themselves to
that omnipotent conviction, so strong were their carnal prejudices against his
humble State, and holy Doctrines. That reproach is more justly due to Infidels
under the Gospel, than to Israel in the Prophet: Who is blind as my Servant?
The Heathens who are blind from their Birth, and have only some glimmering
apprehensions that Eternity succeeds Time, are less culpable than those who
have infinitely more reason to believe it, and yet believe it less. The Plea
for them will be a terrible Accusation against such Unbelievers. If a blind
Person falls, it moves compassion; but if one voluntarily shuts his Eyes
against the Sun, and refuses the direction of the Light, and falls from a
Precipice, his Ruin is the just consequence of his Folly. Simple Ignorance
excuses as to the degrees of the Fault, but affected wilful Ignorance, now
Reason and Revelation with united Beams give so clear a prospect into the
Eternal World, aggravates the Guilt, and Sentence of such Unbelievers. It Is in
vain to offer Arguments to convince them; for they are as deaf as Adders to the
wisest Instructions, till Sense extort a belief from them. They have hardened
their Hearts and Faces against all Reproofs, and by an open contempt of
Scripture-Threatnings, are past reclaiming. There are many degrees of Sins,
many steps in the descent to Hell, but the lowest and nearest the Gates of that
infernal Prison, is the scornful derision of God's terrible preparations for
the Wicked hereafter.

Besides, the most who are Believers in Title, are Infidels in Heart. Our
Savior tells the Jews, who pretended the highest Veneration to the Writings of
Moses, That if they had believed Moses, they would have believed him; for Moses
wrote of him. If Men did seriously believe such an excellent Reward, as the
Gospel propounds, would it be a cold unpersuasive motive to them? The
depravation of the Will argues a correspondent defect in the Mind, though not
absolute total Infidelity, yet such a weakness and wavering in the Assent, that
when Temptations are present and urgent, and it comes to actual choice, Sense
prevails over Faith. This will be clear by Universal Experience in temporal
things. The probable hope of Gain, will make those who are greedy of Gold,
prodigal of their Lives, and venture through tempestuous Seas to accomplish
their Desires. And if the belief were equal, would not Men do or suffer as much
for obtaining what is infinitely more valuable? A firm Assent would produce
adherence, and Faith in the Promises, Fidelity in obeying the Commands of
Christ. Tertullian proprounds it as a powerful incentive to the Martyrs, Quis
ergo non libentissime tantum pro vero habeat erogare, quantum alii pro falso?
Who would not joyfully sacrifice Life and all it sindearments, to obtain true
Blessedness, which others do for the vain Appearance of it? On the contrary,
the fear of a present destructive Evil will control the most eager Appetites.
It Is recorded that when the Army of Israel were in pursuit of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14. 24, 25, 26.
Saul to complete his Victory, forbad upon pain of Death that any should taste
Food till the Sun was down. In the chase of their Enemies, they past through a
Wood abounding with Honey, yet notwithstanding their Hunger and Faintness, and
the easy Provision before them, no Man so much as tasted it; for the People
feared the King's Oath. And did Men truly believe and fear the Law of God
threatening Hell for Sin, would they dare to commit it, though invited by
pleasant Temptations? Nay not only a strong fear, but the mere suspicion of
great danger will restrain the most vehement desires of Nature. What Person
though inflamed with Thirst, would drink a Glass of cool Liquor if he suspected
that deadly Poison were mixed with it? And if Men were persuaded that Sin is
attended with Death, would they drink in Iniquity like Water? The Devils
themselves are not able to conquer the Fear of Judgment to come, they believe
and tremble. Therefore when it is not active upon the Conscience, it is either
because Men do not believe the thing it self, or that Holiness is necessary to
prepare for it. Indeed even in true Believers the apprehension of Eternal
Things has such great allays, that temporal things are over-valued and
over-feared. A strong Faith in the Truth and Power of God, would make the
glorious World so sure and near in our Thoughts, that with indifferent
Affections we should receive good or evil things here, rejoice as if we
rejoiced not, and mourn as if we mourned not. Our Lives would be so regular and
pure, as if the Judge were to come the next hour, as if the Sun did now begin to
be darkened, and the Trumpet of the Archangel were sounding, and the noise of
the dissolving World were universally heard. Infidelity deads the Impression,
and suppresses the reigning Power of Eternal Things in our Hearts. In short,
Men are heavenly or earthly in their Choice and Conversation, as they are
directed by the sincere Light of Faith, or misled by the false beams of Sense.

CHAP. IX.
Consideration is requisite in order to a wise Choice. How it must be managed
that it may be effectual. It must be serious, frequent, and with application to
the Soul. Motives to it. The true Causes why Carnal Men are averse from it.
THE second thing requisite in order to a wise Choice is Consideration. For as
by Faith the virtue of the Reward is diffused through all the Faculties, and
the Powers of the World to come are felt in the Soul; so, by consideration,
Faith is exercised and becomes effectual. This unites and reinforces the beams
of Eternal Truth, and inflames the Affections. As the Psalmist expresses
himself, My Heart was hot within me while I was musing, the Fire burned. Heaven
is a Felicity so glorious and attractive, that if duly considered, no Man can
possibly refuse it: and Hell is a Misery so extreme and fearful, that if
seriously laid to Heart, none can possibly choose it. The last End is to be
conceived under the notion of an infinite Good, without the least mixture of
Evil, to which the human Will has a natural tendency. The liberty of
indifference is with respect to some particular good Things, which may be
variously represented, so as to cause inclination or aversion. That Men who
believe Eternal Life is the Reward of Holiness, yet with a careless
inadvertency pass over their Duty; and that Eternal Death is the Wages of Sin,
yet securely continue in it, is more wonderful than to see Martyrs sing in the
Flames, and the great cause of it is the neglect of Consideration. This is
assigned to be the cause of that unnatural and astonishing Rebellion of Israel
against God their Father and Sovereign: Isa. 1. 2, 3.
Hear O Heavens, and give Ear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have
nourished and brought up Children and they have rebelled against me. The Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel does not know, my
People does not consider.

This Duty as it is of admirable Advantage, so it is universally necessary: for
all are equally concerned, and it is within the power of all to perform. Though
Men cannot convert themselves, yet they may consider what is preparatory to
Conversion. For the Will may turn the Thoughts of the Mind to any sort of
Objects.

I will briefly show the nature of this Duty, and how to manage it for
spiritual profit, and those Objects from whence our Thoughts derive vigor for
the swaying of the Will and the conduct of the Life.

1. The nature of Consideration is discovered by its end, which is this; that
the Mind being satisfied in the just Reasons upon which the choice of Heaven is
to be made, the Will and Affections may be engaged in an earnest joyful and
constant pursuit of it. And in this respect it differs from simple Knowledge,
and naked Speculation, that informs the Mind without influence and efficacy
upon the Heart. Like a Garland of Flowers that adorns the Head without any
benefit and refreshing to him that wears it. And practical meditation differs
from the study of divine things in order to the instructing of others. That is
like a Merchant's buying of Wine for Sale, this like providing it for our own
use.

2. That the Consideration of Eternal Things may be effectual, it must be,

1. Serious and deliberate. For the Affair is great in reality above all
possible conception or comparison. All other things, how considerable soever in
themselves, yet respectively and in parallel with this, are of no account. Our
Savior told Martha, One thing is necessary: Mary has chosen the better part,
that shall not be taken from her. What Instance can be of equal moment with
that of entertaining the Son of God? yet a serious attention to the Words of
Eternal Life dropping from his Lips, was more necessary than making Provision
for him. The greatest and most weighty Affairs in the World are but a vain
Employment, but irregularity and impertinence, in compare with Eternal
Salvation. And the greatest solemnity of Thoughts is requisite, to undeceive
the Mind, and engage the Will for Heaven. It Is very observable that Errors in
Judgment and Choice spring from the same causes, the not sincere and due
weighing of Things. In the decisions of Questions, Truth is discovered by
comparing, with an equal staid Attention, the Reasons of the one and the other
part: but when some vicious Affection contradicts the Truth, it fills the Mind
with Prejudices, that it cannot impartially search into things, and is deceived
with specious fallacies, with the image of Truth. For according to the present
application of the Mind it is determined, and Passion strongly applies it to
consider that which is for the carnal Interest, and consequently Inclination,
not Reason, is the principle of the Persuasion. And this is more evident in
Men's foolish Choice. As the Eye cannot see but what is visible, nor the
Understanding conceive what is not Intelligible, the Will cannot love and choose
what is not amiable at least in show. If the Devil did appear without a
disguise, he would have no power to persuade, but in all his Temptations there
is the mixture of a Lie to make it pleasant. He presents a false Perspective,
to make what is but superficial appear solid and substantial. And the carnal
Heart turns the Thoughts to what is grateful, without seriously considering
what is infinitely better, and accordingly chooses by the Eye of Sense, the
Happiness of this World. Therefore till Eternal Things are opened in the view
of Conscience, and the Mind calmly considers by the Light of Faith their
reality and greatness, no right valuation, nor wise choice can be made.

Besides, the most clear and rational enforcements by the actings of the
Thoughts, are necessary to make a strong impression on the Affections, and
rescue them from the captivity of the Flesh. In other things as soon as the
Mind is enlightened, the Will resolves, and the inferior Faculties obey; but
such is the resistance of the carnal Heart, that although it is evident from
infallible Principles there is an everlasting Glory, infinitely to be preferred
above the little appearances of Beauty and Pleasure here, yet the most piercing
reasons enter heavily without earnest inculcation. Slight or sudden Thoughts
may produce vanishing Affections of complacence, or distaste, and fickle
resolutions, that like sick Feathers drop away, and leave the Soul naked to the
next Temptation; but solemn and fixed Thoughts are powerful on the Heart, in
making a through and lasting Change. When the Clouds dissolve in a gentle
Shower, the Earth drinks in all, and is made Fruitful; but a few sprinkling
Drops, or a short storm of Rain, that wets only the Surface, without sinking to
the Root, is little beneficial. In short, there may be some excitations to
Good, and retractions from Evil, some imperfect faint essays toward Heaven,
from an impulse on the Mind; but solid Conversion is produced by deliberate
Discourse, by the due consideration and estimation of things, it is rational and
perpetual.

2. Consideration must be frequent to keep eternal Objects present, and
powerful upon us. Such is the natural Levity and Inconstancy, Sloth and
Carnality of the Mind, That the Notions of Heavenly Things quickly pass
through, but of Earthly abide there. If a Stone be thrown upwards, it remains
no longer in the Air, than the impression of the force by which it was thrown
continues; but if it falls on the Earth, it rests there by Nature. When the
Soul is raised in contemplation to Heaven, how apt is it to fall from that
height, and lose the esteem, the lively Remembrance and Affections of Eternal
Things? But when the Thoughts are excited by the presence of what is pleasing
to Sense, the withdrawing the Object does not deface the Idea of it in the
Memory, nor lessen the Conceit, nor cool the Desires of it, because the Heart
is naturally inclined to it. Therefore it is necessary every day to refresh and
renew the conceptions of eternal Things, that although they are not always in
act, yet the efficacy may be always felt in the Heart and Life. The Soul
habituated to such Thoughts will not easily yield to Temptations, that surprise
and overcome others that are Strangers in their Minds to the other World: Nay
the presence of Temptations, as by Antiperistasis, will reinforce the
Resolutions for Heaven; like the pouring Water upon Lime, that revives a hidden
Fire in it, which seems a natural Miracle. It Is therefore of great advantage
frequently to sequester our selves from the World, to redeem Time from secular
Affairs, for the recollecting of our Thoughts and their solemn exercise upon
the Eternal World. Sense that reveals natural things, darkens spiritual. How
can the Thoughts be fixed on invisible things so distant from Sense, if always
conversant with secular Objects that draw them down? In the silence of the
Night a small Voice is more distinctly heard, and a little distant Light more
clearly seen: so when the Soul is withdrawn from the noisy throng of the World,
and outward things are darkened, the Voice of Conscience is better heard, and
the Light of Heaven more perfectly received.

3. Consideration of Eternal Things must be with present Application to the
Soul. It Is not the mere conviction of the Mind, but the decree of the Will that
turns Men from Sin to Holiness, from the Creatures to God. The Heart is very
deceitful, and by variety of shifts and palliations is disposed to
irresolutions and delays in spiritual Concernments. How often does the
miserable Sinner contend with himself, and while Conscience urges him to seek
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Affections draw down to the Earth, the carnal
part prevailing over the rational, he overcomes, and is overcome, he is
convinced and condemned by his own Mind. Till Consideration issues in this,
that with settled Judgment and Affections the Soul determines for God and
Heaven, it is without profit. Therefore in the managing this Duty, it is our
Wisdom not to be curious and inquisitive after subtle Conceptions, and exalted
Notions of the future State, that little confer to the making the Heart better,
but to think seriously on what is plain and evident, and most useful to produce
a present lasting Change. It were egregious Folly in a Man, that for the use of
his Garden should with great labor fetch Water from distant Fountains, and
neglect that which springs up in his own Ground. That Meditation is profitable
which produces not new Thoughts, but holy and firm resolutions of obeying God
in order to the full enjoying of him for ever.

To persuade us to the serious practice of this Duty, there are many
enforcements.

Is any Man so foolish, so regardless of his convenience, to purchase a House
wherein he must live all his Days, and will not first see whether it will be
convenient, and secure for his Habitation? Shall we not then consider Heaven
the Mansion of Blessedness, and Hell the Seat of Misery and Horror? for
according as we choose here, we shall be in the one or other place for ever. I
shall in a particular Chapter endeavor to represent something of the
inexpressible Misery of the Wicked hereafter, and show how congruous and
powerful the Thoughts of it are to restrain Men from Sin, but at present shall
briefly excite to the Meditation of the Heavenly Glory, as the most noble,
delightful and fruitful work of the Soul, whiles confined to the Body of Flesh.
It Is the most exalted exercise of the Mind, the purest converse with God, the
Flower of consecrated Reason. It Is most like the Life of glorified Spirits
above, who are in continual contemplation of the Divine Excellencies, and it is
most raised above the Life of carnal Men, that are sunk into sensuality and
brutishness. It Is the most joyful Life, in that it sheds abroad in the Soul
delights that neither satiate, nor corrupt, nor weaken the Faculties, as the
delights of Sense do, but afford perfection as well as pleasure. It Is the most
profitable Life. As in those parts of the Earth where the beams of the Sun are
strongly reflected, precious Metals and Jewels are produced, wherein the
refulgent resemblance of that bright Planet appears: so the lively and vigorous
exercise of the Thoughts upon the heavenly Glory, will produce Heavenly
Affections, heavenly Discourses, and a heavenly shining Conversation. This will
make us live like the blessed Society above, imitating their Innocence and
Purity, their joyful, entire and constant Obedience to God. This confirms the
holy Soul in its Choice, with an invincible efficacy against the Temptations
and Lusts of the World. The serious considering Believer is filled with
ravishing Wonder of the Glory that shall be revealed, and looks down with
Contempt upon the Earth, and all that has the Name of Felicity here. All the
Invitations, nay Terrors of the World, are as unable to check his pursuit of
his blessed End, as the Breath of an Infant to stop the high flight of an Eagle.

But how rare and disused a Duty is this? How hardly are Men induced to set
about it? Business and Pleasures are powerful Diversions. Some pretend Business
as a just cause, but in vain; for the one thing necessary challenges our
principal Thoughts and Care. Besides, there are intervals of Leisure, and the
Thoughts are always streaming, and often run waste, which directed aright,
would be very fruitful to the Soul. The true cause of this neglect is from the
inward temper of Men. Carnal Pleasures alienate the Mind, and make it unfit for
the deep serious actings of the Thoughts upon Eternal Things. I have said of
Laughter, thou art mad, it makes the Mind light and vain and desultory. As a
distracted Person by every motion of Fancy flys from one thing to another
without coherence. The Heart filled with cloudy Cares, and smoaky Fires, with
Thoughts and Desires about worldly Things, is unprepared for such a clear, calm
and sedate Work. A Carnal Person can taste no sweetness, feel no relish in the
Meditation of Heaven, nor any spiritual Duty. It Is as if one should take some
delicious Fruit into his Mouth, a Peach or the like, without breaking the Skin;
it would be rather a trouble, than pleasant. Nay the Gospel expressly declaring,
that without Holiness no Man shall see God; those who by vicious Affections are
engaged in any sinful way, being conscious of their guilt and unpreparedness,
and that while such, they are under a peremptory exclusion from celestial
Glory, cannot endure the thoughts of Heaven. The Divine Presence is their
Torment, and the serious Consideration of it, is to bring them before God's
holy and just Tribunal, to accuse and condemn them.

CHAP. X.
The Objects of Consideration specified. The End of Man's Creation considered.
The Things of the World and Heaven that solicit our Choice, considered in their
Quality and Duration.
I Shall next proceed to a more particular view of those Objects, from whence
Consideration derives vigor, for the inclining of the Will to a right Choice,
and for regulating the Life.

1. Consider the End for which Man was designed in his Creation, why endued
with rational and noble Powers of Soul, and placed by the Sovereign Maker in
the highest rank of so numerous and various Natures that fill the Universe. Is
it to raise an Estate, to shine in Pomp, to enjoy sensual Pleasures for a
little while, and after the fatal term to be no more for ever? Was he sent into
the World upon as mean a Business as that of the foolish Emperor, who employed
an Army, furnished with all Military Preparations, to gather Shells upon the
Seashore? This were, according to the passionate expostulation of the
Psalmist, to charge God that he had made all Men in vain. Reason and Scripture
tells us the End of Man is to glorify and enjoy God, the obtaining whereof
makes him perfectly happy, and the missing of it perfectly miserable. This is a
fundamental Truth, upon which the whole Fabric of Man's Duty and Felicity is
built. Without this Foundation, our Faith presently sinks. If the clearness of
this principle be obscured, we shall wander from the way of Eternal Life, and
not only lose the way, but the remembrance and desire of it. Thinking is the
property of the reasonable Soul, and the just order of Consideration is, that
the Mind primarily regards this supreme directive Truth that is to govern all
our Actions. 'Twas prudent Counsel that Primum ego scriptoris officium
existimo, ut titulum suum legate, atque identidem interroget se, quid caeperit
scribere.
one of the Ancients gave for composing a Book, that the Author frequently
reflect upon the Title, that it may correspond in all the parts with his
original Design. Thus it becomes a Man often to consider the End of his Being,
that the course of his Life may have a direct tendency to it; and the more
excellent our End is, the more constraining is the necessity to prosecute it.
It Is of great Efficacy to reflect upon our selves, Whither do my Thoughts and
Desires tend? for what do I spend my Strength and consume my Days? Will it be
my last Account how much by my Prudence and Diligence I have exceeded others in
temporal acquisitions? If a General were at play while the Armies are engaging,
would it be a noble Exploit for him to win the Game, whiles his Army for want
of conduct loses the Victory? Will it be profitable for a Man to gain the
World, and lose his Soul? Let Conscience answer in Truth.

It Is observable what is reported of a Cum natalis dies Februarii admonuisset
aetatis numerandae, and tricesimo reperissem, invasit me subita moestitia, and
perculsit admirantem, quomodo sine sensu vitae ad ejus culmen pervenissem, a
quo lux quaelibet fit obscurior, and dies nostri ad occasum inclinare
incipiunt. Visa est mihi rerum facies momento mutata, and tunc primum me
hominem agnovi. Memoires Chanut.
noble Forreigner, that reflecting upon his Birthday, and the Age of his Life,
he was surpised with grief, and struck with Astonishment, that without a due
Sense of the proper Business and End of Life, he was arrived to that Age, when
our Days begin to decline. In an instant all things seemed to change appearance
in his view. Then first (says he) I perceived I was a Man, for before I had not
resolved for what I should employ my Life. The issue was, his serious
Resolution unfeignedly to honor God, sincerely to confess Christ, to place his
Felicity in Holiness of Life, and most zealously to follow it. Let any one that
is not of a reprobate Mind, and an incorrigibly depraved Heart, duly consider
the sublime and supernatural End of Man. O what a mavelous change will it
make in him, of Carnal into Spiritual? nay it would be a kind of Miracle if he
continued in his sinful State. How will it transform him into another Man, with
new Valuations, new Affections and Resolutions, as if he were born again with a
new Soul? How will it amaze him that his whole course has been a contradiction
to the wise and gracious design of God, that all his Industry has been a race
out of the way, a perpetual diversion from his main Business, that his Life has
been fruitless and dead to the true End of it? How will he be confounded at his
former Folly? Then alone we act with Understanding, when moved by our blessed
End, and our Actions by a strict tendency without variation issue into it.

2. Consider attentively the Objects that stand in competition for our Choice,
the present World and Heaven, to make a judicious comparison between them in
their Quality and Duration.

First, in their Quality. The things of the World, according to the judgment of
God himself, who is only Wise and Good, and has the highest Authority to decide
in the case, are but fallacious appearances of Happiness, mere Vanity. And
certainly the Creator knows the true worth of all things, and would not
disparage his own Works, but would undeceive Men that are apt to judge and
choose by the Eye of Sense. The Apostle tells us, that an Idol is nothing in
the World; although the matter of it may be of Gold, or Marble, or Wood, yet it
has no divine Perfection which the Idolater attributes to it. So all worldly
things, in which Men place their chief Care and Confidence and Joy, though they
have some degrees of Goodness, and are a transient relief to us in our passage
to Eternity, yet they are nothing as to perfect Felicity. It Is merely Opinion
and Conceit that makes them so valued and pleasing, like a rich Dye to a slight
Stuff from whence its price arises. Reason is either obscured, or not obeyed,
when the World is the Object of our Choice. Now what are these appearances of
Beauty and Pleasure compared with a Blessedness that is truly infinite? Carnal
Joy smiles in the Countenance, flatters the Fancy, touches the Sense, but
cannot fill the Heart, but the Favor of God satisfies the Soul. Thou have put
Gladness into my Heart, more than when their Corn and Wine increased. Carnal
Joy in its highest elevation in the time of the Harvest and Vintage, is
incomparably less than Spiritual Joy that springs from the Light of God's
Countenance. The World cannot fill the narrow capacity of our Senses, but
divine Joys exceed our most enlarged comprehensive Faculties. The Eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing; but the Peace of God passes
all Understanding. The Things of the World are of a limited Goodness, Wisdom is
not Strength, nor Learning Riches, nor Beauty Fruitfulness: But God is a
Universal Good, in whom are all attractives to raise and satisfy our Desires.
If Men did consider, they would distinguish and despise in comparison all that
is named Felicity here, with the Favor of God. To seek for satisfaction in the
Creature and forsake him, is as if one desirous to see the Light should
withdraw from the presence of the Sun, to borrow it from a weak Ray reflected
by some obscure matter. Now if there be so vast a difference in their Nature,
as between a painted Vapor, and the solid glorious Good, between Finite and
Infinite, why is there not a difference accordingly in our Esteem, Affections
and Respects to them? How unreasonable is it that a Soul capable of God, should
cleave to the Dust? It would be most egregious Folly to hang a Weight, that is
able to turn a great Engine, upon a small Clock: it is incomparably more
Foolish, when the love of Happiness, the Weight of Human Nature, which applied
aright, will turn our Desires to Heaven, is only used to give vigorous motion
to our endeavors about earthly things.

2. Consider their Duration. The Apostle tells us that the main scope of his
actions was things invisible; and gives the reason of it, for the things that
are seen are Temporal, and the things that are not seen are Eternal. To insist
upon the vast difference between temporal and eternal may seem needless: for
the first notions of things are of such uncontrollable Clearness, that an
attempt to prove them, is to light a Candle to discover the Sun. Yet this
principle drawing after it such powerful Consequences for the government of our
Hearts and Lives, and Conscience being so remiss, and the sensual Affections so
rebellious, it is needful to consider this seriously, that what is really
assented to in Speculation, may not be contradicted in Practice. Now who can
unfold the infinite volume of Ages in Eternity? the Understanding of an Angel
can no more comprehend what is incomprehensible than the Mind of a Man. A Snail
will pass over an immense space as soon as an Eagle: for though one dispatches
more way than the other, yet both are equally distant from arriving to the end
of what is endless. But that the conception of Eternity may be more distinct,
and affecting, it is useful to represent it under some temporal resemblances,
that sensibly though not fully express it. Suppose that the vast Ocean were
distilled drop by drop, but so slowly that a thousand years should pass between
every drop, how many Millions of years were required to empty it? Suppose this
great World in its full compass from one Pole to another, and from the top of
the Firmanent to the bottom, were to be filled with the smallest Sand, but so
slowly that every thousand years only a single Grain should be added, how many
Millions would pass away before it were filled? If the immense Superficies of
the Heavens, wherein are innumerable Stars, the least of which equals the
magnitude of the Earth, were filled with Figures of Numbers without the least
vacant space, and every Figure signified a Million, what created Mind could
tell their Number, much less their Value? Having these Thoughts, I reply; the
Sea will be emptied drop by drop, the Universe filled grain by grain, the
Numbers written in the Heavens will come to an end, and how much of Eternity is
then spent? Nothing; for still infinitely more remains. In short, what ever is
temporal, extend the continuance of it to the utmost possibility of conception,
is infinitely short of Eternity. A Day, an Hour, a Minute, has some proportion
with a thousand years; for that duration is determined by a certain number of
Days, and Hours, and Minutes: but Millions of Ages have no proportion to
Eternity, because it is an indeterminable Duration. The Mind is soon tired and
lost in searching after numbers to represent it: it is confounded and struck
with amazing Horror, and can only direct the Eye upward or downward to the two
Habitations of Eternity, the glorious and the miserable, Heaven and Hell. Now
let us compare the Things of the present World with those of the future State.
The first are measured by flying Time, the other remain in an unmovable
Eternity. The Comforts that spring from the Earth, suddenly wither and fall to
it: the Tree of Life flourishes only above. Frequent changes from Prosperity to
Adversity are the Properties of this mortal State. As those who are in Voyages
at Sea, sometimes are in a calm and presently suffer a storm, and are forced to
alter their course by the changing of the Winds. So it is with us in our passage
here; but upon the first entrance into another World, all the variations of
this are at an end. Verily every Man at his best estate is altogether Vanity.
Surely every Man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain. The
visible Felicity of Man is of no continuance. We may frequently observe in the
Evening, a Cloud by the reflection of the Sun invested with so bright a Luster,
and adorned with such a pleasant variety of Colors, that in the judgment of
our Eyes, if an Angel were to assume a Body correspondent to his Glory, it were
a fit matter for it. But in walking a few Steps, the Sun is descended beneath
the Horizon, and the Light withdrawn, and of all that splendid flaming
appearance, nothing remains but a dark Vapor, that falls down in a Shower.
Thus vanishing is the show of Felicity here. In this, Sense assists Faith; for
the Experience of every day verifies what the Scripture declares, that the
fashion of this World passes away. And therefore the guilty folly of Men is
aggravated, to set their Eyes and Hearts upon that which is not. To see one
passionately dote on a Face ruined and deformed with Age, to be enchanted
without a Charm, raises wonder, and exposes to contempt. Yet such is the
stupidity of Men to embrace with their most entire Affections the withred
Vanities of the World, that are hastening to their period. 'Twas a stinging
reproach to Idolaters from God, None considers in his Heart, neither is their
Knowledge nor Understanding, to say, I have burnt part of it in the Fire, yea I
have also baked Bread upon the Coals thereof, I have roasted Flesh and eaten
it, and shall I make the residue an Abomination; shall I fall down to the stock
of a Tree? And are not sensual Men equally guilty of such monstrous Folly? for
though universal Experience convince them, that all things under the Sun are
fading, and that many times their dearest Comforts are snatched away from their
Embraces, yet who does advisedly consider, and say to himself, shall I give my
Heart to transient Shadows? shall I cherish vain hopes, vain aims and desires
of obtaining Happiness in a perishing World? Although the worshipping a Stock
be Idolatry of grosser Infamy, yet it is as foolish and as destructive to set
our chief Love and Joy, that is only due to God, upon the Creature. And what
follows in the Prophet is justly applicable to such Persons; He feeds on
Ashes (that not only afford no nourishment, but is very hurtful to the Body) a
deceived Heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his Soul, nor say,
is there not a Lie in my right Hand? Thus carnal Men are so blinded with their
Affections to these short lived Pleasures, that they cannot take the true
liberty of judging and reflecting that they are deceived and delighted with
empty Shadows that will suddenly end in disappointment and sorrow? Briefly,
these glittering Fictions and false Joys cannot please without an error in the
Mind, that shall last but a little while. And if you saw a distracted Person
Sing and Dance, with a conceit that he is a Prince, would you be willing to
lose sober Reason for his fantastic Pleasure, especially if you knew that his
cheerful fit should suddenly change into a mournful or raging Madness for ever?
But the Blessedness above is unchangeable as God the Author and Object of it,
Eternal as the Soul that enjoys it. And shall the World that passes away with
the Lusts thereof, turn our Affections from the undefiled immortal Inheritance?
Shall the vanishing appearance, the fleeting Figure of Happiness be preferred
before what is substantial and dureable? Astonishing Madness! that God and
Heaven should be despised for painted Trifles. If a spark of true Reason, of
sincere Love to our Souls be left, we shall count all things but dross and
dung, that we may gain the Kingdom of Glory. Thus Eternity inlightens, thus it
counsels us.

CHAP. XI.
Other Motives propounded. God desires the Eternal Happiness of Men. All that
unfeignedly seek it, shall enjoy it. The terms are gracious and easy upon which
it is offered to Men.
TO excite us further to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, I shall propound other
Motives to Consideration.

1. God is very willing that Men should be saved and partake of his Glory. For
this end, he has brought Life and Immortality to light in the Gospel. The Lord
Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness, has dispel'd the darkness of the Gentiles, and
the shadows of the Jews, and rendered the blessed and eternal State so clear and
so visible, that every Eye may see it. Our assurance of it is upon infallible
Principles. And though the excellent Glory of it is inexpressible, yet it is
represented under variety of fair and lovely Types to invite our Affections.
Besides, God makes an earnest offer of Life to us in his Word, he Commands,
Counsels, Excites, Urges, nay Entreats and Beseeches with infinite Tenderness,
that Men will accept of it. Thus the Apostle declares, Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead be reconciled to God. Is it not evident then beyond the most
jealous suspicion, God is desirous of our Happiness? Can we imagine any design
any insincerity in his Words? Why should Heaven court a Worm? It Is his love to
Souls that expresses it self in that condescending compassionate manner, to
melt and overcome the perverse and hardened in Sin.

And as his Words so his Works are a convincing Argument of his Will: His most
gracious sustaining and supporting of sinful Men, his innumerable Benefits
conferred upon them, in the provision of Good, and preservation from Evil, are
for this End, that by the conduct of his merciful Providence they may be led to
Repentance, and received to Grace. And the temporal Judgments inflicted on
Sinners, are medecinal in their Nature, and in his design to bring them to a
sight and abhorrence of Sin, to prevent their final ruin: if they prove mortal
to any, it is from their obstinate Corruption. The time allowed to those who are
obnoxious to his Justice every hour, is not a mere reprieve from Torment, but a
space of Repentance to sue out a Pardon: They are spared in order to Salvation.
2 Pet. 3. 9.
The Lord is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to Repentance.

But above all his other Works, the giving of his Son to be a Sacrifice for
Sin, is an incomparable demonstration, how much he delights in the Salvation of
Men. Since God has been at such cost to put them into a capacity of obtaining
the Kingdom of unchangeable Glory, far transcending the earthly Paradise that
was forfeited by Sin, we have the strongest assurance that he desires their
Felicity. And how guilty and miserable will those Sinners be that when Christ
has opened Heaven to us by his Blood, refuse to enter into it. When Brutus
propounded to a Philosopher his design to restore Rome to Liberty, he replied,
That the action would be glorious indeed, but that so many servile Spirits that
tamely stoopt under Tyranny, were not worthy that a Man of Virtue and Courage
should hazard himself to recover that for them, which they did so lightly
esteem. The Redemption of Mankind is without controversy the most glorious work
of God, wherein the concurrence and concord of his Attributes appear in that
excellent manner, that only his miraculous Wisdom could find out. But how
astonishing is the unworthiness of Men, who wretchedly neglect Salvation, which
the Son of God purchased by a Life full of Sorrows, and a Death of infinite
Sufferings? Blessed Redeemer! may it be spoken with the humble affectionate and
thankful sense of thy dying Love, why did thou give thy self a ransom for
those who are charmed with their Misery, and with the most foul Ingratitude
disvalue so precious a Redemption? How justly shall they be for ever deprived
of it? Behold, ye dispisers, and wonder, and perish.

2. Consider, this glorious Blessedness shall be the Portion of all that
unfeignedly choose it, and earnestly seek it. This motive was enclosed in the
first, but deserves a separate Consideration. And of this we have infallible
assurance from the Word of God, who cannot lie. Godliness has the Promise of
the Life to come. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. The
hope of a Christian is so certain that it is compared to an Anchor fastened in
Heaven. And besides the Fidelity of his Word, God has given us Security of the
Reward, the Life of his Son. This methinks should turn the Current of our
Desires and Endeavors to Heaven. For notwithstanding all our toil and sweat,
the labor of the Day and the watchings of the Night for the obtaining earthly
things, yet we many times fall short of our aims and hopes. 'Twas the
observation of the wisest Man, I returned and saw under the Sun, that the Race
is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, neither yet Bread to the
Wise, nor yet Riches to Men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to Men of Skill;
but Time and Chance happens to all. Indeed such is the order of Divine
Providence in the World, there must be different conditions of Men here, some
Rich, others Poor, some Noble* others Mean, some in Command others in
Subjection. And from hence it is also evident, that neither Dignity nor Riches
nor Pleasures are the Happiness of Man. For it is not becoming the Wisdom and
Goodness of God to make that the last end of the reasonable Creature, which
though sought with Sincerity and Diligence, may not be obtained, or of which
without his own consent he may be deprived. But civil distinctions and
qualities are of no value and consideration with respect to the obtaining or
excluding from Heaven. The rich and honorable that are in an exalted State,
have not a more easy ascent and entrance into the Kingdom of God than those who
are in the lowest degree. The Stars appear with the same bigness to him that
stands in the deepest Valley as on the highest Hill. Is there any difference
between the Souls of the rich and great in the World, and the Souls of the poor
and despised? are they not equally the Offspring of God, and equally ransomed
by the most precious Blood of his Son? are they not equally capable of Eternal
Rewards? are not the Promises of the heavenly Kingdom, equally addressed to every
one that has an immortal Soul, that is faithful to his Duty and Covenant with
God. This should inspire all with flaming Desires, and draw forth their utmost
Industry, and make them steadfast and unmovable, always to abound in the Work
of the Lord, knowing our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. I know the
carnal Will is impetuous and impatient of delay; and earnest for what is
present with the neglect of the future Glory. But the unreasonableness of this
is evident to all, for it is not a new and strange thing to sow in hopes of
reaping a Harvest, for Men to be industrious and active on Land and Sea for
future Advantage. Nay it is the constant practice of the World: The Merchant,
the Husbandman, the Student, the Soldier, and every Man in the circle of his
Calling are visible instances of this; and though many times the most
flourishing hopes are blasted, they are not discouraged. And is it not a sight
full of wonder to observe Men cheerful in Labors and Hardships in the Service
of the World, to carry it so lightly as if they had Wings, and all for a poor
and uncertain Recompense, and to be slow and languid in their endeavors for a
Reward as great and as sure as God is glorious and true? How many ambitiously
strive to please a Prince, and wait long in his Service, who is but a Man, and
therefore variable in his Temper and State, sometimes is not willing to do what
he can, and sometimes cannot do what he would to reward his Servants? and is
there not infinitely more reason we should labor to please God* who is the
most liberal, and rich, and certain Rewarder of all that seek him?

3. Consider, How gracious the terms are upon which Heaven is promised in the
Gospel, Our Savior's Laws are so holy, just, and in their own Nature so good
to Men, even in their present performance, that their own excellence and equity
and sweetness is sufficient to recommend them without a respect to the glorious
Reward of Obedience. For what can be more desirable than conformity to the
Nature of the blessed God? What Pleasure is comparable to that which springs
from a pure Conscience, from a godly righteous and sober Conversation? How
joyful is the performance of that Service which more immediately is directed to
the honor of the Divine Majesty? in Prayer and other sacred actions we draw
near to the Fountain of Felicity, and receive from his fullness. In the
affectionate Praises of God we are Companions of the Angels. And is not
Integrity and Honesty in our dealings with Men more easy and comfortable than
Fraud and Oppression? Is it not troublesome to be always under a Mask, to use
arts and disguises to avoid the reproach and revenge that attends unjust
actions when discovered? Are Temperance and Chastity as hurtful to the Body, as
Luxury and Lasciviousness the essential parts of carnal Felicity? How miserably
distracted is Man when the Heart is rent with numberless Vanities, the
Affections divided between various Objects! how quiet and composed, when the
Heart is united to God as the supreme Good, and the Affections joyfully
conspire in his Service! Can it then be pretended that the Yoke of Christ is
heavy, and his Law hard? Or are his Promises uncertain, and his Reward small?
No, his Commands are not grievous; in the keeping them there is a great Reward,
a present Paradise. Religion will make us happy hereafter in the enjoyment of
God, and happy here in Obedience to his Holy Will. Such is his Goodness that
our Duty and Happiness are the same.

But it will be said, that the Gospel requires us to pluck out the right Eye,
and to cut off the right Hand, and to take up the Cross of Christ, that is, to
mortify the dearest Lusts, and to submit to the sharpest Sufferings for his
Honor that we may be eternally Happy. To this I answer.

It Is true, the human Nature in this depraved State, only relishes such Objects
as pleasantly insinuate with the carnal Senses, and it is bitter as Death to
bind up the Affections from them. But Grace gives a new divine Nature to the
Soul, and makes it easy to abstain from fleshly Lusts. To make this more clear
by a sensible Instance: Suppose a diseased Person whose Stomach is oppressed with
corrupt Humors, and his Throat and Mouth so heated with Choler and continual
Thirst, that he thinks it impossible, though for his Life, to abstain from
immoderate Drinking. If a Physician by some powerful Medicine cleanses the
Stomach, and tempers the internal heat, he then can easily restrain himself
from Excess. Thus a carnal Man that is full of false Estimations, and irregular
Desires, while there are Pleasures without, and Passions unsubdued within,
though his Salvation depends on it, thinks it impossible to restrain the
exorbitant Appetites of Flesh and Blood. The Gentiles thought it strange,
Christians did not run with them to the same excess of Riot. But Divine Grace
so clarifies and inlightens the Mind, so purifies and elevates the Affections,
that it is not only possible but easy to abstain from unlawful Pleasures. St.
Austin before his Conversion was astonished that many in the vigor of Youth,
and in a frail World lived Chastely; and reflecting upon himself, was encouraged
by this Thought, that which such and such observe, why shall it be impossible
to me to observe? and upon serious trial, by the prosperous influence of
Heaven, was a Conqueror over all carnal Temptations. Nay after his holy Change,
Quam suave carere: suavitatibus istis?
the withholding his Heart from vicious Delights, was inexpressibly more sweet
than his former enjoying of them. And are there not many visible examples of
holy heavenly Christians, to whom grosser sensual Pleasures are unsavory and
contemptible? You may as well tell the number of the Stars, as of those who
have practiced Religion in its strictness and purity, and by their enlightened
Conversations directed us in the way to Heaven. And are their Bodies taken from
the Vein of a Rock, and not composed of Flesh and Blood as well as others? Are
their Passions, like Solomon's brazen Sea, unmovable by any Winds of
Temptations? Are they entirely exempted from the impression of Objects, and the
lower Affections? No, they are alive, and sensible of those things that ravish
the Affections of carnal Men, but by the power of Grace despise and overcome
them. And this Grace is offered in the Gospel to all that sincerely desire it,
so that it is a vain wretched pretense that Religion binds to hard Service.

To the other part of the Objection, that sometimes Religion exposes the
Professors of it to heavy Sufferings. I answer, Indeed the Gospel is plain and
peremptory in this, if we will reign with Christ, we must suffer with him, when
we are called forth to give a noble testimony to his Truth. It Is no
extraordinary Elevation, no point of Perfection, but the duty of every
Christian to be always ready in the disposition and resolution of his Mind, and
by actual Martyrdom to sacrifice his Life, when the honor of Christ requires
it. But it is no hard condition to suffer transient Afflictions for the
obtaining a Happy Immortality, to be conformable to the Image of our suffering
Redeemer, that we may be crowned with his Glory. How many Christians esteemed
themselves honored in the Disgrace, and blessed in the Injuries they suffered
for Christ, and with an invincible Patience, and astonishing Joy, endured the
most cruel Persecutions, though yet the human Nature in them was as tender and
sensible of Pains as in others: but the natural aversion and repugnance to
suffering was overruled by the determination of the rational Will, upon the
account of their Duty, and the Reward attending it. They gave a most convincing
sensible Testimony how much more valuable Heaven is than this present World,
willingly exposing themselves to all Evil here, and rejoicing in hope of a
glorious issue.

In short, the Reward of Obedience is a triumphal Crown; and where there is no
Victory there can be no Triumph; and where no Combat no Victory; and where no
Enemy, no Combat. Therefore we are commanded to fight against our internal
Enemies, our corrupt Affections, to kill the Lusts of the Flesh, and to
encounter and overcome by Humility and meek Submissions the cruelty of
malicious Enemies without us, in a direct order of obtaining the Crown of Life.
And a Believer that has Heaven in taste and expectation, will easily renounce
the most pleasant, and willingly endure the sharpest Temptations, for the
blessed Reward of his Obedience.

CHAP. XII.
The Gospel threatens Hell to all that prefer the Pleasures of Sin before
Heaven. How congruous and powerful a Motive this is to work on carnal Men. The
Misery of an everlasting Hell represented.
4. COnsider, if Men choose the Pleasures of Sin that are but for a season,
before Heaven, that infinitely exceeds this World, then an everlasting Hell
shall be their Portion. There is no middle State in the next World, no
tolerable mediocrity, but two contrary States, yet alike in this, that the
Happiness and Misery are equally Infinite and Eternal. And by the most wise
righteous Will of God, there is an inseparable connection between the Choice and
Actions of Men here, and their future Condition for ever. The equity of this
cannot be denied without renouncing the Light of Reason. For when by a Chain of
Consequences sinful Pleasures are linked with eternal Punishments threatened in
the Divine Law, he that will enjoy those forbidden Pleasures, binds himself to
suffer all the pains annexed to them. And it is just that those who err without
Excuse, should repent without Remedy. Now the threatening of eternal Punishment
is the most proper Argument to work on carnal secure Sinners.

1. Because they are more capable to conceive of the Torments of Hell, than the
Joys of Heaven. Storms and Darkness are more easily drawn by a Pencil, than a
calm bright Day. Fire and Brimstone are very painful to Sense, and the
imagination strongly represents its vehemence in tormenting the Body, and what
an evil the uncessant remorse of the guilty Conscience will be hereafter, is in
part understood by the secret accusations and twinges of self-condemning
Sinners here: but they are absolutely Strangers to the Joys of the Holy Ghost,
the Delights of the Soul in the Contemplation and Love of God, the peace and
contentment of Conseience in his Favor. They cannot without Experience know
how good the Lord is, no more than see a taste. To discourse to them of the
Spiritual Pleasures that flow from the divine Presence, of the Happiness of the
Saints that are before the Throne of God, and serve him Day and Night in his
Temple, is to speak with the Tongue of an Angel unintelligible things. Si
frigido loquar nescit quod loquor* Aug.
Their Affections and Minds and Language are confined to sensible things. The
natural Man receives not the things of the Spirits of God, for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. There may be in a carnal Person a conception of Heaven as a Refuge
from Miseries, and some smothering confused thoughts of its Felicity, as the
Idea of Light and Colors in one Blind from his Birth; but only the pure in
Heart can see God, as in the perfect Vision of Glory in Heaven, so in the
imperfect reflection of it in the Gospel.

2. Carnal Men are more disposed to be wrought upon by representing the
Torments of Hell, than the Joys of Heaven. For we cannot love but what is
known, nor enjoy but what is loved. And as the purification of the Heart from
vicious Affections, is the best means to clear the Mind, so the illustration of
the Mind is very influential to warn the Heart. The true conception of Heaven
in its amiable Excellencies, would convey such a sweetness as to change Hatred
it self into Love; and of this only prepared Souls are capable. But those who
are sunk into Sense are without relish of spiritual Felicity, and are either
allured or terrified only with that is pleasant or painful to Sense.

It Is recorded as the unparalled Folly of Nero, Identidem dictitans, qualis
artifex pereo. Suet.
that when he was ready to cut his own Throat to avoid the fury of the
Multitude, he broke forth into great expressions of Sorrow what an excellent
Artist he died. 'Twas not the loss of the Roman Empire that so much troubled
him, as that so much skill in Music died with him. He valued himself more as a
Fiddler than an Emperor. Thus carnal Men with a folly infinitely more
prodigious, when Death is near, are not so much affected with the loss of the
Crown of Glory, and the Kingdom of Heaven, as with their leaving the present
World and its Vanities. This makes Death intolerably bitter. Till the Love of
God inflames and purifies the Heart, the fruition of his Glory is not esteemed
nor desired. A Seraphim sent from the Presence of God with a flaming Coal from
the Altar, touched the Lips of the Holy Prophet, and his Heart was presently
melted into a compliance with the Divine Will. But if a Rebel Angel, that burns
with another Fire than of Divine Love, were dispatched from Hell, with a Coal
from that Altar, where so many Victims are offered to divine Justice as there
are damned Souls, and touched obdurate unreformed Sinners, that they might have
a lively sense what it is to burn for ever; this were the most congruous and
effectual way to reclaim them. Like stubborn Metals they are only made pliant
by the Fire.

Indeed the fear of Hell though raised to the highest degrees, is not
sufficient to convert a Sinner thoroughly to God. For that Religion that is the
mere effect of Fear, will be according to the nature of its Principle, with
resistance and trouble, wavering and inconstant when the violence of the fear
is lessened. Whereas that which is from the inclination of Love and the hope of
a desired Good, is fully voluntary and persevering. As a Scholar that applies
himself to Learning by the constraint of Fear, his Study is uneasy, and whilst
he is reading, his Fancy transports him to other things, and when his task is
finished, he presently runs to Play. But a Lover of Learning with Diligence and
Delight is intent in his Studies, and though engaged in other Affairs, yet his
Thoughts are still conversant about Learning. In short, the fear of Hell may be
only a natural Affection, that recoils from what is tormenting to the Body, and
is consistent with the Love of Sin; but the hope of Heaven as it is revealed in
the Scripture, is a spiritual Affection, and always joined with the hatred of
Sin.

Now the great design of the Gospel is by the fear of Hell, as a powerful
preparative, Nisi timore incipiat homo Deum colere, non perveniet ad amorem.
Aug.
to make way for the love of Heaven. If carnal indulgent Sinners are not roused
by a quick apprehension of Hell, they will securely enjoy their pernicious
Pleasures, and grow old in Sin, and at last die impenitent. No offers of Mercy
will prevail, till they are stormed by the Terrors of the Lord. But when the
fear of eternal Misery has made a breach, divine Grace victoriously enters and
takes Possession. The convinced and contrite Sinner most humbly and willingly
embraces the precious Promises, wherein not only Pardon and Indemnity is
offered, but the richest favor, the advancing him into a State of Eternal
Glory. Thus the sweetest Hopes succeed tormenting Fears, and the Obedience
which before had a mixture of involuntary flows from the entire consent of the
Soul, with filial Freedom.

Before the particular Description of the pains of the Damned, I shall observe
in General, That the full representation of Hell is beyond all human
Expression, nay our most fearful Thoughts cannot equal the Horror of it. Psalm.
90. 11.
Who knows the Power of thine Anger? What are the prepared Plagues by infinite
Justice and Almighty Wrath for obstinate Sinners? It is impossible for the most
guilty and trembling Conscience to enlarge its sad apprehensions according to
the degrees of that Misery. The Lord will show forth his Wrath, Romans 9. 22.
and make his Power known in the Vessels fitted for Destruction. None can tell
what God can do, and what Man shall suffer, when made capable to endure such
Torments for ever, as now would presently consume him. As the Glory of Heaven
cannot be fully understood till enjoyed, so the Torments of Hell cannot be
comprehended till felt. But we may have some discovery of those unknown
Terrors, by the following Considerations.

1. The Wisdom of God requires that the Punishment threatened in his Law, as it
must so be firmly decreed, that all obstinate Rebels shall of necessity undergo
it, so it must incomparably exceed all temporal Evils, to which Men may be
exposed for their Obedience to the divine Commands. Otherwise the threatening
would not be an effectual restraint from Sin. For the propinquity of an Evil
makes a strange impression on the Mind, and present Fear makes a Person
sollicitous to avoid the incursion of a danger ready to seize on him, without
forecasting to prevent an evil looked on at a distance. Therefore that the
sanction of the divine Law may preserve the Precepts inviolable, that there may
be a continual reverence of it, and a fixed resolution in the Heart of Men not
to transgress, the penaly threatened must be in its own nature so terrible, that
the fear of it may conquer the apprehension of all present Evils, that can be
inflicted to force us to Sin. As on the other side, to confirm our purpose to
please God in all things, the Reward of Obedience must be of infallible
assurance, that all and only those who serve him faithfully shall enjoy in the
future State, and so excellent, that all the allurements of the World, may in
comparison with it, be of no consideration to divert us from our Duty. They
command the Heart, and have its most prevailing Respects, from whom is expected
the most desirable Good, and feared the most terrible Evils. Therefore our
Savior warns his Disciples, Fear not them that can kill the Body, (make that
part die that is mortal) but fear him that after he has killed, has power to
cast into Hell, yea I say unto you, fear him. All the exquisite Tortures, that
the most cruel contriving and powerful malice of wicked Men can inflict, is so
much less than the Wrath to come, that avoid the one and venture on the other,
is more brutish Stupidity, than that of the Horse or Mule, that starts at the
shadow of a Bush, and springs over a Precipice.

2. The Judgments of God executed here, are light and tolerable in comparison
of the punishment of Sinners in the next Life. 1. Temporal Evils of all kinds
and degrees, as Pestilence, Famine, War, are designed for the bringing of Men
to a sight and sense of their Sins, and are common to Good and Bad here. And if
his anger be so terrible when he chastises as a compassionate Father, what is
his fury when he punishes as a severe Judge? If the correcting Remedies ordered
by his Wisdom and Love for the conversion of Sinners be so sharp, what is the
deadly revenge of his irreconcilable Hatred?

2. The Miseries of the present State are allayed with some enjoyments. None
are so universally afflicted, so desolate, but something remains to sweeten the
sense of their Sufferings. Judgments are tempered with Mercies. No Man is
tortured with all Diseases, nor forsaken of all Friends, nor utterly without
Comfort. And when the Affliction is irremediable, yet if our grief produces
Sympathy in others, it is some ease to the troubled Mind, and by that assistance
the Burden is made lighter. But in Hell the Damned are surrounded with
Terrors, encompast with Flames, without any thing to refresh their Sorrows, not
a drop of Water to a Lake of Fire. All that was esteemed Felicity here, is
totally withdrawn. Death puts a period to their Lives, and the Pleasures of Sin
for ever. For it is most just, that those Objects which were abused by their
Lusts, and alienated their Hearts from their Duty and Felicity, should be taken
away. And which is extreme Misery, in their most pitiful State they are
absolutely unpitied. Pity is the cheap and universal Lenitive, not denied to
the most guilty in their Sufferings here: for the Law of Nature instructs us to
pity the Man, when the Malefactor suffers. But even this is not afforded to the
Damned. All their Agonies and Cries cannot incline the Compassion of God, and
the blessed Spirits in Heaven toward them: for they are not compassionable
Objects, their Misery being the just effect of their perverse obstinate Choice.
And in Hell all human tender Affections are extinguished for ever. Now it is the
perfection of Misery, the excess of desolation to be deprived of all good
things pleasing to our Desires, and to suffer all Evils from which we have the
deepest aversation and abhorrence. As in Heaven all good is eminently
comprised, and nothing but Good, so in Hell all Evil is in excessive degrees,
and nothing but Evil.

3. Temporal Evils are inflicted by the mediation of second causes that are of
a limited power to hurt: but in the next World he more immediately torments the
Damned by his absolute Power. The Apostle tells us, that the wicked are
punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
and the Glory of his Power. What is the lashing with a few Rushes, to a blow
given by the hand of a Giant that strikes dead at once? This comparison is
below the Truth.

More particularly, Indeed it is difficult to conceive how a material Fire can
act on a spiritual Substance. But it is unreasonable to determine that it is
impossible. For if we consider what pain is, it is as conceiveable how pure
Spirits are capable of it, as Spirits in Conjunction with Bodies. The human
Soul in its Nature is Spiritual as the Angels, yet has a painful sense of Fire
or other afflicting Evils incumbent on the Senses. The Body merely feels not
pain, but it passes through the Body to the Soul. If the Soul by a strong
diversion of Thoughts apply it self to an Object, the Body is insensible of
pain, as is evident in some Diseases; and that in the heat of Battle, deep
Wounds are not felt. And as God by a natural Constitution has ordered, that the
Body so touched and moved, excites a painful Sense in the Soul, he may have
ordained that the Devils shall feel the impressions of Material Fire, in the
places to which they shall be confined.
the state of Misery is set forth in Scripture by such representations as may
powerfully instruct and terrify even the most carnal Men. Nothing is more
intolerably painful, then suffering the violence of Fire enraged with
Brimstone: and Hell is described by a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, wherein the
Wicked are tormented. Whether the Fire be Material or Metaphorical, the reality
and intenseness of the Torment is signified by it. But the ordinary Fire,
though mingled with the most torturing Ingredients, is not an adequate
representation of it. For that is prepared by Men, but the Fire of Hell is
prepared by the Wrath of God for the Devil and his Angels. The Divine Power is
illustriously manifested in that terrible preparation: So that, as some of the
Fathers express it, if one of the Damned might pass from those Flames into the
fiercest Fires here, it were to exchange a Torment for a Refreshment. The
Scripture speaks of the vehement heat and fiery Thirst, and outer Darkness in
which the Damned suffer, to satisfy the rights of Justice in the torment of
those Senses, for the Pleasure of which Men wilfully broke the Laws of God.

But the Soul being the chief Sinner, shall be the chief Mourner in those
Regions of Sorrow. An Image of this we have in the Agonies of Spirit, which
sometimes the Saints themselves are in here, and which the most stubborn
Sinners can neither resist nor endure. Job was afflicted in that manner that he
complains, The Arrows of the Almighty are with me, Job. 6. 4.
the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirit, the Terrors of God set themselves in
Array against me. If a Spark of his Displeasure falls on the guilty Conscience,
it tears and blows up all, as a Fire-ball cast into a Magazine. All the
Diversions in the World, Business, Pleasures, Merry Conversation, Comedies are
as ineffectual to give freedom from those Stings and Furies in the Breast, as
the sprinkling of Holy Water is to expel a raging Divil from a possessed Person.
Those who in their Pride and Jollity, have despised serious Religion, either as
a fond Transport and Ecstasy toward God, or a dull Melancholy and Dejection
about the Soul, or an idle Scrupulosity about indifferent things, yet when God
has set their Sins with all their killing circumstances in order before their
Eyes, how changed, how confounded are they at that Apparition? How restless
with the dreadful expectation of the doom that attends them! Belshazzer in the
midst of his Cups, and Herd of Concubines, by a few Words written on the Wall,
containing his Process and Judgment, was so terrified by his guilty jealous
Conscience, that his Joints were loosed, Nature sunk under the apprehension.
Now all these troubles of Mind, are but the beginnings of Sorrows, but the
Smoke of the infernal Furnace, but earnests of that terrible Sum which divine
Justice will severely exact of the Wicked in Hell.

Indeed these Examples are rare, and not regarded by the most, and by some
looked on as the effects of Distraction; but to convince the bold and careless
Sinners who never felt the stings of an awakned Conscience, what extreme
terrors seize upon the Wicked in the other World, Consider,

1. The Apprehension shall be more clear and enlarged than in the present
State. Now the Soul is oppressed with a weight of Clay, and in Drowsiness and
Obscurity. The great things of Eternity are of little force to convince the
Conscience, or persuade the Affections. But then the Soul shall work with the
quickest activity. The Mind shall by an irresistible Light take a full view of
all afflicting Objects. The most stupid and unconcerned Sinners shall then see
and feel their ruined State, what a glorious Felicity they have lost, what a
Misery they are plunged into, without any possibility of lessening it by false
Conceits, and receiving any relief by the error of Imagination.

2. The mournful Thoughts shall be always fixed upon what is tormenting. The
Soul in conjunction with the Body cannot always apply it self to one sort of
Objects. For the Ministry of the sensible Faculties is requisite to its
Operations. And the Body must be supported by Eating and Drinking and Rest,
which interrupts troublesome Thoughts. Besides the variety of Objects and
Accidents here avert the Mind sometimes from what is afflicting. But the
separate Soul is in no dependence on the Body, and after their reunion, there
shall be no necessity of Food or Sleep, or any other animal actions to support
it, but it shall be restored to a new capacity for new torments, and preserved
in that miserable State by the power of God. There will be nothing then to
divert the lost Soul from sad Reflections upon its Misery. There are no lucid
intervals in Hell.

3. All the passionate Powers will then be let loose at once upon the guilty
Creature. And if there be no single Passion so weak, but heightened, will break
the Spirit, and render Life so miserable, that a Man will take Sanctuary in the
Grave to escape, how miserable is the Condition when the most fierce and united
Passions war against the Soul? This is signified by the never dying Worm that
gnaws on the tenderest parts, and of quickest sense. Shame, Sorrow, Despair,
Fury, Hatred and Revenge are some of that Blood of Vipers that torment the
Damned.

1. Shame is a Passion of which human Nature is very sensible, and this in the
highest degree of Confusion shall Dan. 12. 2.
seize on the Wicked. For all the just causes of Shame shall then meet. The
inward source of it is the consciousness of Guilt, or Turpitude and Folly in
the Actions; and all these are the inseparable Adjuncts of Sin. The guilty Soul
by a piercing reflection upon its Crimes, Tacita sudant praecordia culpa. Juv.
has a secret shame of its Degeneracy and Unworthiness. The Passion is
increast, when a discovery is made of vile practices that defile and debase a
Man, expose to Contempt and Infamy, before Persons of high Quality and eminent
Virtue, whom we admire and reverence, and whose esteem we value. To be
surprised in an unworthy Action by such a Person, disorders the Blood, and
transfuses a Color into the Face, to cover it with a Vail of Blushing. And the
more numerous the Spectators are, the more the Disgrace is aggravated. And if
Derision be joined with the Ignominy, it causes extreme Displeasure. O the
universal Confusion, the overpowring amazement that will seize on Sinners in
the great day of Discovery, when all the Works of Darkness, all their base
Sensualities shall be revealed before God Angels and Saints? When all the
covers of Shame shall be taken off, the excuses and denials, to extenuate or
conceal their Sins shall vanish, and their Breasts be transparent to the Eyes
of all: How will they be ashamed of their foul and permanent Deformity in the
Light of that glorious Presence? How will they be astonished to appear in all
their Pollutions before that bright and immense Theater? How will they be
confounded to stand in all their Guilt before that sublime and severe Tribunal?
How will they endure the upbraidings for all the Sins which they have so
wickedly committed, and the derision for the punishment they so deservedly
suffer? The holy Judge will laugh at their Calamity, and mock when their fear
comes. The Righteous also shall see, and shall laugh at them, Lo these are the
Men that made not God their Portion, but perishing Vanities, that preferred
sweet Folly before severe Wisdom. The Devils will reproach them for that
scornful advantage they had over them, that as Children are seduced for things
of Luster to part with real Treasures, so they were easily persuaded for the
Trifles of Time to exchange Eternal Happiness. Whither will they cause their
Shame to go? Those black Sinners that here never change color for their
Filthiness, Jer. 14. 12.
that hardened by custom in Sin, are impenetrable to Shame, as the brute Beasts
that are absolutely destitute of reason, nay that have not only overcome all
tenderness, but glory in their Shame, shall glow at the manifestation of their
sordid Lusts, their vile Servilities, and be covered with Confusion, and the
sense of it shall be revived in their Minds for ever.

2. To open Shame is joined the greatest inward Sorrow. This Passion when
violent penetrates the Soul in all its Faculties, and fastens it to the
afflicting Object. When it dwells in the Bosom, it gives an easy entrance to
what ever cherishes and increases it, and rejects what might assuage and lessen
the sense of the Evil. The most pleasant things do not excite desire or joy,
but exasperate Grief. Like those Animals that convert the best nourishment into
their own Poison; so deep Sorrow receives mournful impressions from all things,
and turns the sweetest Comforts of Life into Wormwood and Gall. The causes of
Sorrow are either the loss of some valued Good, or the sense of some present
Evil. And the Sorrow is more violent, as the Cause is great in it self, and in
the apprehension and tenderness of the Sufferers. Now both these Causes with
all the heavy Circumstances that can multiply and aggravate Sorrow, meet in
Hell the Center of Misery.

The loss is inconceivably great. If Cain when banished from the Society of the
Saints, where God was publicly worshipped, and by spiritual Revelations and
visible Apparitions, graciously made himself known, cried out in anguish of
Soul, My punishment is greater than I can bear, from thy Face shall I be hid,
and I shall be a Fugitive upon the Earth, how intolerable will be the final
separation from his glorious and joyful Presence? It Is often seen how tenderly
and impatiently the human Spirit resents the loss of a dear Relation. Jacob for
the supposed Death of Joseph, was so overcome with Grief, that when all his
Sons and Daughters rose up to comfort him, he refused to be comforted, and
said, I will go down to the Grave unto my Son mourning. This is a Sin and a
punishment. Jussisti Domine and sic est, ut poena sit sibi omnis inordinatus
affectus. Aug.
It Is established by the righteous and unchangeable Decree of God, that every
inordinate Affection in Man should be his own Tormentor. But if the loss of a
poor frail Creature for a short time be so afflicting, how insupportable will
be the Sorrow, for the loss of an infinite Eternal Good? It may be a carnal
Wretch may think comfortably of this now, whilst he lives in Pleasures, but in
the next World he shall be totally deprived of all things that please his
voluptuous Senses, and shall understand what a misery it is to lose the favor
and enjoyment of the blessed God. Our Savior told the Jews, There shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth (the Symptoms of extreme Sorrow) when ye shall
see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God,
and you your selves thrust out. The sight of that blessed Company entering into
the sacred Mansions of Light, will make the loss of Heaven infinitely more
discernable and terrible to the Wicked, who shall be cast into outer Darkness,
and for ever be deprived of Communion with God and his Saints.

With the loss of the most excellent Good, the suffering of the most afflicting
painful Evil is joined. The Sentence is, Depart ye cursed into everlasting
Fire. And if an imaginary Sorrow conceived in the Mind without a real external
Cause, as in Melancholy Persons, when gross Vapors darken and corrupt the
brightness and purity of the Spirits that are requisite for its cheerful
Operations, is often so oppressing that Nature sinks under it, how
insupportable will the Sorrow of condemned Sinners be, under the impression and
sense of God's Almighty and avenging Hand, when it shall fully appear how pure
and holy he is in his Anger for Sin, how just and dreadful in punishing
Sinners? It may be the indulgent Sinner may lessen his fear of Hell, by
fancying the number of Sufferers will assuage the sense of their Misery. But
this is a foolish mistake. For the number of Sufferers shall be so far from
affording any relief, that the Misery is aggravated by the Company and
Communication of the Miserable. Every one is surrounded with Sorrows, and by
the sights of Woe about him, feels the universal Grief. The weeping and
wailing, the cries and dolorous expressions of all the Damned, increases the
torment and vexation of every one. As when the Wind conspires with the Flame
it is more fierce and spreading.

3. The Concomitant of Sorrow will be Fury and Rage against themselves, as the
true causes of their Misery. For God will make such a discovery of his
righteous Judgment, that not only the Saints shall glorify his Justice in the
condemnation of the Wicked, but they shall be so convinced of it, as not to be
able to charge their Judge with any defect of Mercy, or excess of Rigor in his
proceedings against them. As the Man in the Parable of the Marriage Feast, when
taxt for his presumptuous intrusion without a Wedding Garment, how came thou
in hither? was speechless: so they will find no plea for their Justification
and Defense, but must receive the eternal Doom with Silence and Confusion. Then
Conscience shall revive the bitter remembrance of all the methods of divine
Mercy for their Salvation, that were ineffectual by their Contempt and
Obstinacy. All the compassionate calls of his Word, with the holy Motions of
the Spirit, were like the sowing of Seed in the Stony Ground, that took no
root, and never came to perfection. All his terrible Threatenings were but as
Thunder to the Deaf, or Lightning to the Blind, that little affects them: the
bounty of his Providence designed to lead them to Repentance, had the same
effect, as the Showers of Heaven upon Briers and Thorns that makes them grow
the faster. And that a Mercy so ready to pardon, did not produce in them a
correspondent affection of grateful obedient Love, but by the most unworthy
provocations they plucked down the Vengeance due to obstinate Rebels, will so
enrage the Damned against themselves, that they will be less miserable by the
Misery they suffer, than by the conviction of their torn Minds, that they were
the sole Causes of it. What Repentings will be kindled within them, for the
stupid neglect of the great Salvation so dearly purchased, and earnestly
offered to them? What a fiery addition to their Torment, that when God was so
willing to save them, they were so willful to be Damned. They will never
forgive themselves, that for the short and mean Pleasures of Sense, which if
enjoyed a thousand years, cannot recompense the loss of Heaven, nor requite the
pains of Hell for an Hour, they must be deprived of the one and suffer the
other for ever.

4. The Sorrow and Rage will be increased by Despair: for when the wretched
Sinner sees the Evil is peremptory, and no Outlet of Hope, he abandons himself
to the violence of Sorrow, and by cruel Thoughts wounds the Heart more, than
the fiercest Furies in Hell can. This Misery that flows from despair shall be
more fully opened under the distinct consideration of the Eternity of Hell.

And as from Despair the condemned Creature turns Enemy to himself, so to God.
It Is said of the Worshippers of the Image of the Beast, Rev. 16. 10, 11.
that they gnawed their Tongues for Pain, and blasphemed the God of Heaven
because of their Pains. The Torment and Blasphemies of those impenitent
Idolaters, are a representation of the state of the Damned, where the just and
dreadful Wrath of God upon Men, and the impious Rage of Men against God is in
the highest degrees. For when the guilty Sufferers are so weak, that they
neither by Patience can sustain their Torments, nor by Strength resist the
Power that inflicts them; yet are wicked and stubborn; they are irritated by
their Misery, and foam out Blasphemies against the righteous Judge. They hate
God with a direct Enmity, and are always under his invincible tormenting Power.
Hatred takes pleasure in Revenge, either real or imaginary. The Damned Wretches
were they as Omnipotent to Effect, as they are malicious to Desire, would
dethrone God, and destroy his Being. But he is infinitely above the transports
of their Fury. All their rancorous cursed imprecations, are reflexively
pernicious to themselves; like Arrows shot up against the Sun, that fall down
upon their Heads that shot them. Now what more inrages a stubborn malicious
Spirit, than to be utterly unable to reach and hurt an irreconcilable Enemy,
the object of its habitual detestation? Briefly, as the blessed Spirits are in
Heaven, and Heaven is in them, by those holy and joyful Affections that are
always exercised in the Divine Presence, so the Damned are in Hell, and Hell is
in them by those fierce and miserable Passions that continually prey upon them.

4. The Eternity of their Misery makes it above all other Considerations
intolerable. Our Savior repeats it thrice in the space of a few Verses, to
terrify those who spare some favorite Corruption, that in Hell their Worm dies
not, and the Fire is never quenched. God will never reverse his Sentence, and
they shall never change their State. How willingly would carnal Men raze the
Word Eternal out of the Scriptures, but to their grief they find it joined with
the Felicity of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell. The second Death has all the
terrible qualities of the first, but not the ease and end it brings to Misery.
All the Tears of those forlorn Wretches, shall never quench one spark of the
Fire. Where are the delicious Fair, the Music, the Purple, and all the carnal
Delights of the rich Man? they are all changed into a contrary state of Misery,
and that state is fixed for ever. From his vanishing Paradise he descended into
an everlasting Hell. In this the Vengeance of God is infinitely more heavy than
the most terrible execution from Men. Human Justice and Power can inflict but
one Death (that will be soon dispatched) upon a Malefactor worthy to suffer a
hundred Deaths; if he be condemned to the Fire, they cannot make him live and
die together, to burn and not be consumed: But God will so far support the
Damned in their Torments, that they shall always have Strength to feel, though
no Strength to endure them. Those extreme Torments which would extinguish the
present Life in a Moment, shall be suffered for ever. This Consideration
infinitely aggravates the Misery. For the lost Soul rackt with the fearful
Contemplation of what it must suffer for ever, feels as it were at once all the
Evils that shall torment it in its whole duration. The perpetuity of the Misery
is always felt by prevision. This is as the cruel breaking of the Bones upon
the Wheel, when the Soul is tormented by the foresight of Misery that without
allays shall continue in the circulation of Eternal Ages. To make this more
sensible, let us consider, that pain makes the Mind observant of the passing of
the hours. In Pleasures, Time with a quick and silent motion insensibly slides
away: but in Troubles the Hours are tedious, in violent pains we reckon the
minutes as long. It Is observable how passionately the afflicted Psalmist
complains, Psalm. 77. 7.
Will the Lord cast off for ever? Will he be favorable no more? Does his
Promise fail for evermore? Has he forgotten to be gracious? Has he in anger
shut up his tender Mercies? In what various pathetic forms does he express the
same Affection? Though he had assurance that the gracious God would not be
always severe, yet his anguish forced from him complaints as if the moment of
his Trouble were an Eternity. But what strains of Sorrow are among the Damned,
who besides the present sense of their Misery, have always in their Thoughts
the vast Eternity wherein they must suffer it?

When three terrible Evils were propounded to David's choice, pining Famine for
three years, or bloody War for three Months, or devouring Pestilence for three
days, he chose the shortest, though in it self the heaviest Evil.

Many sad Days must pass under the other Judgments, where Death by anticipation
in such variety of Shapes would be presented to the Mind, that the lingering
expectation of it would afflict more than the sudden stroke: whereas the fury
of the Pestilence would be soon over. But the Damned have not this relief, but
shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. How earnestly do they seek
for Death, but cannot find it? what a favor would they esteem it to be
annihilated? For certainly, if when the Evils in the present State are so
multiplied, that no Comfort is left, or so violent that the afflicted Person
cannot enjoy them, and refresh his sorrowful Spirit, Death is chosen rather
than Life, it cannot be imagined that in the future State where the Misery is
extreme, and nothing remains to allay it, that the Damned should be in love
with the unhappy good of simple being, and not choose an absolute extinction if
it might be.

If any one should be so foolish to think that custom will render that State
more tolerable, he may find a terrible confutation of his vain Fancy. Indeed
continuance under light Evils, may arm the Mind with patience to bear them, but
in great extremities it makes the Evil more ponderous and intolerable. He that
is tortured with the Stone, or on the Rack, the longer the Torture continues,
the less able he is to sustain it. In short, as the Joy of Heaven is infinitely
more ravishing, that the Blessed are without fear of losing it; so the Misery
of Hell is proportionably tormenting, that the Damned are absolutely destitute
of hopes of a release. O it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, who lives for ever, and can punish for ever. Now the serious
Consideration of this Misery, is the most proper and powerful means to awaken
indulgent Sinners, and make them resolved to cut off the right hand, and pluck
out the right Eye, to part with the dearest Lusts rather than be exposed to it.
According to the judgment of Sense, would any one in his Wits choose the
enjoyment of the most intense and exquisite Pleasures for a Year, and
afterward be content to burn in a Furnace for a Day, much less to enjoy them
for a Day, and to burn for a Year? what stupid Beasts are they who for
momentary Delights incur the Fiery and Eternal Indignation of God? Do we
provoke the Lord to Jealousy? are we stronger than he? Try but the Finger with
the Flame of a Candle, or touch but a hot Coal; you will soon discover your
weakness. But alas, how hardly are Men induc't to exercise their Minds on this
terrible Object. He thinks least of Hell, who has most reason to consider it:
so unwilling is the carnal Heart to have represented to it the evil to come.
Yet this is the first Motive that compels Sinners to change their course, and
turn from Sin to Holiness, from the Creatures to God. The Joys of Heaven being
Spiritual and Divine (as was before observed) have no attractive influence upon
their Affections, would never convert and reform any, but the torment of Fire
being most evident and vehement to Sense, is strongly represented by the
Imagination, and affects carnal Men. How many abound with vicious obstinate
habits, that by solemn and believing thoughts of the unquenchable Fire, have
felt the Miracle upon the three Children in the Furnace, renewed in themselves,
their strong Cords burnt asunder, and all their Powers restored to the freedom
of Duty, the blessed liberty of Obedience. The Truth is, if God had not formed
Hell for the Punishment of Sin, and only prepared the Celestial Kingdom for the
Reward of Holiness, the blessed Angels would be the sole Possessors of it, and
Heaven would be as empty of human Souls as it is full of Glory: so foolishly and
violently is the corrupt nature of Man drawn by what is pleasing to Sense,
though with the certain loss of the most precious and eternal good things in
the Divine Treasury. But the belief that within a little time nothing will
remain of their sinful Pleasures, but the never dying Worm, and ever living
Flames, makes them considerative of their imminent danger, and as it were by
necessity to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, as a secondary Object to escape from
Hell. As the virtue of the Lodestone when encompast and armed with Iron, is
increast, and draws a far greater weight than when it is single, thus the
attractives of Heaven are more powerful to move our obdurate Hearts, when
enforced from the terrors of Hell. In this respect, the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom, of the active and best Wisdom, that directs us in the way
to Blessedness.

CHAP. XIII.
The last Direction. Earnest Prayer to God, to inlighten our Minds to believe
the Eternal World, and effectually turn our Wills, to desire and prosecute the
Blessedness to come.
HAving a discovery so clear and certain in the Holy Scriptures of the
everlasting recompenses in the next World, of the Kingdom of Heaven, (prepared
by God to show his excellent Glory to his faithful Servants) where Love and
Peace and Joy dwell for ever, and of the infernal Prison, where despair and
Rage and Sorrow, and whatever is signified under the terrible allusions of Fire
and Brimstone, are ordained by Divine Justice for the Wicked, it might be
justly hoped, that all Men would by a holy violence take Heaven, and by the
swiftest Motion flee from the Wrath to come. The instinct of Nature and the
light of Reason excite them to secure their most precious Interest. Can there
be an Expectation, Desire or Capacity in Man of enjoying a Blessedness beyond
what is Infinite and Eternal? And can there be any Evil so formidable as
Everlasting Misery? Now both these Objects are set before Men, and propounded
to their Choice. And we are infallibly assured from God himself, that all who
are sincere and constant in their Choice and Pursuit, shall obtain Heaven, and
that none shall be cast into Hell, but those who choose it, and therefore most
worthily suffer it. But, O astonishment! if with a serious Eye we regard the
course of Men's Actions, it is visible that incomparably the greatest number of
Christians in Profession love Death, and hate Eternal Life. Not that it is
possible for the reasonable Creature to do this directly, with an explicit aim,
but virtually and by interpretation. They intend Happiness, but choose Misery.
For he that voluntarily breaks the Law of God, chooses the known Penalty of its
Violation. He that prefers this perishing World before Heaven, rejects it in
the most contumelious manner. And such is the depravation of Man since his
Fall, the Mind being diverted by vain Thoughts, and the Heart prepossessed with
sensual Desires, that till the Spirit of his Mind be renewed, and his original
Affections to the Supreme Good be revived and restored by Divine Grace, he is
regardless of it, and only applies himself to what is pleasing to Sense.
Therefore a most necessary Duty incumbent upon us, is by humble and fervent
Prayer to address our selves to God for his Spirit, to enlighten our Minds,
that we may believe the reality and greatness of the Eternal Reward, and to
reform our Wills that we may feel its attractive Force. Both these acts of the
Spirit are requisite, that the Love of God, as our chief Felicity, may be the
regent Principle of our Hearts and Lives.

1. For this end the Holy Spirit convinces Men thoroughly of the reality and
greatness of an invisible Happiness. Indeed the Heathens saw something of this
as it were in a Dream, they had some transient Glances, and volatile Wishes,
concerning it, but miserably weak and ineffectual. And in the most of
Christians the convictions of a future State are not so clear and strong as to
govern their Hearts and Lives. How many of eminent intellectual Faculties are
stupid as to their great Interest, and spend themselves about Trifles, and are
equally tractable to Eternal Ruin, as the Ox to the Slaughter? He that is
destitute of the illuminating Grace of the Spirit, is blind and cannot see afar
off. Now by the Analogy between the corporal and the intellectual Faculties, we
may understand in some measure how the Mind is illuminated by the Spirit of
God. For as to the act of Seeing, two things are requisite, 1. External Light
in the Air, without which the Colors, Figures and Beauties of Objects are not
visible to the sharpest Eye, but lie obscured under impenitrable Darkness. 2.
Internal Light in the Eye in which the visive Power consists: if this be
extinguished the clearest Light of Heaven is of no use for the discovery of
Things. Thus the Understanding is enabled to see Spiritual Things. 1. By the
revelation of the Object: in this respect Life and Immortality are brought to
Light by the Gospel. Till that bright discovery was made of Eternal
Blessedness, it was above the desires and hopes of sinful Man. Coelum, homo nec
optare poterat ex ignorantia, nec sperare ex propriae miseriae conscientia. 2.
By the inward inlightning from the Spirit of Wisdom, that removes the
Ignorance, Prejudice and Inadvertency of the Mind, which as Scales darkened its
Sight, and disposes it to perceive the verity and excellency of spiritual and
future Things, though not with comprehensive evidence, yet with that assurance,
that no doubtfulness or suspense remains concerning them. It Is observable that
Faith is expressed in Scripture, by Prudence, Wisdom, and Knowledge, whereby a Man
knows the grounds and motives of his Judgment and Actions. And Sin is called
Folly. For as when the understanding Faculty, either from the indisposedness of
the Organs, as in Idiots, or from the disorder of Fancy by the inflammation of
the Humors, as in distracted Persons, cannot weigh and compare, and therefore
makes a perverse judgment of things; so the carnal Mind by not due measuring
and pondering, judges falsely of Spiritual Things. If something no bigger than
the Hand were put before the Eye, it would intercept the Sight of the Heavens;
and he that not considering the properties of things near and distant, should
conclude that piece to be bigger than the Heavens, were justly reputed a Fool.
And the Folly of carnal Men is more gross, who prefer things present to Sense,
before what is future and of everlasting consequence to the Soul. But there are
some actions which if done by a Natural, would be counted Folly, yet being done
by those who in the reputation of the World are Wise, are esteemed Prudent, but
they are the most deplorable Folly. Now as the restoring the Laesum principium,
the broken Mind to its sound State, whereby it is able to consider, discern and
conclude of things according to their Nature, such is the action of God's
Spirit upon the corrupt Mind, clarifying and enlightening it, so that it
receives full conviction by the clearest marks of divine Authority shining in
the Gospel of the Truth of all the great and precious Promises therein
contained, and causing it by a steady application of the Thoughts to see the
vast difference between what is Temporal, and Eternal, how despicably light all
the Vanities of this World are found, when put in the Balance against the
infinite inestimable Happiness of the next. In short, the renewed Mind knows
Spiritual Things according to their Nature and Qualities, believes, esteems,
and determins that they are of Eternal moment, and absolutely necessary for the
Happiness of Man. And as when the natural Faculty of seeing is perished, it is
irreparable by human Skill, and without a Miracle can never be restored, so the
intellectual Faculty when darkened by sinful Lusts, without the renewing power
of the Spirit can never know Spiritual Things as they ought to be known.
Therefore as the blind Men in the Gospel who dispair'd of help from the
Physicians, hearing of the miraculous Power of Christ, importunately begged his
healing Mercy, so let us pray to the Light and Savior of the World, but in a
more noble and higher Sense, Lord that we may receive our sight. Let us with
the most zealous Affections call upon the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Glory, that he would give unto us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation
in the knowledge of him, the Eyes of our understanding being enlightened, that we
may know what is the hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of
his Inheritance in the Saints.

2. The efficacious Influence of the Holy Spirit is requisite to change the
Will, that with a free and full consent it may desire and prosecute the
Spiritual Eternal Good. Without this, the conviction of the Mind is not
powerful enough to convert the Soul from the love of the World, to choose
Heaven. There may be an enlightened Conscience, without a renewed Heart. Though
the Judgment assents that God is the Supreme Good, yet till the Heart be
circumcised, the sensuality of the Affections taken away, divine Love that
directs the Life to God as our blessed End, can never possess it. Suppose that
Men had a sensible and strong assurance of the Eternal State hereafter, if all
those who lived godly in a visible manner ascended with Elias to Heaven, and if
all who continued in their Sins visibly descended into Hell, as Corah and his
Company were swallowed up alive by the Earth, before the Israelites, if Men
could hear the joyful Exultations of the Saints above, their high Praises of
God, and hear the desperate Cries and deep Complaints of the Damned: if one
according to the desire of the rich Man were sent from Hell, and with his Fiery
Tongue should preach a Sermon of those Torments, not describing them at a
distance, but by a sensible demonstration in himself, yet this alone were not
sufficient to draw off their Hearts from the deceitful Happiness of this World,
and fasten them on the perfect and Eternal Happiness in the next. Indeed they
could not then indulge their Lusts so securely, but they would be Strangers to
the Life of God, such an inveterate alienation of Heart is in Men from real
Holiness. Till the sanctifying Spirit by a directive persuasive Light that
represents the Truth and Goodness of Spiritual Things, transforms the Soul, and
makes it Spiritual in its Valuations and Affections* it is inwardly averse from
Grace and Glory. The Lord direct our Hearts into the Love of God, and into the
patient waiting for Christ, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe.

FINIS.

