Cain and Abel MALIGNITY, That is Enmity to Serious Godliness, That is, To an
Holy and Heavenly State of Heart and Life: Lamented, Described, Detected, and
unananswerably proved, to be the Devilish Nature, and the Militia of the Devil
against God, and Christ, and the Church and Kingdoms, and the surest sign of a
state of damnation.

By Richard Baxter, or Gildas Salvianus, Who earnestly beseeches all Enemies,
Scorners, Opposers and Persecutors of serious Obedience to God, not to refuse
so small a matter as the Reading this short undeniable Evidence, to save their
Souls, while yet there is hope, from so damnable a state of Sin and Diabolism.
Especially Magistrates and Clergymen, who are Sacrilegious and Blasphemous, if
in the name of Christ's Ministers, they turn those Sacred Offices against him.

LONDON, Printed for Tho Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower
end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1689.

READER,
THIS reprehensive Lamentation of English Malignity, or hatred, and scorn, and
persecution of serious Godliness, by them who profess to believe in God, and to
be Christians, was written in prison (but without any provoking sense of my
suffering) in Anno 1685. or 1686. And by one that was not wholly ignorant, how
much of the Papists counsel and power, was causal in our change since the
return of K. Chapter 2. 1660. And therefore it grateth so much upon the Papists,
though they were professed Protestants who were the open Agents.

It was written by one who can remember, at least since 1627. that the serious
practice of Godliness was the common scorn of the vulgar rabble; and he that
did but read the Scripture, and Books of Piety, and pray in his family, and
catechize Children or Servants, or hear a Sermon at the next Parish Church from
a Godly Conformist, when he had none at home; yea that did but seriously talk
of Christ or Scripture, or the Life to come, or preparation for Death and
Judgment, went under the name of a Puritan, which was a reproach in the mouth
of drunkards, swearers, fornicators, and all the sensual, worldly sort, both
high and low. And that Conformable Ministers (yea and Gentlemen) that were but
seriously Religious, no more escaped this scorn than Nonconformists (who were
then so few, that they were in most places unknown.) He sadly remembers how
greatly this malignant rabble triumphed in the Bishops Visitation Articles, and
in the Preaching and Talk of many Priests, who sharpened their Sermons with
Invectives against Puritans as dangerous Hypocrites, though they had not a
Nonconformist within many miles. He heard the Godly Conformable Ministers
lament, that the Bishops and Ecclesiastical Courts by their jealousy and heat
against the Nonconformable Puritans, became the strength and encouragement of
this malignant vicious rabble; and that the young worldly Ministers took it for
the way to preferment, to Preach against Puritans, while they treated the
multitude of Profane prayerless families that had no savor of serious
Religion, as their good and peaceable Flocks. He lived to see the Godly Learned
Conformists, so grieved for this, that they longed for a Reformation; and many
Conformists (as Bishop Robert Abbot, Bishop Downame, and diverse others
published their Reproof and Lamentation for it: And good Robert Bolton (in his
Directions for walking with God) thinks that since Malice entered into the heart
of man, there was never a word tossed with more Malice in the mouths of
drunkards and profane men, than the word [Puritan.] Hundreds and thousands of
these wicked scorners of Religion, were either admitted (or driven) to the
Sacrament, or lived quietly in great Parishes while they despised it, while
these poor Puritans were strictly hunted after! And if they fasted and prayed
with a dying or sick friend, without getting a License for it from the Bishop,
the Churchwarden must enter them into their Inquisition, or be forsworn.

These Puritans having the greatest averseness to Popery, in some things were
too suspicious of all that they thought smelled of it: And when they heard that
in Ireland the Papists had most barbarously murdered the Protestants (two
hundred thousand) and that they boasted that they rose by the King's
Commission, and threatened to invade England, and that the English Papists were
against the Parliament; this made them think that the Protestant Religion was
not safe, but in the Parliaments part and care: Upon which the next year when
our odious Civil War began, many of them went into the Parliaments Armies: But
the generality would fain have lived quietly at home, but the debauched rabble
and their Patrons would not suffer them: But they turned the name Puritan into
[Roundhead] and [Down with the Roundheads,] was the common Cry. I have my self
by the Cry been in present danger, in passing through a City where no man knew
me, because I wore not long Hair. If their Neighbors did but pray, and sing a
Psalm in their houses, the rabble would (like the Sodomites at the door of Lot)
set up a Cry against them in the streets, and say, [Down with the Roundheads]
the Rebels, a Gowry, a Conspiracy, etc.] Even where I lived they assembled with
weapons, and sought my life, and knocked down (mortally by the issue) even
strangers in the streets that meddled not with them, because they were accounted
friends to the Puritans. By this means the Parliaments Garrisons and Armies
were filled with Religious men, that were forced to fly from their houses by
the malignant, ignorant drunkards, to save their lives: And this, even this was
the ruin of K. Charles, and his Army, and of the persecuting Bishops and
Clergy. Necessity made thousands to be Soldiers that could not live at home:
And most were moved by an Argument, that was not cogent, still saying, [We
cannot believe that God would suffer the generality of the most Religious to
choose the wrong side, and the generality of the Papists and ignorant drunkards
and malignants to be in the right.]

O what shame and pity is it that the Antipuritan Clergy no better remembered
from 1660. till now, by what means they fell; and that they no more understood,
nor yet understand, what a torrent of sin, of danger, and of shame, is come
upon them, by their strengthening themselves by sheltring (to say no worse) the
sensual irreligious malignant rabble (Rich and Poor) that they may tread down
the Puritans, that by their own doings are brought into a dislike of them. Will
God ever bless a profane rabble (or Gentry) to be the honor and strength of
the Church, against the Religious that desire a Reformation?

It is not their new foolish names and scorns, (as Whigs, Trimmers,
Presbyterians, etc.) that will prove that it is not serious Piety that they
hate: As long as the most filthy wicked livers are the Enemies and Accusers,
and in their own Party and Companions, the vilest debauchery passes for
sufferable, and a small disgrace, and thousands of such live at ease, when
preaching the Gospel, and praying without their Fetters or Book, must cost men
ruin, and imprisonment, and scorn. And Sulpitius Severus his sharp Invective
against Ithacius, Idacius, and the rest of the Bishops in their Synod was, that
in prosecuting the Priscillian Gnostics, they brought the matter to that pass,
that if Godly men did but fast, and pray, and read Scripture, the Bishops made
them suspected as Priscillianists (even St. Martin himself.) Woe to them that
turn the sacred Offices of Magistracy and Ministry against God that did ordain
them, to be used as in his name, and in some representation of himself,
sacrilegiously blaspheming him as an Enemy to himself. Shall the Throne of
Iniquity have fellowship with God, that frames mischief by a Law, to make sin
common and allowed?

By this the Reader may see that there is a double History needful to the full
understanding of this Book; and of the nature and causes of Malignity; that is,
1. The History of Adam's fall, and the great depravation of humane nature
thence arising; and the true meaning of the Enmity thence put between the
Woman's and the Serpents seed, exemplified in the two first Brothers born into
the world; as also in Ishmael and Isaac, Esau and Jacob; and frequently
mentioned by Christ and his Apostles.

2. The History of the advantages that Malignity has got in England since the
Reformation; and especially since the return of Charles the second. This must
contain the sad differences begun at Frankford in Q. Marys days; the errors
and extremes of both the differing Parties; the by assing determinations of Q.
Elizabeth; the difference between the first Bishops that had been exiles, and
their Successors; the Presbyterians provocations by over-opposing Episcopacy,
and the Bishops design to root them out; and the making of the Canons to that
end: The rise of a new sort of Bishops, begun in Laud, Neile, Howson, Corbet
and Buckeridge, with Mountague, and their growth under Buckingham against the
old Churchmen: The design of a Coalition with Rome, and the French and English
attempts thereto: The interruption of this design by the first Long Parliament,
and the Wars: The Scots forcing the Parliament (that in their straits asked
their help) to take their Covenant: The imposing that Covenant on the whole
Ministry, and making it a dividing Engine on pretense of Unity* The Parliaments
casting out (with a multitude of flagitious Ministers) some Doctors, for being
against them, for the King, contrary to the desires of Peacemakers: The
Presbyterians under Monk restoring King Charles the second: The return and
preferment of his Doctors, and their revengeful resolutions: Their design to
get all Church Power and Preferment, and Academick Rule into the hands of them
that most hated Puritans, or would endeavor their extirpation, and would
educate Youth in bitter prejudice and hatred of them: The vulgar hatred of
serious Godliness in Conformists and Nonconformists, under the name of
Puritans: The power that a few returned Doctors had with the King and
Chancellor in the dispose of Preferments, and thereby to overruled the
Parliament, and to procure the Acts of Uniformity, Corporation Oaths, Vestry
and Militia Oaths, and the Acts for Banishments, Confinements, Imprisonments,
Fining, Ejecting, Silencing and Ruining such whose Consciences pleaded Gods Law
and Authority against any of their Oaths, Impositions, and silencing
Prohibitions to preach the Gospel: The great difference in the Wars (I meddle
not with the Cause) between the Adherents and Soldiers of the K. (Chapter I.) and
the Parliaments in point of Piety and Sobriety: The Animosity and implacable
heat, by which the before Conquered, and now Ruling Party, proceeded toward
the ruin of those that they took for Enemies to the Cause Civil or
Ecclesiastic, which they had owned: The unhappiness of the then present
Ministry, that being young then, had never meddled with Wars, that they must
equally suffer as Enemies, for fearing the Imposed Oaths, Subscriptions,
Covenants and Practices: The rejoicing of the common sort of the luxurious,
drunkards, whoremongers and Infidels, that they had got so many of the
Religious into contempt, and scorn, and ruin: The woeful increase of Whoredom,
Luxury, and Impiety and Sadducism hereupon: The great numbers of Religious
people, who before hoped for Peace and a pious Prelacy, that fell hereupon into
an hatred of Prelacy, and a great disesteem of the Conforming Ministry; and so
our Divisions are grown to a fixed factious Enmity; and malice and worldly
interest will hear no motions or petitions for Peace; and yet madly plead all
for Love and Peace, while they implacably fight against them, and accuse those
as the Enemies of Peace, who beg Peace of them, and cannot obtain it.

This is the sum of the doleful History which this Book presupposes: But
should I write it, the rage would be increased. The foregoing Narrative is as
much as is fit for this brief Discourse, which, if you will, you may style
Acris correptio, with Gildas; or Planctus Ecclesiae, with Alv. Pelag. Or the
Groans of the Church, with a late Conformable Divine. It has been cast by four
years, at first because it would not be endured, and after in a vain hope that
our Church Reformation would make such a complaint less necessary. But now I
perceive the Devil will be the Devil, and Mankind will be born blind, sensual
and malignant, till there be a new Heaven and Earth in which dwells
Righteousness. Come Lord Jesus.

August 24. (1689.) The fatal Day of Silencing in England in 1662.
Chap. I. A Lamentation for the case of the Deluded, Malignant, Militant World.
1. THE depraved and miserable condition of Mankind, has long been the
astonishing wonder of the sober and inquisitive part of the world: Philosophers
were puzzled with the difficult questions, whence it first came? and why it is
no more remedied? Christians are taught by the sacred Scriptures how to answer
both, by laying it on man's misusing of his free will, supposing Gods permission
of his trial and temptations; and on his resistance and rejection of remedying
grace, in the degree that it is vouchsaft or offered. But still there are
difficulties, and our understandings are dark, and hardly satisfied. And whence
ever it comes, the case is doleful, and we cannot but think of it with
astonishment and lamentation. When we saw an hundred thousand made dead corpse
by the London Plague 1665. it did not take off the terror to know how it
begun. And when we saw the City on a dreadful flame, which none could stop, it
cured not the general astonishment to conjecture how it was kindled or carried
on: No doubt but Hell it self proclaims that God is Holy, Wise and Just, and
Devils and Men are the cause of their own everlasting punishment. But yet if we
had a sight of it, amazement and dread would overwhelm us. And, alas! what a
Map of Hell is the greatest part of Earth? Hell is a place of Lying, Malignant
and murderous, hurtful Spirits, miserable by and for their wickedness: And is
not this in a lower degree, a true description of most of the Earth?

2. Nineteen parts in Thirty of the Earth are Idolaters and Heathens: And do I
need to say, how ignorant, wicked and miserable they are? Many of them
publicly worship the Devil, as Witches do with us; and he deludeth them, and
appears in diverse shapes to them, and rules them as he does Witches. And
those that are more civil are strangers or enemies to Christ: Six parts of the
thirty are Ignorant Mahometans, destroyers indeed of Heathenish Idolatry, and
such as take Christ for a great and true Prophet, but know him not as a
Savior, but equal or prefer a gross Deceiver, and live under barbarous Tyrants
who by violence keep them in the dark. The other five parts that are called
Christians, alas! consist most of people bred up in lamentable Ignorance,
mostly barbarous or debased by the oppression of Tyrants; such as the
Moscovites, most of the Greeks, the Abassines, Armenians, and many Eastern
Sects and Nations. What Ignorance the vulgar Papists are bred in, in Italy,
Spain, Germany, Poland, France, and other Countries, and what enmity to true
Reformation prevails in Princes, Priests and People; and by what Lying and
Cruelty they fight against Truth, and what Inquisitions, Murders and inhumane
Massacres have been their powerful means, I need not use many words to tell.

And are the Protestant Reformed Churches free from fleshly, worldly, wicked
men? from ignorant malignant cruel Enemies to Truth, and Piety, and Peace?

3. Our Kings Dominions are the best and happiest Nations on Earth. Here is
most Knowledge of the Truth, and most proportionably that truly Love it, and
live in a holy obedience thereto, and fain would live a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness, honesty and sobriety: But, alas! they must be contented
with their own personal uprightness and reward, and the peace of their
Consciences in Gods acceptance. But with men there seems to be no hopes of
common Wisdom, Piety, Love and Peace.

We are all baptized with one Baptism; we all profess to be the servants of one
God, and the faithful followers of one Christ, and to believe in one Holy
sanctifying Spirit, and to believe the same Canonical Scriptures as the Word of
God, indicted by that Spirit; and to be of one Holy Catholic Church, which is
all the Members of Christ on Earth; and to hold the Communion of Saints: We
mostly in England and Scotland agree in the Protestant Reformed Doctrine, and
Sacraments; Our concord in profession is so great, that if some men had not
devised some Oaths, Professions, Covenants, Practices and Knacks, and Engines
of their own (which they dare not say, God made) to become the matter of our
unavoidable dissent, they could hardly have known how to pretend any difference
in religion among us, and hell would scarce have found any Cloak for malicious
accusations, enmity and discord.

You shall scarce meet with a man that will not speak well of Love and Peace,
and say that we must Love God above all, and our Neighbors as our selves, and
do as we would have others do to us. And yet is there any Enmity or
Disagreement? Alas how great, and how uncureable?

4. Who would think that knew us not by our Profession, but only by our
Actions, but that the three Kingdoms consisted of the deadliest Enemies to each
other? Of Turks and Christians; of Wolves and Sheep, that I say not of Devils
and Men? Yea Turks and Christians can live together in Hungary and all the
Eastern Countries; Orthodox and Heretics can live together, in Poland,
Helvetia* Holland, etc. But Protestants and Protestants cannot live together in
Britain. Cities and Corporations, Countries and Churches, i^ not Families also,
are distracted in enmity and more than mental feuds and war. Guelphes and
Gibelines, party against party, studying Accusations against each other, as if
they were Scholars daily exercised in the School of him that is the Accuser of
the Brethren. All their Learning and Wit is called up, and poured out, to
render others as odious as they are able. All their power, interest, friends
and diligence are used to ruin and destroy each other. No lies or perjury with
some seem unlawful to accomplish so desired an effect. In all companies, the
discourse and converse that should be to edify each other in Love, and comfort
each other by the hopes of dwelling together in Heaven, is taken up with
slanders, backbitings, scorning, railing and plotting the overthrow of the best
of their neighbors. Innocence never wants odious or scornful names: As if they
were acting their part that called Christ and his Apostles, and the ancient
Christians, Deceivers, Blasphemers, Enemies to Caesar, Ringleaders of Sedition,
that taught men to worship God contrary to the Law. Every drunkard and wicked
liver can as easily make his conscionable neighbor a Rogue, or a Traitor, or a
Schismatic, or an Hypocrite, as he can open his mouth and speak. And to
justify all this malice is become a virtue; hating the most religious, is Zeal
for Government and Order; destroying Christ's Members, is standing up for the
Church; hunting them as Dogs do Hares, or as Hawks do the lesser birds, is a
meritorious work, of supererogation no doubt, and will not finally lose its
reward: God is served by hating and scorning them that are serious in his
service. It is Religion to make Religion odious, and call it Hypocrisy, and to
be for that which is uppermost, and befriends their worldly Interest, and to
make him suspected of Disloyalty, who is for obedience to God. Conscience, and
fear of sinning, and of damnation, is the mortal enemy to be conquered or
driven out of the Land; as if there were no quietness to be expected in men's
minds, no concord in the Church, no obedience to the Clergy, or the Laws, no
safety from Sedition, till Conscience be silenced or banished, and men give
over fearing God; or as if Christ and Caesar could not both reign, but God or
Princes must be dethroned.

And O that the sacred Tribe were innocent, and none of them were the leaders
in such hypocritical malignity! Their Canons ipso facto excommunicate all (not
excepting Princes, Parliaments or Judges) that do but say, that any of their
Ceremonies, Liturgy, or Officers in Church Government, (not excepting the
lowest or Laymens power of the Church Keys by decreeing Excommunications and
Absolutions) are repugnant to the Word of God: And when they have ipso facto
Excommunicated them all, they call them Separatists for not coming to their
Communion: Think not the contradiction and hypocrisy incredible: read but the
5, 6, 7, and 8. Canons, and judge. They have a Law, and by their Law he is cut
off from the Church or Christ, that does but call any of these the Inventions
of Prelates, sinful, or say that God forbids them; And the Jail must be his
dwelling till he die there, who in ten cases remains Excommunicate, and does
not openly profess that he repents, and judges that to be sinless, which he
is utterly unable so to judge. When we have preached seven and seven years, to
persuade a Drunkard, a Liar, and Profane swearer, an Atheist, to Repent, he
lives quietly out of the Jail though he repent not: But if a man repent not
(when he cannot) of judging that God forbids such humane inventions and
impositions in Religion, take him Jailer; He that will not be for our humane
Offices, Ceremonies and Impositions, shall not be of our Church; And when we
have cast him out, we'll say, He separateth: and if he be not of our Church, he
shall be in Jail; As if the Church and the Jail, would hold all the land,
except his sin be such a Peccadillo as Atheism, Sadduceism, Bestiality,
Hobbism, Popery, Manslaughter, Adultery, Drunkenness, Swearing, etc. not
aggravated by the crimes of breaking the Canons in point of conformity; Or if
many thousands cannot or will not come within the Doors of the Parish Church,
so they will go to no unlicensed preacher, nor worship God in House or Church
at all, they live quietly out of Prison. But if the mote of an Oath or Ceremony
scrupled be in their eye, that eye must be pulled out (if the mote cannot) or
else the whole body be cast into their Hell. And if the Preacher be but a
Candidate of Domination, his way is often to call to the Magistrate to execute
the Law upon such as dare presume to worship God openly, till they hold all
such imposed Oaths, Covenants, Professions and Practices to be lawful: He is to
make his auditory believe that such men are dangerous, intolerable persons, and
that their meeting to worship God and learn their duty, is to cherish Sedition,
Heresy and Schism, and that Rebellion is in their hearts; and that the
Preachers that even to a thing indifferent are not of their mind and obedience,
are deceivers, and factious, and it is no sacrilege, but a duty to forbid them
to preach the Gospel. If the People dare not trust the Parson, Vicar or Curate
of the Parish, (be he what he will, whom a -- Patron chooses for them) with
the Pastoral Ordinary conduct of their Souls, or if he Preach not at all, if
they go to the next Parochial conformist for the Sacrament, he is to be driven
home, and used as disobedient.

Through the great mercy of God while the Bible is Licensed, a Preacher in
England knows not how to spend his hour, if he say not somewhat for Faith and
Godliness, Love and Peace: And when they come down, none are so hated by some
of them, as those that believe and do to their utmost what they for fashion
sake persuaded them to believe and do. Their neighbors who have not a word
with the Priest of any thing but this World, nor read a chapter or put up a
prayer in their families, these are good and quiet neighbors; But if any
seriously prepare for their everlasting state, and mind their Salvation above
the World, especially if he pray without-book, and dislike the ignorance and
scandalous lives of sorry Priests, these are the dangerous troublers of the
land, away with them, and give us those that trouble us not with the talk of
God and of death, and Heaven or Hell, of Scripture or of Conscience, and that
scruple nothing that we would have them say or do. If such pray, it is but in
hypocrisy; If they go to hear any other Preacher, it is in faction. If they
speak any words to God which are not written down for them to read, they
sawcily prate to God and speak but nonsense; If they be earnest as knowing what
they pray for, they do but whine and cut faces, and speak through the Nose, or
are a pack of groaning Hypocrites. It is confessed that the spirit of Adoption
and Supplication is Gods Gift; and that this Spirit taught the Bishops and
Convocation in what words to pray to God: But if the most holy or learned man
besides them pretend to it, and think that any may pray by the Spirits help but
the Convocation, there are reverend men that will deride that Spirit or that
prayer. I would at least they would let men pray by reason and the sense of
their Souls necessities (as a Child will beg pardon of an offended Father,) if
they will not give them leave to pray by that Spirit (which all must live by
that will be saved.)

Physicians use their patients with some humanity, and will not say to him that
says, [My stomach cannot take down this Potion; I shall cast it up] You shall
take it or die, or go to Prison: Or if one say, [This Pill is bigger than my
Throat can swallow,] They will rather say, It shall be made less than they will
cut his Throat wider to get it down. And sure the reason is because the Law
does make them Physicians to none but Volunteers, and give them no compelling
power: If it did, I know not what inhumanity they might come to: For I will not
believe that there is any thing in Divinity which tends to make men more
inhumane than Physicians. I have seen Jews and others that will eat no swines
flesh; And I have known many that a taste of Cheese would cast into a swound
near death: And I never knew any say, you shall eat this, or die: Nor that ever
motioned the making of a Law that all men should be imprisoned, or forbidden
all other meat* who refused to eat Swines-flesh, for fear of tolerating Jews.

But we have Priests too many, that will say, Take every Oath, Promise or
Ceremony required of you, or preach not, nor worship God openly at all: Take me
for your Pastor, or you shall have none: Hear me, or hear no man: Receive the
Communion from me, or from none: Deny not the lawfulness of a Ceremony, or be
Excommunicate.

4. And is it now any wonder that the people say as they are taught? And these
are lessons easilier learnt than a Catechism, or the Creed, or the meaning of
Baptism. How quickly can a man learn to call his Neighbor Whig, or Tory! Or to
hate a Godly man, or in a Tavern or Alehouse to scorn them, or drink and curse
to their confusion, and to say, I hope to see them all hanged or banished out
of the Land: As a Priest that knows not what Divinity or the Priestly Office
is, may before he takes many degrees, attain the ability learnedly to call his
Godly Neighbors, Schismatics, or Hypocrites or worse; So no doubt a few such
Sermons, if not a Tavern, can quickly teach them that never knew what Religion
is, yea that can scarce speak sense, to revile the wisest and best men, as if
they were sinners against the true Religion, if they will be serious in any
true Religion at all.

5. O sinful! O miserable Land! Who kindled all the hellish flames of thy
malignity and mad divisions? And who continues them, and for what? What cloven
foot has entered, and expelled concord? What Spirit rules thee? Were it the
Spirit of Christ, it would be for healing, Love and Concord; It would set men
on studying to promote Love to all, even unto enemies, but much more to the
most holy. It would make men zealous of good works, and if it were possible as
much as in them lies to live peacebly with all men, to bless those that curse
them, to pray for those that hate and persecute them, forbearing and forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake forgiveth us. It would teach them
while they have time to do good to all men, but especially to them of the
household of Faith; Men's hearts would be constituted of Love: It would become a
nature in them. Their Speech and Converse would be the Savoury breath of Love:
Their dealings toward all men would be the works of Love: Their sharpest
reproofs would be but to do the sinner good.

But alas another Spirit has possessed thee which rages and teareth thee; and
is blind and deaf; It calls for Fire from Heaven, and it kindles a fire of
Hell: And sure his name is Legion; for there are many. It passes under the
names of Wisdom, and Hatred of some evil: But it must needs be Earthly, Sensual
and Devilish, for it is neither Pure, nor Peaceable, Gentle, or Merciful and
Impartial, but foameth with bitter envy and strife, unto confusion and every
evil work: And yet thou know not what manner of Spirit thou art of.

Is it God that sets rulers and people against each other. Does he divide
his own Kingdom, against it self, when he tells us that the Devil will not do
so by his. Is it God that sets the parts of the same body in a hatred and War
against each other? As if it were the interest of the nobler and the Servile
parts to weaken or destroy each other? And it were an addition to the health
and welfare of the one, which is gotten by Conquest from the other? Is it God
that makes people despise or dishonor their lawful Governors, or any Rulers
to hate the best Subjects, and desire more to be feared than to be loved, and
rather to have power to do hurt, than actually to do good? Is it God that sets
Corporations, and Churches and Neighbors and Families, in a state of Malice,
Vexation, Strife, and a kind of War against each other? Does the Spirit of God
indite the malicious Pamphlets, which exercise the utmost of Wit and Hatred, to
destroy* Love, and to call the Nation into the Devils Camp, by mutual hatred to
live as Enemies, and Fight against the Lord and the ways of Peace. And if any
endeavor a reconciling healing of our wounds, it is turned into scorn, and his
healing motions are represented as the grand causes of division; and to beg for
peace is heinous Schism, and next Rebellion against the Church, and a crime
sufficient to forfeit that man's Peace and Reputation: And he that tells men of
the only possible terms of Concord, is made the chiefest cause of discord. To
serve and worship God no otherwise than Peter and Paul did, and than God
prescribes is enough to render us unworthy to live on English Earth? And if
England may not suffer such, why should any other nation suffer them? There are
men that keep holy days for St. Peter, and St. Paul, and dedicate Churches to
them, and their bellies are maintained at Dives rates, and their Wealth and
Revenues and Grandeur held up, by that which is dedicated to these Churches,
(and to alienate any of this superfluity from their flesh were worse Sacrilege
than to cast out and silence a thousand faithful Preachers;) And yet if St.
Paul were a Preacher now in France, Spain, Italy or England, and would worship
God but as he did when he was on Earth, and would not swear, say and do as much
more as the Bishops Canons bid him, I think we should again hear those words,
Acts 22. 22. Away with such a fellow from the Earth, for it is not fit that he
should live (here:) Unless he wrought miracles to convince men: And whether
those would prevail is a doubtful case; or whether he would not pass for a
Deceiver and Fanatic.

6. As in times of War, all broken, beggarly and idle fellows, turn Soldiers,
as the easiest trade to live by, and are never after good for any other trade,
but to kill and rob men; So the Love-killing Regiments, have forsaken other
trades, and this is like to put down all. Booksellers complain that they can
fell few Books but News and Scorning or Invective Libels. And what is the
subject of our (formerly weekly and now daily) News Books? Why, they tell us
that such a City or Corporation are altogether by the Ears as Enemies, some
choosing one Mayor and some another; Some called Whigs, and others Tories; Some
seeking the ruin and Blood of others, and some hardly escaping the power of
false Witnesses and Oaths! One Jury acquitting a man whose life is sought, and
another condemning him* In such a Town or City so many find, and so many
distreined on, and so many crowded into Jails, and such and such Preachers cast
into Prison, and such a one dead there, for praying to God and openly
worshipping him without-book, or by no book but his own. In such and such a
Country the people prosecuting each other on such accounts, and some flying
into other parts, and some into America to seek that peace among Savages and
Wolves, and Serpents, in Wildernesses, which they could not have under sacred
Protestant Prelates and their Clergy. In France the poor Protestants hunted
like Hares, neither suffered to live at home, nor to fly naked to beg their
bread in other Lands; and all this for the concord and peace of the holy
Catholic Church; a pattern so worthy of imitation, that even such excellent
men as Grotius think, that it is worth all hazards, labor and cost, to reduce
England and the Lutherans to the French-Church-Consistence, and to silence and
ruin all as Calvinists that are against it. From Hungary we must read, how the
persecuted Protestants, after their utmost suffering and patience, are fain to
call in Turks to save them from the cruelties of Christians. And that those
parts that are under the Turks have far more prosperity and freedom in
Religion, than those that are under the Emperor and Papists.

And Protestants under them are kept in co^^^^al fear, as knowing that it is
their Law and Doctrine that Princes are bound to do their best to exterminate
or destroy them, on pain of Excommunication, Deposition and Damnation^ And
remembering the Inquisitions, the Piedmont, French, Dutch, Irish, etc.
Massacres: So that they are brought to this hard dilemma, Choose whether you
will be Dead men, or be proclaimed Rebels. If whole Countries will not lie down
and die patiently without self-defence, they are odious Rebels.

These and such other are the subjects of our News-books, which have broken the
poor Booksellers, who were wont to live by selling Books of Learning, and of
practical Divinity. And too many Preachers are fain to be short as well as
formal in their Sermons for Christian Love, because they spend so much time in
Preaching up hatred and destruction. Were there but any Art that could devise
any Engine that could reach the heart, and turn it into the hatred of those
that never did them wrong (as they say some Philters and Charms will make men
mad with Love;) Or if any Apothecary had an effectual Medicine against
brotherly Love* I doubt these would become the most accustomed Shops and
prosperous Trades in all the City: But for want of such, some Pulpits, Printers
Booksellers, Clubs, Drinking-houses, and Play Houses (to pass by fouler) must
serve the turn. But if God have not mercy on the Land by restraining them,
Gunpowder-makers, Gun-smiths, Swordsellers, Soldiers, Swearers and
Executioners, will swallow up most other Trades in the Land. It Is worth enquiry
whether in foresight of this, they set not their Sons to such Trades as these,
or Apprentices to such Lawyers as are best at preparative Accusations, and have
learnt Tertullus's Art: Or to such Schools and Tutors as can teach them the
Learning of Zedekiah, and the four hundred Prophets, 1 King. 22.

7. And all this is the more unexcusable and lamentable, because they came but
lately out of the fire, which this same malignant Spirit kindled; The very same
causes cast the three Kingdoms into dreadful Flames and Blood. The Histories of
the bloody murder of many hundred thousands called Albigenses, Waldenses and
Bohemians, in Piedmont, Germany and elsewhere, and of the Netherland cruelties,
the Spanish Inquisition and Invasions, the murder of thirty or forty thousand
at once in France, and of two of their Kings, the Powder Plot here, as well as
the Bonefires in Q Marys days, and much more their Councils and Doctors
defending and commanding such usage of Protestants, did set all our Parliaments
one after another into a vehement unwillingness to be so used, and to fall into
their hands that will do it if they can: And when the evil Spirit had raised
cross interests and distrusts between King and Parliament, the Papists seeming
to be for the War and King, and suddenly murdering in Ireland no fewer than two
hundred thousand, and pretending the Kings Commission, and threatening the like
in England, affrightned the People into the Army, after raised by the
Parliament. And though I think all that War in England killed not the fourth
part so many as the Papists had murdered in Ireland; yet so dismal and odious
was it, and had so direful an end, as loudly told us how bad the causes and
beginnings were. Few parts of the Land were free from spoil, plunder and
poverty; yea or from terrible Sieges and fields of blood: Englishmen laboring
to destroy each other, and some hiring Foreigners to help them: And Lads
running from their Parents to be as Apprentices to the Man-killing Trade.
Counties were against Counties, Cities against Cities, Neighbors against
Neighbors, single persons flying from Men as from Bears and Tigers, as after
in the Plague-time, afraid of almost all that they met. And at last the very
Armies falling out among themselves: The first raised for the Parliament, were
mastered by a second Party, that brought in (as Auxiliaries) a new Imposition;
and that Party after mastered and cast down by a third that brought in a new
Cause; and that prevailing, pulling down their Masters, an Usurper odiously
destroying the King, and setting up himself with another Title, and subduing
and ruining those that were against it, even both the Parties that began the
War: And yet when he was dead, to show the World what divisions can do, that
same Victorious, Rebellious Army, fell all into pieces by its own discord, and
was totally dissolved as by a miracle, without one drop of blood that ever I
could hear of; and the Victorious leaders many of them hanged, drawn and
quartered, and their heads and quarters hanged up on the City Gates.

And would not one think that a Nation of men in their wits, should after so
long and sad experience of the mischiefs of hatred and division, be willing of
the reviving of Love and Concord, and hate all motions of dividing any more?
But alas, they hate them that would heal our wounds; and if any one lay on a
healing Plaster, there are hands too many both Lay and Clergy, ready with rage
to pull it off, and yet it is all on pretense of healing us, that they will not
suffer us to be healed; for the way of peace they have not known. Unhappy
Surgeons, that know no Balsom but Corrosives and Distilled Vinegar, yea no way
of healing but by dismembring, even the usefullest members of the Body. Having
learned of the Romish Leeches that live on blood, when they are for exhausting
the vital Stock, and cast the Kingdom into a Palsy or Marasmus, they tell you
it was all but corrupt or haemorrhoidal blood, and the loss of it necessary to
cure the madness of the Land.

The beginning of some reconciliation between the first contending Parties,
began to flatter us with the hopes of Restored Love and Quietness: Secret
consultations prepared the way: Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, Print their
Protestations for Oblivion and Reconciliation, and against Revenge. Hereupon
those that by Land and Sea, in the three Kingdoms had fought against the King,
restore him: The land rejoices in the smiling hopes of reviving Charity and
Concord: The King chiefly causes these hopes by his Declarations and Act of
Oblivion, and specially his healing Gracious Declaration about Ecclesiastical
Affairs. The house of Commons and the City Ministers give him thanks for it:
Who would have thought now but such Experience, such Protestations, such
Obligations, such Authorities should have put the whole Kingdom into a longing
desire to perfect the work of Love and Peace? But it proved clean contrary:
Some had other things in their Heads and Hearts; outlandish Fashions,
especially French, have long been the Badge of English folly! There are men in
Spain that trade much in the fire, and Queen Mary brought the trade into
England: There are men in many other Foreign Lands, who are so devout that
their Canons and Religion rule their appetites; And they love no meat like a
Carbonado'd Protestant, nor are pleased with any Perfume or Incense so much as
with the smell of a roasted Saint, first called a Heretic or Schismatic: Like
the Roman Tyrant that gloried in the sweetness of the smell when he smelt the
stink of the Carcasses which he had laid to dung the Field. And there were men
abroad that learnt these Fashions, and Contracted such a familiarity and Love
to Foreigners, as that for obtaining Union with them, all the Divisions,
Distractions and Calamities of England and Scotland, are not thought too dear a
Sacrifice: And as some Sons of Nonconformists must be doubly virulent to
expiate the guilt of their Original sin; So some English men must like Sampson
and David, bring double Testimony of their real enmity to the Philistines, from
their Skins, before they can be trusted abroad as real reconcilers: And they
say that there are some things that will be closely united, by no cement so
well as by humane blood. Doubtless the Gospel as used in English, and Preached
by true Protestants, (such as the Pseudo-Bellamie in Philanax Anglicus
hatefully calls Protestants off Sincerity,) goes not with many beyond Sea,
for the same Gospel which they believe. And therefore no wonder if the
Preachers of it be unpleasing to them; and he that will please them, and unite
with them, must silence or oppose those that they would have to be silenced and
disgraced. And some think that Union with many Kingdoms of Christians, which
call themselves the Catholic Church, is much to be preferred before the Love
and Concord of a hated party in our Island. And as Dr. Saywell (the Master of a
College and Bishop Gunnings Chaplain) says (to prove that there is a
Universal Legislative and Judicial power in the Clergy, over Kingdoms as well
Persons;) [If more persons or particular Churches give offense by Heresy,
Schism, etc. The CHURCH UNIVERSAL, or the rest of the Bishops may reprove them
for it, and then there is no Reason why one man should be censured and many
should go free, and consequently our Savior has established the Authority of
his Church over all Christians as well particular Churches as private men:
Churches of Kingdoms and Nations have a SOVEREIGNTY over them to which they
must yield obedience, Isa. 60. 12. The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve
thee, shall perish: yea those Nations shall be utterly wasted, page 343.

Though Kings have no Civil Universal Sovereign over them but Christ, yet it
seems all the world both Kings and Kingdoms have an Ecclesiastical Sovereignty
over them all: Communion of equals and Christian Counsel and Reproof is not
enough, such as all Neighbor Princes may use toward one another; Nor the
denial of such Communion to the incapable! But all Kings and Kingdoms must be
under one Church Sovereignty, which has a Legislative and Judicial power over
them all, to excommunicate, absolve them, etc. And how much more in ordine ad
Spiritua^ia the common exposition of Ecclesiastical Power tells you: As
experience long told many Kingdoms what the Excommunicating of a King, and
Interdicting a Kingdom the worship of God, do signify toward their Dethroning
or Invasion.

And all this must be done, not as for the Pope, but under the name of a
General Council, and the poor Pope shall have no power but, say some, to call
that Council, and call it General when there is no such thing, and preside in
it, and rule us as chief Patriarch and St. Peter's Successor, in the Intervals
of General Councils (that is, continually) and that not Arbitrarily, but by the
Laws of the Church or Councils, (and no mortal man can tell which those
Authorized Legislative Councils are, among the hundreds of erroneous or
contradicting ones.) So that Popery in England is an abhorred thing; for it is
nothing with some but the Popes absolute Government of the whole Church, as
without or above Laws and Ecclesiastic Parliaments.

And can you reconcile all this to our Oath of Supremacy, and the Canons that
establish it, renouncing all foreign Jurisdiction? Yes easily, we have been
told it means only foreign Civil Jurisdiction which belongs to the King, and
not foreign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, (which is all that the sober Popes do
claim, save indirectly in ordine ad Spiritualia) To Command a Nation on pain of
Excommunication and Damnation (according to diverse Councils) to renounce their
Allegiance to their Excommunicate Prince, and to depose him and set up another,
is no act of Civil, but of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which yet has
dethroned Emperors and overthrown Dominions.

And says A. Bishop Laud (in Dr. Stillingfleet's defense of him, p. 540. [It
does not follow, because the Church may err, therefore She may not Govern. For
the Church has not only a PASTORAL Power, to Teach and Direct, but a PRETORIAN
also, to control and censure, etc. And for external obedience to General
Councils when they err, [Consider whether it be not fit to allow a General
council that honor and privilege which all other Great Courts have:
Stillingfleet, p. 534.]

So that instead of a Council of equals for concord (as Princes use for peace
with their neighbors,) We have an Universal Sovereign Court set up with
Pretorian Power, to make binding Laws, and pass Judgment to all the Christian
World, and (say some) They are Schismatics that obey not these Universal Laws,
and obedience to them, and suppressing all forbidden Assemblies for Gods
worship is the only way to Christian concord.

And where this foreign Jurisdiction is made of such absolute necessity, that
without subjection to it by Kings and Kingdoms, there is no concord to be had,
nor any avoiding of the guilt of Schism, what wonder if some can wish that
silencings, reproaches, ruins, and confusions may be thought no dear price to
obtain an universal union; for which Christ and his Law are insufficient. They
that have read Grotius, Cassander, Baldwin, Hoffmeister, Erasmus, A. Bishop
Laud, Dr. Heylin of his Life, Bishop Sparrow, A. Bishop Bromhal and the
Prefacer Bishop Parker, Thorndike, Bishop Gunning and his Chaplain Dr. Saywell,
and such others, and against them all have read Dr. Isaac Barrow of the
Supremacy against Thorndike, etc. may understand where our difference and
danger lies.

8. And is Englands self destroying disease uncureable! God has in wonderful
mercy given us peace from foreign Enemies? And is there no hope of prevailing
with English men to live together in peace? Must that of Isa. 49. 36. be our
case, to eat our own Flesh, and be drunken with our own Blood as with sweet
Wine? Alas, no counsel, no petitions, no tears, no experience, no judgments of
God by Plagues and Flames, have hitherto one jot prevailed; But the Ulcer of
men's minds grows more and more putrid and malignant!

Two ways are by some proposed: First that all the Conscientious worshippers of
God in the Kingdom, should bring their judgments to a full conformity, in every
particular to their rulers: Whenas first they cannot tell us who these must be:
some say to the King or Law? Some say to the Bishops in a National Convocation:
Others say, to the foresaid foreign universal Sovereignty of General Councils,
(with the Patriarchs.) If the first be the way, what Kingdoms must it be in? Is
it no where but in Britain? Or also in France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Poland?
And must there be as many Religions as Kings and Laws will make? And how far
must this go? And where must we stop? Must Kings choose us a God? Or choose
whether we shall have any God, any Christ, any Bible, any worship of God, and
so any Heaven?

If it be the Bishops that must be the common rule of our Religion, what
Countries and Ages does this rule serve for? Was it the rule where Princes and
Prelates were Arians, or Nestorians, or Eutychians, or Monothelites, or
Papists? Is it the rule now in France, Spain, Italy, etc. Or was it so in the
Popes Catholic Church, from An. 700 till the Reformation.

If it be General Councils, I am weary of repeating the Proofs that there never
was one, nor ever is like to be one, or ought to be. If it be an European
Council, who shall call them, and who shall judge whether it be equal, and so
far General? And are not the greater number of European Bishops known Papists?
And will they not then be the Major Vote? And so we must be as bad as they? And
if the rest of the Christian world be not bound by them (in Greece, Ethiopia,
Armenia, Syria, etc.) Why are we? Is it the Council of Ariminum, Sirmium,
Milane, etc. or of Ephesus 2, Nice 2d many at Constantinople, at the Laterane,
at Lions, at Florence, at Constance, at Basil, at Trent, that are our Rule!
Must all that will be Catholics and saved, hold all the Heresies,
Contradictions, and Corruptions that Councils have held, and obey all their
load of Canons? If the Italians, French, English, etc. are all disagreed, how
many and which Councils we must obey, can all poor people know which is in the
right? And has Christ left Religion so uncertain a thing? Or so mutable that
General Councils of Prelates may be still increasing it? If he was the the
maker of it, by himself and his Apostles, we may know more certainly where to
find it: Most Christians may say, Christ we know, and Peter and Paul, etc. we
know: But your Councils are too many, too voluminous, too uncertain, for us to
know. But if they are such an absolutely necessary rule as you pretend, why do
not teachers preach them to us daily as they do the Sacred Scriptures?

If any would come down to confine these universal Laws only to Things
Indifferent, alas, must the world be confounded and divided about things
indifferent? Are not things indifferent variable as Countries and Ages are? And
must the world have one Sovereignty to make Laws for them? Cannot we have Life,
Liberty, Peace and Love without things indifferent? Or without agreeing in
them. Are there any two in the whole world, that are not ignorant, and that
differ not about many greater matters than things indifferent? Does he know
himself, or know what a man is, that thinks all tolerated Christians must be so
Skilled in all things indifferent, which men may impose, as to know them to be
such? When it is so hard to teach the people things necessary, few and plain?
Alas, Lord, why must the Churches be left in such hands?

9. But some have found out another remedy for our divisions; and that is, That
only the Bishops shall be engaged to a Foreign Jurisdiction, or profess the
necessity of obeying them, (under the name of a General Council, and in the
intervals, of a College of the Bishops of the whole world, as one
Aristocracy;) And that this shall not be imposed on any Lay-Communicants, but
their Consciences shall be left at liberty; Nor at the first on the inferior
Clergy, till they are prepared to receive it: But only that the People obey the
Priests and Prelates, and the Priests obey the Prelates and all their Governing
Officers, and the Prelates only profess obedience to the Pretorian Court
called, The Catholic Church. Bishop Gunnings Chaplain tells us that the Laity
are not required in order to Communion to declare for General Councils. Whether
they use the like Moderation in France, Spain, Germany, I know not, viz. For
the Bishops only to Profess obedience to the Pope, and the Priests to the
Bishops, and the people to the Priests and Bishops. I hear they go further.

And if Conventicles (as they will call them) are also suppressed, we need not
fear Religious Violence, Murder and Ruin, (upon a feared Roman Successor.)
For says the same Bishops Chaplain, page 283. [For matters may be so ordered,
that all Officers, Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military, and all that are
employed in Power or Authority of any kind, be persons both of known Loyalty to
the Crown, and yet faithful Sons of the Church, and firm to the established
Religion, and the Laws that they act by may be so explained in the favor of
those that conform to the public Worship, and the discouragement of all
Dissenters, that we must reasonably be secure from all violence that the
Papists can offer to force our submission: For when all our Bishops and Clergy
are under strict obligations and Oaths, and the people are guided by them; and
all Officers Civil and Military are firm to the same interest, and under severe
penalties if they act any thing to the contrary; Then what probable danger can
there be of any violence or disturbance to force us out of our Religion, when
all things are thus secured, and the power of External Execution is generally
in the hands of men of our own persuasion.]

Ans. The Dr. says well: I am of his mind in this: When they have subdued and
cast out all Dissenters (as they do in France) and the Bishops and Clergy are
settled under a Foreign Church-Jurisdiction, and the People settled in Obedience
to them, and all Offices Civil, Military and Ecclesiastic in their hands, I do
not think they need to fear that the Papists will use violence to change their
Religion, whoever reigns.

But the Question is, whether this suppose an Union with all in England that
are now against a Foreign Jurisdiction, or only the destruction of them, or
else the forcing them to these terms? As to a destruction of them, or forcing
them to such terms, surely Violence must do this. And what though the Subjects
of Foreign Power fear no Violence, are all the rest (that is, the Protestants)
of the Kingdom inconsiderable? We suppose the old Church of England, and all
our Parliaments since the Reformation, were against a Foreign Jurisdiction:
And will it be no loss to England to destroy so many, that is, the Body of the
Land?

But the Question is, Whether they may not be thus brought to concord by
consent? I answer, no, unless you suppose them to be men that indeed have no
Religion, and therefore can easily part with the bare name. For they are sworn
by the Oath of Supremacy against all foreign Jurisdiction: And put the case
that the Pope and a Council, or the King of France would bring the Emperors or
the Kings Army to serve him, and be at his Command, and he would only desire
that the General Officers and Colonels may be engaged to obey him, and the
Captains and lower Officers to obey them, and the Soldiers to obey the
Officers; but the common Soldiers shall be bound to no more, than this
obedience to their Officers. Query, Whether all these Soldiers be not Traitors
to the King or Emperor? Cromwells common Soldiers took no Commissions against
King or Parliament; they did but obey their Officers that pulled down both! And
were they therefore guiltless. Protestants will not thus follow such Prelates,
against their Oaths, and against the known truth, and against their duty to God
and the King.

10. But though it be notorious that Domination and Jurisdiction be the things
which cause the Papal Clergy to trouble and tear the Christian world, what is
it that makes the Laity so mad, and gets this Clergy such a militant crowd
against their own Tranquillity and Salvation? It Is as visible as any moral
thing, that the Churches Divisions and Wars, and Miseries have about a thousand
years risen, from Satan's thrusting such worldly, fleshly, unholy men into holy
Offices, who seek them but to serve their Pride and Covetousness, and Fleshly
Appetites, and Ease, and who are Enemies at the heart to the serious obedience
to Christ, which formally they preach. Christ's own Apostles in their time of
ignorance, began to strive which of them should be greatest; of which we have
recorded his sharp rebuke; which St. Peter himself did after second, in 1 Pet.
5. 1, 2, 3. in words so plain, that if his pretended Successors had not first
claimed a power (as the Church) to be the determining expounders of all the
Bible, they had lain under the Condemnation of Christ and Peter, Naked, without
a Defense or Cloak: But this Church-expounding authority sets them above all
the Word of God, which is now but what they please to make it, and an
instrument to execute their wills: And indeed it is now rather the Pope and his
Prelates and Councils than Christ, that are the Lawmakers to the Church: For
it is not he that makes the words only that makes the Law, but he that gives
them their sense. The words are but as the body, and the sense is the Soul of
the Law. The Ministerial Church now scorn the name of Ministers, and being
become Pretorian and Magisterial, they give Christ and his Spirit in the
Apostles leave to make the words and body of the Scripture or Divine Law, as
God formed Adams body of the dust, so that they may give it the breath of Life,
and also may make far more Voluminous Laws of their own, and cut off and
condemn all the Children of God, that cannot believe that it is lawful to obey
them.

And though the Ignorant think that the claim of universal Legislation and
Judgment, in the universal Church and General Councils, be no Service to the
Domination of particular Clergy men, no nor to any, seeing there will never be
a General Council,] They understand not the mystery of iniquity, and mistake.
We have English Writers that have told them, 1. That indeed Power is first
given to the body, (fine doctrine for Royalists) but by the Body it is given to
the Prelates to use for them. 2. That as a General Council has the Supreme
power, so the Prelates under them have the Inferior Ruling power, and the
executive in the intervals of Councils: 3. That as Councils represent the
Church in Sovereignty, so every Bishop is by his office, the true
Representative of the Clergy of his Diocese, and every Metropolitan the
Representative of his Province, and every Patriarch of his Patriarchate; And
then are not the Patriarchs (at least with the Metropolitans,) Universal Rulers
in such Intervals? 4. And the Pope is the Patriarch of the West, and has a
primacy in the Church universal, and must be confessed to be principium unitatis
Catholicae, and say some, to be the President of Councils. 5. To which others
add, that it belongs only to the president to call Councils, and to Judge which
are Lawful, without whose call they are so far from binding us, that they are
themselves but unlawful Routs. And what would you have more?

But what is all this to the poor Priests? What? Why, 7. The people know not
what the volumes of Councils say, and it is the Priests (or no body) that must
tell it them, (both what their exposition of Scripture is, and what their own
additional Laws are) without which they cannot be obeyed: so that indeed the
peoples Faith is ultimately resolvedly into the authority of the Priest, who
tells them what the Bishop says, who tells them what the Metropolitan and his
Synod says, who tells them what the Patriarch and his Synod says, who tells
them what the chief Patriarch and a General Council says, who tell them
determinatively what Christ and the Scripture says and means.

But what is this to Councils when there are none? Yes, 8. Those that are past
and gone, have left all those binding Laws by which the present Bishops as an
Aristocracy must govern all the Christian World.

But are not they for Monarchy in the state? How come they then to plead for a
Sovereign Aristocracy over the Catholic Church, and how come even the French
Clergy to be for the power of a Church Parliament above the Pope? I cannot
answer that; let the Pope and they debate it.

But I wonder that A. Bishop Laud should be for the derivation of all power
from the Body, as Richard Hooker is: See Dr. Stillingfleets Defense of him p.
544. 545. etc. [No Body collective, whenever it assembled it self, did ever
give more power to the representing body of it, than a binding power upon it
self and all particulars; Nor ever did it give this power, otherwise, than with
this Reservation in nature, that it would call again and reform, and if need
were, abrogate any law or ordinances upon just cause made evident, that the
representing Body had failed in trust or truth. And this power no Body
collective, Ecclesiastical or Civil, can put out of it self, or give away to a
Parliament or Council, or call it what you will, that represents it -- The
power which a Council has to order, settle and define differences arising
concerning faith, it has not by any immediate institution of Christ, but it
was prudently taken up by the Church from the Apostles example.] See Dr.
Stillingfleets Defense.

I confess that the generality of Politicians and Lawyers, Heathens, Papists
and Protestants go much this way, as to Civil Government, and say that the
Majestas personalis is in the King or Senate, but the Majestas realis in the
Body which gives the Organical power, and on just cause may take it away. It
is no honor to be singular in Politics, and I have said enough of this
elsewhere (Christ. Direct. p. 1.) But if it be the Body of the whole Church on
Earth that must give Church Officers and Councils their power, and recall it
when there is cause, if ever the whole Christian World meet together to vote
it, when it comes to Poling, we will give both the Monarchical and the
Aristocratical Conciliar Papists three for one, to try who has the power given
by the Body. But while two or three parts do already disown almost all their
Councils, the case is decided. But if an old Councils Heresies, Errors or
Tyranny can be invalidated only by a new one that is truly General, or a new
one as Papal as the last, we confess that Trent Canons are like to be the Law,
to the end of the World.

11. But again, what is it that makes so many of the Laity serve the Popish
Prelates universal claim, or keep up the destructive enmity and divisions of
the Christian World? A stranger would think that it were chiefly caused by some
great contrariety of real Interests, or that one party adhered to some
principles or practices, which were really hurtful to the others rights? While
both were serious for Christianity. But it is become by long experience
notorious, that all the Christian Worlds calamitous divisions are principally
from the old enmity between the Woman's and the Serpents Seed, and that all is
but the Prosecution of that which their first Patriarch Cain began: exemplified
after in the discrimination of the Children of men and the Sons of God, and in
Esau and Jacob, Ishmael and Isaac, and so down to the days of the Apostles:
And, says Paul, As he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the spirit; even so it is now. Among us it is notorious, that if we
knew how to cure men of the radical Enmity of the flesh against the spirit, and
of a carnal minds averseness to God and serious Godliness, the rest of our
differences were never like to continue our Wounds and cruel Factions.

In Families you may hear that this is the fundamental difference. Husband and
Wife, Parents and Children, Master and Servants, upon the mere account of
serious Godliness, do live like Enemies, that are impatient of each other. If
the Husband be ungodly, the Wife, Children or Servants that have but a care of
their Salvation, are still under his restraints, or frowns, or scorns: This
praying (especially if it be without Book) so much preaching and hearing; yea
any serious talk of God, or Heaven, or Scripture, is a troublesome weariness to
him; and he tells them, it is but Hypocrisy, or more ado than needs: If any
compassionately tell him of the evil of his swearing, or tippling, or
profaneness, he tells them they are precise Puritanes or Fanatics, and worse
than he. If they will needs hear Sermons, he will have them go but to some cold
or ignorant Preacher, or one that will please him with a calumny or scorn at
Puritans, or that will say as he does, that this stir for Salvation, and
meddling so much with Scripture and Religion, is but proud, self-conceited
Fanaticism. In a word, it is serious Preaching, and Hearing, and Reading Gods
Word, serious Praying, and Preparation for the Sacrament, serious Discourse of
the state of their Souls, and Preparation for Death, Judgment and Eternity,
serious fearing and avoiding sin, and speaking against the sin of others, that
is the common eyesore and trouble of the world, which they secretly hate, and
cannot bear with in their Families, in their Neighbors, in Magistrates, in
Ministers or People.

And because it eases their minds by vent, and by keeping up some hopes that
they may be saved without this serious Godliness themselves, they cherish a
conceit that the persons that herein differ from them are as bad, if not much
worse than others; and gladly hear those that slander and deride them: Such
Company, such Pamphlets, such Sermons please them. And to make them odious,
they have for them some contemptuous, scornful Nickname; which, though it be of
no signification, is as effectual as the truest charge. Among the Roman Sects,
do but call a man a Heretic, or Schismatic, a Lutheran, a Calvinist, a
Zwinglian; and elsewhere do but call him a Sectary, a Schismatic, a Puritan, a
Calvinist, a Nonconformist, an Independent, a Presbyterian, a Roundhead, a
Fanatic, a Whig, and it serves the turn as well as if you had proved him a
proud Hypocrite, or a Rebel. And there be among the real Schismatics also some
persons, that if you do but call a man Episcopal, a Conformist, an Arminian, a
Church of England man, that goes to the Common Prayer, they think that he must
needs be a Temporizer, Graceless or Dangerously unsound.

And thus the miseries of the Land are continued and increased. But because the
spirit of Cain is the Grand Incendiary, and the Enmity against serious Holiness
throughout all the world, is the principal cause of Divisions, Hatred, Wars and
Bloodshed, I will here annex many Reasons which, with men that have any Reason
left them, should cure this Malignant Enmity to Holiness, if men will but
soberly consider them.

I have said so much to such already, especially in my Saints Rest; Now or
Never; my Family Book; and a Saint or a Brute, that I cannot do this work again
without repeating much that is said. But seeing all that does not serve, and the
Ulcer breaks out more dangerously than ever, till it come to a Noli me
tangere, we must continue some hope and use of means; and if we lay on fresh
Plasters of the old materials, while only New Books are by such regarded, we
are bound to do our best: It is but so much labor lost; and it is not utterly
lost to our selves, while we have peace of Conscience in Gods acceptance.

But being sure to be misreported when I have done my best to be understood,
that I be not guilty of it, I will first show what I mean by serious Godliness,
and next what I mean by Malignity or Enmity to serious Godliness.

Chap. II. Whom I mean by Godly Persons, and whom by Malignant Enemies to
Godliness.
1. BY GODLINESS I do not mean, 1. Any Superstition, or making Religions, or
Religious Duties which God never made, and extolling these, and the Party that
are for them. God has made us Religious work enough: Could we do that well, we
need no more. Religion, so far as it is made by men, is no Religion, but a
contradiction or equivocation; for Religion is our Obligation and Duty to God,
and Conscience of it. Could I be for Superstition, or more Religion than God
has made us, I might be for all the New Religions of Rome, Franciscans,
Dominicans, Carthusians, Jesuits, Oratorians, and all the rest: And I might be
for their Works of Supererogation, their Massings, worshipping Bread, Angels,
dead Saints, Images, their Pilgrimages, Relics, and all their pretended
Traditions and Councils, their new made Church-Laws; and I should know no end.

2. And 2. By Godliness I mean not any singular, odd Opinion differing from the
Scripture, and making a Sect, or any Error whatsoever; nor any Opinion which
is contrary to any thing which the whole Church on Earth did ever hold as
necessary to Salvation or Communion.

3. Nor 3. Do I mean any Truth or Duty of inferior moment, which only makes to
the well-being of a Christian, though this be an Inferior part of Godliness;
at least not that which a godly willing person knows not to be his duty.

4. Much less 4. Do I mean any proud false conceit of a man's own Godliness, and
becoming one of an unwarrantable Sect, that he may be conspicuous to others, or
cherish this presumption in himself; and say to others, Stand by, I am holier
than thou: Or as the Pharisee, I thank thee Lord that I am not as this
Publican: (Though yet all that will be saved must greatly differ from the
ungodly, and must with thankfulness own Gods grace.)

5. Nor 5. Do I mean any unlawful practice, which on the pretense of Godliness
may be done, whether unjust censures, backbiting, unwarrantable separations
from others, divisions, disobedience to Authority, Sedition, Rebellion, etc.
These are all contrary to Godliness and true Religion. Christ is the strictest
condemner of them, and Godliness the best cure. If any Godly or Religious
person, be guilty of any one of these, 1. It cannot be as known and in a
predominant degree; 2. And it is his Disease (as a Leprosy to a man) and not
his Godliness.

6. But by GODLINESS I mean only the serious Consent to, and Performance of the
Covenant which we made with God in our Baptism: That we seriously believe that
there is One only God, of most perfect Power, Knowledge and Goodness, our
Creator, Maintainer, Governor and End; whom we must Obey, and Serve, and Love
above all Creatures whatsoever; and that he is the Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, and will give everlasting blessedness to the faithful, and
everlastingly punish the ungodly. That we seriously believe that Jesus Christ
is the Redeemer and Savior, who Teaches, Rules, Pardons, Sanctifies and
Saves all true penitent Believers; who is our Intercessor, Head and Judge.
That we seriously believe that the Holy Ghost indicted and sealed by his Gifts
and Miracles the Doctrine and Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, now
recorded in the Scriptures, and that he is sent from the Father and the Son to
Regenerate, Sanctify, Comfort and Strengthen those that shall be saved.

And that we seriously consent to Love and Obey God our Father, Savior and
Sanctifier as his Creatures, Subjects and Children in these Relations, that we
may be pardoned and saved by him. And that we be willing to forsake the Devil
and his Works, and the World and Flesh, so far as they would tempt us to break
this Covenant against God, and our Obedience and Salvation.

And lastly, That we seriously or sincerely (though not perfectly) endeavor in
our lives to keep this Covenant, preferring God in our Love and Obedience, and
our Hopes of Life everlasting before all the pleasures and treasures of this
World, and resisting the temptations of the Devil, World and Flesh, which would
turn us from him, and from our Obedience and Hope: And that we truly (though
not perfectly) trust God and our Redeemer for the Heavenly Glory which he has
promised.

This is plainly, distinctly and fully what I mean by Godliness or Holiness:
And such are the persons (though all imperfect, and of diverse degrees) which I
call Saints or Godly: He that feigneth me to mean any thing else, does but
abuse himself and me: If there be none such, there are no Christians, and all
the Word of God is vain.

But every Duty commanded by God is a part of the matter of our Obedience and
Religion, viz. As according to the first Commandment to take God for our God,
to be absolutely Obeyed, Loved and Trusted, and to renounce all Idols, and
neither to Obey, Love or Trust our selves or any creature before him; So also
according to the second Commandment, to renounce all scandalous symbolizing
with Idolaters, in the outward worship of God in their sinful way; especially
by Images, and other apearances of Idolatry: And that we worship God, according
to his Word.

And according to the third Commandment, that we avoid all Profanation of holy
things; All Perjury, false Vows, and fathering falsehoods upon God or his Words,
and rash Swearing and Unreverent using of Gods Name, and turning his worship
into a lifeless form.

And according to the fourth Commandment, that we worship God publicly in
solemn assemblies, and devote the Lords day to holy exercises; that we search
the Scriptures, pray for what God has promised, or commanded; Meditate and
Confer of holy things, and celebrate the Sacraments in the Communion of Saints.

And so according to the second Table that we honor and obey our Parents, and
(as far as their right of Government reaches) all other that God sets over us:
And dishonor them not, nor obey Civil, Ecclesiastical or Domestical Usurpers
against them.

That we do our best to save our neighbors Life and Bodily welfare, against
Murderers or Usurpers; and hurt no man's life or health either violently or by
Iezabels pretense of Justice.

That we keep our Senses, Thoughs, Affections, Passions and Actions, from all
unchastity and immodest lasciviousness.

That we wrong no man in his estate, but to our power help them.

That we avoid all Injustice, Lying, false Witness, false Judgment and
Oppressive, Unrighteous Government; And promote Truth and Justice to our power.

And lastly that we love our Neighbor as our selves, and take his welfare and
his sufferings as our own, and do as we would have others do by us, and covet
not to draw from him to our selves.

So that he that pretends to love God and Godliness, and obedience to Christ,
and yet loves not such a life as this, he lies, or says he knows not what.

And he that hates men or opposes them, for any one of all these duties, (for
reading or hearing Gods Word, for praying for things promised, for holy
Conference and Meditation, for sanctifying the Lords day, for desiring a
Shepherd and not a Wolf; for abhorring profaneness, and other great sins) does
thereby declare that it is so much of Godliness or Obedience which he
abhors; and it is through Ignorance doubtless if he seriously love and
practice the rest of Gods Commands.

7. II. By Malignant Enemies of Godliness, 1. I do not mean every one that has
any backwardness to any duty, which he overcomes in the practice: Nor every
one that is guilty of some omissions: The spirit is willing, and the flesh is
weak.

8. 2. I mean not those that are Godly in the main so far as they can know, but
through education or otherwise are ignorant of some Integral Truths or Duties,
and have an opposing contentious Zeal against them by mistake; and by factious
company are taught therefore to speak evil falsely of those from whom they
differ. I hear some revile all even with terms of enmity and unchristian
threatenings, yea seeking their ruin, who do not swear, say and practice all
that is required to English Conformity. I do not conclude them therefore
Malignant Enemies of Godliness, if they live soberly, righteously and godlily
in their way, and prefer God before Men, Heaven before Earth, the Soul before
the Body, and a Holy life before the pleasures and profits of the flesh. If
they are uncharitable against all that are not for Diocesans, Lay-Chancellours
Excommunications, Symbolical Crossing of Children as a Covenanting sign of
Christianity, and all the rest; I wish them more Charity, but I call them not
Malignant Enemies.

I find Bishop Gunnings Chaplain thinks that he does say well, when he says,
that [Not only Murderers, Adulterers, Drunkards, but such Schismatics as
disturb the peace, and weaken the authority of the Churches Discipline (theirs)
are to be excommunicated and reckoned among Heathens and Publicans; and Enemies
to the Gospel of Christ (if they preach it without a Diocesanes license.) p.
214. And that it is already our case, that it is a very difficult matter to find
a Jury and Witnesses especially among the Dissenters, upon whose credit we may
rely.) All this signifies how little blind Faction is to be believed, and how
far it conquereth even humane modesty and veracity: But yet I difference it
from the Enmity to Godliness which I speak of. And that you may see that he is
no Papist, though for a Foreign Jurisdiction, he tells you of Cromwell that
[There is too great, reason to suspect that he intended to settle Popery in the
Nation, when matters had been ripe to go through with it.] I confess this is
news to me: I have roundly told him to his face of his Disloyalty in deposing
our English Monarchy, and told the world then of his treacherous Usurpation,
but it never came into my thoughts that he intended to settle Popery in the
Nation. But if these words come from Clergy Truth and Modesty, they are very
considerable. I hope the old Royalists will be against Popery the more if
Cromwell was for it: And the Papists I hope will be no more angry with Dr.
Moulin that answers Philanax Anglicus, for making the Kings death to be
caused and concluded by the Papists, if Cromwell was for them. But Faction will
face men down, that Snow is black.

So on the other side, I hear some that are against Infant Baptism, sharply
censure all that are not of their mind; And some oversharply censure the
Prelatists and Conformists; And almost all the Christian world is divided into
parties, that too little stick at the injurious censuring of others; The
Papists, Greeks, Abassines, Armenians, Nestorians, Jacobites, etc. And among
the Papists, the Dominicans and Molinists, and Jansenians, etc. And among the
Protestants, too many. This is no small sin, but it is not that enmity to
Godliness it self which I mean.

9. 3. And I mean not by malignity, men's Differences in Civil and Political
Controversies. Though I take Popery to be half a Civil Controversy, and to be
unsufferable by such Princes and People whom they bind themselves to depose and
destroy: And that to Subject all the Christian world to the Legislative,
Judicial and Executive Government of one Pope, or one Pretorian Court, is no
better than to proclaim such a Pope or Court, to be public enemies and
usurpers to all Christian Princes and States. But yet abundance of Political
differences may consist with serious Piety: My reason is, because God has not
made Political Controversies so clear as that all good Christians can resolve
them. Neither the Light of Nature, nor the Bible* nor Tradition ends them.
Nor has he put them into our Creed or the ten Commandments, nor laid men's
Salvation on them, as he has done on the Essentials of Religion: Nor commanded
all men to be so well Skilled in Statute Books and Common Law as to be able to
know which party is in the right. And therefore I join not with those Clergy or
Lay-Gentlemen, who damn all that are not of their mind and side, in differences
of that nature.

I often hear some say that Kings and States do all receive their Authority
from the Body of the Nation who are the chief seat of it. So Hooker, so Laud,
and indeed as aforesaid, so Heathen, Papist and Protestant Politics ordinarily
hold: I call not all these malignants, though I am fully satisfied, 1. That God
is the Instituter of Magistracy in genere. 2. And that he has so far specified
it as to determine of its unchangeable Essentials (that they shall as his
Officers promote obedience to the ten Commandments.) 3. And that he never gave
this governing power to the people. 4. But that all that the people do is, 1.
To specify it as to the number of persons (a Monarchy, Aristocracy or, mixed of
these and some Democracy.) 2. To limit it by determining of the Degrees of
power, about Property and Liberty, and all things which Gods Law has left
undetermined, and mutable. 3. And to determine of the persons and Families that
shall receive the immutable power from God and the mutable from men.

I often hear some most magnify Democracy, and some Aristocracy, and some
Monarchy, and some a mixture; and some English Clergy men are for a Civil
Monarchy Subject to a Catholic Clergy-Aristocracy: I call none Malignants for
any such differences.

I find some Papists and Protestants Politic writers saying that when it
proves hurtful to the Commonwealth, the people may retract the power given
the Prince, and change the Government, and Hooker says, No doubt in such a
case a Prince will part with it: And A. Bishop Laud, before cited, says of the
like, and abrogating Laws, This power no Body Collective Ecclesiastical or
Civil, can put out of it self and give away, And I find many that extol Hooker
and Laud, call this a principle of Rebellion. It is neither of them that I call
Malignants.

I find most writers of Politics agreed that the Law of nature Allows and
Commands Kingdoms and Commonwealths self-defence against any public Enemies
that seek to destroy them. And that no man on pretense of Right to a Crown has
any right to destroy the body of the people, or the Bonum publicum which is the
Essentiating end of Government, nor can be simul rex and publicus hostis. I
hear others take this for an unchristian doctrine of Rebellion, and say, that
if a King would destroy all the people of a Kingdom (in revenge, or in siding
with another Kingdom of his own or another,) they ought not to resist him, or
any that he Commissioneth to do it: And that if he should Commission a few men
to kill all the Parliament as they sit, or to burn the City, it is Rebellion to
resist by self-defence. I hear Lawyers themselves at great difference on such
matters, some for more power, and some for less: I find the great Defenders of
Monarchy, such as Barclay and Grotius de Iure Belli, naming many cases in which
Kings may be resisted, yea and forfeit all: And I find others among us of a
contrary mind. Yea I find the Conformable and Diocesane Pillars quite differ in
such cases, Bishop Bilson naming many cases in which resistance is no
rebellion, (To Subject his Kingdom to a Foreign Realm, or to change the form
of the Commonwealth from Impery to Tyranny, or neglect the Laws Established by
common consent of Prince and People, to execute his own pleasure; In these and
other such cases which might be named, if the Nobles and Commons join together
to defend their ancient and accustomed Liberty, Regiment and Laws, they may not
well be counted Rebels, says he, of Obedience, page 520.) But I hear many now
say the contrary, and Condemn such Doctrine as disloyal.

I find some join with the Papists in accusing the Reformation as caused by
Rebellions, in Germany, Geneva, France, Belgium, etc. And I find Bishop Jewel,
Bilson, and other Bishops defending the French defense, and Dr. Peter Moulin of
Canterbury in his answer to Philanax Anglicus, Contradicting their accusers, as
false in Point of History.

Abundance of such Political Controversies are now lately agitated, some
charging their adversaries with Rebellion, and some with Tyranny: Some saying,
they are guilty of Treason against the King; and others, They are Traitors
against the Kingdom: And too ordinarily damning one another; as if these
matters were Articles of our Creed.

What a dismal difference is there now about those words in the Declaration in
the Corporation Act; [There is no Obligation on me or any other person, from
the Oath called the solemn League and Covenant: Some say there are none but
Rebels will refuse it; And that if any obligation had been granted to things
lawful or necessary some would have extended it to Rebellion or Schism. And
therefore all Obligation is to be renounced. Others say, that National perjury
is a forerunner of National Calamity or ruin; and that where Oaths bind not,
there can be no Trust; and no Trust, no Commerce: And they think as Dr.
Sanderson, and Casuists, Papists and Protestants do, that though an Oath or Vow
be unlawfully Imposed and Sinfully taken, and part of the matter of it be
unlawful, and the Imposers and Takers are bound to repent, and no one is bound
by it to the unlawful part, yet the taker is bound to that part of the matter
which is lawful or necessary: And they take it to be lawful and necessary to
Repent of sin, to oppose Profaneness, Schisms, Heresy and Popery, to defend
the King, and therefore that it obliges them to these.

I meddle not with the Roman opinion that it is the Henrician Heresy to say
that Kings have a power of investing Bishops, and disobeying the Popes
Excommunication; and of such as Cardinal Perron that dare not question or deny
the power of the Pope and Councils to Excommunicate and depose Kings, because
then they must condemn approved General Councils, which are their religion
itself, and (says he) must grant that the Pope is Antichrist, and the Church
erroneous that has so long used this.

I name all these Political Controversies, 1. To tell you that it is not
factious and passionate enmity to each other on such accounts, which I mean by
enmity to Religion.

2. And to remember men, that if in so many and great points of Politics and
Government, the Learned and Christian World, have so great difference, what
reason is there that we should Damn or Excommunicate, or hate each other about
a hard opinion in Religion, or a Ceremony.

3. And to tell the Popish Church, that if it were a good argument that there
must be one Pretorian Court or Church, to oblige all the World by an universal
determination in what sense to expound the Scripture, because it is abused to
error by men's mistake, and there must be an end of Controversies; by the same
reason there must be an universal Pretorian Court to expound all human Laws,
and end the controversies of Lawyers; Yea and to master all men's Reason; for
Scripture is no more commonly controverted and abused than Law is; And not half
so much as Reason is, which is pleaded for almost all the falsehood and
wickedness in the World.

10. Moreover it is not personal feuds between Man and Man that I mean by
Enmity to Godliness: No though any such be against an Innocent and Godly Man,
where it is not for his Godliness, but some other difference.

11. I will say more though some dislike it, it is not a Papist as such that I
mean by a Malignant Enemy of Godliness; I know that Education, and Temptation,
and want of hearing the confutation of their errors judiciously made, may
cause Godly persons to think that the universal Church must be united in some
humane Head or Sovereign power; and that there is no other way to end
controversies and schisms, and that (as Dr. Saywell says) there must be some
over Kingdoms or National Churches, as well as over particular persons, that
many may not escape while a few are punished: It is easy to be deceived by the
pretenses of Unity and Concord, while men see the divisions and discords of
others: And the false pretenses of Antiquity are so confidently uttered by
their Clergy, that men unacquainted with the history may verily believe them:
And the plea for an uninterrupted succession of Ministerial ordination, and
that a Superior must give power to the Inferiors, deceives many. If there must
be a Diocesane to ordain and rule all Presbyters, and a Metropolitan to ordain
or rule the Diocesanes, and a Patriarch to rule them, from whom shall the
Patriarchs receive their power, or commands, but from a Pope? The poor
reasoning which the French now use with the Protestants puzleth unskilful
persons; viz. Was there any Church before your reformation? If yea, where was
it? And had not you your Ministerial power from it? It was Rome or none: And if
it was the true Church then, it is so now. We answer them, there was and is one
only Catholic Church: Of this Christ only is the Head or Universal governor,
and no man or men; Of this all Lawful Pastors are his official guides in their
several Provinces, as many Justices and Mayors of Corporations under one King:
That all these having one King (Jesus) and one Law (of Christ) and one Spirit,
and one Faith and Hope, are to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, and to use Synods when needful to that end, but not as a Pretorian or
Regent Aristocracy or Court. That the Church before Luther was all over the
World where ever there were Christians: in Ethiopia, Egypt, Syria, Armenia,
Georgia, Circassia, Asia, and where ever the Greek Christianity is, in Moscovy,
and in all Europe where there were true Christians. That the envious man having
sowed Tares, this Church is unhappily fallen into many corruptions, diseases,
and factious sects, almost all censuring one another: no part of it is perfect:
That the Papal part is in Doctrine, Worship and Government one of the most
corrupted parts! Yet so far as their diseases or errors nullify not their
profession of Christianity, they are parts, though leprous. And therefore
though they are the most uncharitable and schismatical part, as they cut off or
unchurch all the Christian World save themselves, yet being as Christians
united to the rest in the common faith, their Baptism and Ordinations are not
nullities as they invest men in the Christian Society and Christian Ministry;
though that part of them is a nullity which engages men in a schism and in
sin. That the Ministerial power is not the gift of Man, but only of Christ, who
by the Charter of his recorded Word, gives the power and the obligation to
that person who is duly chosen and called thereto: As the Kings Charter gives
the power to the Mayor of a Corporation duly qualified and chosen: that the
ordainers are but partly Judges of due qualification, and partly Ministerial
Investers, and not at all the Donors of the Power: that ordination is for order
sake needful, when it may be had to keep men from being Judgers of their own
sufficiency: But order being only for the thing ordered, (as the Sabbath was
made for man, and not man for the Sabbath) is not necessary against the end.
That there is no necessity that a Superior must ordain: but as the College of
Physicians, Philosophers, etc. make Physicians, Philosophers as approved, so
may equals in the Ministry: Do not Bishops make or consecrate Bishops. If this
were not so, who makes the Pope? If he did not pretend that his power is given
him immediately from Christ, he must grant that there are some men above him to
give it him, and so he is not the Sovereign. If they say that the power of
Popes (and Kings) is given by the whole body (the Church) he is then no Pope:
for it is known that three parts of the Christian World are against him. If he
will say, None are the Church but those that are his party, any sect or rebels
may say the like, and appropriate authority to themselves.

Nothing more cheateth the ignorant, than ambiguous words, and confusion: And
explaining those words, and needful plain distinction, would save the writing
of many volumes, and would make truth easily meet the seeker, and unravel all
the spider Webs of deceivers.

Do but well use these few distinctions and all Popery vanishes into smoke. 1.
Distinguish between a Catholic Church as headed by Christ; (This we are all
members of;) and a pretended Catholic Church, headed by the Pope or any men:
This is another Church as to the denominating form, having another informing,
unifying head: And this is it which we deny.

2. Distinguish visibility: Christ's Church is so far visible as to have a Head
who was visible on Earth, is visible in Heaven, and will visibly come to
Judgment, and visibly reign for ever. It has visible Laws, Protection and
Officers; The subjects bodies and their profession are visible; And it is no
farther visible; no not as to the Souls or real faith of the subjects. The
Papists Church has an Usurping Visible Humane Head on earth.

3. Distinguish of Baptism and Ordination as into Christ's Catholic Church, and
done by Papists as Christians; And as into the Popes Catholic Church and done
by Papists as Papists.

4. Distinguish of Subjection, and Communion: We owe Communion when we owe no
Subjection, and where men have no right to be our Governors.

5. Distinguish between Communion in Christianity, and that in Essentials,
Integrals or Accidents; and Communion in errors and corruptions, or defects.
We have Communion with Papists and all Christians in Christianity, (if they be
Christians indeed:) But we renounce Communion in the errors and sins of them
and all others, as far as we are able to avoid them. All Christians have Union
and Communion in the Essentials of Christianity: No Christians have Union and
Communion in all the Integrals (on Earth) all being imperfect: But the more
such Union and Communion, the better. No Christians have, or ought to have
Communion in all the Accidents. All should avoid Communion in sin.

6. Distinguish between Communion of Hearts, Communion of Profession, and
Communion in Local presence: We have Heart Communion in one Essential Faith,
Hope and Love with all true Christians on Earth. We profess all one Faith in
the Essentials: We have nearer Communion, or fuller with the Reformed Churches
which are soundest in the Integrals, than we have with the more faulty and
corrupt. But we have Local presence but in one place at once; and we ought to
avoid Local presence where we cannot have it without sin, though we have
Communion in Faith, Love and Profession with the same men. If a Reformed Church
will not admit our Local presence without subscribing some one untruth, we must
be absent, when we may be present with a worse Church which excludes us not by
any such Imposition.

7. Accordingly distinguish of Separation: We separate not at all from Union or
Communion with Papists as they are Christians, or as they hold any Truth: But
1. We separate from Subjection and Obedience to them, which we never owed them,
or any other Church. 2. We separate from Communion with their Church, as it is
a Policy informed by an Usurping Humane King or Head. 3. We separate from all
their sins so far as we know them. 4. We deny Local presence in their
Mass-worship, because of the sin imposed on us, both before it, and in it. 5.
We are incapable of Communion in all accidents, or mutable indifferent things.

Understand and use well these few plain distinctions, and you need little more
to answer all the Papists.

And I fear not to add, that were the Papists in my power (as I never did) I
never would use any inhumanity or cruelty toward them; yea, I would use no
Offensive, but only Defensive force against them; nor hurt one of them, further
than they made it necessary for the Defense of the Land, or those whom they
would hurt.

I knew not till a Book called The Liberties of England lately told me, how
many very severe Laws are against them. I am no Judge of the times that they
were made in, nor of their occasions: But I think that of late they have done
more hurt than good: For 1. Some of them seem too severe. 2. Some I cannot
prove to be justifiable; viz. Those which would compel them to come to our
Sacramental Communion, when many a good Minister would not receive them if they
came: And that which excommunicateth them that never were of our Communion: And
that which lays the Excommunicate as such in prison, etc. 3. It greatly
tends to misinform Foreigners, who seeing these Laws, think they are all put
in Execution; and so believe those that tell them, that the Catholics here are
under constant Cruelties, and frequent Martyrdoms; whenas I never in all my
life knew of one Papist that suffered so much for his Religion, as I have done
my self, within these few years past, though my sufferings are so small as to
be no meet matter of very great complaint. 4. These Laws being a continual
danger to them (should there be Governors that would execute them) does put
them on continual plotting and striving against them. Sufferings, or great
dangers, put men by fear upon self-defence, and the utmost endeavors for
deliverance, who would be more quiet if they found themselves in safety; and
though their Clergy would be still plotting the recovery of the Papal power, to
subject King and Kingdom to the Sacred King of Rome, yet the Laity would be
less against the common Peace, when they found that it was their own Peace.

12. I have told you what I mean not by Malignant Enmity to Godliness; I tell
you now what I mean by it; viz.

When the blindness and ungodliness of corrupted Nature, increased by practice
into Serpentine Enmity, and turning men's hearts by unbelief and disaffection
from God and Heaven, does possess them with a deep dislike of a holy, heavenly
and spiritual life; first as to their own practices, and then as it is in
others; and because it is against their worldly hopes and fleshly lusts, they
hate it, and reject it themselves, and then hate and maliciously oppose it in
others; yea though Law, Custom, and worldly Interest draw them formally to
profess Christianity and Obedience to Gods Laws, and to Vow that in Baptism,
they hate the serious performance of their own Profession and Vows; and would
be glad to drive it out of the world, and to set up Hypocrisy and Ceremony, or
a Stage Religion and Mummery, or the toothless Mass and Formalities in its
stead: And if custom or shame hinder them from persecuting or scorning Truth
and Godliness in its proper name, they will show their mind by these things
following.

1. They will set up some worldly, fleshly Interest (like the Papal Kingdom)
which is contrary to the Christian and holy Interest; and then they will
persecute Christians not as Christians, nor as Godly in name, but as such
indeed by pleading Conscience and Obedience to God, against their inconsistent
interest and ways.

2. Among all that are against their carnal false interest, they will cull out
the more serious godly persons to afflict.

3. Among all the faithful, they will cull out those who do Christ most service
in the world; because Christ's service is it that is their disservice, and
opposite to their sin.

4. They will make a scorn of their very Religious duties, and take up mimical
derisions, to make them seem ridiculous or contemptible.

5. When they can charge them with no crimes, they will purposely make Nets to
catch them, as the Enemies of Daniel did by him, Dan. 6. And as the Spider
makes her curious Webs to catch and kill the Flies.

6. Yea they will make faults by slander, and lies, if not by perjuries, if
they can find none.

7. Yea their virtue, piety and innocence shall be all called Hypocrisy; and
when they cannot accuse their actions, they will accuse their hearts and secret
thoughts, and judge them as if they had a Casement into their breasts.

8. Yea if their innocence cannot be so stained, they will hate them so much
the more, because they cannot tread down their reputation.

9. They will search after, and aggravate all the failings of Religious people,
and turn them into crimes.

10. If any one of them, or an Hypocrite, that is like them, be guilty of any
notable fall, they will persuade men that all the rest of their lives is like
that crime; yea and that all that profess much seriousness in Godliness, are as
bad as they; that all the rest of the life of Noah, Lot, David, Solomon, etc.
were as bad as the criminal part; and that all the Servants of Christ are
Peter's, or Iudas's.

11. That it is not their sins, but their piety which they hate, you will see
in that they live in far greater sin themselves, and take it to be no great
harm, but hate those that reprove them.

12. And they make light of the common crimes of others. They can bear with an
Atheist, an Infidel, a Drunkard, a profane Swearer, a derider of Godliness,
yea a Persecutor, a Fornicator, a man of no Religion, if he will but be for
them, and serve their interest, and will not scruple Communion with such: But
men never so sober, just and godly, that cross their wills and carnal ways,
they cannot endure: And if they be such Clergymen, as the world has too many,
such serious Godly men, for disliking their ungodliness, are made the common
objects of their Pulpit and discoursing scorn or accusations, and perhaps are
excommunicate ipso facto, for dissenting from their Opinions or Wills.

13. Such usually in former ages have been the chief Instigators of Princes and
Rulers, to hate men of serious Religion, and to stir up Persecution against
them, and to render such odious to the world as Heretics or intolerable
Villains. O what difference is there between the true narratives of the Lives
of Luther, Calvin, Beza, and abundance such, and the odious lies and
defamations written of them by some others. Yea, those who commend Melancthon,
Bucer, and many such for Learning and Moderation, hate their Doctrine of
Reformation and serious Piety.

14. And you may note, that in any slander of a Godly man, they will sooner
believe one or two ignorant malicious Drunkards against them, that never knew
them, than the testimonies of hundreds of most faithful persons who praise and
vindicate them, though they better knew them.

15. They seldom give the accused leave to speak for themselves before they
believe Accusations against them; but conclude that they are as bad as
backbiting malice reports them behind their backs.

16. They are glad to hear of any infamy of Religious persons, and loath to hear
them praised without contradiction; and are glad to hear of any suffering which
befalls them.

17. If there be any public differences in a Church, City or Land, they are
usually against that side, which most favors serious Godliness, be they who
they will. If the King, Parliament, and Bishops will be for the persons and
ways of soberness, justice and serious Godliness, they would be on the other
side. And they will cry up any that will cry them down, or would oppress them.

18. Lastly, The quality of the Enemies may help with the rest to tell what it
is that they are against: when it is the generality of worldlings, proud,
ambitious men, sensual drunkards, gluttons, fornicators, profane and
irreligious, who hate Godliness so far, as to drive it from themselves and
families, and rather venture on Hell fire, than be truly godly; it is easy to
know what these hate in others.

I have told you who I mean by Malignant Enemies of Godliness, that the
mistakers and slanderers of my words may have no excuse. Could we now but
prevail against this Cainism, or Devilism, it would do much to recover the
Peace of many Nations of the Earth: But Christ has told us, that this Enmity
between the seed of the Woman and the Serpent, of which Cain and Abel were the
first specimen since the Fall, will never cease till Christ come, as is
terribly described, 2 These. 1. 6, 10, 11, 12. and Matthew. 25. But yet some Saul's
may become Paul's, and for the hope of the recovery of such, I will adjoyn such
Reasons as should convince any that have the use of Reason left.

Chap. III. Undeniable Reasons against Malignant Enmity to serious Godliness.
1. TO deny that there is a God who is the Supreme Governor of Man, is to be
mad in despite of the whole world which proves it: And it deposes all Kings,
who claim their Authority as given them by God, and as his Officers; for if
there be no God, there is none to give them Authority: And to grant that there
is a God, and yet deny him our love, honor and obedience, is to speak gross
contradiction, or else profess open malice against God himself. If he be God,
he is perfectly Wise; and should not perfect Wisdom govern us? If he be God, he
is perfectly Good, and man's chief Benefactor; and should he not then have our
chiefest Love? If he be God, he is of absolute Power; and should he not then be
obeyed? If he be God, he made us, and still maintains us, and we live
continually by his will, and have all that we have of his bounty; and we, and
all we have are wholly his own; and is not then all our thanks and service due
to him? If he be God, he is our Judge, and will be just in punishing and
rewarding; and should we not then serve him with the greatest fear, and with
the highest hopes? These things are undeniable.

Dare any man that believes there is a God, say, that man can Love him too
much? or too much honor him, or obey him? Can we return him more than his due?
It is therefore no less than practical Atheism, or else a rebellious defiance
of God, to blame or hate men, for loving, honoring and serving him to the very
utmost of their power. And to deny God, or defy him, is a thousand fold more
damnable sin and treason, than to deny and defy the King, or your own Parents.

2. God has himself commanded man, to Love him with all his heart, and soul,
and might; and to obey him with his greatest fidelity and diligence, and to
fear him more than any creature, and to place our chiefest hopes on his
promised rewards, and to seek first his Kingdom and Righteousness, and not to
sin wilfully to save our lives, or gain all the world, Deuteronomy. 6. 5, 6, 7. and
10. 12. and 11, 12, 13, 14. Mat. 22. 37. Heb. 11. 6. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Luke 12. 4.
Heb. 12. 28, 29. Mat. 10. 39, 42. and 16. 25, 26. and 6. 33. Luke 14. 26, 33.
Mat. 5. 19, 20. And the Law of Nature speaks no less. And if God command it,
and you condemn it, do you not condemn God? If you command your Son, or
Servant, or Subject any thing, he that blames him for obeying you, blames you
more than him. If it be a fault of folly to love and serve God with all our
heart, and mind, and might, the fault or folly would be Gods that requires it,
and not ours. And, is such a blasphemer meet for humane Society, who will
accuse his Maker? If God be blameworthy, he is not perfect: And if he be not
perfect, he is not God: And so to be against our utmost obedience, does amount
to no less than Blasphemy or Atheism.

3. Do you think that Man is a creature that needs to be blamed for loving or
obeying God too much? Do you not know that Nature is vitiated by sin, and Man
is now backward to God, and all that is good and holy? You may as well blame a
lame man for running too fast, as a sinful man for obeying God too much. It Is
more foolish than to blame a sick man for working or eating too much that can
do neither? Or to hold a man in a Consumption from going up the Hill too fast?
Do you find your own hearts so forward to a holy life, as that you need pulling
back or hinderance, when no exhortation or necessity will persuade you to it?
And if you need no such reproof or stop, why should you think others need it?
Do you not use to say that all men are sinners? And do sinners need to be
blamed for obedience? Do you not daily confess that you have done the things
which you ought not to have done, and left undone the things that you ought to
have done, and there is no health in you; And yet will you blame men for too
much Obedience? It seems then that your Confessions of sin are Professions of
it; and while you tell what you have done, you do but tell what you mean to do,
and what you would have all others do: or else you blame your selves for
sinning, and hate your Neighbors for not sinning.

4. If you hate men for holiness and avoiding sin, you hate Jesus Christ most:
for he was most holy, and free from all sin: And you hate the Angels and all in
Heaven, for they are holy and void of all transgression.

5. Have you any better Master to serve than God? or any better work to do than
he commands, or any better thing to seek and hope for than he has promised?
If not, should not the best be preferred. What do you love and seek your
selves? Is money or fleshly pleasure better than God and Heaven? Is Sin and
Sensuality a better employment than his Service? Is your flesh and lust a
better master? Compare them, and we are content that the best be preferred.

6. Why do you take on you to believe in Christ, if you be against holiness,
and for sin? Christ came into the world to die for sin, to show Gods hatred of
it: And would you have us wilfully to commit it, and to despise his Blood? He
came to destroy the works of the Devil; and will you plead for them? He came by
his Doctrine, example and grace to bring man to holy obedience: And do you hate
men for the same, and yet call your selves Christians?

7. How dangerously do you draw toward the sin against the Holy Ghost, if you
hate or blame men for being holy, or seeking to be such; when it is all the
work of the Holy Ghost on men's Souls to make them holy? It Is a dangerous thing
to hate the work of the Holy Ghost; and as it were defy him, and do despite to
him.

8. Are you not your selves in your baptism Vowed and Devoted to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, renouncing the world, the Flesh and the Devil? And
do you hate men for being such as you have vowed to be your selves? And do you
think that God will not severely reckon with you for such Perjury and base
Perfidiousness.

9. Do you not in your daily hypocritical devotions condemn your selves by your
own tongues? Do you not pray that the rest of your lives may be Pure and Holy?
And at the same time hate Purity and Holiness? Do you not pray that Gods will
may be done on Earth as it is done in Heaven? And can we have a higher, purer
pattern? Do you know any that does Gods will better than it is done in Heaven?
Or is it not damnable hypocrisy to pray for that which you hate, and hate all
men that desire and endeavor it? When you say or hear all the ten
Commandments, you pray, [Lord have mercy upon us and incline our hearts to keep
this Law:] And do you hate men for endeavoring to keep it? If you come to the
Lords Table, you confess your sins, and bind your selves in Covenant to forsake
them, and to live a holy life, and you take the Sacrament upon it; And the
Liturgy warns you to take heed that you dissemble not, nor be hinderers of
Gods holy word, lest the Devil enter into you as he did into Judas, and fill
you with all unrighteousness. And if you hate or oppose that holy obedience to
God which you profess, after all this, what must be the portion of such
hypocrites? And in your Creed you profess to believe in God, the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, and to hold a Holy Catholic Church, and the Communion of
Saints; And yet do you hate Saints that obey the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
and hate their Communion?

10. Has not God printed on man's nature such a sense of the difference between
Good and Evil, as that all Laws and Government are founded in that sense? And
no man loves to be counted or called a bad or ungodly, or unconscionable man:
A Liar, a Knave, a Perjured man or a wicked man: And yet do you hate men for
avoiding wickedness?

11. Do not you use to accuse Religious men of some sin or other. (Truly or
falsely) and think by that to make them odious? And yet do you accuse them, and
hate them most for not sinning? To be Sober, Just and Godly is but to avoid
sins of Omission and Commission. And do you at once accuse them as sinners and
hate them for obeying God, and sinning no more?

12. Does it never affright you to find the Devils nature in you, as hating the
Divine or holy nature which is in faithful Godly men? And to think how openly
you serve the Devil, and do his work? No man that believes there are Devils
can doubt, but that the hatred of God, as holy, and the hatred of his holy
Word, and Work, and Servants, is the Devils malignity, and the opposing of them
his work. If he were to write you his Commandments, they would be contrary to
Gods, and the chief of them should be, [Thou shall not Love God, nor serve him
with all thy Heart, and Soul, and Might, nor Love those that do so; but hate,
deride, oppose and persecute them. And is it honorable openly to serve the
Devil? Christ tells such men, Ioh. 8. That the Devil is their Father, because
they have his nature, and that his work they do, for he was from the beginning
a Liar, and a Malignant Murderer, and turned man from obeying God. And can you
think that he loves you, or that his Service against God is better than Gods;
or his reward better?

13. Does it never touch your Consciences to consider that you are the Children
and followers of cursed Cain; and how punctually his case against Abel, and
yours against Gods Servants is the same? By faith Abel offered to God a more
excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was
righteous, God testifying of his Gifts; and by it he being dead, yet speaks,
Heb. 11. 4. Cain hated him because God more accepted him and his offering; 1
Ioh. 3. 10, 11, 12. In this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children
of the Devil: Whoever does not righteousness is not of God, nor he that loves
not his Brother: For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that
we should love one another: Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew
his Brother: And wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil and his
brothers righteous.

14. Is it possible that any man can unfeignedly believe a Heaven as the reward
of holy obedience, and yet think we can do too much to obtain it, or be too
careful to make it sure? Is not everlasting glory worth the cost of a holy
life? Or can it be too dearly bought?

15. Or is it possible to believe Gods Judgment, and Hells Punishment, and yet
to hate those that do their best according to Gods own Counsel to escape it?

16. What monstrous cruelty is it in you to wish poor Souls to do that which
God has told us they shallbe damned for? God says, Without holiness none
shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 5. 20. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Mat.
5. If ye live after the Flesh ye shall die, but if by the Spirit you mortify
the deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 7, 8. 13. What manner of persons
ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? 2 Pet. 3. 11. We
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us serve God acceptably, with
Reverence and Godly fear, for our God is a Consuming Fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29. Be
steadfast, unmovable always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as
you know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. This is
the very tenor of the Gospel: And would you wish men to damn their Souls for
nothing? To lose Heaven, and suffer Hell for ever, and all to avoid a pure and
holy life? What a bloody motion is this? Worse than if you entreated us all to
cut our own throats. Let us try first whether you will do far less at our
request? Will you give the poor all your Lands and Estates? Will you run into
Fire or Water, or set your own houses on fire when any will but desire it? It Is
like you have heard of the Woman who being tempted to adultery, desired the
tempter first to hold his Finger in the Fire for her; Which when he refused,
she told him, it was less reason she should burn in Hell to Satisfy his lust.
If you will not part with your Life or Estate when another desires you, why
should we part with Heaven for ever, and choose Hell at your desire?

Yea we see that you will not leave an ill-gotten gain, or a Sport, or a Whore,
or a Drunken Cup, for all the Love of God, the blood of Christ, and the hope of
Heaven; And shall we part with God, and Heaven, and Christ to humor you?

And what is it that you offer us instead of all that we must part with? And to
ease the pain which we must undergo? Nothing, or worse than nothing. If we
should renounce God and our hope of Heaven, you cannot give us health or wealth
for it: Much less can you secure these or life to us till to morrow. And will
any thing that you can give us, be better than Heaven to us? Or will it make
Hell tolerable?

Will you undertake to answer for it at the bar of God, if we are charged with
an ungodly, fleshly life, or omitting our necessary duty? You cannot answer for
your selves but by trembling confession: You cannot save your selves; Nor will
all your wealth and honor get you one drop of Water to cool your tongues. And
shall we trust that you can answer for us, or save us? When you would have any
man wilfully to neglect that holy life which God enjoyneth, you would have him
to be madder than one that would Burn his House, and Kill himself, if you did
but require it. And what horrid cruelty is this? You are worse than man-eating
Cannibals? But the best is you cannot force us to it; And if you think to hire
or flatter us into Hell, you must have somewhat more to say, and to offer us
than we yet ever heard of; Much less are we so much below Bedlams, as to
forsake our Salvation, lest you should call us Precisians, or Puritans, or any
such nickname or word of scorn, as does but show the folly and misery of the
speaker. You will not be laughed or mocked out of your Estates, or Lives; Nor we
out of our Salvation. In short, Nature is not willing to lie in Hell, and Grace
makes us desire Heaven; And we never yet found that any thing else was more
desirable.

17. And what is there amiss in the Word or Work of God, and in a serious godly
life, that should make us be against it? Does God make bad Laws? Are your wills
and lusts and appetites a better law? Or could you have taught God to amend the
Bible, or to govern better? God needs us not: His Laws are all made for our
good? All his ways are pleasantness, and all his paths are peace. Speak true
reason. Is it a better life to love a Whore, or to please Lust and Appetite,
than to love God? What is there in Love and Obedience to God that should make
it detestable, or make us miserable? Is it a greater trouble to live in hope of
Heavenly Glory, than to live in the despair either of a Sadducee or a Rebel?
You may wiselier tempt us to fall out with our food, or friends, or health. We
know that Faith and Godliness, are not only man's duty, but his interest, much
more than health is to our bodies, food to our natures, and the converse of
dearest friends to our delight.

18. We have had experience of both ways, and would you have us mad against our
experience? We tried the World and Sin too long, and found nothing in it but
brutish pleasure and luscious Poison: Nothing that will save Soul, life or
health: And some trial God in mercy has given us of his love, and the life of
obedient faith and hope: And the more we try it, the better we find it: Only we
can reach to so small a degree as does but tell us how good it is, and make us
long for more. And whether the Devil would persuade, scorn or affright us from
it, by his own mouth or by yours, we hope it shall be all in vain.

19. And who or what are you that would reason, mock or affright us from a life
of obedience to God? Are you wiser than God, and dare you give him the lie,
that we should believe you before him? Or are you better than God, that you can
make a better choice for your selves and us? Are you more merciful than God,
and would save us from some hurt that he would do us? Are you truer than God,
and more to be believed? Are you greater than God, and more to be feared? Or
are you not the most foolish, ignorant and damnably your selves deluded by the
Devil: And shall the words or mocks of such, drive us to forsake our Souls and
God? Should we obey you and lie in Hell for it for ever, it would be no small
part of the torment of our Consciences, to think that we came thither by
regarding the threats or scorns of worms and fools before all the Word, and
Love of God and our Redeemer.

20. And before we change our Obedience to God for another course, let us know
what we shall change it for, and whether it be for something better: Has your
course made you better or happier than the faithful are? Do we not see and feel
with sorrow, that the worldly, fleshly, ungodly sort, are in all Nations the
Plagues of the Earth, and worse to mankind than Wolves and Serpents? They will
not let the world live in peace; striving and fighting for dominion and
mastership, and more of the world, they are like Dogs about their Carrion,
worrying and tearing one another: They turn Man into a more odious creature
than Swine or Toads, by filthy lusts, and horrid profaneness: They make their
Countries worse than Bedlam, raving against that which the God of Heaven has
commanded and made necessary to Salvation. And are these such good and pleasant
fruits as should entice us to change our master, work and hopes, for this, and
worse that follows it?

And who shall be our Rule, if we forsake God and his Word? If Princes, how
many minds are they of through the world? And are they all in the right? Or how
shall we know which is right but by the Word of God? Or must all men be for the
God and Religion of his King? If it were Prelates, of how many minds are they
through the world, and how bitter in condemning one another? If it must be the
major part, how shall obscure men know who those be that can have no just
cognizance of the state of the Earth, whether Papists, Greeks, Jacobites,
Nestorians, etc. be the major part? And how shall we know that the major part
of the Clergy are the best and soundest, when we see that the major part of the
Laity is usually the worst? Or is it certain that the Papists Bishops are
sounder than our Protestant Bishops, because they are more? If we forsake our
Concord in God and his Word, we can have none.

21. What mean you to do with Conscience, your own, and ours, and other men's?
Conscience is Gods Officer in us, and judges of men and actions as they stand
subject to God and his Judgment. To drive Conscience out of the world, and to
drive all reverence and obedience to God out of the world, is all one. To
subject Conscience to Lust or Man, is to subject God to Lust or Man in our
estimation and practice. And is God so easily deposed? And will he give up his
Scepter to a scorner, a drunkard, or a persecutor?

And what shift will you make at home to quiet Conscience in your selves? You
little know how deep it biteth, and how hardly it is quieted, when it is
awaked, as shortly and certainly it will be: Then Judas will bring back his
price, and say, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood; and all the comfort
his companions will give him is, See thou to that: What Is that to us? And
hanging or precipitating himself is next. It Is like he before thought as you
do, that he could have better mastered his Conscience: But you may as wisely
think to conquer pain and death.

But whatever you do with your own, if we should leave our obedience to God, to
obey you, or any men, we know not what we should do with our own Consciences,
nor how to quiet them. God has brought us out of that Darkness and Lethargy
which quieted them in sin heretofore: And we cannot now be ignorant of that
duty to God, that self-interest, that danger to wilful sinners, and that evil
of sin, which would begin Hell in us here: And are not your scorns and
threatenings easier than this?

22. Do not most men at death see the madness not only of enmity, but of
neglect of a holy life, and wish that they might die the death of the
righteous, and that their last end might be like his? Had you rather die a
Dives or a Herod, or a Lazarus or a Paul? Is it not a shame to your devilish
cause and you, to see men live in one mind and die in another? And scorn, hate
and persecute serious Godliness till the Sentence of death is past upon them,
and then to wish they were such themselves. Or if you be more hardened to the
last, you are the more hopeless: But how quickly did such another change his
note, and cry, Father Abraham, send one to my five brethren to warn them, that
they come not to this place of torment? If you mock at these words, you mock at
Christ that spoke them, and sure you look not to be saved by a derided Christ.
And it is base Hypocrisy to deride him, and yet call your selves Christians, and
go to Church as if you served him. Live as you would die and be judged, for you
shall be judged as you live and die. Either hold to the mind that you will
never change, or change it quickly before it be too late.

23. If you know what a man is, you know that his Soul is better than his
corruptible flesh; And if you think your Throats and Guts and Fancies worth all
the Cost and Care and Labor which you bestow on them in the world, shall not
we think our Souls worth more? What Godly man that you think makes too much a
do for Heaven, does bestow more time, and words, and labor for it, than you do
for the Flesh and World? Do we not see how men will labor at land, and venture
through dangerous Seas, and Fight in Wars, and Plot against all that stand in
their way* and this all day, from year to year, and all for Provision for Flesh
and Fancy. And do those that you accuse do more for their Salvation? If you
know not now, you will shortly know, which makes the better choice and bargain.

24 What harm does Godliness and Conscience do you in other men? Had you not
rather have a son that takes Disobedience, Whoredom, Gaming and Drunkenness for
sin, than one that makes no Conscience of them? Had you not rather have a Wife
whose Conscience restrains her from Scolding and Adultery, and a Servant that
makes Conscience of robbing or deceiving you, than one that does not? Sure
unconscionable Servants and Debtors are more troublesome than they that fear God
and believe that injustice is a damning sin? But the truth is, most wicked men
are for so much Conscience and Religion in others, as restrains them from
wronging or hurting them; but no more, nor for that much in themselves which
may restrain them from hurting others.

But if you resolve rather to be damned than to be Sober, Just and Godly, and
obey God against the flesh; Why cannot you bear with other men that make a
wiser choice? What hurt does their praying do you; or their preaching, while
they are responsible for any ill Doctrine? What if they be reading the
Scripture, or hearing Directions for a holy life, while you are Drinking, or
Gaming, or reading a Romance, or Railing Libel, does their Piety hurt you? What
if they dare not Swear and Drink as you do, does this do you any harm? What is
it but the Serpentine enmity that makes you hate those that never hurt you?

25. If you will believe God, it is for the sake of Godly men that God
preserves the World from ruin: He would have saved Sodom had there been but
ten such persons in it: He will not destroy the world, till he has gathered
all his chosen out of it: And do they deserve to be most hated?

26. How exceeding dear a love has God and our Redeemer expressed, to all holy,
obedient believers? God calls them his Jewels, his Treasure, in whom he
delights; He gave Christ specially for them: He seals them to Salvation by
his Spirit: he justifies them, and will glorify them in Heaven: Christ calls
them Flesh of his Flesh, his Friends, his Spouse, they are united to him, he
washes them in his blood, and feeds them with his Flesh, and will make them
equal to the Angels, and will condemn their Enemies: And are not you devilish
enemies to God and Christ, who cull out those for your malice and Enmity, whom
God chooses out to magnify the wonders of his Love on them for ever?

27. The Angels of Heaven rejoice at the Conversion of a sinner, Luke 15. 10.
And rejoice to be Christ Servants for their defense continually: And is it not
Devils then and their Servants and Soldiers that are against them? Take heed;
Gods Angels that smote a Herod, may do execution on you ere long.

28. The Holy Ghost says, 1 Cor. 6. That the Saints shall judge the world, and
even the Angels, that is, the evil ones: Did you believe this, you would be
afraid to hate and persecute them now.

29. Even Heathens are for much honoring and worshipping their Gods; yea many
offer them too costly Sacrifice: What praises does Julian give to the Sun, and
what strictness of life does he Command his Priests? What great contempt of the
Body and the World, did the Platonists, the Stoics and the Cynicks profess?
And shall professed Christians hate those that are obedient to the true God yea
to show that the War between Good and Evil goes on in all the World; even
among Heathens those that were for true virtue were despised and hated by the
sensual.

30. And is it not a self-condemning thing in those that accuse Gods Servants
as making too much ado in obeying the Law of God, and yet make (as the Church
of Rome does) abundance more Laws or Canons of their own, and require precise
obedience to them all? Yea will burn men at a Stake for breaking their Laws;
Does God make too much work in the Judgment of them that think it not enough
without much more, as if Gods Law were too narrow and insufficient? Yea learn
by the Church of England, whose Canons (5, 6, 7, 8.) ipso facto excommunicate
them that do but affirm any thing to be repugnant to Gods word in their
Liturgy, Ceremonies or Church Governing Offices: And can you think that obeying
God deserves hatred, when disobeying men deserves excommunication? Learn of
our late Laws, which account all the Ministers of England worthy to be cast out
and silenced if they dare not take the imposed Declarations, Oaths and
Subscriptions, and do what the Act of Uniformity imposes; And do you think it
worthy of reproach to be as strict in obeying Gods known Laws, as is required
to the Act of Uniformity and the Canons?

31. Even the Church of Rome applaudeth great Rigor and Strictness of life, in
such as will obey the Pope; And they have allowed Orders of Friars whose rules
tie them to great abstinence, to much praying, and some to much Preaching, so
that Religion is all their calling. And shall the strict obeying of Gods known
Laws render men odious among professed Protestants? Yea the Papists honor the
very Bones and Relics of their dead Saints? And you your selves keep holy days
for many Saints: And will you at the same time hate and hurt those that
endeavor to imitate them? Will you imitate those Pharisees whom Christ
pronounces Woe against, who at once honored the dead Prophets with building
them Monuments or Tombs, and murdered the living that succeeded them?

32. You can never come to Heaven, or be saved from Hell your selves, without
serious Holiness, Justice and Sobriety: And will you hate that without which
you cannot be saved?

33. Scarce any sin does more certainly prove you to be ungodly, than hating
godliness: What ever hope there may be of those that sin against Conscience,
and wish to be better, and purpose Repentance, that man cannot be a truly Godly
man, that is an Enemy to godliness, so that this is a dreadful deaths mark on
you.

34. You would extirpate the principle of self-love, which God has made
inseparable from us. There is somewhat in our nature which we cannot lay by,
which makes us unwilling to be damned. If you that believe no Hell, dare
venture into it, we cannot do so, who do believe it. If you say, that it is our
folly to believe that none shall be saved without Holiness, and mortifying the
deeds of the body by the Spirit, bear with that folly which does you no harm:
It is not Men or Devils that we had it from, but the Holy Ghost in Scripture.
If it be your wisdom to give God the lie, and believe a Drunken sot, or the
Devil, before him, it shall be none of ours: Speed as you choose, and let us
speed as we choose: we shall meet your Souls shortly in another mind and tune.
Strive not to make us choose damnation now our Eyes are open: We were once too
easily befooled: but cannot now so hate our selves.

35. Moreover, he that would not have a man live a life of holy obedience to
God, would have him lay by that which he was made for, and that which God
continues his life for, and that which he has his reason and all his daily
mercies for. What else have we to do in the World? Have men going to the Grave
and Eternity, nothing to do but Eat and Drink, and Laugh, and Play, and run up
and down like Ants with sticks and straws, and then die, and call all vanity
and vexation too late? If we may not spend our time in making sure of a better
World, we had rather we had never been born, or had died in infancy, or that we
had a dose of Opium that would make us sleep out the rest of our lives in
quietness, rather than spend it as you do, and then give a sad ac^ount of all:
we had rather we had been Birds or Beasts, Dogs or Swine than Men, were it not
for that life which you hate, and the hopes which depend on it. It had been a
greater kindness to us to have murdered us at the birth, than to tempt us to
live for our damnation.

36. What do you think it is that is Gods Image on man's Soul, you know that
it is said in Scripture that God made man at first in his own Image, and that
Christ by his Spirit renews them to that Image. What is it think you, God
has not hands and feet, and bodily parts as we have? It is the Soul that has
his Image. And do you think it is the love of Money, and Lust, and Sport, or
Gluttony, or Drunkenness that is his Image? Scripture says Ephesians. 4. 23, 24.
Colos. 3. 10. it is Holiness: And this is called the Divine nature, as coming
from God, and inclining nature unto God. Either Holiness, Wisdom and
Righteousness is Gods Image, or else there is none such on man; And then you
make Gods Word to be false. And if this be it, and this it which you hate, are
you not haters of God? And is not that to be devilish and hated by God?

37. While you are angry at them that say few are saved, or that none but
Saints or serious godly obedient men are saved, you would sink all the World
into utter despair, and make none or next none to be saved. One part of the
haters of godliness believe no life to come; And these would have all men
despair. For if there be none, there is none to be hoped for: and they that
think men die but as Dogs and Swine do, must be expected to live like Dogs and
Swine. The other part of you, labor by all means to make themselves and others
believe that the profession of more godliness than worldly carnal men have, is
but hypocrisy, and that such are at the heart as bad as others: And if this be
so, what is the consequence, but that none are saved? For unless you will give
God the lie, or be saved in spite of him, you must believe that none are saved
that are not sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, and live not after the Spirit,
mortifying the flesh, Ioh. 3 3, 5. Heb. 12. 14. Romans 8. 6, 7. 8, 9, 13. 2 Cor.
5. 17. And that no man can be saved that loves the world more than God and
Heaven, and fleshly pleasure more than holiness. And therefore if there be none
such, then none are saved. Hypocrisy will not save men: God tells us that
Drunkards, Fornicators, Covetous, Thieves, Extortioners, Revilers, Effeminate,
Idolaters, cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Ephesians. 5. 5.
And if any man love the world (best) the love of the Father is not in him, 1
Ioh. 2. 5. And if all that pretend to be better are hypocrites, than none at
all are saved.

It may be you have the kindness to except some few. But if those few be all
that be not either carnal men (described Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 9.) or hypocrites,
how few then do you make to be saved, if God be true?

38. Who do you think it is that Christ means, when he says, I send you as
Lambs among Wolves? Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sakes; Blessed
are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake? When they say all
manner of evil of you falsely for my sake: The World will hate you as it hated
me, because you are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World:
Marvel not if the World hate you? As many as will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer Persecution, etc. Who do you think all this is spoken of? It is
not of you, that are fleshly, worldly, ungodly men; Who Persecuteth you for
righteousness sake? Who hates, revileth or imprisoneth, or fineth you, for
living godly in Christ Jesus? Do you suffer as much for reviling Preachers, as
we have done for Preaching? What suffer you for all the Oaths that be sworn
daily in Streets and Taverns, and the horrid profaneness, Atheism, Sadduceism,
Infidelity that men are guilty or? If you did suffer for Whoredom, Drunkenness,
Blasphemy is that for Christ or righteousness? When the Holy Ghost says, As he
that was born after the Flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit,
even so it is now, is it such as you that he means? When Peter says, [They
speak evil of you, and falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ, 1 Pet.
3. 16. whom means he? When he says, 1 Pet. 4. They think it strange that you
run not with them to all excess of riot (lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquetings and abominable idolatry) who do you think he means?
And when he says, 1. Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye should show forth the
praises of him that has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light;
who is it that he means? You Will say, It is Christians: True: But is it
Hypocrites? Is it those that will say at last, Lord we have Prophesied in thy
Name, and Eat and Drunk in thy presence, to whom Christ will say, Depart from
me, ye workers of Iniquity, I know you not? Sure false Christians are worse
than Heathens.

39. The way which you take against Religious persons does show who it is that
sets you on work, and what it is that is the root of your enmity. As Gods Image
is in the understanding, will and executive power of man, so is Satan's; and he
is accordingly described by Christ, to be 1. A Liar and Deceiver; 2. A
Malignant, Hater of Goodness, or Holiness; and a cause of sin; 3. A hurtful
murderer or destroyer. And these are the three ways by which Godly people are
prosecuted in the world. 1. Belying them is grown so common with their enemies,
that there is nothing scarcely so notoriously false which they will not affirm
of them, and it is well if some will not preach it, print it, or swear it: And
they make one another easily believe it. Till experience proved it, I did not
think that humane nature had been liable to such impudent, monstrous lying.

2. The daily business of many is, by wit and diligence to draw men to hate
Religious men on false pretenses: As plainly as Christ preaches and urges
Love, as his great Commandment; so plainly do these press and urge men to
Hatred: But of this before.

3. And Hatred tends to Hurtfulness: What plotting and laboring is there in
the world, to ruin and destroy each other? The malignant spirit is
blood-thirsty. It Is strange how the unclean Devils thirst to draw or suck some
blood from Witches. Nothing more alienates me from the Papal Kingdom, than that
it lives like Leeches upon blood. To read over the History of the Inquisition,
and of their Massacres, would make Men take Toads, and Adders, and mad Dogs,
and Wolves, for harmless things in comparison of some Men. If any would requite
them (or others) with the like, I hate it in Protestant or Papist. The Turks
conquered the Greek Empire, partly by the mutinous divisions of the Christians,
and partly by promising them Liberty of Religion: And when the Christians
thought they should have that, they yielded up the Empire with the less
resistance. And that which was so advantageous to the Infidels, might, well
used and limited, be more advantageous to the Christian Truth and Church.

But though good things may be used in an ill cause, it is a sign of a bad
cause which needs bad means. That cause which is carried on by Lying, Perjury
and Deceit, by malignant Love-killing, endeavors, and by cruelty, and
hurtfulness, and blood, is thereby made suspicious to all wise men. It is a
wonder of impudency in Baronius, Binnius and other Papists, to justify Martin,
a Canonized Saint, for renouncing Communion to the death with the Synods and
Bishops who persuaded the Emperor to draw the Sword against the Gnostick
Priscillianists; and themselves to defend a thousand-fold greater cruelties and
murders in their own Church on the account of Religion: But sin is mad
self-contradiction.

4. I conclude with this great truth: They that hate and oppose Godly men's
obedience to God, do seek to silence the chief Witness of Christ, and to cast
out Christianity from the Earth. Christianity cannot be proved to be true, but
by the Spirit, which is its Seal and Witness. This Witness of the Spirit was
not only extraordinary in Languages and numerous Miracles, but also ordinary in
the work of Sanctification. This Seal is set on all that shall be saved in all
times and places. The Lord knows who are his: And let him that names the
name of Christ depart from iniquity. He redeemed us to purify to himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works: Teaching us, that denying ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this
present world: Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 12, 13, 14. By this healing
work Christ is known to be indeed our Physician, the real Savior that saves
his people from their sins. As man generateth man, and the Father is known by
the similitude of the Child; and as he is known to be a good Artist that can
make others such. This is Christ's standing Witness in all times and places. And
when you would turn this into scorn, and cloud it with slanders, or the charge
of Hypocrisy, and would have such judged an odious people, and have them
driven out of the world, what do you in effect but spit in the face of Christ,
and crown him with Thorns, and call him a Deceiver, and crucify him afresh,
and seek to expel Christianity from the Earth? What reasonable man could
believe Christ to be Christ, the Savior of the world, if he did not sanctify
men, and make them much better and fitter for Heaven than other men?

So that in this you directly militate for the Devil, the World and the Flesh,
against God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, against the Holy Catholic Church,
and the Communion of Saints, and the Hope of Resurrection and life everlasting;
which if you did openly under the name of Infidels or Heathens, or rather as
the professed Soldiers of the Devil, it were less disingenuous and hypocritical,
than to do it in the Church, and under Christ's colors, and in the Christian
name.

And you must be sure that you are stronger than God and our Savior, if you
will prevail to the last. God has undertaken the defense of the Just: Christ
has undertaken to present them triumphant before his Father, and cast their
Enemies into Hell. Are you sure you can overcome him? Vile Worms that cannot
fetch a breath without him! When began you to be stronger than God? Was it in
the womb? or in Infancy when you could not go? Or was it when the Devil and the
Flesh made you mad or drunken in ignorant malice? If so, the drunken fit will
soon be over, and God will awake a tormenting Wit. If you can conquer God, try
your strength first on his works: Stop the Sun: change Night and Day: turn the
Tide of the Sea: live without Meat or Air: resolve that you will never die:
save all your Friends from death. Can you do none of this, and yet will you
venture a War against God? Or do you think to fight against his Servants, and
bribe him to be on your side, and forsake them to your rage? Did Christ take
Man's Nature, and die to save them, and will he now turn on Satan's side against
them? He overcame the Devils temptation on Earth; yea called Peter Satan, Mat.
16. when he would have tempted him not to die for his chosen. Let Men or Devils
go try him in his Glory, whether he will change his mind, and take your part
against his own holy Truth and Servants.

Chap. IV. Objections and false Accusations answered.
BUT I know that as Christ and his Apostles were not hated, nor killed without
pretended cause and reason, nor the Martyrs murdered without accusation; so
none will now justify the scorning or persecuting an innocent person, or a
Saint as such, but they will first make them odious, and seem worthy of all
that is done against them. They will say, It is not godly men, but wicked
Hypocrites that we hate and prosecute; a false and odious sort of persons, who
are unruly, and set up their own wit and will against the Laws and Governors
of the several Kingdoms where they live: They are the very worst of men.

Ans. If they are so indeed, they are none of the men that I am pleading for,
nor you the men that I reprove. But before we come to particular Accusations,
it is your wisdom to answer these few Questions.

1. Have you particular matter against them to make good this charge? Or is it
only a general malicious Accusation?

2. Is it individual persons that you mean, by whom it is proved? or do you thus
accuse whole companies of men? What if one said of Papists, Jews or Turks, They
are Murderers, Adulterers, Perjured, etc. Do you think he were not an odious
slanderer, to speak that of all or most, or the whole Party, which he can prove
but by some few?

3. Do you know all the persons whom you accuse? And have you heard it proved?
Or do you not say this of whole Congregations assembled to worship God, of whom
you know not one of many? If this be so, it is inhumane calumny.

4. Have the particular persons been heard speak for themselves, and give the
reason of their actions? and were they proved insufficient? Or were they
condemned unheard? Or was Gods Word derided and taken for no reason?

5. Do you not know that the Devil is the great Accuser of the Brethren? and
that he has malice and craft enough to say as bad as you can say, by the best
of men? and must he be believed?

6. Are you sure you can make God believe you, that these men are as bad as you
affirm? If not, and if he find a man in prison for obeying his word, and ask
who laid him there, will you undertake to prove that he was laid there for some
crime? If God own him, and say, he is my Servant, will you confute him, and
say, No, but he is a Schismatic, God knows a Saint from a Schismatic better
than you do. Sheep-steelers use to sheer the sheep and cut out the mark: But
they have to do with men: Gods mark is where man cannot take it away; And the
foundation of God stands sure. The Lord knows who are his.

7. Know you not that Christ, and his Apostles and all the Martyrs were as
deeply charged, and put to death as Malefactors? We must then have better proof
than accusation.

8. If they prove faithful Christians whom you thus accuse, Christ has
undertaken their Justification: It is his office. And do you think to baffle
him? Can he not answer you? Romans 8. 32, 33, 35. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he that will condemn
them?

9. Have you not greater sins your selves than those whom you accuse? If so,
you condemn your selves. Would you have God judge of them as you do? If so, do
you not tell him how to judge of you, and even crave him to condemn you?

10. Doubtless you know that you are sinners: And how think you to be justified
at the Bar of God? Is there any but Christ to judge and justify you? And do you
think he will justify his Enemies, that hated, accused and condemned his
Servants?

11. Those that dwell near godly Christians and should know them, are more
unexcusable for their malice and slanders than foreigners and strangers are.
Men of another land or age may be deceived by lying fame or history. But you
that are their Neighbors are without excuse. I speak for none but persons
fearing and obeying God: And you might easily have known that they are neither
Fornicators, Drunkards, Perjured, swearers, Liars, Oppressors, Thieves, nor
suffer for any such crimes as these.

12. And if they are as wicked as you say, why do you not prosecute them for
such wickedness? What are the French Protestants now prosecuted and ruined for?
Have any Judicatures proved them guilty of any such crimes against God or Man?
Or is it not only for worshipping God contrary to the Kings and Prelates Laws?
And how is that? As Christ's Apostles did: They refuse nothing in Gods worship
which God commanded, or any of Christ's Apostles used, or any Churches in their
days or long after. And did the Apostles offer God so odious a worship as
deserved hatred and destruction? When Daniels Enemies designed his ruin, they
said, Dan. 6. We shall find no matter against this Daniel except it be
concerning the Law of his God; And so they got a Law made against praying to
any God but the King for a certain time. Daniel must be cast to the Lions for
breaking the Kings Law: The poor flies deserve death for coming into the
Spiders Web: But did not the venomous Worm Spin it of purpose out of her own
Bowels, or condensate air, to take and kill the flies by craft? In England
there are many that worship God as the French Protestants do, and no better
than Christ's Apostles did: If this be their horrid wickedness that makes them
unworthy to live out of Prison, say so, and pretend no other. But if it be
Heresy, false Doctrine, Perjury, Fornication, Robbing, Treason, Sedition or
any other crime, why are they not accused of these before the Judges? And why
are those charged with them that never were so accused and proved guilty? Will
not all wise men take those persons for malicious Liars, who by their published
accusations thus odiously charge multitudes, and never offer to prove it
against them at the Judicatures? Their accusation shows they want not will,
therefore their not prosecuting them for any such sort of crimes, shows that it
is truth that is wanting.

13. And if they be such wicked persons, whence is it, that they are charged
merely with Hypocrisy, by such as say, that they live soberly and justly and
demurely, but they are at the heart as bad as others. Their accusers commonly
confess that they are most free from all immoralities, and have an outward show
of righteousness, but these heart-searchers see that their hearts are bad. And
do they not by this confute their own accusations?

14. And why is it that they that know them best can see none of the wickedness
which you accuse them of, (beyond those humane infirmities of which they most
accuse themselves). As I have often done, I again solemnly profess, as one that
cannot be far from my account before the judge of all the the World, that
having now lived to the 68th year of my age, and been most familiar since the
age of sixteen or seventeen, with that sort of men whom the Vulgar then called
Puritans (described by Mr. Bolton and such other Conformists) though I have met
with many that had their mistakes and frailties, and troublesome differences in
lesser things, and some Hypocrites intruded among them, yet I never knew any
other sort of men comparable to them in Christian Knowledge, Faith, Obedience
to God, Hatred of sin, Care of their duty to God and man, Sobriety, Temperance,
Chastity, Truth, Heavenly desires, endeavors and hopes: And that they so far
excelled the rest of my acquaintance, as made their grace amiable to me, and
confirmed my belief of the Sacred Scripture: Yea more, if I had not had the
happiness of knowing such a sort of men that in holiness, Justice and Love
excelled the rest of my acquaintance, or at least credibly heard of such, I
could not have believed in Christ, as a Savior of men whom he made no better
than Turks and Infidels; Nor could I have believed a Heaven for men no better
prepared for it. And that now near my end, I see so great a difference in
Holiness, Justice and Charity, between those commonly reviled for worshipping
God but as the Apostles did, and those that hate and persecute them, as greatly
helps me in believing that there is a Savior and Sanctifier, and Heaven for
the faithful, and a Devil that deceives the rest, and a hell that will receive
them; which is even visibly begun on Earth.

Accus. But (say they) it is not for their Godliness or Sobriety that we accuse
them, but for their sin, and wickedness.

Ans. Still this is but General, and signifies nothing. But, 1. What is that
odious sin? 2. It Is Gods merciful Providence that keeps sin in general under
such shame, as that the actors of it speak against it, even in their slanders.
3. But if this be the true cause why do you cull out those that have least sin
to fasten your accusations of sin upon? If there be a conformable Minister that
is more Holy, Charitable, and Zealous against sin than the rest, he is one of
those that is called a Puritan and accused of sin? Why do we hear none of your
furious charges against the common Drunkards Revellers, Gamesters,
Whoremongers, Persecutors, Profane Blasphemers, Liars, and the Families that
call not upon God, show no serious regard of any Religion at all? You can live
among these, and Swear and Drink, and Play with them, and never cry out against
them as bad men.

Accus. But religion, being the best thing, the Corrupters of that are worse
than Drunkards, and Swearers, and Adulterers.

Ans. Such corrupters there may be as are worse indeed: But what is it that
they corrupt Religion in? They subscribe to all the Bible, and the ancient
Creeds? And if need be to the English Articles of Religion. Is not all that
enough? Their many large published writings tell the world their Judgment in
Religion; Such as Mr. Arthur Hildershams, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Greenhams, Dods,
Anthony Burges, Richard Alleins, and abundance such: What errors are in these?

2. Why are they not these twenty years accused of Preaching false Doctrine,
and proved guilty and punished for it, if they are such?

3. If it be not in Doctrine what is it?

Accus. They worship God contrary to the Law; in not using the Common Prayer
book.

Ans. 1. Those that constantly join in the Parish Churches in the Common Prayer
are as much hated, Reviled and Prosecuted as the rest. Therefore this charge is
but hypocrisy.

2. What do they that for matter or manner is positively contrary to Law in
Gods worship: They read Scripture, Pray, Preach, Praise God with Psalms,
Communicate in the Lords Supper: Does the Law forbid any of this?

3. Not using the rest of the Liturgy is a Negation, and no Act at all, and
therefore no act of worship, and therefore no unlawful act, no more than
silence is: He that is silent, and he that omits the rest of the Liturgy,
worships not God by using it; but he does nothing contrary to it, or forbidden
by it.

4. If Peter and Paul were unknown in England, and worshipped God but as they did
on Earth, would you therefore call them Rogues or Rebels, or lay them in the
jail? Did they worship God in an odious, intolerable manner? Did the Holy Ghost
by them write an infallible Rule for all things necessary in Religion? and yet
are they unsufferable rogues that worship God but according to that rule?

5. Are they wiser men than they that have made us another rule or worship? or
have they more of Gods Spirit, and more authority in religion?

6. Do not the Imposers say that all which they add is no part of Religion, but
things indifferent? And are they odious corrupters of Religion, who omit no
part of Religion, but only humane indifferent things?

7. Do you not reverence the Church for some hundred years after Christ, which
imposed no Liturgies, but left every Pastor to use his own Prayers?

8. Do you not harden the Papists that call our Religion new, and ask where it
was two hundred years ago, if you make the Liturgy as now formed and imposed,
our Religion, when it is not two hundred years old.

9. The Godly Bishops of England have ever owned the other Protestant Churches,
and their Communion, who have none of our Liturgies, nor any like it.

10. If this be the odious crime, why do you never Revile or Prosecute the
Atheists, Infidels, Sadduces, Hobbists, and those many thousands that seldom if
ever go to any Church, or worship God publicly at all? Is the worship that
Peter and Paul used worse than irreligiousness and infidelity?

11. Who can believe that you are sincerely zealous against misworshiping God,
when you can ordinarily your selves be in a drinking house or playing house, at
the time of public worship? And when so few of you ever so much as worship God
in your Families, by Prayer, or read the Scripture, or Catechize your families?

12. Is it not a strange thing to hear men accuse others for not using the
Liturgy in Gods worship, and at the same time would have them that refuse it,
to be forbidden all public worshipping of God at all? Does this signify any
dislike of their omitting Gods worship? Which is the more ungodly omission? to
omit all worship of God and live like Atheists, or to omit only so much of the
Liturgy as the Apostles used not? I have known many that could not eat cheese,
as is said before (nor scarce smell it without danger of Death:) If you would
have a Law made that such shall eat no other meat, few wisemen will believe
that it is their health and life that you desire. If a man fail in paying his
Landlord some odd act of Service, will you make a Law that he shall pay nothing
at all? If a Subject neglect paying some excise, or using Bow and Arrows, will
you forbid him paying any thing, or serving the King at all? Sure they that
forbid men all public worship, be offended at somewhat else than that men do
not rightly worship God, unless they think that not to worship him at all is
better than doing it without their Book.

Obj. But he shall be Compelled to better worship.

Ans. How? when he lies in jail he cannot publicly worship God at all. Is
that better worship? I know it is banishment which some would have executed.
And will men worship God any better among Heathens or Infidels, or others? Or
why should other Countries endure them, if they be not to be endured in their
own?

Are not Englishmen that worship God only by their own Book, as much
Nonconformists when they are in other Lands, France, Spain, Italy, Germany,
Holland, etc. as those are here that do not use it: And are they there
intolerable and worthy of ruin?

Did the Apostles or first Churches banish any on such accounts? Will Christ
banish them from his Kingdom? Has he made any such Laws? And is not he the
absolute Sovereign? Has he left his Servants to the will of man, to use them
how they will, or cast out of his Church whom they will? Are you sure these are
none of the number of whom Christ says, I was hungry and ye fed me not, etc.
In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these my Brethren, you did
it not to me, Mat. 25.

Accus. But they are Schismatics, and Separate from the Church; and is not
that a damnable sin?

Ans. 1. Being speaking only to malignant enemies of serious Godliness, I say;
It is not only Separatists that you hate, but Godly Conformists yea perhaps
most of all, because you are more restrained from hurting them. How often hear we
Curses and Revilings against Conforming Puritanes, or as some call them [Church
Whigs.] If they are not haters of their brethren, but Friends to Love and
Peace, you nickname them [Trimmers.] And cursing those whom Christ blesses,
when he says, [Blessed be the Peacemakers, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven] You say, [Cursed be the Trimmers, and would the Kingdom were rid of
them.] It is any that are for a holy life, and obedience to God, that you abhor.

2. As I said before, you spare those that come to the Parish Churches no more
than others: The old Nonconformists wrote more against Separation than any else
in England did. And yet were hated as intolerable. The reconcilers who are
since made Nonconformists, did publicly offer to be Subject to Archbishops
and Bishops, to use the Liturgy themselves if reformed, and if it were not, yet
never pleaded for separation: And yet are never the more endured.

2. But who is it that they separate from? Do they not profess Union and
Communion with the whole Catholic Church on Earth? What separation do you
mean? Is it their Local absence? And are not you such Separatists from all the
world, saving the Assembly where you meet? One cannot be in two places at once.

Or is it that they dislike somewhat in your Forms of Worship? so they may in
others Forms, with whom yet they profess Communion: And in what is it that they
show dislike or separation? They hold Communion with you as Christians, and as
reformed from Popery: They separate not from Papists as Christians: And from
you it is only for that which you say is no part of your Worship or Religion,
but things indifferent; which they think to be sin. And are those Separatists
from your Church, who only separate from that which is no part of your Church
or Worship?

3. Are the French and Dutch Churches in London Schismatics or Separatists,
who profess Communion with our Churches, though they use not our Oaths,
Subscriptions or Liturgy? Liking their own mode better, and preferring it, is
no Separation. If I like your Liturgy better than any in the Bibliotheca
Patrum, is that separating from all Churches that use the rest?

4. Who are the Schismatics in France, Italy, Poland, etc. Those that are
called so, and persecuted as such; or those that impose on them the things
which they judge sinful?

What if you were in a Presbyterian Land, where the Liturgy and Prelacy are
forbidden, and another Form set up by Law; and you should contrary to that Law
use the Liturgy and Ceremonies; or at least refuse subscribing against Prelacy,
and for Lay Elders? If they excommunicated or ruined you for this, who do you
think were guilty of the Schism?

5. Do they forsake the Assemblies before they are excommunicated? Or is it not
an odd thing for to excommunicate men first, and then accuse them for not
coming to Church? I have known Ministers stop in the midst of Public Worship,
and refuse to go on, till an excommunicate person went out. The whole
representative Church of England do in their 5, 6, 7, and 8 Canons ipso facto,
without trial or sentence, excommunicate all in England, who affirm any thing
to be sinful or repugnant to Gods Word, in the Church Governing Offices
whatsoever, in the Liturgy, Ceremonies or Articles. And shall they after this
be called Separatists for not coming in? Does not the Canon show that the
Church would not have them come in, when they cast them out?

Obj. But the Church and Canon bid them repent of that their wicked error, and
publicly confess it, and so come in.

Ans. 1. Is a man's Judgment absolutely in his power? Can a man believe a thing
to be a wicked error merely because the Canon says so? He that can believe
what his list, believes nothing truly. If this Belief be necessary to Church
Communion, and to escape damning Schism, it is necessary to Salvation: Why then
is it not in the Creed, Ten Commandments or Bible? Do you call them the things
Indifferent, and then call it a wicked error to hold them sinful? Is not this
to make it necessary to Salvation or Communion, to have so much Learning or
Knowledge, as to- know all Indifferent words and things in the world to be
indifferent, which men will impose? I would all Church Members with your and
others knew all necessary things. Do you believe in your heart that all, or
half the Parishioners do know these things to be lawful, or understand any more
of them than those that think otherwise? when thousands cannot answer a
necessary question of the Creed or Catechism; nor know who Christ is, and how
he saves us?

Why is there not a Catechism made containing the sound proof that
Lay-Chancellors power of the Keys, and Diocesan Bishops that have no Bishops
under them, and our present Court-Church discipline, and all the Rubric,
Ceremonies and Forms are lawful, if all must be excommunicate that think and
say otherwise?

Obj. If they are so ignorant that they cannot know Church Orders to be lawful,
they are not fit to communicate with the Church.

Ans. Make no Church Orders necessary to Communion, but what Christ and his
Apostles have made necessary to it; and then cast out and spare not all as
ignorant that refuse them.

2. But again, do you believe that most, or all that you keep in, are wiser and
more knowing than those that you cast out? How shall such as I believe you, who
know that in all the Parishes which my cohabitation allowed me to know, it is
the most knowing and religious part that most dissent, and the generality of
the grossly ignorant that understand few Articles of the Creed, do conform. As
ignorant as I am, and hundreds of my calling and mind, I would I were not only
silenced and imprisoned, but put to death, on condition that all that you now
receive as Members of the Church, had no more ignorance than we have. But it is
our lot, to tire our selves with teaching poor people to understand their
Baptism, Christianity, Creed, Lords Prayer, and Ten Commandments, and leave
most ignorant when all is done, and yet our selves after our hardest and longest
study, to be judged so ignorant about some Indifferent things, as to be unfit
for Ministry or Communion.

Accus. If men will not obey Church Governors and Laws, they are Rebels, and
unfit for Christian Society. If every man shall follow his own fancy, what
Order will there be? Do not all Churches require obedience to their Orders?

Ans. 1. The Church has One Universal King, who has made Universal Laws for
all; which must be first obeyed, and against which no man has power. And yet
his own Laws have things necessary to all, in which they must unite, and
Integrals and Accidents which all know not, in which they must bear with one
another. No man understands all the Bible: And are many Laws and Books more
necessary than Gods?

2. Whoever depraveth the necessary points of Religion by his own fancies,
should be rejected. But all men living err in many lesser things.

3. In what Countries is it that your Rule holds, that Rulers must be thus far
obeyed in Religion? Is it in China, or Pegu, or Indostan, or Turkey? Or is it in
Italy, Spain, Poland, Silesia, Bavaria, or France? Or is it at Geneva, Holland,
or the Presbyterian Countries? Or is it only in England, Scotland and Ireland?
And was it so here before Henry the 8th. or only since? And how shall any know
where it is, unless he try and judge his Rulers Commands by the Laws of God?
Will you follow this Rule in France or Spain? Or shall all Subjects judge of
Kings capacities?

Accus. But, they hold unlawful Assemblies of their own, and worship God
contrary to Law, and yield not so much as Passive Obedience.

Ans. 1. You know the Ministers are forbidden their Office, unless they will
take those Oaths, Subscriptions, Professions and Practices, which they dare not
take, for fear of sin and damnation: And they would be thankful if their
reasons may be heard, and if any will instruct them better: And they are
confirmed in their Opinion by the answers, or no answers rather, made to the
reasons already given in. And they are devoted or vowed to the sacred Ministry
in their Ordination: And if there be such a sin as Sacrilege in the world,
they are confident it were Sacrilege in them to alienate themselves from the
Office which they have undertaken. As it is Apostasy from Christianity to
violate our Baptismal Vow, though men should command it, they doubt not but it
is perfidious Apostasy from the sacred Ministry, to violate the Ordination Vow,
though Bishops silence them: As it is Adultery to violate the Conjugal
Contract, though a Bishop should require it; seeing he that married them has
no power to unmarry them, unless they do it first themselves, and prove
Desertors or Adulterers.

2. And the people that are excommunicate, or forbidden to worship God
publicly, unless they will do that which they think is sin, are still under
Gods command to worship him, and not to forsake Church-assembling for his
worship. What would you have these Ministers and People do? They study and pray
to God to convince them, if they take these Oaths, Subscriptions, Professions
and Practices to be sin, and they be no sin: They resolve to be ruled by Gods
Word: They are willing to hear any thing that may better inform them: They
wonder that men accuse them that have no more to say to change them. If they
desert the Ministry, they fear Gods vengeance: If these poor people give over
all Gods Public Worship, and live like Atheists, Conscience living or dying
will torment them. If they do that which they are persuaded is sin, when the
Imposers call it but Indifferent, Paul has antidated their Sentence; He that
doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith: for whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, Romans 14. Change their Judgment they cannot: sin they dare
not: To give over worshipping God, is to renounce Salvation: Change the Law or
Canon, men will not. It seems to me a strange penalty to forbid men to worship
God at all, because they think some Subscriptions or Forms to be sin: More
strange than to say, All that will not wear Crape shall go naked: Or, all that
will not eat Anchovies shall eat nothing. If a man think the use of a Crucifix
in Worship sinful, sure to give over all Worship is more sinful: But men have
their ways.

3. What Worship is it that they offer God contrary to Law? They are willing to
do all required in Scripture by Christ and his Apostles: And were they Rebels
and Rogues? Or is their Worship intolerable?

4. What harm will it do their Neighbors, or any, if they only read the
Scripture, and praise God with Psalms, and preach and pray as God prescribes,
without Subscriptions or Ceremonies? Are any hurt by this? Does the same
Liberty to the Dutch here hurt any body, or break Peace? Does the difference of
Cathedral and Parish Worship break Peace; or of those Churches that have Organs
and Altars, and those that have none?

The Papists are the greatest pretenders to Unity, and most cry down Schism;
and yet if all will but be Servants to the Pope, he will License multitudes of
Orders that more differ from one another than we from you: Jesuits,
Benedictines, Dominicans, Carthusians, and abundance more.

5. Dare any man of Self-knowledge and Conscience say, that all your Worship is
not more faulty, than is the omission of a Form or Ceremony? Will not all the
world be forbidden to worship God, if all as bad as this be forbidden? And how
many worshippers of God, think you, will be left in England, if all must give
over that have greater faults than the omission of a thing called but
Indifferent?

6. As to what you talk of Passive Obedience, though the phrase be a
contradiction, yet the thing meant is a mere cheat of one that has devised
that absurd phrase: And calls Omissive Obedience by the name of Passive;
Omitting an Action is not suffering. Daniel was forbid to pray, and the
Apostles to preach: They would not yield this Omissive Obedience, but they
yielded that which is commonly called Passive. They patiently suffered.

7. Do you not know that about two hundred thousand in and near London cannot
come within the doors of the Parish-Churches, (nor hundreds hear that can crowd
in;) shall all these be made Atheists, or taken for Rebels if they will not
forbear to worship God?

8. I suppose you know that many thousands stay at home in their Houses, Shops,
Taverns, in sin or idleness: Are these thought worthy of a Jail or Banishment?
Or is their course better than to worship God as Peter and Paul did? O the
difference between Gods Judgment and some men's! But Gods Judgment shall
determine all.

9. Are there no unfaithful and unskilful Ministers? Will no Patrons choose
such? Is not the Ministers skill and faithfulness of great importance to men's
Salvation? What if Bishops or Laws imposed an unskilful or untrusty Physician
on you, and forbad you to choose a better, would you die obediently, or rather
say, no one has power so to betray my life? No nor your Soul neither.

10. If you have the hearts of Christians consider this undeniable consequence:
If you will have no union or concord among Christians till they agree in all
things that are of no greater weight and evidence, than your forms and
ceremonies are, you would have no concord in the world, no not between any two
persons: And you may as well say, none shall be endured that are not just of
the same visage and complexion: And then all the doubt will be, who is the man
that will be the strongest and longest liver, to possess all England himself
alone.

Accus. But they show that they are Perjured, false, unconscionable Rogues,
that took on them to scruple Oaths and our Church Communion till now, and now
can do all rather than be out of places of trust.

Ans. 1. As to your Church communion, can you blind men's eyes, that they shall
not read, what the old Nonconformists have written to persuade men to it? See
Mr. Hildersham, Bradshaw, Gifford, Paget, Ball, and abundance more. And did not
the present Nonconformists show the same judgment 1660 and 1661 in their
treaty? And do not many come to your assemblies? And would they not all that
are Ministers Preach there if they could have leave? And have you not, as is
before proved, Excommunicated them by your Canons 5, 6, 7, 8. And is the Oxford
Act (which imprisoneth them all six months if they be seen within five miles of
a Corporation or any place where they have preached within 20 years) an
invisible thing? Do you lay men in Jail by it, and yet think it must be
unknown? And he that knows it knows that it Sentences all such to Jail if they
be seen in your Churches? And is it the course of humane converse, to say, If
you come into any Church within five miles etc. you shall lie in Iail six
months; And if you do not, you are Rogues and shall lie in Iail for not coming?
Just when the Ministers agreed to come more frequently than before, this act
came out, and drove them back. You Will say, They can appear in their own
assemblies.

Ans. 1. His Majesty encouraged them by granting them Liberty by his
Declaration. 2. They have more hope there of escaping out of your hands, than
they have in your own Churches.

And do you not see in Print what Mr. Tombs the Anabaptist wrote long ago to
persuade his followers to your communion? And what Mr. Nigh wrote to persuade
the Independants to come to your Churches? what great change is here of their
judgments?

Obj. But why did not the people do so all this while?

Ans. Because their own Teachers did, as they thought, more profit them. Many a
man thinks it lawful to wear rags that yet had rather wear whole and comely
clothes; and lawful to eat brown bread, and drink water, that will fare better
when they can, and yet take these when they cannot. The people that had good
houses before the fire, did without any change of their judgments, get into any
poor rooms or cottages after it.

2. But suppose they lately change their judgments, (as many no doubt have) you
that think it is for the better are strange Christians that reproach men for
repenting and amending. Do you call them to Church and reproach them for not
coming, and seek to ruin them for it, and now accuse them for coming? Does not
this show that some men desired the present Impositions, not for concord of
all, but to drive some away, lest they should come in, and the land have
concord? And does not this show what men we have to do with; and that it is
somewhat else than nonconformity which such men hate? Your Justice is [Come to
Church, or lie in Iail as Schismatics: And if you come you are perfidious
rogues.] Whether they do or do not, all is one to such judges: who have some
other hateful matter in their Eye.

Obj. But their doing it just now to keep their Charter, and keep from
suffering, proves that they are perfidious Rogues.

Ans. 1. I pray tell men of brains and sense, for what it is that you would
have men Excommunicated, and laid in Jail or Fined, if they Conform not? Do you
do all this without any purpose or hope to drive them to conformity? And do you
do it only to make them perfidious Rogues. If suffering may not alter them, why
do you use it on them?

2. But who knows not that some things are lawful to avoid suffering which else
would not be lawful. It is lawful to cast your goods into the Sea to save the
Ship and men's lives; Which else were a sin: It Is lawful to give a Thief your
purse to save your life, which else were unlawful: It Is lawful to blow up
neighbors houses to stop a fire; Christ proved it lawful to break the Sabbath
in cases of necessity; he withdrew into the Wilderness and far from Jerusalem,
to avoid the pharisees persecution. And Paul was let down by the Wall in a
basket; Which without danger of suffering, had not been lawful: Though no sin
must be done to avoid suffering, yet that may and must be done, which
self-preservation makes no sin, but a duty; To kill a man that assaults you in
your own defense is not the same crime as unnecessarily to kill him.

But as to the other case of taking the Corporation Oath and Declaration, if
you know the case (as you should do before you accuse men) you know that it is
the true sense of them that is all the controversy: No body scruples swearing
Loyalty, and renouncing Rebellion and Sedition, and all unlawful means of
reformation: That which makes it difficult is that on one side, the proper
universal sense of the words seems to them unlawful, and Oaths must be taken in
the usual sense, unless our Rulers give another, yet on the other side,
learned, sober Conformists profess that they take such words in the limited
sense, or else they would not take them; And they argue subtly to prove that
to be the true sense; And our Lawmakers to whom it belongs will not end the
controversy by an exposition. And can you wonder here if men fluctuate in
uncertainty? And a late writer having given subtiler arguments for the limited
sense than were published before, did persuade many: And in that limited sense
twenty Nonconformist Ministers took the oath long ago in London at one time.

But I justify none that mistake in so great a matter. And doubtless if they
sinned God will not bless it to their good; It will prove their snare: And I am
glad that we are agreed that Perjury is a heinous sin: I beseech you then to
consider, 1. Whether those men are fit to accuse them who drive them to it, and
say to Ministers, Swear or lie in Iail: 2. Or those who are of the mind of
Grotius, Bishop Tailor and such others, that Lying is Lawful when it saves our
selves, and wrongs no other: And of those Divines that say, It Is as lawful to
defend my self from pernicious Imposers with my tongue as with my hands.

3. Let us all with fear (who believe there is a God) avoid the dreadful crime
of perjuring the whole land. This whole Kingdom is sworn against all Foreign
Jurisdiction in the Oath of Supremacy; and against all endeavors to alter the
Government of Church or State, by 1. the Corporation Act, 2. The Vestry Act, 3.
The Militia Act, 4. The Oxford of Confinement. 5. And obliged by the Act of
Uniformity. Is it not perjury than to endeavor any alteration of it? 1. What
shall we then think of them that would bring in Popery? would they not perjure
the Kingdom? 2. What shall we say of them that write for a Foreign Church
Jurisdiction, under the name of General Councils, or a College of Bishops, or
of Foreign Patriarchs, of whom the Pope is chief, and the Principium unitatis,
to the universal Church. Is it no change of our Church Government to bring us
under a foreign Jurisdiction? Is it no change of State Government to make the
King and Kingdom, Subject to that foreign Jurisdiction, who may excommunicate
him, and so bring on him all the evil which Excommunication infers? And what
man in his wits knows not that Prelates and Priests are much at the will and
power of the Princes under whom they live? Does not our King expect that his
Bishops obey him? And those that must have this Universal Jurisdiction over our
King and us, are the Subjects of other Princes, of which the far greatest part
are Papists, Mahometans, Infidels, Heathens, or such as are called Heretics;
And if our King and we be made Subject to the Subjects of the Turk, the Pope,
the Kings of Spain, France, Poland, the Emperor, the Moscovite, the Dukes of
Bavaria, Tuscany, and such like, is he not made a Subject to their Lords and
Masters, and much worse? Will not this project perjure England?

3. Whether it be any alteration of Government by them that would change the
Power and use of Parliaments, I leave to Lawyers.

4. But I would fain be satisfied of another case. These Kingdoms of England
and Scotland took a Covenant and Vow, some Voluntarily, some at their
Compositions, who had been sequestered for the King: This Vow contained diverse
matters, of which some are notorious duties, as to repent of their sins, to
oppose Popery, Schism, and Profaneness, to defend the King, etc. It Is not
denied by most that I meet with, that this Oath or Vow was unlawfully imposed,
and unlawfully taken, and many think some of the matter was unlawful, viz. to
oppose Prelacy, etc. But seeing Casuists are agreed, that an Oath unlawfully
both imposed and taken, binds to that part of the matter which is lawful and
necessary, notwithstanding the Conjunction of the rest. And the Corporations of
England are all formed by a Declaration taken by all in power and trust, that
[There is no Obligation, (without the least exception) on me or any other
person from the Oath called the Solemn League and Covenant; The doubt is
whether every man may declare that, of all the thousands of three Kingdoms
(whom he never knew,) no one is bound by that Oath, or Vow, to repent of his
sins, or in his place and calling to oppose Schism, Popery, or Profaneness, or
to defend the King? and whether all may declare that the Londoners and
Ministers, and the restored old Parliament, and General Monks Army who restored
the King, as supposing they were bound to it by that Oath, were all deceived,
and were under no such obligation thence? And whether I am not bound in charity
to think that the sequestered Royalists put a good sense on it, when they took
it? And so whether all the Corporations of England are free from -- And for
what it is that God has singled them out for Judgment?

If you be agreed with us (and with manking) against so great a sin as Perjury,
especially national, let us help one another with Love and Patience to resolve
such doubts.

Accus. But they have been guilty of Rebellion in a Civil War, and therefore
are justly suspected to Preach or hold Rebellious Doctrine.

Ans. 1 Are those men lovers of Love and Concord who purposely make use of
pardoned acts to keep the Kingdoms wounds still open? Did not the King tell you
in his Declarations and Act of Oblivion, that the putting up of all (save to
the excepted persons) and closing for the future in mutual love, was the only
way to the Nations peace? You would tempt men to think that you desire to see
such days again, by trying whether destroying men will tempt nature to a
self-defence.

2. But you have often had it proved (by Henry Fowlis, Bishop Barlow and
abundance more) that no Protestants come near the Principles and Practices of
the Papists, as to King-killing and Rebellion. And if yet you know not that the
War began between two parties of Episcopal conformists, here among the English,
you are unfit to judge of that which you know not: And by reading Rushworth,
Whitlock or any true Histories of such times and matters, you may be better
informed: As you may of their different principles if you read Jewel, Bishop
Bilson, and Richard Hooker on one side, and Mainwarning and Sibthorp on the
other.

3. But how few men are alive that had any hand in those miserable Wars? You
have often been offered a thousand thanks if you will silence and hunt no other
that are as innocent as you, and more than many of of their accusers. And shall
thousands suffer for other men's deeds? 3. What will wise men think of such a
sort of men, as charge multitudes in general with Rebellious and Seditious
Doctrine, and have accused so few of any such these twenty years, that I know
not of one publicly Accused, Tried and Proved guilty, of all called
Presbyterians in all this Land? If they are guilty prove it, and let the guilty
suffer, and not the innocent: Only had I my wish I would Bar Perjury, and
Condemning men unheard.

Accus. They are an unpeaceable sort of people.

Ans. That Is soon said. Who has these 22 two years manifested most desires of
Peace? They that have begged for it again and again: Pleaded and written for it:
Offered their Oaths that they would obey any lawful Commands for it, and do any
thing which they did not believe that God forbids? Or those Bishops that would
not have one Form or Ceremony, or needless Subscription forborne, to save
thousands of Ministers from being silenced and laid in Common jails, nor to
save many thousand of the people from suffering, and to heal the divisions of
the Church. One would think this should be as easy a Controversy, as when
Soldiers are plundering the Country, and the people on their knees entreating
for their goods and lives, to determine which of them is most against War.

Accus. But what need they make such a stir with their Religion: What need they
any more than go to Church and live obediently and be quiet? Why will they be
righteous over much; will not less ado bring men to Heaven? Why do they differ
from their Neighbors, and judge all carnal that be not as Scrupulous as they?
God is merciful; and will he save none but Puritans, or precise zealots?

Ans. Now you come to the real matter of your distaste: I did not meddle with
the case of Nonconformity as it is a Controversy between Godly men, but only as
you make a pretense of it, to exercise your enmity against serious Godliness,
and a handle to lay hold on many whom Christ will justify and save. To all
before said I add,

1. If you think they do too much, search the Scriptures, and see whether it be
not less than God commands? And if so, is it not God whom you accuse and
reproach?

2. If they do too much in obeying God, why do Canon-makers impose such
abundance on them, as if God had not imposed enough?

3. Why do you never find fault with men for being too strong, too healthful,
too rich, too great, but only for being too obedient to God? When Christ says;
If we did all that God commands we must say, we are unprofitable Servants, we
have done no more than was our duty, and the best on Earth come short of duty.
But this which is the Core I answered before. And conclude, that all that be in
their right wits can easilier bear all your accusations and persecutions of us,
as if we did too much in obedience to God, than the accusation of Conscience
and the displeasure of God for doing too little: Which alas when we have done
our best would sink us into despair, had we not the merits of Christ's suffering
and perfect righteousness to trust to.

Chap. V. An humble Expostulation with the English Papists who by Information
and Prosecution seek our ruin.
THough it be not Popery as such that I am here reasoning against, the course
that many Papists take in seeking our destruction, gives me cause of this
humble expostulation: And I speak now of no other, but of them. I mean, 1.
Those that write so hotly and ragingly to provoke Superiors to ruin us. 2.
Those that make a trade of being delators against us for worshipping God as we
do. 3. Those of them that break in upon us with greatest haughtiness and fury,
to take away all our goods, and seek our imprisonment. 4. Those that seek to
ruin us by those Laws which were made against themselves. 5. Those that would
make Superiors believe that our Doctrine is more rebellious than theirs. To
these I offer a few modest questions.

Qu. 1. There are some among you that profess great Spirituality and strictness
in Religion: Serenus Cressy wrote to me (commending Baker's book which he
published) that he forsook the Church of England because he found no Spiritual
contemplation and devotion among us. Such as Nerius, Sales, Kempis, Gerson
Borromaeus, Renti, etc. are really the chief honor of your Church. Much of
that for which I am hated by the Enemies of serious godliness, I acknowledge to
Gods praise, I was first chiefly awakened to by a book written by one whom
Watson, and others of your party grievously accuse, I mean Parsons Book of
Resolution corrected by Bunny. True Christianity and Godliness is the same
thing in all that have it. Your Priest Mr. Hutchinson, alias Berry, writes
that the most of serious Godliness among Protestants is found among those
called Puritans: So that I was fain to defend the Conformists against his
charge: All this being so, is it the Spirit of God that engages and enrageth
you with the most destructive bitterness against those men whom you confess to
be the most Religious, merely because they are stiffest against your Church
Government and way of worship? And do you not know that it tends more
sensibly than disputes, to persuade the people whom you thus hate and
prosecute, that your Religion is malignant, and enmity to real Godliness?

Qu. 2. Do you think it is prudent for you, as soon as ever you get up and
before you dare openly own your name and cause, to begin with Malice, Rage and
Cruelty, and that against the most religious (as you say?) Will not this
persuade the people that all is true that is said of your intended cruelty, and
make them fear you, as so many Leopards or Wolves? Will they not say, if the
young Serpents can so easily sting, what will the old ones do? And if your
infancy here begin with such destructive zeal, what will you do when you are at
full growth?

Qu. 3. You cannot be ignorant what cause to accuse your Church with Cruelty
and Blood, has been given the world by your Church Laws and Practices: By the
Council at the Laterane under Innocent 3d the Council for damning Henrician
Heretics, even Kings that claim Investiture of Bishops, and those that decree
the burning of all that you call Heretics: By the murder of so many thousand
Albigenses, Waldenses, Bohemians, etc. By the Inquisitions more inhumane
cruelties in Belgium and Spain, etc. By the Massacres in France, and the murder
of Henry III. and IV. By Queen Mary's flames; By the two hundred thousand
murdered in Ireland: And there be many among you who disown all this, and say
it is not from the principles of your Religion (when yet General Councils
approved are your Religion it self.) This being copiously opened (as I said
before by Henry Fowlis, Bishop Barlow, etc.) had it not been more prudent for
you to have begun with Lenity and Love, to have drawn men to think that you are
better minded, than to persuade them that you are of your rulers and
forefathers mind, and mean to imitate them?

Qu. 4. Have you not observed that all parties have fallen by forcing multitudes
to be their enemies by seeking to destroy or hurt them? Most men love
quietness, and will live in peace, if others will give them leave: But when
they see that they must offend others, or not defend themselves, it sets all
their wit and power on work against their intolerable enemies: There are few
creatures in the world that have not some power and inclination to hurt others
for their own defense. The Be has a Sting to defend her Hive and Honey. And
do you not remember that your sufferings in England came most by Queen Mary's
flames, and the Spanish Invasion, and the many Treasons against Queen Elizabeth
and by the Powder Plot? And how the French Massacre and Murders of Kings, and
the horrid Inquisition set all our Parliaments against you? And how the Murder
of 200000 in Ireland drove many thousands into the Parliaments Army that else
would not have gone? And will you yet stir up all the Land to fear and hate you?

Qu. 5. Is it not both imprudent and unrighteous for you of all men to turn
those Laws against us, which were made against you, and have so much slept, and
little troubled you? You will by this call people to take notice of them, that
did not before. For my own part, as I never hurt any of you, so I know not that
any of the Ministers did, whose ruin you endeavor. We hear of none of your
sufferings by any such. Indeed these late years many have died as for the Plot
so much talked of. But by whom did they die? Was it not by the accusation and
witness of Papists? Were not Oats, Bedlow, Dugdale, Turbervile, Prance,
Dangerfield, Ienison, Smith, alias Barry, the Yorkshire Witnesses, and the
rest besides the Irish, all men of your selves, that came out of your own
Bosoms? whether the men died justly or unjustly I leave to God; But sure it was
men of your own selves that did it. And will you be revenged for this on such
Protestants that meddled not in it?

And you should remember that you and we have a Protestant King, who has sworn
all his Kingdom against all foreign jurisdiction, and all endeavor of any
alteration of Government in Church or state, and so much abhors Popery that he
has made a law severely to punish all that shall but raise any suspicion that
he is a Papist. And you must in reason take heed of dishonouring and defaming
him, by defaming Protestants in general.

And sure since Queen Elizabeth's days we have had no Kings whom you can justly
accuse of cruelty toward you. No not King James when the Powder Plot had
provoked him; if half be true that the Bishop of Ambrun says of his conference
with him, or that Rushworth and others say of the Oath of the King, Prince and
Council for Toleration, you are disingenuous if you accuse them of cruelty or
rigorous severity.

In you Philanax Anglicus (as formerly in the Image of both Churches) you make
all called Protestants of sincerity, to be of Rebellious principles, and their
Religion introduced by it; and yet profess that you honor the King, as if you
would have men doubt whether he be a Protestant of sincerity, or else were as
bad as you describe. Had the severe Laws been executed against you, especially
for mere Religion, no one could wonder if you desired relief: But while you
live quietly, and Words and Paper hurt you not (that I hear of) to begin with
so much hurtfulness to them that meddled not with you, will disserve your cause.

Qu. 6. And is it consistent with reasonable modesty to go about to make the
World believe that the Protestant Doctrine is less loyal than yours? Do you
think your Books are invisible, and all your practices forgotten: It is none of
the business of this writing to accuse you herein, of any thing but falsely
accusing others, and seeking to destroy us on such accusation. Though you may
thus deceive the ignorant that know no more of you than what you tell them,
that will but turn to your dishonor at last. Are not your foresaid Council
Canons which are your Religion, visible? Have not the forecited writers truly
cited them and multitudes of your Doctors which may better inform men? Are all
the Wars of Italy, Germany, etc. against Princes and Emperors, for the Pope,
forgotten? Was it not a Council of your Bishops that decreed that all the
carcasses of those Bishops that were for the Henrician Heresy (that is, for the
Emperors power of investing Bishops and his exemption from being excommunicated
and deposed by the Pope) should be dug out of their Graves, and Burnt? Was
it not a council that deposed Ludovicus Pius? How many more such acts have they
done? And are not your most learned Doctors allowed to publish the
justification of the Popes power to excommunicate and depose Kings if they
deserve it (in his judgment?) Do not your politic Writers, Casuists and
Divines ordinarily hold that the people give Kings, their power, and may take
it away when they forfeit it, and that tyranny is such a forfeiture? And that
the people should not suffer a Heretic to reign? And that subjects may be
absolved from their Oaths of Allegiance, according to the foresaid Laterane and
Greg. 7. Roman Councils? But too much is said of this by many, and the case is
past a modest denial.

Even those Protestants that were in Arms for the Parliament, and restored the
King, were so far from thinking that their Oaths of Allegiance may be dispensed
with, that if I knew any thing of those men and times, it was principally the
Conscience of two Oaths (the Oath of Allegiance, and the Oath called the
Covenant) that by them overcame the opposition of the other Army, and brought
home the King. It was this that engaged the Ministers of England against both
Cromwell and a Commonwealth: and the Ministers were followed by most of the
religious people of the land, which broke the adversaries strength: It was this
that engaged the excluded members of the (then) long Parliament: It was this
that engaged the City of London: It seems it was this that engaged Genesis Monk's
Army, when they say in their address to him, (see it, in Englands Triumph for
K. Charles the 2d p. 85.) [ We hope to evince to his Majesty and all the world,
that we and all those that have been engaged in the Parliaments cause, are his
Majesty's best and most real subjects; and that your Excellency and the Armies
under your command, have complied with the obligations for which they were
first raised, for the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, the Honor
and Dignity of the King, the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty and
Property of the Subjects, and the Fundamental Laws of the land.]

I am not justifying all that I recite; I doubt not but they were much
mistaken. But if they had then been told that shortly all the Corporation
Offices and Trusts in England shall be constituted by a personal Declaration of
every one, that [There is no obligation on any person from the Oath called the
Solemn Covenant] to restore the King, oppose Schism, or to any thing whatever,
the effect would have been such, as makes me wonder that the Royalists (as then
called) should be very eager to make all such declare, that all these
Soldiers, Ministers, Parliament and Citizens that restored the King as bound
to it by that Oath, were therein mistaken, and no such obligation thence was on
them.

Qu. 7. I need not name to you the sorry fellows out of the Jails, where they
lay for inhuman villainies that have been our zealous, ranting, tearing,
prosecuters? And do you think such actors are an honor to your cause? If it be
good, use good men in it.

Qu. 8. Why do you play your game under board, and behind the Curtain? If you
are not ashamed of your cause, openly own it. Is falsehood, lying and
dissembling beseeming them that say they are of a Church out of which none can
be saved? I remember when Terret, alias Johnson, had seduced the eldest
Daughter of the Countess of Balcarres (whom they stole away and made a Nun in
France,) and she was after asked, why she did so long go to our Churches, join
in family worship, read Protestant Books, and talk against the Papists, and
deride them, after she was a Papist her self, she answered that they had leave
to do all that as long as they did not openly Profess their Religion, and were
not detected. But when once they were discovered and openly professed
themselves Roman Catholics, they must then suffer any thing rather than
conform to us.

Gods cause needs not such juggling and lying.

Qu. 9. Why do you not ingenuously plead your cause against us, so as may
satisfy an understanding Conscience, before you seek our destruction? 1. Your
arguings are commonly fitted only to cheat the ignorant by ambiguities, and
confusion, and equivocal terms; Your queries or methods to the French
sufferers, are only a formed cheat, by confounding, 1. Subjection to
Governors, and Communion with neighbor Churches. 2. Communion with your
Church in Christianity and Communion with its sins. 3. A Catholic Church
informed only by the sovereignty of Christ, and a pretended universal Church
informed by the sovereignty of Man (a Monarch or a Church-Parliament.) 4. The
office of keeping, delivering and teaching men Gods Laws, and an absolute power
to Judge of their sense, and to make more as a supplement to their defects,
obliging all the world on pain of Excommunication and Death: And more such.

2. Any writings which undeniably open your frauds, you take no notice of, nor
vouchsafe to answer upon the importunity of Mr. Johnson, and diverse others; I
have lately written; 1. A reply to Johnson. 2. A small book in answer to one of
your Papers, to prove that we have a certainty of Christianity without Popery.

3. In answer to another, a small Book called, Full and Easy satisfaction which
is the true Religion. None of them will you answer, nor those before written:
But instead of a sober investigation of the truth, some of you raise odious
slanders of my life, and threaten and seek my destruction. I never hurt any of
you, as I said before, nor ever persuaded any to severity against you. I have
long ago publicly proposed terms on which we might live together as neighbors
in peace. But destruction and misery are in your way (that I have observed) and
the way of peace you have not known.

There are three things which alienate common Christians from you more than all
other disputes. 1. That you can go so openly against the plainest words of God
(as in blotting out the Second Commandment, in notorious contradicting 1 Cor.
12. and Romans 14, and 15. about the terms of Church Union and Communion; about
Latin Prayers and Worship to the ignorant, denying the Cup to the Laity,
denying sense in Transubstantiation).

2. That you befriend Ignorance so much, by the said Latin Worship, forbidding
most to read the Scripture translated, and accuse Gods Spirit of writing
obscurely, to cover this.

3. That your Religion lives by cruelty and blood, and cannot stand without
it: Which at least in prudence you should hide as long as you can; Or at least
not design to make the ignorant and vicious Protestants, your Proselytes and
Agents conjunctly to ruin those whom your Consciences know to be the most
Conscientious and seriously religious.

By which already the flock of Christ do (under your Sheeps cloathings) so
judge of you by your fruits, that if any man that is called a Protestant*
Clergyman, do but Write and Preach for cruelty and ruin toward serious
Conscionable Christians, people by this very mark do presently suspect that he
is either a Papist or so near them as that he is ready to pass over to them,
whom he so assisteth in destructive work.

Qu. What must be the cure of Malignity?

Ans. When the heel of the holy seed is sufficiently bruised, the Serpents Head
must be broken. 1. The War in Heaven which formerly cast down the Dragon, must
break the supreme Serpentine Head. II. Then his Heads military on Earth will be
broken. I. The usurping universal Head called Ecclesiastical: II. The national
Serpentine Heads. I. Exterior; Mohammedan and Heathen. II. Interior; called
falsely Christian: I. Serpentine Monarchs, that War against Christ. II.
Serpentine Prelates and their Patrons, that fight against Christ as in his own
name, and by his pretended commission.

And all this by Christ, and not by sinful means.

Reformation is begun a Minoritis at the lowest, for personal Salvation of the
Elect: But a Majoritis, at the Heads for public welfare: And God must raise
Reforming Princes and Pastors to that end.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.

Mr. Baxter's Catholic Theology. Folio. A Third Volume of Sermons Preached by
the late Reverend and Learned Tho. Manton D. D. In two parts. Folio.

A Hundred Select Sermons on several Texts, of Fifty on the Old Testament, and
Fifty on the New. Folio.

Choice and Practical Expositions on four Select Psalms. Folio. Both by the
Reverend and Learned Tho. Horton D. D. late Minister of St. Hellens, London.

The true Prophecies and Prognostications of Michael Nostrodamus, Physician to
Henry the Second, Francis the Second, and Charles the Ninth, Kings of France,
and one of the Best Astronomers that ever were. Folio.

Sixty one Sermons, Preached mostly on public occasions, whereof five formerly
Printed by Adam Littleton D. D. Rector of Chelsea in Middlesex. Folio.

The Saints Everlasting Rest, or a Treatise of the Blessed State of the Saints
in their Enjoyment of God in Glory. 4to.

The English Nonconformity, as under King Charles II. and King James II. Truly
Stated and Argued, By Richard Baxter. 4to.

A Discourse concerning Liturgies. By the late Learned and Judicious Divine,
Mr. David Clarkson. 8vo.

A Discourse of the Saving Grace of God. By the late Reverend and Learned David
Clarkson Minister of the Gospel. 8vo.

The Vision of the Wheels seen by the Prophet Ezekiel; opened and applied:
Partly at the Merchants Lecture in Broad-street, and partly at Stepney, on
January 31. 1689. Being the Day of Solemn Thanksgiving to God for the great
Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Slavery, by His then Highness the
most Illustrious Prince of Orange. Whom God raised up to be the glorious
Instrument thereof. By Matthew Mead Pastor of a Church of Christ at Stepney.
4to.

The Life of Faith in every State. By Rich. Baxter. 4to.

Alderman Ashurst's Funeral Sermon. 4to.

A Key for Catholics to open the Juglings of the Jesuits: The first part of
answering all their common Sophisms: The second against the Sovereignty and
necessity of General Councils. 4to.

Full and easy satisfaction, which is the true Religion: Transubstantiation
shamed. 8vo.

Naked Popery: Answering Mr. Hutchinson. 4to.

FINIS.

