A CALL TO THE Unconverted TO Turn and Live, AND Accept of Mercy while Mercy
may be had, as ever they would find Mercy in the day of their extremity: From
the Living God.

By his unworthy Servant RICHARD BAXTER.

To be Read in Families where any are Unconverted.

London, Printed by R. W. for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster, and
are to be sold by him there; and by Nathaniel Ekins, at the Gun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

The Reason of this Work.
IN that short acquaintance I had with that Reverend, Learned servant of
Christ, Bishop Usher, he was often from first to last importuning me to write a
directory for the several ranks of Professed Christians, which might distinctly
give each one their portion: beginning with the Unconverted, and then
proceeding to the babes in Christ, and then to the strong: and mixing some
special helps against the several sins that they are addicted to. By the
suddenness of his motion at our first congress, I perceived it was in his mind
before: And I told him, both that it is abundantly done by many already; and
that his unacquaintedness with my weakness, might make him think me fitter for
it then I was. But this did not satisfy him, but still he made it his request.
I confess I was not moved by his Reasons, nor did I apprehend any great need of
doing more then is done in that way: nor that I was likely to do more. And
therefore I parted from him without the least purpose to answer his desire. But
since his death, his words often came into my mind: and the great Reverence I
bore to him, did the more incline me to think with some complacency of his
motion. And having of late intended to write a Family Directory, I began to
apprehend how congruously the forementioned work should lead the way; and the
several conditions of men's souls be spoken of, before we come to the several
Relations. Hereupon I resolved by Gods assistance to proceed in the order
following. First, to speak to the impenitent Unconverted sinners, who are not
yet so much as purposing to Turn, or at least are not setting about the work.
And with these I thought a wakening Persuasive was a more necessary means then
mere Directions. For Directions suppose men willing to obey them: but the
persons that we have first to deal with, are wilful and asleep in sin, and as
men that are past feeling, having given themselves over to sin with greediness,
Ephesians. 4.19. My next work must be for those that have some purposes to Turn and
are about the work, to Direct them for a through and true Conversion, that they
miscarry not in the birth. The third part must be Directions for the younger
and weaker sort of Christians, that they may be stablished, built up, and
persevere. The fourth part, Directions for lapsed and backsliding Christians,
for their safe recovery. Besides these there is intended some short Perswasives
and Directions against some spec^al errors of the times, and against some
common killing sins. As for Directions to Doubting troubled Consciences, that
is done already. And the strong I shall not write Directions for; because they
are so much taught of God already. And then the last part is intended more
specially for Families as such, Directing the several Relations in their
Duties. Some of these are already written: whether I shall have life and
leisure for the rest, God only knows. And therefore I shall publish the
several parts by themselves, as I write them: and the rather, because they are
intended for men of different states, and because I would not deter them by the
bulk or price, from reading what is written for their benefit. The use that
this part is published for, is 1. For Masters and Parents to read often in
their Families, if they have servants or children that are yet unconverted. 2.
For all such Unconverted persons to read and consider of themselves. 3. For the
richer sort that have any pity on such miserable souls, to give to the
unsanctified that need them: (if they have not fitter at hand to use and give)
The Lord awake us to work while it is day for the saving of our own and others
souls, in subserviency to the Blessed God, the Maker, the Redeemer and the
Sanctifier of souls.

Rich. Baxter.
December. 10. 1657.
To all unsanctified persons that shall read this Book; Especially of my
Hearers in the Borough and Parish of Kederminster.
Men and Brethren,
THE Eternal God that made you for a life Everlasting, and has Redeemed you by
his only Son, when you had lost it and your-selves, being mindful of you in
your sin and misery, has indicted the Gospel and sealed it by his Spirit, and
commanded his Ministers to preach it to the world, that pardon being (...)
offered you, and Heaven b^ing ^ot before you, he might call you off from your
fleshly pleasures, and from following after this deceitful world, and acquaint
you with the life that you were Created and Redeemed for, before you are dead
and past remedy. He sends not you Prophets or Apostles, that receive their
message by immediate Revelation; but yet he calls you by his ordinary
Ministers, who are Commissioned by him to preach the same Gospel which Christ
and his Apostles first delivered. The Lord stands over you, and sees how you
forget him and your latter end, and how light you make of Everlasting things,
as men that understand not what they have to do or suffer: He sees how bold
you are in sin, and how fearless of his threatenings, and how careless of your
souls, and how the works of Infidels are in your lives, while the belief of
Christians is in your mouths. He sees the dreadful day at hand, when your
sorrows will begin, and you must lament all this with fruitless cries in
torment and desperation, and when the remembrance of your folly will tear your
hearts, if true Conversion now prevent it not; in comparison of your sinful
miserable souls, the Lord that better knows your case then you can know it,
has made it our duty to speak to you in his name, (2 Corinthians. 5.19.) and to
tell y^u plainly of your sin and misery, and what will be your end, and how sad
a change you will shortly see, if yet you go on a little longer. Having bought you
at so dear a rate as the blood of his Son Jesus Christ, and made you so free
and general a promise of pardon, and grace, and everlasting glory, he
commands as to tender all this to you, as the gift of God, and to entreat
you to consider of the necessity and worth of what he offers. He sees and
pittieth you, while you are drowned in worldly cares and pleasures, and eagerly
following childish toys, and wasting that short and precious time for a thing
of naught, in which you should make ready for an everlasting life: and
therefore he has commanded us to Call after you, and tell you, how you lose
your labor, and are about to lose your souls, and to tell you what greater and
better things you might certainly have, if you would hearken to his Call, (
Isaiah 55 1, 2.3.) We believe and obey the voice of God; and come to you daily
on his message, who has charged us to preach and be instant with you in season
and out of season, and to lift up our voice like a Trumpet, and show you your
transgressions and your sins, Isa. 58.1. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. But, woe and alas! to
the grief of our souls, and your own undoing, you stop your ears, you stiffen
your necks, you harden your hearts, and break our hearts, and send us back to
God with groans to tell him that we have done his message, but can do no good
on you, nor scarcely get a sober hearing. O that our eyes were as a fountain of
tears, that we might lament our ignorant careless people; that have Christ
before them, and pardon, and life, and heaven before them, and have not hearts
to know and value them! that might have Christ, and grace, and glory, as well
as others, if it were not for their wilful negligence and contempt! O that the
Lord would fill our hearts with more compassion to these miserable souls, that
we might cast our selves even at their feet, and follow them to their houses,
and speak to them with our bitter tears: For long have we preached to many of
them as in vain; we study plainness to make them understand; and many of them
will not understand us. We study serious piercing words, to make them feel, but
they will not feel. If the Greatest mattter would work with them, we should
awake them: If the sweetest things would work, we should entice them and win
their hearts: if the most dreadful things would work, we should at least
affright them from their wickedness; if Truth and Certainty would take with
them, we should soon convince them: if the God that made them, and the Christ
that bought them might be heard, the ease would soon be altered with them: if
Scripture might be heard, we should soon prevail: if Reason, even the best and
strongest Reason might be heard, we should not doubt but we should speedily
convince them: if experience might be heard, even their own experience, and the
experience of all the world, the matter would be mended. Yea if the Conscience
within them might be heard, the case would be better with them then it is. But
if nothing can be heard, what then shall we do for them! If the dreadful God
of Heaven be slighted, who then shall be regarded? If the inestimable Love and
blood of a Redeemer be made light of, what then shall be valued? If Heaven have
no desiderable Glory with them, and everlasting Ioys be nothing worth; If they
can jest at Hell, and dance about the bottomless pit, and play with the
consuming fire, and that when God and man do warn them of it; What shall we do
for such souls as these?

Once more in the name of the God of Heaven, I shall do the M^ssage to you
which he had commanded us, and leave it in these standing lines to convert your
or condemn you; to change you, or to rise up in Judgment against you, and to
be a witness to your faces, that once you had a serious Call to Turn. Hear all
you that are the drudges of the world, and the servants of the flesh and Satan!
That spend your days in looking after prosperity on earth: and drow^ your
consciences in drinking, and gluttony, and idleness, and foolish sports; and
know you sin, and yet will sin, as if you set God at defiance, and bid him do
his worst and spare not! Hearken all you that mind not God, and have no heart
to holy things, and feel no savor in the Word or Worship of the Lord, or in
the thoughts or mention of eternal life! that are careless of your immortal
souls, and never bestowed one hour in enquiring, wha^ case they are in, whether
sanctified or unsanctified, and whether you are ready to appear before the
Lord! Hearken all you that by sinning in the light, have sinned your selves
into Atheism and Infidelity, and do not believe the Word of God. He that has
an ear to hear, let him hear the Gracious and yet Dreadful Call of God! His eye
is all this while upon you. Your sins are registered, and you shall surely hear
of them all again: God keeps the Book now; and he will write it all out upon
your Consciences with his terrors: and then you also shall keep it your selves.
O Sinners, that you knew but what you are doing! and who you are all this while
offending! The Sun it self is darkness before the glory of that Majesty which
you daily abuse and carelessly provoke The sinning Angels were not able to stand
before him, but were cast down to be tormented Devils. And dare such silly
worms as you, so fearlesly offend, and set your selves against your Maker! O
that you did but a little know, what a case that wretched soul is in, that has
engaged the Living God against him! The word of his mouth that made thee can
unmake thee: the frown of his face will cut thee off, and cast thee out into
utter darkness. How eager are the Devils to be doing with thee that have
tempted thee* and do but wait for the word from God, to take and use thee as
their own? and then in a moment thou will be in Hell. If God be against thee,
all things are against thee: this world is but thy prison, for all that thou so
love it: thou art but reserved in it to the day of wrath ( Job 21.30) Thy
Judge is coming, thy soul is even going. Yet a little while, and thy friends
shall say of thee, He is dead! and thou shall see the things that now thou
did despise, and feel that which, now thou will not believe. Death will bring
such an Argument as thou can not answer; An Argument that shall effectually
confute thy Cavils against the word and ways of God, and all thy self-conceited
dotages. And then how soon will thy mind be changed? Then be an unbeliever if
thou can; stand then to all thy former words which thou wast wont to utter
against the Scriptures, or against a holy and a heavenly life. Make good that
cause then before the Lord, which thou wast wont to plead against thy Teachers,
and against the people that feared God. Then stand to thy old opinions, and
contemptuous thoughts of the diligence of the Saints: Make ready now thy
strongest Reasons, and stand up then before the Judge, and plead, like a man,
for thy fleshly, thy unworldly, and ungodly life. But know that thou must have
one to plead with that will not be outfaced by thee, nor so easily put off as
we thy fellow Creatu^es. O poor deceived wretched soul! there is nothing but a
slender vail of flesh betwixt thee and that amazing sight, which will quickly
silence thee, and turn thy tune, and make thee of another mind! As soon as
Death has draw this curtain, thou shall see that which will quickly leave thee
speechless. And how quickly will that day and hour come? When thou have had but
a few more merry hours, and but a few more pleasant draughts and morsels, and a
little more of the honors or riches of the world, thy portion will be spent,
and thy pleasures ended and all is then gone that thou set thy heart upon;
of all that thou soldst thy Savior and Salvation for, there is nothing left,
but the heavy reckoning. As a thief, that sits merrily drinking the money in an
Alehouse which he has stolen, when men are riding in post haste to apprehend
him; so is it with you. While you are drowned in cares or fleshly pleasures,
and making merry with your own shame, death is coming in post haste to seize
upon you, and carry your souls to such a place and state, as now you little
know or think of. Suppose when you are hold and busy in your sin, that a
messenger were but coming post from London to apprehend you, and take away your
lives: though you saw him not, yet if you knew that he was coming, it would
mar your mirth, and you would be thinking of the haste he makes, and harkening
when he knocked as your door: O that you could but see what haste death makes,
though yet it have not overtaken you! No post so swift! No messenger more sure!
As sure as the Sun will be with you in the morning, though it has many
thousands, and hundred thousand miles to go in the night; so sure will death be
quickly with you, and then where is your sport and pleasure! then will you jest
and brave it out! Then will you jear at them that warned you? Then is it better
to be a Believing Saint, or a sensual Worldling? And then whose shall all those
things be that you have gathered? ( Luke 12.19, 20, 21.) Do you not observe
that days and weeks are quickly gone; and nights and mornings come apace and
speed^ly succeed each other? You sleep; but your damnation slumbereth not: You
linger; but your judgment this long time lingreth not: (2 Pet. 2.3, 4, 5.) to
which you are reserved for punishment (2 Pet. 2.8, 9.) O that you were wise to
understand this, and that you did consider your latter end! Deuteronomy. 32.29. He
that has an ear to hear, let him hear the Call of God in this day of his
salvation.

O careless sinners, that you did but know the Love that you unthankfully
neglect, and the preciousness of the blood of Christ which you despise! O that
you did but know the Riches of the Gospel! Oh that you did but know, a little
know, the certainty, and the glory, and blessedness of that everlasting life,
which now you will not set your hearts upon, nor be persuaded first and
diligently to seek! ( Heb. 11.6. and 12.28. Matthew. 6.33.) Did you but know the
endless Life with God which, you now neglect, how quickly would you cast away
your sin: how quickly would you change your mind and life, your course and
company, and turn the stream of your affections, and lay out your care another
way? How resolutely would you scorn to yield to such temptations as now deceive
you and carry you away? How zealously would you bestir your selves for that
most blessed life? How earnest would you be with God in Prayer? How diligent in
hearing, and learning, and enquiring? How serious in meditating on the Laws of
God? (Psalm. 1.2.) How fearful of sinning in thought, word, or deed? and how
careful to please God, and grow in Holiness? O what a changed people you would
be! And why should not the certain Word of God be believed by you, and prevail
with you, which opens to you these glorious and eternal things?

Yea let me tell you, that even here on earth, you little know the difference
between the Life which you refuse, and the Life which you choose? The
Sanctified are conversing with God, when you dare scarce think of him, and when
you are conversing but with earth and flesh. Their Conversation is in heaven,
when you are utter strangers to it, and your belly is your God, and you are
minding earthly things, Phil. 3.18, 19.20. They are seeking after the face of
God, when you seek for nothing higher then this world. They are busily laying
out for an endless life, where they shall be equal with the Angels, ( Luke
20.36.) when you take up with a shadow, and a transitory thing of naught. How
low and base is your earthly, fleshly, sinful life, in comparison of the noble
spiritual life of true Believers? Many a time have I looked on such men with
grief and pity, to see them trudge about the world and spend their lives, and
care, and labor, for nothing but a little food and raiment, or a little fading
pelf, or fleshly pleasure, or aerie honors, as if they had no higher things to
mind. What difference is there between the lives of these men, and of the
beasts that perish, that spend their time in working, and eating, and living
but that they may live? You taste not of the inward heavenly pleasures which
Believers taste and live upon. I had rather have a little of their comforts,
which the fore-thoughts of their Heavenly inheritance does afford them, though
I had all their Scorns and Sufferings with it, then to have all your pleasures
and treacherous Prosperity: I would not have one of your secret gripes and
pangs of conscience, and dark and dreadful thoughts of death, and the Life to
come, for all that ever the world has done for you, or all that you can
reasonably hope that it should do. If I were in your Unconverted Carnal state,
and knew but what I know, and believed but what I now believe, methinks my life
would be a foretaste of Hell: How often should I be thinking of the Terrors of
the Lord, and of the dismal day that is hasting on! Sure Death and Hell would be
still before me: I should think of them by day, and dream of them by night; I
should lie down in fear, and rise in fear, and live in fear, lest death should
come before I were Converted. I should have small felicity in any thing that I
possessed; and little pleasure in any company, and a little joy in any thing in
the world; as long as I knew my se^f to be under the Curse and wrath of God. I
should be still afraid of hearing that voice, Luke 12.20 [Thou fool, this night
shall thy soul be required of thee.] And that fearful sentence would be
written upon my conscience, Isa. 48.22. and 57.21. [There is no Peace says my
God, to the wicked.] O poor sinners! it is a joyfuller life then this that you
might live, if you were but willing, but truly willing to hearken to Christ and
come home to God. You might then draw near to God with boldness and call him
your Father, and comfortably trust him with your souls and bodies. If you look
upon Promises, you may say, they are all mine. If upon the curse, you may say,
[From this I am delivered!] When you read the Law, you may see what you are
saved from: when you read the Gospel, you may see him that Redeemed you, and
see the course of his Love, and holy Life, and sufferings, and trace him in his
temptations, tears and blood, in the work of your salvation: You may see death
conquered, and Heaven opened, and your Resurrection and Glorification provided
for in the Resurrection and Glorification of your Lord. If you look on the
Saints, you may say, [They are my Brethren and Companions.] If on the
unsanctified, you may rejoice to think that you are saved from that state. If
you look upon the heavens, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars innumerable, you may
think and say, [My Fathers face is infinitely more glorious: Its higher matters
that he has prepared for his Saints: Yonder is but the outward Court of
Heaven. The blessedness that he has promised me is so much higher, that flesh
and blood cannot behold it.] If you think of the grave, you may remember that
the Glorified Spirit, a Living Head, and a Loving Father, have all so near
Relation to your dust, that it cannot be forgotten or neglected, but will more
certainly revive, then the plants and flowers in the spring; because that the
soul is still alive that is the Root of the Body, and Christ is alive that is
the Root of both. Even death, which is the King of fears, may be remembered and
entertained with joy; as being the day of your deliverance from the remnants of
sin and sorrow, and the day which you believed, and hoped, and wa^ted for, when
you shall see the blessed things which you had heard of, and shall find by
present joyful experience, what it was to choose the better part, and to be a
sincere believing Saint. What say you sirs, is not this a more delightful life
to be assured of Salvation, and ready to die, then to live as the ungodly that
have their hearts overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of
this life, and so that day comes upon them unawares? Luke 21.34, ^6. Might you
not live a comfortable life, if once you were made the Heirs of Heaven, and
sure to be saved when you leave the world? O look about you then, and think
what you do, and cast not away such hopes as these for very nothing. The flesh
and world can give you no such Hopes or Comforts.

And besides all the misery that you bring upon your selves, you are the
troublers of others as long as you are Unconverted. You trouble Magistrates to
rule you by their Laws. You trouble Ministers by resisting the light and
guidance which they offer you: Your sin and misery is the greatest grief and
trouble to them in the world. You trouble the Commonwealth, and draw the
Judgments of God upon us: Its you that most disturb the holy peace and order
of the Churches, and hinder our Union and Reformation, and are the shame and
trouble of the Churches where you intrude, and of the places where you are. Ah
Lord! How heavy and sad a case is this, that even in England where the Gospel
does abound, above any other Nation in the world, where Teaching is so plain
and common, and all the helps we can desire are at hand; when the sword has
been hewing us, and Judgment has run as a fire through the Land; when
deliverances have relieved us, and so many admirable mercies have engaged us to
God and to the Gospel, and an holy life, that yet after all this, our Cities,
and Towns, and Countries should abound with multitudes of unsanctified men, and
swarm with so much sensuality as everywhere to our grief we see. One would have
thought that after all this Light, and all this experience, and all these
Judgments and Mercies of God, the people of this Nation should have joined
together as one man to Turn to the Lord; and should have come to their godly
Teachers, and lamented all their former sin, and desired him to join with them
in public Humiliation, to confess them openly, and beg pardon of them from the
Lord; and should have craved his Instruction for the time to come, and be glad
to be Ruled by the Spirit within, and the Ministers of Christ without,
according to the Word of God. One would think that after such Reason and
Scripture evidence as they hear, and after all these means and mercies, there
should not be an ungodly person lest among us, nor a worldling, o^ a drunkard,
or a hater of Reformation, or an enemy to holiness be found in all our Towns or
Countries. If we be not all agreed about some Ceremo^ies or Forms of
Government, one would think that before this, We should have been all agreed to
live a holy and heavenly l^fe, in obedience to God, his word and Ministers, and
in Love and Peace with one another. But alas, how far are our people from this
course! most of them in most places do set their hearts on earthly things, and
seek not first the Kingdom of God, and the righteou^ne^s hereof; but look at
holines^ as a needless thing: Their Families are prayerless, or else a few
hea^tl^ss l^feless words must serve instead of hearty fervent daily prayers:
their children are not taught the knowledge of Christ, and the Covenant of
Grace, nor brought up in the nurture of the Lord, though they fa^sly promised
all this in their Baptism. They instruct not their servants in the matters of
salvation, but so their work be done they care not. There are more oaths and
^n^ses and ribbald or railing speeches in their families, then gracious words
that tend to edification. How few are the Families that fear the Lord and
enquire at his Word and Ministers, how they should live, and what they should
do, and are willing to be taught and ruled, and that heartily look after
everlasting Life? And those few that God has made so happy, are commonly the
byword of their neighbors; when we see some live in drunkenness, and some in
pride and worldliness, and most of them have little care of their salvation;
though the cause be gross and past all controversy, yet will they hardly be
convinced of their misery, and more hardly recovered and reformed: But when we
have done all that we are able to save them from their sins, we leave the most
of them as we find them. And if according to the Law of God, we cast them out
of the Communion of the Church, when they have obstinately rejected all our
admonitions, they rage at us as if we were their enemies, and their hearts are
filled with malice against us; and they will sooner set themselves against the
Lord, and his Laws and Church, and Ministers, then against their deadly si^s.
This is the doleful case of England. We have Magistrates that countenance the
ways of Godliness; and a happy opportunity for Unity and Reformation is before
us, and faithful Ministers long to see the right ordering of the Church* and
of the Ordinances of God; but the power of sin in our people does frustrate
almost all. Nowhere almost can a faithful Minister set up the unquestionable
Discipline of Christ, or put back the most scandalous impenitent sinners from
the Communion of the Church, and participation of the Sacraments, but the most
of the people rail at them, and revise them; as if these ignorant careless
souls were wiser then their teachers, or then God himself; and fitter to rule
the Church then they. And thus in the day of our visitation, when God calls
upon us to Reform his Church, though Magistrates seem willing, and faithful
Ministers are willing, yet are the multitude of the people still unwilling, and
sin has so blinded them and hardened their hearts, that even in these days of
Light and Grace, they are the obstinate enemies of Light and Grace, and will
not be brought by the Calls of God, to see their folly, and know what is for
their good. O that the people of England knew at least in this their day the
things that belong unto their peace, before they are hid from their eyes! Luke
19.42.

O f^ol^sh miserable souls! ( Gal. 3.1.) who has bewitched your minds into
such madness, and your hearts into such a deadness, that you should be such
mortal enemies to your selves, and go on so obstinately toward damnation, that
neither the word of God, nor the persuasions of men can change your minds, or
hold your hands, or stop you till you are past remedy! Well, sinner^! this life
will not last always, this patience will not wait upon you still. Do not think
that you shall abuse your Maker and Redeemer, and serve his enemies, and debase
your souls, and trouble the world, and wrong the Church, and reproach the
godly, and grieve your Teachers, and hinder reformation, and all this upon free
cost. You know not yet what this must cost you; but you must shortly know, when
the righteous God shall take you in hand, who will handle you in another manner
then the sharpest Magistrates, or the plainest dealing Pastors did, unless you
prevent the everlasting torments by a sound conversion, and i^ speedy obeying
of the Call of God. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, while mercy has
a voice to Call!

One desperate Objection (which I have after touched, but with too much
brevity) I find sticks close to the hearts of many ungodly men. They think that
God does not so much care what men think or say, or do, as we persuade them,
and therefore they care so little themselves. For the convincing of such
Atheistical men as these, I shall propound these following Question,

1. Do thou think God cares whether thou be a man or not? If not, Who made
thee, and preserves thee? If he do then sure he cares whether thou behave thy
self as a man. No man is so foolish as to make any instrument, or build an
house, or a ship, and not to care when he has done, whether it be good for the
use he made it for? Do not for shame then impute such folly to the God of
Wisdom, as if he made so noble a creature as man, and endowed him with such
noble faculties, and all for nothing; and cares not what becomes of him when
he has done. Why should God give thee a mind that can know him; and a heart
that can love him, if he cared not whether thou know him, and love him or not?
Do you not see that in the course of nature every thing is fitted to its use?
The beasts know not God, nor are capable of loving him, beca^se they were made
for no such use; but thy capacity shows that thou wast made for God, and for a
life to come.

2. Do thou think that God is everywhere present, and infinite, and
All-sufficient? If not, thou do not believe that he is God; And it is
u^re^sonable to imagine that God has made a world that is greater and more
extensive or comprehensive then himself: for none can communicate more then he
has. But if thou a^t forced to confess that God is everywhere, and as
sufficient for every single m^n as if he had never another creature to regard,
you must need^ confess then that he is not careless of the hearts and ways of
the Sons of men: For they are things that are still before his eyes. It is base
and blasphemous thoughts of God, as if he were limited, absent or insufficient,
that makes men think him so regardless of their hearts and ways.

3. Do thou think that God cares what becomes of thy body? Whether thou be
sick or well? whether thou live or die? If not, then how come thou by thy
life, and health, and mercies? If they come from any other fountain-tell us
from whence; Is it not to God that thou prayest for life and health? Dare
thou say to him, I will not depend upon thee? I will not be beholden to thee
for the life and mercies of another day? If so, then thou art a blinded
Atheist. But if thou think God cares for thy body, can thou think he cares
not more for thy soul? If he must regard to furnish thee with mercies, he will
sure have a regard whether thou Love and Live to him that gave them.

4. Do thou believe that God is the Governor of the world or not? If not,
then there can be no rightful Government. For as no Justice of Peace can have
Power but from the Sovereign, so no Sovereign can have power but from God, nor
be a lawful Governor but under him. And then all the world would be turned
into confusion. But if thou must needs confess that God is the Governor of the
world, what an unwise, unrighteous Governor would thou make him, if thou
think that he regards not the hearts and ways of those whom he does govern?
This still is but to deny him to be God.

5. If God do not care so much what is in our hearts, or what we do, Why then
would he make a Law for our hearts, and words, and ways? Would he command us
that which he does not care for? Would be so strictly forb^d us sin, if he were
indifferent, whether we sin or no? Would he promise eternal life to the holy
and obedient, if he care not whether we be holy and obedient or no? would he
threaten Hell to all that are ungodly, if he care not whether we were godly or
not? Dare thou say that the Almighty Holy God is fain to rule the world by a
Lie, and to deceive men into obedience? Yea the very Law of nature it self does
contain not only precepts of our duty, but the Hopes and fears of a Life to
come, without which the world could not be governed! And certainly they are no
deceits, by which are infinite Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness does govern the
world.

6. If God did not much regard our hearts and lives, why does he make all the
world to be our Servants? Does he give us Sun, and Moon, and Stars, the earth
and all the creatures to attend us, and serve us with their lives and virtues,
and yet does he not care for our hearts or service? This is as foolish as to
say, that he has made all the world in vain, and cares not for it now he has
made it.

7. If he cared not for the frame of our hearts and lives, he would not have
sent his Son to Redeem us, and to cleanse us from all iniquity, and sanctify
us a peculiar people to himself, Tit. 2.14. Surely the price that was paid for
sinners, and the wonderful design of God in our Redemption, does show that he
makes not light of sin, and that he is wonderfully in love with holiness.

8. If God did not regard our hearts and lives, he would not have made it the
office of his Ministers, to call us daily to Repentance and an holy life; Nor
commanded them to make such a stir with sinners to win them unto God; He would
not have appointed all his Ordinances, public and private also to this end.
Does God command all this ado, for a thing that he regards not?

9. Nor would he punish the world with Hell hereafter, or so many dreadful
judgments here, as thousands feel, if he cared not what they think or do?
Methinks men that are so often groaning under his rod, should feel that he
looks after their hearts and ways.

10. And how can the Holy Ghost be our Sanctifier, if God be so indifferent
whether we be clean or unclean? Dare you think that the Holy Ghost does take
upon him a needless work?

11. Methinks you might perceive even in the malice of the Tempter, that God is
holy, and hates iniquity, and his Word is true that tells us of the eternal
punishment of sin. This Scripture tells us of the Angels fall, and that many of
them are become Devils by their sin, and are malicious enemies of man's
salvation. And do you not easily perceive it to be true? How come they else to
be such importunate Tempters of men: which we feel, alas, by too much
experience? Or if this evidence be not palpable enough to convince the Infidel,
How come they to make so many bargains with Conjurers and Witches, to draw them
from God and Salvation, as they have done? How come they to appear in terrible
shapes to so many as they have done, and still upon designs that declare their
own dejected base Condition, and their enmity to God and man, and their eager
desire to engage men in a way of sin? If any Infidel will not believe that
really there have been Witches and Apparitions, and consequently that there are
Devils who are miserable and malicious spirits; who by sin are cast out of the
favor of God, and would draw men into their miserable case, let them come and
reason the case with me, and I shall quickly tell them of so many, sure
undeniable instances, and give them so much proof of the truth of it, as shall
leave them nothing to say against it, ^^less they will still say, [ We will not
believe.] Yea so much, as that I will not be beholden to the vilest Atheist or
Infidel to believe it, if he will not quite renounce his Reason, but give it
leave to see the Light.

12. Lastly, if yet you think that God (the Sovereign Ruler of the world, that
is everywhere present and preserves all) does care so little what men are, or
what they do, whether they are holy or unholy, obedient or disobedient to his
Laws, then methinks that you your selves, and all the rest of your
fellow creatures should little care. Two Questions therefore I must here
propound to you. 1. Do not you care what men say of you, or do to you? Are you
contented that men slander you and abase you, or set your houses or Towns on
fire, or destroy your cattle, or wives and children, and imprison, wound or
kill your selves? If you will make a great matter of what men say or do against
you, can you be so mad (for it is no better) as to think that the Omnipotent,
Holy God should little regard what is said or done against himself, and against
h^s servants, and that by such silly worms as men, that are his workmanship?
Did not selfishness make you blind and partial, you would know, that one sin
against God, deserves more punishment, then ten thousand thousand times as
much, against such silly things as you. Do you make no matter of difference
between a bad servant and a good? an obedient, and a disobedient child? a Son
that would lay down his life for you, and a Son that longs for your death that
he may have your Lands? between a faithful friend and a deadly enemy? If you do
not, you are not men but something else in humane shape. If you do, then you
are somewhat worse then men, if yet you would have the Blessed God to make no
great difference between those that love him above all the world, and those
that regard him not; between the Holy and unholy soul.

And 2. I would ask you, Whether you would have the Rulers of the world to take
no care what men say or do, or would you not? If not, then you would have all
the world turned loose, and you would have every man that is poorer then you,
have leave to rob you: and every man that hates you, have leave to beat you or
to kill you: and every man that likes your house, or lands, or goods, or
cattle, to have leave to take them from you; and every man to defile your wives
or daughters that has a mind to it? And so we should see whether it is that
Infidelity leads men. But if you like not this, then you are most unreasonable,
if you would have Magistrates to be regardful of men's actions, and not God. If
Magistrates must hang men for wronging you, and the Eternal Majesty must not
punish them for wronging him, and breaking his Laws, which is infinitely a
greater matter. As if you would have a Constable punish men, and the King or
Judge to have no regard of it. For Kings are under God, as Constables are under
Kings; and a thousandfold lower.

The truth is, wicked men are fallen so far from God to themselves, that they
are as gods to themselves, in their own esteem, and besides themselves they
know no God: and therefore any wrong that is done against them, or any good
that is done for them, they would have regarded; but the wrong and disobedience
that is against God, they would have nothing made of. And they have such narrow
blasphemous thoughts of God, as if he were a finite creature like themselves,
that can be but in one place at once; that makes them so blaspheme his
Providence, and think he minds not Good or Evil, and will not reward the godly
or punish the ungodly; but ^ere like the Idols of the Heathen, that have eyes
and see not, ears and hear not, and hands without an executive power. But when
the Memorial Book of God is opened, which is written for them that fear the
Lord, and think upon his name, and when the Lord shall say of them, These are
mine, as he is making up his Jewels, and spares them as ^ man spares his Son
that serves him, then shall (those Infidels) ^^turn (to their wits) and the
righteous shall return from their fears and sufferings, and shall discern
between the Righteous and the Wicked, between those that served God, and those
that served him not, Mal. 3.16 17, 18.

Another Objection I find most common in the mouths of the ungodly, especially
of late years. They say, [ We can do nothing without God; We cannot have grace
if God will not give it us: and if he will, we shall quickly Turn: If he have
not predestined us, and will not Turn us, how can we Turn our selves or be
saved? It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs;] And thus they think
they are excused.

I have answered this formerly, and in this book; but let me now say this much.
1. Though you cannot cure your selves, you can hurt and poison your selves. Its
God that must sanctify your hearts; but who corrupted them? Will you wilfully
take Poison because you cannot cure your selves? Me think you should the more
forbear it. You should the more take heed of sinning, if you cannot mend what
sin does mar. 2. Though you cannot be converted without the special Grace of
God, yet you must know that God gives this Grace in the use of his holy means
which he has appointed to that end; and common grace may enable you to forbear
your gross sinning (as to the outward act) and to use those means. Can you
truly say that you do as much as you are able to do? Are you not able to go by
an Alehouse door, or to shut your mouths and keep out the drink; or to forbear
the company that hardneth you in sin? Are you not able to go to hear the word,
and think of what you heard when you come home, and to consider with your
selves of your own condition, and of everlasting things? Are you not able to
read good Books from day to day, at least on the Lords day, and to convers^
with those that fear the Lord? You cannot say that you have done what you were
able. 3. And therefore you must know that you can forfeit the Grace and help of
God by your wilful sinning or negligence, though you cannot without Grace turn
to God. If you will not do what you can, its just with God to deny you that
grace by which you might do more. 4. And for Gods Decrees, you must know that
they separate not the end and means, but tie them together. God never decreed
to save any but the sanctified, nor to damn any but the unsanctified. God does
as truly Decree from everlasting whether your Land this year shall be barren or
fruitful, and just how long you shall live in the world, as he has Decreed
whether you shall be saved or not. And yet you would think that man but a fool
that would forbear plowing and sowing, and say, If God have Decreed that my
ground shall bear corn, it will bear it, whether I plough and sow or not. If
God have decreed that I shall live, I shall live, whether I eat or not; but if
he have not, it is not eating that will keep me alive. Do you know how to
answer such a man, or do you not? If you do, then you know how to answer your
selves; for the case is alike* Gods Decree is as peremptory about your bodies,
as your souls. If you do not, then try first these conclusions upon your
bodies, before you venture to try them on your souls: see first whether God
will keep you alive without food or raiment, and whether he will give you corn
without tillage and labor, and whether he will bring you to your journeys and
without your travel or carriage: and if you speed well in this, then try
whether he will bring you to heaven without your diligent use of means, and sit
down and say, we cannot sanctify our selves.

And for the point of Free Will which you harp so long upon, Divines are not so
much disagreed about it, as you imagine. Augustine as well as Pelagius, Calvin
as well as Arminius, the Dominicans as well as the Jesuits, all do generally
maintain that man has Free Will; but the Orthodox say, that Free Will is
corrupted and disposed to evil. Epiphanius condemned Origin for saying that man
had lost the image of God, and makes it a point of Heresy. And yet one may
truly say, that man has lost Gods image, and another may truly say that he
has not lost it. For there is a twofold image of God on man; the one is
Natural, and that is, Our Reason and Free Will, and this is not lost. The other
is Qualitative and Ethical, and this is our Holiness, and this is lost, and by
Grace restored; No man of brains denies that man has a will that is Naturally
free; Its free from violence, and its a self determining Principle. But it is
not free from evil Dispositions. It is Habitually averse to God and Holiness,
and inclined to earthly fleshly things. It is enslaved by a sinful byas. This
no man me thinks that it a Christian should deny; and of the Aged, I see not
how an Infidel can deny it. Alas, we easily confess to you, that you have not
this Spiritual Moral-Free will, which is but your right Inclination, and your
Habitual Willingness it self. If you had a will that were freed from wicked
Inclinations, I had no need to write such Books a^ this to persuade you to be
willing in a case which your own salvation lies on. To the grief of our souls,
we perceive after all our preaching and persuasions, that the ungodly have not
this spiritual free will. But this is nothing, but your willingness it self, and
inclination to be willing, and therefore the want of it is so far from excusing
you, that the more you want it (that is, the more you are wilful in sin) the
worse you are, and the sorer will be your punishment. And our preaching and
persuasion, and your Hearing and Considering, are the appointed means it get
this Moral power or Freedom, that is, to make you truly willing.

Well, Sirs, I have but three requests to you, and I have done. First, that you
will seriously read over this small Treatise: (and if you have such as need it
in your Families, that you would read it over and over to them: and if those
that fear God would go now and then to their ignorant neighbors, and read ^his
or some other Book to them of ^his subject, they might be a mean^ of winning of
souls.) If we cannot entreat so small a Labor of men for their own salvation,
as to read such short Instructions as these, they set little by themselves, and
will most justly perish. Secondly, when you have read over this Book, I would
entreat you to go alone, and ponder a little what you have read, and bethink
you, as in the sight of God, whether it be not true, and do not nearly touch
your souls, and whether it be not time for you to look about you. And also I
entreat you, that you will upon your knees beseech the Lord that he will open
your eyes to understand the truth, and turn your hearts to the Love of God, and
beg of him all that saving grace that you have so long neglected, and follow it
on from day to day, till your hearts be changed. And withal that you will go
to your Pastors (that are set over you to take care of the health and safety of
your souls, as Physicians do for the health of your bodies) and desire them to
direct you what course to take, and acquaint them with your spiritual estate,
that you may have the benefit of their Advice, and Ministerial help. Or if you
have not a faithful Pastor at home, make use of some other, in so great a need.
Thirdly, When by Reading, Consideration, Prayer and Ministerial Advice, you are
once acquainted with your sin and misery, with your Duty and Remedy, delay not,
but presently forsake your sinful company and courses, and turn to God, and
obey his Call. A^ you love your souls, take heed that you go not on against so
loud a Call of God, and against your own knowledge and consciences, lest it go
worse with you in the day of Judgment, then with Sodom and Gomorrah. Enquire
of God, as a man that is willing to know the truth, and not to be a wilful
C^eater of his soul. Search the holy Scriptures daily, and see whether these
things be so or not: try impartially whether it be safer to trust to Heaven or
Earth, and whether it be better follow God or man, the Spirit, or the flesh,
and better live in Holiness, or sin; and whether an unsanctified estate be safe
for you to abide in one day longer. And when you have found out which is best,
Resolve accordingly, and make your choice without any more ado. If you will be
true to your own souls, and do not love everlasting torments, I beseech you as
from the Lord, that you will but take this reasonable advices. O what happy
Towns and Countries, and what a happy nation might we have, if we could but
persuade our neighbors to agree to such a necessary motion! What joyful men
would all faithful: Ministers be, if they could but see their people truly
heavenly and holy! This would be the Unity, the Peace, the Safety, the glory of
our Churches: the happiness of our neighbors, and the comfort of our souls.
Then how comfortably should we preach Absolution and Peace to you? and deliver
the Sacraments which are the Seals of Peace to you? And with what Love and Joy
might we live among you? At your deathbed, how boldly might we comfort and
encourage your departing souls? and at your Burial, how comfortably might we
leave you in the grave, in expectation to meet your souls in heaven, and to see
your bodies raised to that glory?

But if still the most of you will go on in a careless, ignorant, fleshly,
wordly, or unholy life, and all our desires and labors cannot so far prevail
as to keep you from the wilful damning of your selves, we must then imitate our
Lord, who delights himself in those few that are his jewels, and in the
little Flock that shall receive the Kingdom, when the most shall reap the
misery which they sowed. In nature excellent things are few: The world has not
many Suns or Moons: Its but a little of the earth that is gold or silver.
Princes and Nobles are but a small part of the Sons of men. And it is no great
number that are Learned, Judicious or wise here in the world; And therefore if
the gate being strait, and the way narrow, there be but few that find
salvation, yet God will have his glory and pleasure in those few. And when
Christ shall come with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, his
coming will to be glorified in his Saints and admired in all true believers, 2
These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10.

And for the rest, as God the Father vouchsafed to create them, and God the Son
disdained not to bear the penalty of their sins upon the cross, and did not
judge such suffering vain, though he knew that by refusing the Sanctification
of the Holy Ghost, they would finally destroy themselves; so we that are his
Ministers, though these be not gathered, judge not our labor wholly lost (see
Isa 49 5.)

Reader, I have done with thee (when thou have perused this Book) but sin has
not yet done with thee (even those that thou thoughtest had been forgotten long
ago) and Satan has not yet done with thee (though now he be out of sight;) and
God has not yet done with thee, because thou will not be persuaded to have
done with the deadly reigning sin. I have written thee this persuasive, as one
that is going into another world, where the things are seen that here I speak
of; and as one that knows thou must be shortly there thy self. As ever thou will meet me with Comfort before the Lord that made us, as ever thou will
escape the everlasting plagues prepared for the final neglecters of salvation,
and for all that are not sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and love not the
communion of the Saints, as members of the Holy Catholic Church, and as ever
thou hopest to see the face of Christ thy Judge, and of the Majesty of the
Father, with Peace and Comfort, and to be received into glory, when thou art
turned naked out of this world, I beseech thee, I charge thee, to hear and obey
the Call of God, and Resolvedly to Turn, that thou may Live. But if thou Will
not, even when thou have no true Reason for it, but Because thou will not: I
summon thee to answer' it before the Lord, and require thee there to bear me
witness that I gave thee warning; and that thou wast not condemned for want of
a Call to Turn and Live, but because thou would not believe it, and obey it:
which also must be the Testimony of

Thy serious Monitor Rich. Baxter.
December. 11. 1657.
The Contents.
A Preface to the Unsanctified, exhorting them to turn, and answering some
Objections. The text opened, p. 1. to 9. Doct. 1. It is the unchangeable Law of
God that wicked men must Turn or Die, p. 9. Proved, p. 11. Obj. God will not be
so unmerciful as to Damn us: Answered, p. 14, 15. The Use, p. 22. Who are
wicked men, and what Conversion is; and how we may know whether we are wicked
or Converted p. 27. to p. 45. Applied, p. 45. to p. 70. Doct. 2. It is the
Promise of God that the wicked shall live if they will but Turn; that is,
unfeignedly and thoroughly Turn, p. 70. Proved, p. 77. Doct. 3. God takes
pleasure in men's Conversion and salvation; but not (...) their death or
damnation: He had rather they would Turn and Live; then go on and Die, p 85.
Expounded, to p. 93. Proved, p. 93. to p. 103. Doct. 4. The Lord has confirmed
it to us by his Oath, that he has no Pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that he Turn and Live: that he may leave man no pretense to doubt of it, p.
103. Use. Who is it then that takes pleasure in men's sin and death? Not God,
nor Ministers, nor any good men, p. 106. Doct. 5. So earnest is God for the
Conversion of sinners, that he doubleth his commands and exhortations with
vehemence, Turn ye, Turn ye, Applied. p. 120. Some Motives to obey Gods Call
and Turn, p. 126. Doct. 6. The Lord condescendeth to reason the case with
Unconverted sinners, and to ask them, Why they will die? p. 152. A strange
Disputation. 1. For the Question. 2. The Disputants. Wicked men will die, or
destroy themselves, p. 154. Use. The sinners cause is certainly unreasonable,
p. 163. Their seeming Reasons confuted. p. 175, Qu. Why are men so unreasonable
and loath to Turn, and will destroy themselves? p. 200. answered. Doct. 7. If
after all this men will not turn, it is not long of God that they are
condemned, but of themselves, even of their own wilfulness. They die because
they will die, that is, because they will not turn, p. 209. Use 1. How unfit
the wicked are to charge God with their Damnation. It is not because God is
unmerciful, but because they are cruel and merciless to themselves, p. 225.
Obj. We cannot convert our selves; nor have we Free Will. Answered, p. 235.
(and in the Preface.) Use. 2. The subtilty of Satan; the deceitfulness of sin;
and the folly of sinners; manifested, p. 238, Use. 3. No wonder if the wicked
would hinder the Conversion and Salvation of others, p. 240. Use 4. Man is the
greatest enemy to himself, p. 241. Man's destruction is of himself, proved, p.
242. The heinous aggravations of self-destroying, p. 257. The concluding
Exhortation, p. 263. Ten Directions for those that had rather Turn then Die, p.
273. to the end.
These Books following of the same Authors, are also Printed for Nevil Simmons
Book-selseller in Kederminster.
TRue Christianity, or Christ's Absolute dominion, and man's necessary
self-resignation and Subjection, in two Assize Sermons preached at Worcester, in
12o.

A Sermon of Judgment preached at Paul's, before the Honorable Lord Major and
Aldermen of the City of London, December. 17. 1654. and now enlarged, in 12o.

Making light of Christ and Salvation ^oo often the Issue of Gospel Invitations,
manifest in a Sermon preached at Law-^eace Jury in London, 8o.

The Agreement of diverse Ministers of Christ in the County of Worcester for
Catechizing or personal Instructing all in their several Parishes that will
Consent thereunto, containing 1. The Articles of our Agreement. 2. An
Exhortation to the people to submit to this necessary work. 3. The Profession
of Faith and Catechism, in 8o.

Guildas Salvianus, the Reformed Pastor, showing the nature of the Pastoral
work, especially in private instruction and Catechizing, in 8o.

Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments, and the True Nature of Visible
Christianity, 4o.

Of Justification: four Disputation^ clearing and amicably defending the Truth,
against the unnecessary Oppositions of diverse Learned and Reverend Brethren, 4o.

A Treatise of Conversion preached and now published for the use of those that
are strangers to a true Conversion, especially the grossly Ignorant and Ungodly*
4*

One sheet for the Ministry against the Malignants of all sorts.

A Winding Sheet for Popery.

One sheet against the Quakers.

A second sheet for the Ministry, Justifying our Calling against Quakers,
Seekers and Papists, and all that deny us to be the Ministers of Christ.

Directions to Justices of Peace, especially in Corporations, to the discharge
of their duty to God, written at the request of a Magistrate, and Published for
the use of others that need it.

The Crucifying of the world, by the Cross of Christ: With a Preface to the
Nobles, Gentlemen, and all the Rich, erecting them how they may be Richer.

A CALL TO THE Unconverted.
Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live.
Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die OF house of Israel?


IT has been the astonishing wonder of many a man as well as me, to read in
the holy Scrippture how few will be saved, and that the greatest part even of
those that are called, will be everlastingly shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and be tormented with the Devils in Eternal fire. Infidels believe not this
when they read it, and therefore must feel it. Those that do believe it, are
forced to cry out with Paul Romans 11.33. Oh the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways
past finding out! But nature it self does teach us all to lay the blame. of
evil works upon the doers; and therefore when we see any heinous thing done, a
principle of justice does provoke us to enquire after him that did it, that the
evil of the work may return the evil of shame upon the author. If we saw a man
killed and cut in pieces by the way, we would presently ask, Oh who did this
cruel deed? If the town were wilfully set on fire, you would ask, What wicked
wretch did this? So when we read that the most will be firebrands of hell for
ever, we must needs think with our selves, How comes this to pass? and who is
it long of? Who is it that is so cruel as to be the cause of such a thing as
this? And we can meet with few that will own the guilt. It is indeed confessed by
all that Satan is the cause: but that does not resolve the doubt, because he is
not the principal cause. He does not force men to sin, but tempt them to it,
and leave it to their own wills whether they will do it or not. He does not
carry men to an Alehouse, and force open their mouths, and pour in the drink,
nor does he hold them that they cannot go to Gods service, nor does he force
their hearts from holy thoughts. It lies therefore between God himself and the
sinner: One of them must needs be the principal cause of all this misery,
which ever it is: For there is no other to cast it upon; And God disclaimeth
it. He will not take it upon him. And the wicked disclaim it usually, and they
will not take it upon them. And this is the Controversy that is here managing
in my text.

The Lord complains of the people; and the people think it is long of God.
The same controversy is handled Chap. 18. where Verse 25. they plainly say,
that the way of the Lord is not equal, and God says, It is their ways that
are not equal. So here they say, Verse 19. If our transgressions and our sins
be upon us, and we pine away in them, how shall we then live* As if they should
say, If we must die and be miserable, how can we help it? As if it were not
long of them, but God. But God in my text does clear himself of it, and tells
them how they may help it if they will, and persuades them to use the means,
and if they will not be persuaded, he lets them know that it is long of
themselves; and if this will not satisfy them, he will not therefore forbear
to punish them: It is He that will be the Judge; and he will Judge them
according to their ways; They are no Judges of him or of themselves; as
wanting authority, and wisdom, and impartiality: Nor is it their cavilling and
quarrelling with God that shall serve their turn, or save them from the
execution of Justice which they murmur at.

The words of this Verse contain, 1. Gods purgation or clearing of himself from
the blame of their Destruction. This he does, not by disowning his Law, that
the wicked shall die, nor by disowning his Judgment and Execution according to
that Law; or giving them any hope that the Law shall not be executed; But by
professing that it is not their death that he takes pleasure in, but their
returning rather, that they may live: And this he confirms to them by his
Oath. 2. An express Exhortation to the wicked to Return; wherein God does not
only Command, but persuade, and condescend also to reason the case with them,
Why they will die? The direct end of this Exhortation is, That they may Turn
and Live. The Secundary or reserved ends, upon supposition that this is not
attained, are these two. First to convince them by the means which he used,
that it is not long of God if they be miserable. Secondly to convince them from
their manifest wilfulness in rejecting all his commands and persuasions, that
it is long of themselves: and they die even because they Will die.

The substance of the Text does lie in these observations following.

Doct. 1. It is the unchangable Law of God that wicked men must Turn or Dye.
Doct. 2. It is the promise of God, that the wicked shall live if they will but
Turn. Doct. 3. God takes pleasure in men's Conversion and Salvation, but not in
their death or damnation. He had rather they would return and live, then go on
and die. Doct. 4. This is a most certain truth, which because God would not
have men to question, he has confirmed it to them solemnly by his Oath. Doct.
5. The Lord does redouble his commands and persuasions to the wicked to Turn.
^^ct. 6. The Lord condescendeth to reason the case with them, and asks the
wicked, Why they will die? Doct. 7. If after all this the wicked will not turn,
it is not long of God that they perish, but of themselves: their own wilfulness
is the cause of their damnation, they therefore die, because they will die.
Having laid the Text open before your eyes in these plain propositions, I
shall next speak somewhat of each of them in order; though very briefly.

Doct. 1. IT is the unchangeable Law of God that wicked men must Turn or Die.
If you will believe God, believe this: There is but one of these two ways for
every wicked man, either Conversion or Damnation. I know the wicked will hardly
be persuaded either of the truth or Equity of this. No wonder if the Guilty
quarrel with the Law. Few men are apt to believe that which they would not have
to be true: And fewer would have that to be true which they apprehend to be
against them. But it is not quarrelling with the Law, or with the Judge, that
will save the Malefactor. Believing and regarding the Law might have prevented
his death: but denying and accusing ^t will but hasten it. If it were not so,
an hundred would bring their reasons against the Law, for one that would brind
his reason to the Law: and men would rather choose to give their reasons why
they should not be punished, then to hear the commands and reasons of their
Governors which require them to obey. The Law was not made for you to Judge,
but that you might be ruled and Judged by it.

But if there be any so blind (...) to venture to question, either the Truth or
the Justice of this Law of God, I shall briefly give you that Evidence of both,
which not thinks should satisfy a reasonable man.

And first, if you doubt whether this be the word of God or not, besides an
hundred other texts, you may be satisfied by these few. Mat. 18.3. Verily I say
unto you, except ye be converted and become as little children, ye cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. John 3, 3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except
a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God 2 Cor. 5.17. If a man be
in Christ, he is a new creature: Old things are past away, behold all thing are
become new. Colos, 3.9.10. Ye have put off the old man with his deeds, and have
put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that
created him. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness none shall see God. Romans 8.8, 9. So
then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Now if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. 1 Pet.
1.3. According to his abundant grace he has begotten us again to a lively
hope. Verse 23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet.
2.1, 2. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and
envies, and evil speakings, as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
word, that ye may grow thereby. Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into
hell, and all the Nations that forget God. Psalm 11.5. And the Lord loves the
righteous, but the wicked his soul hates.

As I need not stay to open these Texts which are so plain, so I think I need
not add any more of that multitude which speak the like: If thou be a man that
do believe the Word of God: here is already enough to satisfy thee, that the
wicked must be converted or condemned. You are already brought so far, that you
must either confess that this is true, or say plainly* you will not believe the
Word of God. And if once you be come to that pass, there is but small hopes of
you: look to your selves as well as you can; for its like you will not be long
out of Hell. You would be ready to fly in the face of him that should give you
the lie: and yet dare you give the lie to God? But if you tell God plainly you
will not believe him, blame him not if he never warn you more, or if he forsake
you and give you up as hopeless. For to what purpose should he warn you if you
will not believe him? should he send an Angel from heaven to you, its seems you
would not believe. For an Angel can speak but the Word of God: and if an Angel
should bring you another Gospel, you are not to receive it, but to hold him
accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. And surely there is no Angel to be believed before the
Son of God, who came from the Father to bring us this Doctrine, If he be not to
be believed, then all the Angels in heaven are not to be believed. And if you
stand on these terms with God, I shall leave you till he deal with you in a
more convincing way. God has a voice that will make you hear. Though he
entreat you to hear the voice of his Gospel, he will make you hear the voice of
his condemning Sentence, without entreaty. We cannot make you believe against
your wills: but God will make you feel against your wills.

But let us hear what reason you have, why you will not believe this word of
God, which tells us that the wicked must be Converted or condemned? I know your
reason; it is because that you judge it unlikely that God should be so
unmerciful: you think it cruelty to damn men everlastingly for so small a thing
as a sinful life. And this leads us up to the second thing, which is to
justify the Equity of God in his Laws and Judgments.

And first I think you will not deny but that it is most suitable to an immortal
soul, to be ruled by Laws that promise an immortal reward, and threaten an
endless punishment. Otherwise the Law should not be suited to the nature of ^he
subject; who will not be fully ruled by any lower means, then the Hopes or
Fears of everlasting things: As it is in case of temporal punishment; if a Law
were now made that the most heinous crimes shall be punished with an hundred
years captivity, this might be of some efficacy, as being equal to our lives.
But if there had been no other penalties before the flood, when men lived eight
or nine hundred years, it would not have been sufficient, because men would
know that they might have so many hundred years impunity afterward. So is it in
our present case.

2. I suppose you will confess that the promise of an endless and unconceivable
glory is not unsuitable to the wisdom of God, or the case of man. And why then
should you not think so of the Threatening of an endless and unspeakable misery?

3. When you find it in the Word of God that so it is, and so it will be, do
you think your selves fit to contradict this Word? Will you call your Maker to
the Bar? and examine his Word upon the accusation of falsehood? will you sit
upon him and judge him by the Law of your Conceits? Are you wiser, and better,
and righteouser then he? Must the God of heaven come to School to you to learn
wisdom? Must infinite wisdom learn of folly? and infinite Goodness be corrected
by a swinish sinner, that cannot keep himself an hour clean? Must the Almighty
stand at the Bar of a worm? Oh horrid arrogance of senseless dust! Shall every
mole, or cold, or dunghill, accuse the Sun of darkness, and undertake to
illuminate the world? Where were you when the Almighty made these Laws, that he
did not call you to his counsel? Surely he made them before you were born,
without desiring your advice: and you come into the world too late for to
reverse them: if you could have done so great a work, you should have stepped out
of your Nothingness, and have contradicted Christ when he was on earth, or
Moses before him, or have saved A^am and his sinful progeny from the threatened
death, that so there might have been no need of Christ! And what if God
withdraw his patience and sustentation, and let you drop into Hell while you
are quarrelling with his Word, will you then believe that there is a Hell?

4. If (...) such an evil that it requires the death of Christ for its
expiation, no wonder if it deserve our everlasting misery.

5. And if the sin of the Devils deserved an endless torment, why not also the
sin of man?

6. And me thinks you should perceive, that it is not possible for the best of
men, much less for the wicked to be competent Judges of the desert of sin. Alas
we are all both blind and partial. You can never know fully the desert of sin,
till you fully know the evil of sin; and you can never fully know the evil of
sin, till you fully know, 1. The Excellency of the soul which it deformeth. 2.
And the excellency of holiness which it does obliterate. 3. And the reason and
excellency of the Law which it violateth. And 4. the excellency of the Glory
which it does despise. And 5. the excellency and office of Reason which it
treads down. 6. No nor till you know the infinite Excellency, Almightiness
and Holiness of that God against whom it is committed. When you fully know all
these, you shall fully know the desert of sin. Besides, you know that the
offender is too partial to judge the Law, or the proceedings of his Judge. We
judge by feeling, which blinds our reason. We see in common worldly things that
most men think the cause is right which is their own: and that all is wrong
that's done against them: and let the most wise, or just, impartial friends
persuade them to the contrary, and its all in vain. There Is few children but
think the Father is unmerciful, or deals hardly with them, if he whip them.
There Is scarce the vilest swinish wretch, but thinks the Church does wrong
him if they excommunicate him: Nor scarce a Thief or Murderer that is hanged,
but would accuse the Law and Judge of cruelty, if that would serve turn.

7. Can you think that an unholy soul is fit for heaven? Alas, they cannot love
God here, nor do him any service which he can accept. They are contrary to God,
they loath that which he most loves; and love that which he abhors: They
are incapable of that imperfect Communion with him, which his Saints do here
partake of. How then can they live in that perfect love of him, and full
delights, and Communion with him, which is the blessedness of heaven? You do
not accuse your selves of unmercifulness, if you make not your enemy your bosom
Counselor; or if you take not your swine to bed and board with you; no nor if
you take away his life, though he never sinned. And yet will you blame the
absolute Lord, the most wise and gracious Sovereign of the world if he condemn
the Unconverterted to perpetual misery?

Use.
I Beseech you now, all that love your souls, that instead of quarrelling with
God and with his Word, you will presently stoop to it, and use it for your
good. All you that are yet unconverted in this Assembly, take this as the
undoubted truth of God: You must ere long be converted or condemned. There is
no other way, but Turn or Dye. When God that cannot lie has told you this;
When you hear it from the Maker and Judge of the world its time for him that
has ears to hear. By this time you may see what you have to trust to. You are
but dead and damned men, except you will be converted. Should I tell you
otherwise, I should deceive you with a lie. Should I hide this from you, I
should undo you, and be guilty of your blood, as the verses before my Text
assure me, Ver. 8. When I say to the wicked, O wicked man thou shall surely
dye, if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man
shall dye in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. You see
then, though this be a rough unwelcome Doctrine, its such as we must preach,
and you must hear. It is easier to hear of Hell then feel it. If your
necessities did not require it, we would not gall your tender ears with truths
that seem so harsh and grievous. Hell would not be so full, if people were but
willing to know their case, and to hear and think of it. The reason why so few
escape it, is because they strive not to enter in at the strait gate of
Conversion, and to go the narrow way of holines^ while they have time: and they
strive not because they be not wakened to a lively feeling of the danger they
are in: and they be not wakened, because they are does to hear or think of it;
and that is partly through foolish tenderness, and carnal self-love, and partly
because they do not well believe the Word that threatens it. If you will but
thoroughly believe this truth, me thinks the weight of it should force you to
remember it; and it should follow you, and give you no rest till you are
converted. If you had but once heard this word by the voice of an Angel, Thou
must be Converted or Condemned; Turn or Die: would it not stick in your mind,
and haunt you night and day, so that in your sinning you would remember it, and
at your labor you would remember it, as if the voice were still in your ears,
Turn or Die. O happy were your souls if it might thus work with you, and never
be forgotten, or let you alone, till it have driven home your hearts to God.
But if you will cast it out by forgetfulness or unbelief, how can it work to
your Conversion and Salvation? But take this with you to your sorrow; though
you may put this out of your minds, you cannot put it out of the Bible; but
there it will stand as a sealed truth which you shall experimentally know for
ever, that there is no other way but Turn or Die.

O what is the matter then that the hearts of sinners be not pierced with such a
weighty truth! A man would think now, that every Unconverted soul that hears
these words, should be pricked to the heart, and think with themselves, This is
my own case; and never be quiet till they found themselves converted. Believe
it Sirs, this drowsy careless temper will not last long. Conversion and
Condemnation are both of them awakening things; and one of them will make you
feel ere long. I can foretell it as truly as if I saw it with my eyes, that
either Grace or Hell will shortly bring these matters to the quick, and make
you say, What have I done? What a fool^^^ wicked course have I taken! The
scornful, and the stupid state of sinners will last but a little while. As soon
as they either Turn or Die, the presumptuous dream will be at an end, and then
their wits and feeling will return.

BUT I foresee there are two things that are like to harden the unconverted,
and make me lose all my labor, except they can be taken out of the way: and
that is the misunderstanding of these two words, [ The Wicked] and [ Turn.]
Some will think with themselves, Its true, the wicked must Turn or Die: but
wh^^'s that to me? I am not wicked, though I am a sinner, as all men be. Others
will think, Its true tha^ we man Turn from our evil ways: but I am Turned long
ago; I hope this is not now to do. And thus while wicked men think they are not
wicked, but are already Converted, we lose all our labor in persuading them to
Turn. I shall therefore before I go any further, tell you here who are meant by
[ the wicked] and who they be that must turn or die; and also what is meant by
Turning, and who they be that are truly converted: And this I have purposely
reserved for this place, preferring the Method that fits my end.

And here you must observe, that in the sense of the Text, a wicked man, and a
converted man are contraries. No man is a wicked man that is converted; and no
man is a converted man that is wicked: So that to be a wicked man, and to be an
unconverted man, is all one. And therefore in opening one we shall open both.

Before I can tell you what either Wickedness or Conversion is, I must go to
the bottom, and fetch up the matter from the beginning.

It pleased the great Creator of the world, to make three sorts of living
creatures: Angels he made pure Spirits without flesh: and therefore he made
them only for Heaven, and not for to dwell on earth. Bruits were made flesh
without immortal souls: and therefore they were made only for earth and not for
Heaven. Man is of a middle nature between both, as partaking of both flesh and
Spirit; and therefore he was made both for Earth and Heaven. But as his flesh
is made to be but a servant to his Spirit, so is he made for earth but as his
passage or way to Heaven, and not that this should be his home or happiness.
The blessed state that man was made for, was to behold the Glorious Majesty of
the Lord, and to praise him among his holy Angels; and to love him and be
filled with his Love for ever. And as this was the End that man was made for,
so God did give him means that were fitted to the attaining of it. These means
were principally two. First the right Inclination and Disposition of the mind
of man. Secondly the right ordering of his life and practice. For the first,
God suited the Disposition of man unto his End; giving him such knowledge of
God as was fit for his present state, and an Heart Disposed and Inclined to
God, in holy Love. But yet he did not fix or confirm him in this condition; but
having made him a free agent, he left him in the hands of his own free will.
For the second, God did that which belonged to him; that is, he gave man a
perfect Law, requiring him to continue in the Love of God, and perfectly to
obey him. By the wilful breach of this Law, man did not only forfeit his hopes
of everlasting life, but also turned his heart from God, and fixed it on these
lower fleshly things: and hereby did blot out the spiritual Image of God from
his soul. So that man did both fall short of the Glory of God, which was his
End, and put himself out of the Way by which he should have attained it; and
this both as to the frame of his heart and of his life. The holy Inclination
and Love of his soul to God, he lost; and instead of it, he contracted an
Inclination and Love to the pleasing of his flesh, or carnal-self by earthly
things; growing strange to God, and acquainted with the creature: And the
course of his life was suited to the Bent and Inclination of his heart: he
lived to his carnal self, and not to God: he sought the creature for the
pleasing of his flesh, instead of seeking to please the Lord. With this Nature
or Corrupt inclination we are all now born into the world: For who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14.4. As a Lion has a fierce and cruel
nature before he does devour; and as an Adder has a venomous nature before he
sting; so in our very infancy we have those sinful Natures or Inclinations
before we think, or speak, or do amiss. And hence springs all the sin of our
lives. And not only so; but when God has of his mercy provided us a Remedy,
even the Lord Jesus Christ to be the Savior of our souls, and bring us back to
God again, we naturally love our present state, and are ^oth to be brought out
of it, and therefore are set against the means of our Recovery; and though
custom have taught us to thank Christ for his good will, yet carnal self
persuades us to refuse his Remedies, and to desire to be excused when we are
commanded to take the Medicines which he offers, and are called to forsake
all, and follow him to God and Glory.

I pray you read over this leaf again and mark it; for in these few words, you
have a true Description of our natural state; and consequently of a wicked man.
For every man that is in this state of corrupted nature, is a wicked man, and
in a state of death.

By this also you are prepared to understand what it is to be Converted, to
which end you must further know, That the mercy of God, not willing that man
should perish in his sin, provided a Remedy, by causing his Son to take our
Nature, and being in one person God and man, to become a Mediator between God
and man, and by dying for our sins on the Cross, to ransom us from the curse of
God, and the power of the Devil; and having thus Redeemed us, the Father has
delivered us into his hands as his own. Hereupon the Father and the Mediator do
make a New Law and Covenant for man; not like the first which gave life to none
but the perfectly obedient, and condemned man for every sin: but Christ has
made a Law of Grace, or a Promise of Pardon and Everlasting life to all that by
true Repentance and by Faith in Christ are Converted unto God. Like an Act of
Oblivion which is made by a Prince to a company of Rebels, on condition they
will lay down arms and come in, and be loyal subjects for the time to come.

But because the Lord knows that the heart of man is grown so wicked, that
for all this men will not accept of the Remedy, if they be left to themselves,
therefore the Holy Ghost has undertaken it as his office to inspire the
Apostles, and seal up the Scripture by Miracles and Wonders, and to illuminate
and convert the souls of the Elect.

So that by this much you see that as there are three persons in the Trinity,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, so each of these persons have their
several works, which are eminently ascribed to them.

The Fathers works were to Create us, to Rule us (...) his ^ational creatures,
by the Law of Nature, and Judge us thereby: And in mercy to provide us a
Redeemer when we were lost, and to send his Son, and accept his Ransom.

The works of the Son for us were these, To Ransom and Redeem us by his
Sufferings and Righteousness; to give out the Promise or Law of Grace, and Rule
and Judge the world as their Redeemer, on terms of Grace, and to make
intercession for us, that the benefits of his death may be communicated; and to
send the Holy Ghost (which the Father also does by the Son.) The works of the
Holy Ghost for us are these: to indite the Holy Scriptures, by inspiring and
guiding the Prophets and Apostles, and sealing the Word by his Miraculous gifts
and works; and the illuminating and exciting the ordinary Ministers of the
Gospel, and so enabling them and helping them to publish that Word: and by the
same word Illuminating and Converting the souls of men. So that as you could
not have been reasonable creatures, if the Father had not Created you, nor have
had any access to God, if the Son had not Redeemed you; so neither can you have
a part in Christ, or be saved, except the Holy Ghost do sanctify you.

So that by this time you may see the several causes of this work. The Father
sends the Son: the Son Redeemeth us, and makes the Promise of Grace: the
Holy Ghost inditeth and seals this Gospel: the Apostles are the Secretaries
of the Spirit, to write it: the Preachers of the Gospel do proclaim it, and
persuade men to obey it. And the Holy Ghost does make their preaching
effectual, by opening the hearts of men to entertain it. And all this to repair
the image of God upon the soul: and to set the heart upon God again, and take
it off the creature and carnal self, to which it is revolted; and so to turn
the current of the life into an heavenly course, which before was earthly: and
all this by the entertainment of Christ by Faith, who is the Physician of the
soul.

By this which I have said, you may see what it is to be Wicked, and what it is
to be Converted. Which I think will be yet plainer to you if I describe them as
consisting of their several parts: and for the first, a wicked man may be known
by these three things.

First, he is one who places his chief content on earth, and loves the
creature more then God, and his fleshly prosperity above the heavenly felicity:
He savoureth the things of the flesh, but neither discerns nor savoureth the
things of the Spirit: though he will say, that Heaven is better then earth, yet
does he not really so esteem it to himself. If he might be sure of earth, he
would let go heaven, and had rather stay here, then be removed thither. A life
of perfect holiness in the sight of God, and in his love and praises for ever
in heaven, does not find such liking with his heart, as a life of health, and
wealth, and honor here upon earth. And though he falsely profess that he loves
God above all, yet indeed he never felt the power of Divine Love within him,
but his mind is more set on the world, or fleshly pleasures, then on God. In a
word, whoever Loves earth above heaven, and fleshly prosperity more than God,
is a wicked unconverted man.

On the other side, a Converted man, is illuminated to discern the Loveliness
of God: and so far believes the Glory that is to be had with God, that his
heart is taken up to it, and set more upon it, then on any thing in this world.
He had rather see the face of God and live in his everlasting love and praises,
then have all the wealth or pleasure of this world. He sees that all things
else are vanity; and nothing but God can fill the soul; and therefore let the
world go which way it will, he lays up his treasure and hopes in heaven, and
for that he is resolved to let go all. As the fire does mount upward, and the
Needle that is touched with the lodestone still turns to the North: so the
Converted soul is inclined unto God. Nothing else can satisfy him, nor can he
find any Content and Rest but in his Love. In a word, All that are Converted,
do Esteem and Love God beetter then all the world, and the Heavenly felicity is
dearer to them then their fleshly prosperity. The proof of what I have said you
may find in these places of Scripture, Phil. 3.18, 21. Mat. 6.19, 20, 21. Col.
3.1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 18, 23. Psalm. 73.25, 26.

Secondly, a wicked man is one that makes it the principal business of his
life to prosper in the world, and attain his fleshly ends. And though he may
read; and hear, and do much in the outward duties of Religion, and forbear
disgraceful sins, yet this is all but upon the by, and he never makes it the
trade and principal business of his life to Please God and attain everlasting
glory, but puts off God with the leavings of the world, and gives him no more
service then the flesh can spare: for he will not part with all for heaven.

On the contrary, a Converted man is one that makes it the principal care and
business of his life to Please God, and to be saved, and takes all the
blessings of this life but as accommodations in his journey toward another
life; and uses the creature in subordination unto God: he loves an holy life,
and longs to be more holy: he has no sin but what he hates, and longs,
and prays, and striveth to be rid of. The drift and bent of his life is for
God; and if he sin, it is contrary to the very bent of his heart and life, and
therefore he rises again, and lamenteth it, and dare not wilfully live in any
known sin. There is nothing in this world so dear to him, but he can give it up
to God, and forsake it for him and the hopes of glory. All this you may see in
Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Mat. 6.33, 20. Luke 18.22, 23, 29. Luke 14.18, 24, 26,
27. Romans 8.13. Gal. 5.24. Luke 12.21. etc.

Thirdly, the soul of a wicked man did never truly discern and relish the
mystery of Redemption, nor thankfully entertain an offered Savior, nor is he
taken up with the love of the Redeemer, not willing to be ruled by him as the
Physician of his soul, that he may be saved from the guilt and power of his
sins, and recovered unto God: but his heart is insensible of this unspeakable
benefit, and is quite against the healing means by which he should be
recovered. Though he may be willing to be carnally Religious, yet he never
resigneth up his soul to Christ, and to the motions and conduct of his Word and
Spirit.

On the contrary, the Converted soul having felt himself undone by sin, and
perceiving that he has lost his peace with God, and hopes of heaven, and is in
danger of everlasting misery, does thankfully entertain the tidings of
Redemption, and believing in the Lord Jesus as his only Savior, resigneth up
himself to him for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. He
takes Christ as the Life of his soul, and lives by him, and uses him as his
salve for every sore, admiring the wisdom and Love of God in this wonderful
work of man's Redemption. In a word, Christ does even dwell in his heart by
faith, and the life that he now lives is by the Faith of the Son of God, that
has loved him and gave himself for him. Yea it is not so much he that lives,
as Christ in him. For these, see John 1.11, 12. and 3.19, 20. Romans 8.9. Phil.
3.7. 8, 9, 10. Gal. 2.20. Ioh. 15 2, 3.4. 1 Cor. 1.20. and 2.2.

YOU see now in plain terms from the Word of God, who are the wicked, and who
are the Converted. Ignorant people think that if a man be no swearer, not
curser, nor rayler, nor drunkard, nor fornicator, nor extortioner, nor wrong
any body in their dealings, and if they come to Church, and say their prayers,
these cannot be wicked men. Or if a man that has been guilty of drunkenness,
or swearing, or gameing or the like vices, do but forbear them for the time to
come, they think that this is a Converted man. Others think, if a man that has
been an enemy and scorner at godliness, do but approve it, and join himself
with those that are godly, and be hated for it by the wicked as the godly are,
that this must needs be a Converted man. And some are so foolish as to think
they are Converted, by taking up some new and false opinion, and falling into
some dividing party, as Anabaptists, Quakers, Papists, or such like. And some
think, if they have but been affrighted by the fears of Hell, and had
Convictions and Gripes of Conscience, and thereupon have purposed and promised
amendment, and taken up a life of Civil behavour, and outward Religion, that
this must needs be true Conversion. And these are the poor deluded souls that
are like to lose the benefit of all our persuasions; and when they hear that
the wicked must Turn or Die, they think that this is not spoken to them, for
they are not wicked, but are Turned already. And therefore it is that Christ
told some of the Rulers of the Jews, who were graver and civiler then the
common people, that Publicans and Harlots do go into the Kingdom of God before
them, Mat. 21.31. Not that an harlot or gross sinner can be saved without
Conversion; but because it was easier to make these gross sinners perceive
their sin and misery, and the necessity of a change, when the civiler sort do
delude themselves by thinking that they are Converted already, when they be not.

O Sirs, Conversion is another kind of work then most are ware of: Its not a
small matter to bring an Earthly mind to Heaven, and to show man the amiable
excellencies of God, till he be taken up in such Love to him, that never can be
quenched; to break the heart for sin, and make him fly forrefuge unto Christ,
and thankfully embrace him as the l^fe of his soul, to have the very drift and
bent of the heart and life to be changed, so that a man renounceth that which
he took for his felicity, and places his felicity where he never did before,
and lives not to the same end, and drives not on the same design in the
world, as formerly he did: in a word, he that is in Christ, is a new creature;
old things are past away, behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. He
has a new understanding, a new will and resolution, new sorrows, and desires,
and love, and delight, new thoughts, new speeches, new company (if possible)
and a new conversation. Sin that before was a jesting matter with him, is now
so odious and terrible to him, that he flies from it as from death. The world
that was so lovely in his eyes, does now appear but as vanity and vexation: God
that was before neglected, is now the only Happiness of his soul; before he was
forgotten, and every lust preferred before him; but now he is set next the
heart, and all things must give place to him: and the heart is taken up in the
attendance and observance of him: and is grieved when he hides his face, and
never thinks it self well without him. Christ himself that was wont to be
slightly thought of, is now his only hope and refuge, and he lives upon him as
on his daily bread; he cannot pray without him, nor rejoice without him, nor
think, nor speak, nor live without him. Heaven it self that before was looked
upon but as a tolerable reserve, which he hoped might serve turn as better then
hell, when he could not stay any longer in the world, is now taken for his
home, the place of his only Hope and Rest, where he shall See, and Love, and
Praise that God that has his heart already. Hell that before did seem but as a
bugbear to frighten men from sin, does now appear to be a real misery, that is
not to be ventured on, nor jested with. The works of holiness which before he
was weary of, and seemed to be more ado then needs, are now both his recreation
and his business, and the trade that he lives upon. The Bible which was before
to him but almost as a common book, is now as the Law of God, as a Letter
written to him from heaven, and subscribed with the name of the Eternal
Majesty; it is the Rule of his thoughts, and words, and deeds; the commands are
binding, the threats are dreadful, and the promises of it speak life to his
soul. The godly that seemed to him but like other men, are now the excellentest
and happyest on earth. And the wicked that were his play-fellows are now his
grief: and he that could laugh at their sin, is readyer now to weep for their
sin and misery, Psalm 16.3. and 15.4. Phil. 3.18. In short, he has a New End
in his thoughts, and a New Way in his endeavors, and therefore his Heart and
life is New. Before his Carnal Self was his End; and his pleasure, and worldly
Profits, and Credit were his Way: and now God and everlasting Glory is his End:
and Christ, and the Spirit, and Word, and Ordinances, Holiness to God, and
Righteousness and Mercy to men, these are his Way. Before Self was the chief
Ruler, to which the matters of God and Conscience must stoop and give place:
and now God in Christ, by the Spirit, Word, and Ministry is the chief Ruler, to
whom both Self, and all the matters of Self must give place. So that this is
not a change in one or two, or twenty points; but in the whole soul: and the
very end and Bent of the Conversation. A man may step out of one path into
another, and yet have his face the same way, and be still going toward the
same place: but it is another matter to turn quite back again, and take his
journey the clean contrary way to a contrary place. So it is here. A man may
turn from drunkenness to thriftiness, and forsake his good fellowship, and
other gross disgraceful sins, and set upon some duties of Religion, and yet be
going still to the same End as before, intending his carnal Self above all, and
giving it still the Government of his soul. But when he is Converted, this Self
is denied and taken down, and God is set up, and his face is turned the
contrary way: and he that before was addicted to himself, and lived to himself,
is now by Sanctification devoted to God, and lives unto God: before he asks
himself, what he should do with his time, his parts, and his estate; and for
himself he used them: but now he asks God what he shall do with them, and he
uses them for him. Before he would Please God so far as might stand with the
Pleasure of his flesh, and Carnal Self, but not to any great displeasure of
them. But now he will please God, let Flesh and Self be never so much
displeasd. This is the great change that God will make upon all that shall be
saved.

You can say, that the Holy Ghost is your Sanctifier, but do you know what
Sanctification is? Why this is it that I have now opened to you: and every man
and woman in the world must have this, or be condemned to everlasting misery.
They must Turn or Dye.

Do you believe all this Sirs, or do you not? Surely you dare not say you do
not: For it is past doubt or denial: These are not Controversies, where one
learned pious man is of one mind, and another of another: where one party says
this, and the other says that: Papists, and Aanbaptists, and every Sect among
us that deserve to be called Christians, are all agreed in this that I have
said: and if you will not believe the God of Truth, and that in a case where
every sect and party do believe him, you are utterly unexcusable.

But if you do believe this, how comes it to pass that you live so quietly in
an unconverted state? Do you know that you are Converted? and can you find this
wonderful change upon your souls? Have you been thus born again and made anew?
Be not these strange matters to many of you? and such as you never felt upon
your selves? If you cannot tell the day or the week of your change, or the very
Sermon that Converted you, yet do you find that the work is done? and such a
change indeed there is? and that you have such hearts as are before described?
Alas, the most do follow their worldly business, and little trouble their minds
with such thoughts. And if they be but restrained from scandalous sins, and can
say, I am no whore-monger, nor thief, nor curser nor swearer, nor tipler, nor
ex^ortioner, I go to Church and say my prayers, they think that this is true
Conversion, and they shall be saved as well as any. Alas this is foolish
cheating of your selves. This is too much contempt of an endless glory: and too
gross neglect of your immortal souls. Can you make so light of Heaven and Hell?
Your corpses will shortly all lie in the dust, and Angels or Devils will
presently seize upon your souls, and every man and woman of you all, will
shortly be among other company, and in another case then now you are; you will
dwell in those houses but a little longer: you will work in your shops and
fields but a little longer: you will sit in those seats, and dwell on this
earth but a little longer: you will see with those eyes, and hear with those
ears, and speak with those tongues but a little longer, till the Resurrection
day: and can you make shift to forget this? O what a place will you be shortly
in of Joy or Torment! O what a sight will you shortly see in Heaven or Hell! O
what thoughts will shortly fill your hearts, with unspeakable Delight or
Horror? What work will you be employed in? to Praise the Lord with Saints and
Angels, or to cry out in fire unquenchable with Devils? And should all this be
forgotten? And all this will be endless and sealed up by an unchangeable
decree: Eternity, Eternity, will be the measure of your Joys or sorrows, and
can this be forgotten? And all this is true Sirs, most certain true: when you
have gone up and down a little longer, and slept and awak't a few tunes more,
you will be dead and gone, and find all true that now I tell you: and yet can you
now so much forget it? You shall then remember that you heard this Sermon, and
that this day, from this place, you were remembered of these things: and
perceive them matters a thousand times greater then either you or I could here
conceive: and yet shall they be now so much forgotten?

Beloved friends; if the Lord had not awakened me to believe and lay to heart
these things my self, I should have remained in the dark and selfish state, and
have perished for ever: but if he have truly made me sensible of them, it will
constrain me to compassionate you, as well as my self: If your eyes were so far
opened as to see Hell, and you saw your neighbors that were Unconverted
dragged thither with hideous cries, though they were such as you accounted
honest people on earth, and feared no such matter by themselves; such a sight
would make you go home and think of it, and think again; and make you warn all
about you as the damned worldling in Luke. 16.28. would have had his Brethen
warned, lest they come to that place of torment. Why, faith is a kind of sight;
it is the eye of the soul; the Evidence of things aot seen: If I believe God,
it is next to seeing: And therefore I beseech you excuse me, if I be half as
earnest with you about these matters, as if I had seen them. If I must die to
morrow, and it were in my power to come again from another world and tell you
what I had seen, would you not be willing to hear me, and would you not
believe, and regard what I should tell you? If I might preach one Sermon to you
after I am dead, and have seen what is done in the world to come, would you not
have me plainly speak the truth, and would you not crowd to hear me? and would
you not lay it to heart? but this must not be; God has his appointed way of
teaching you by Scripture and Ministers: and he will not humor Unbelievers so
far as to send men from the dead to them, and to alter his established way: if
any man quarrel with the Sun, God will not humor him so far as to set him up a
clearer light. Friends, I beseech you regard me now, as you would do if I
should come from the dead to you: for I can give you as full assurance of the
truth of what I say to you, as if I had been there and seen it with my eyes:
For its possible for one from the dead to deceive you: but Jesus Christ can
never deceive you: the Word of God delivered in Scripture, and sealed up by the
Miracles and holy workings of the Spirit, can never deceive you. Believe this,
or believe nothing. Believe and obey this, or you are undone. Now as ever you
believe the Word of God, and as ever you care for the salvation of your souls,
let me beg of you this reasonable request, and I beseech you deny me not: that
you would without any more delay, when you are gone from hence, remember what
you heard, and enter into an earnest search of your hearts, and say to your
selves, [ Is it so indeed, must I Turn or Die? Must I be Converted or
Condemned? Its time for me then to look about me, before it be too l^te. Oh why
did I not look after this till now? Why did I venturously post off, or flubber
over so great a business? Was I awake, or in my wits? Oh blessed God, what a
mercy is it that thou did not cut off my life all this while, before I had
any certain hope of eternal life? Well, God forbid that I should neglect this
work any longer. What state is my soul in? Am I C^nverted, or am I not? Was
ever such a change or work done upon my soul? Have I been illuminated by the
Word and Spirit of the Lord, to see the odiousness of sin, the need of a
Savior, the Love of Christ, and the Excellencies of God and Glory? Is my heart
broken or humbled within me for my former life? Have I thankfully entertained
my Savior and Lord, that offered himself with pardon and life to my soul? Do I
hate my former sinful life, and the remnant of every sin that is in me? Do I
fly from them as my deadly enemies? Do I give up my self to a life of Holiness
and Obedience to God? Do I love it, and delight in it? Can I truly say that I
am dead to the world and carnal self, and that I live for God and the Glory
which he has promised? Ha^h Heaven more of my Estimation, and Resolution, then
Earth? And is God the dearest and the Highest in my soul? Once I am sure I
lived principally to the world and flesh, and God had nothing but some
heartless services which the world could spare, and which were the leavings of
the flesh. Is my heart now turned another way? Have I a new design, and a new
end, and a new train of holy affect^ons? Have I set my hopes and heart in
heaven? And is it now the scope, and design, and bent of my heart and life, to
get well to heaven, and see the glorious face of God, and live in his
everlasting Love and Praise? And when I sin, is it against the very habitual
bent and design of my heart? And do I conquer all gross sins, and am I weary,
and willing to be rid of mine infirmities? This is the state of a Converted
soul. And thus must t^ be with me, or I must perish. Is it thus indeed with me,
or is it not? Its time to get this doubt resolved, before the dreadful Judge
resolve it. I am not such a stranger to my own heart and life, but I may
somewhat perceive whether I am thus Converted or not: if I be not, it will do
me no good to flatter my soul with false conceits and hopes. I am resolved no
more to deceive my self; but to endeavor to know truly off or on, whether I be
Converted, yea or no; that If I be, I may rejoice in it, and glorify my
gracious Lord, and comfortably go on till I reach the Crown: and if I am not, I
may set my self to beg and seek after the Grace that should convert me, and may
turn without any more delay: For if I find in time that I am out of the way, by
the help of Christ, I may turn and be recovered; but if I stay till either my
heart be forsaken of God in blindness and hardness, or till I be caught away by
death, its then too late. There is no place for Repentance and Conversion then;
I know it must be now or never.]

Sirs, this is my request to you, that you will but take your hearts to task,
and thus examine them, till you see if it may be, whether you are Converted or
not? and if you cannot find it out by your own endeavors, go to your
Ministers, if they be faithful and experienced men, and desire their
assistance. The matter is great; let not bashfulness nor carelessness hinder
you. They are set over you to advise you, for the saving of your souls, as
Physicians advise you for the curing of your bodies. It undoes many thousands
that they think they are in the way to salvation, when they are not; and think
that they are Converted when it is no such thing. And then when we call to them
daily to Turn, they go away as they came, and think, that this concerns not
them; for they are turned already, and hope they shall do well enough in the
way that they are in, at least if they do pick the fairest path, and avoid some
of the foulest steps, when alas, all this while they live but to the world, and
flesh, and are strangers to God and Eternal life, and are quite out of the way
to Heaven. And all this is much, because we cannot persuade them to a few
serious thoughts of their Condition, and to spend a few hours in the examining
of their states. Is there not many a self-deceiving wretch that hears me this
day, that never bestowed one hour or quarter of an hour in all their lives, to
examine their souls, and try whether they are truly Converted or not? O
merciful God, that will care for such wretches that care no more for
themselves! and that will do so much to save them from Hell, and help them to
Heaven, who will do so little for it themselves. If all that are in the way to
Hell, and in a state of damnation, did but know it, they durst not continue in
it. The greatest hope that the Devil has of bringing you to damnation without
a rescue, is by keeping you blindfold, and ignorant of your state, and making
you believe that you may do well enough in the way that you are in. If you knew
that you are out of the way to heaven, and were lost for ever if you should die
as you are, durst you sleep another night in the state that you are in? durst
you live another day in it? Could you heartily laugh or be merry in such a
state? What! And not know but you may be snatched away to hell in an hour! Sure
it would constrain you to forsake your former company and courses, and to
betake your selves to the ways of Holiness, and the Communion of the Saints.
Sure it would drive you to cry to God for a new heart, and to seek help of
those that are fit to counsel you. There Is none of you sure that cares not for
being damned. Well then, I beseech you presently make enquiry into your hearts,
and give them no rest, till you find out your condition, that if it be good,
you may rejoice in it, and go on: and if it be bad, you may presently look
about you for recovery, as men that believe they must Turn or Die. What say
you, Sirs? Will you resolve and promise to be at this much labor for your own
souls? Will you fall upon this self examination when you come home? Is my
request unreasonable? Your consciences know it is not. Resolve on it then
before you stir: Knowing how much it concerns your souls, I beseech you for
the sake of that God that does command you, at whose Bar you will shortly all
appear, that you will not deny me this reasonable request. For the sake of
those souls that must turn or dye, I beseech you deny me not; even but to make
it your business to understand your own Conditions, and build upon sure ground,
and know off or on whether you are Converted or no, and venture not your souls
on negligent security.

But perhaps you will say, What if we should find our selves yet unconverted; what
shall we do then? This question leads me to my second Doctrine, which will do
much to the answering of it, to which I shall now proceed.

Doct. 2. IT is the Promise of God, that the wicked shall Live if they will but
Turn; Unfeignedly and thoroughly Turn.
The Lord here professes that this is it that he takes pleasure in, that the
wicked Turn and Live. Heaven is made as sure to the Converted as Hell is to the
Unconverted. Turn and Live, is as certain a truth, as Turn or Dye. God was not
bound to provide us a Savior, nor open to us a door of hope, nor call us to
Repent and Turn, when once we had cast our selves away by sin. But he has
freely done it to magnify his Mercy: Sinners, there is none of you shall have
cause to go home, and say I preach desperation to you. Do we use to shut up the
door of Mercy against you? O that you would not shut it up against your selves!
Do we use to tell you, that God will have no mercy on you, though you Turn and
be Sanctified? When did you ever hear a Preacher say such a word? You that bark
at the Preachers of the Gospel, for desiring to keep you out of Hell, and say
that they Preach Desperation; tell me if you can, when did you ever hear any
sober man say, that there is no hope for you, though you Repent and be
Converted? No; it is the clean contrary that we daily proclaim from the Lord;
and whoever is born again, and by Faith and Repentance does become a new
creature, shall certainly be saved: and so far are we from persuading you to
despair of this, that we persuade you not to make any doubt of it. It is Life
and not Death, that is the first part of our Message to you: our Commission is
to offer salvation, certain salvation: a speedy, glorious, everlasting
salvation, to every one of you: to the poorest beggar as well as the greatest
Lords: to the worst of you: even to drunkards, swearers, worldlings, thieves,
yea to the despisers and reproachers of the holy way of salvation. We are
commanded by the Lord our Master, to offer you a pardon for all that's past, if
you will but now at last Return and Live: we are commanded to beseech and
entreat you to accept the offer and Return; to tell you what preparation is
made by Christ; what Mercy stays for you; what Patience waits on you; what
Thoughts of kindness God has toward you; and how happy, how certainly and
unspeakably happy you may be if you will. We have indeed also a Message of
wrath and death, yea of a twofold wrath and death: but neither of them is our
principal Message: we must tell you of the wrath that is on you already, and
the death that you are born under, for the breach of the Law of works; but this
is but to show you the need of Mercy, and provoke you to esteem the grace of
the Redeemer. And we tell you nothing but the truth which you must know: for
who will seek out for Physic that knows not that he is sick? Our telling you
of your misery is not it that makes you miserable, but drives you out to seek
for mercy. It is you that have brought this death upon your selves. We tell you
also of another death, even remediless, and much greater torment, that will
fall on those that will not be Converted. But as this is true, and must be told
you, so it is but the last and saddest part of our Message. We are first to
offer you Mercy if you will Turn: and it is only those that will not Turn, nor
hear the voice of Mercy, that we must foretell damnation to. Will you but cast
away your transgressions, delay no longer, but come away at the Call of Christ
and be Converted, and become new creatures, and we have not a word of damning
wrath or death to speak against you. I do here in the name of the Lord of Life
proclaim to you all that hear me this day, to the worst of you, to the
greatest, to the oldest sinner, that you may have mercy and salvation, if you
will but Turn. There is mercy in God, there is sufficiency in the satisfaction
of Christ, the promise is free, and full, and universal; you may have Life, if
you will but Turn. But then, as you love your souls, Remember what Turning it
is that the Scripture speaks of. It is not to mend the old house, but to pull
down all, and build anew, on Christ the Rock and sure foundation. It is not to
mend somewhat in a Carnal course of life, but to mortify the flesh, and live
after the Spirit. It is not to serve the flesh and the world in a more reformed
way, without any scandalous disgraceful sins, and with a certain kind of
Religiousness. But it is to change your Master, and your Work, and End, and set
your face the contrary way, and do all for the life that you never saw, and
Dedicate your selves and all you have to God. This is the change that must be
made if you will live.

Your selves are witnesses now, that it is Salvation and not Damnation that is
the great Doctrine I preach to you, and the first part of my message to you.
Accept of this, and we shall go no further with you, for we would not so much
as affright or trouble you with the name of damnation, without necessity.

But if you will not be saved, there is no remedy, but Damnation must take
place. For there is no middle place between the two: You must have either Life
or Death.

And we are not only to offer you Life; but to show you the Grounds on which we
do it, and call you to believe that God does mean indeed as he speaks: that the
Promise is true, and extends Conditionally to you as well as others, and that
Heaven is no fancy, but a true felicity.

If you ask where is our Commission for this offer; among an hundred Texts of
Scripture, I will show it you in these few.

First, you see it here in my Text, and the following verses, and in the 18. of
Ezekiel. as plain as can be spoken. And in 2 Cor. 5.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. you have
the very sum of our Commission, [ If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, old things are past away; ^ehold all things are become new. And all
things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has
given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ
Reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them, and
has committed unto us the word of Reconciliation: now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled unto God; for he has made him to be sin for us who knew no
sin, tha^ we might be made the Righteousness of God in him.] So Mark 1^. 15, 16.
Go ye into all the word and preach the Gospel to every creature; He that
believes (that (...) with such a Converting faith as ^ expressed) [ and is
baptized shall (...) saved; and he that believes (...) shall be damned.] And
Luke 2^ 46, 47. [ Thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the de^^
the third day, and that Repentan^^ (which is Conversion) and Remission of sins,
should be preached in his name among all Nations.] And Acts 5.30.31. The God of
our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye flew and hanged on a tree; him has God
exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance
to Israel and forgiveness of sins. [And Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you
therefore men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe, are justified from all
things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses] And lest you
think this offer is restrained to the Jews, see Gal. 6.15. [ For in Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature.] And Luke 14.17. [ Come, for all things are now ready;] and ver. 23,
24.

You see by this time that we are commanded to offer Life to you all, and to
tell you from God, that if you will Turn you may Live.

Here you may safely trust your souls: for the Love of God is the Fountain of
this offer, John 3.16. and the blood of the Son of God has purchased it: the
faithfulness and truth of God is engaged to make the promise good: Miracles
have sealed up the truth of it: Preachers are sent through the world to
proclaim it; the Sacraments are instituted and used for the solemn Delivery of
the mercy offered, to them that will accept it: and the Spirit does open the
heart to entertain it, and is it self the earnest of the full possession. So
that the truth of it is past controversy, that the worst of you all, and every
one of you, if you will but be Converted, may be Saved.

Indeed if you will needs believe that you shall be saved without Conversion,
then you believe a falsehood: and if I should preach that to you, I should
preach a lie: this were not to believe God, but the Devil and your own
deceitful hearts. God has his promise of Life, and the Devil has his promise
of Life: Gods promise is, [ Return and Live] The Devils promise is, [ you shall
live whether you turn or not] The word of God is as I have showed you. [ Except
ye be converted and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom
of heaven, Matthew. 18.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, John 3.3, 5. Without holiness none shall see God, Hebrews
12.14.] The Devils word is, [ You may be saved without being born again and
Converted: you may do well enough without being holy; God does but frighten
you; he is more merciful then to do as he says: he will be better to you then
his word.] And alas, the greatest part of the world believe this word of the
Devil, before the word of God; just as our first sin and misery came into the
world. God said to our first parents, [ If ye eat ye shall Die] And the Devil
contradicts him, and says, [ Ye shall not Die] and the woman believed the
Devil before God. So now the Lord says [ Turn or Die.] And the Devil says, [
You shall not die, if you do but cry God mercy at last, and give over the acts
of sin when you can practice it no longer.] And this is the word that the world
believes. O heinous wickedness to believe the Devil before God!

And yet that is not the worst: but blasphemously they call this a Believing
and Trusting God, when they put him in the shape of Satan, who was a liar from
the beginning, and when they believe that the word of God is a lie, they call
this a Trusting God, and say they Believe in him, and Trust on him for
salvation: Where did ever God say, that the unregenerate, unconverted,
unsanctified shall be saved? Show such a word in Scripture. I challenge you, if
you can. Why this is the Devils word; and to believe it is to believe the
Devil, and the sin that is commonly called Presumption: and do you call this a
believing and trusting God? There is enough in the Word of God to comfort and
strengthen the hearts of the sanctified; but not a word to strengthen the hands
of wickedness, nor to give men the least hope of being saved, though they be
never sanctified.

But if you will Turn and come into the way of Mercy, the Mercy of the Lord is
ready to entertain you. Then Trust God for salvation boldly and confidently,
for he is engaged by his word to save you. He will be a Father to none but his
children, and he will save none but those that forsake the world, the Devil,
and the flesh, and come in to his family to be members of his Son, and have
Communion with his Saints. But if they will not come in, it is long of
themselves: His doors are open: He keeps none back: He never sent such a
message as this to any of you: [ Its now too late: I will not receive thee
though thou be Converted.] He might have done so, and done you no wrong: but he
did not: he does not to this day; He is still ready to receive you, if you were
but ready unfeignedly and with all your hearts to Turn. And the fullness of this
truth will yet more appear in the two following Doctrines, which I shall
therefore next proceed to, before I make any further application of this.

Doct. 3. GOD takes Pleasure in men's Conversion and Salvation: but not in
their Death or Damnation: he had rather they would Return and Live, then go on
and die.
I shall first teach you how to understand this; and then clear up the truth of
it to you.

And for the first, you must observe these following things. 1. A simple
willingness or complacency is the first act of the will, following the simple
apprehension of the understanding, before it proceeds to compare things
together. But the choosing act of the will is a following act, and supposes
the comparing practical act of the understanding: and these two acts may often
be carried to contrary objects, without any fault at all in the person.

2. An unfeigned willingness may have diverse degrees. Some things I am so far
willing of, as that I will do all that lies in my power to accomplish it: and
some things I am truly willing another should do, when yet I will not do all
that ever I am able to procure it, having many Reasons to dissuade me there
from; though yet I will do all that belongs to me to do.

3. The will of a Ruler, as such, is manifested in making and executing Laws:
but the will of a man in his simple natural capacity, or as absolute Lord of
his own, is manifested in desiring or resolving of events.

4. A Rulers will as Lawgiver is first and principally that his Laws be
obeyed: and not at all that the penalty be executed on any, but only on
supposition that they will not obey his precepts. But a Rulers will, as Judge,
supposes the Law already either kept or broken: and therefore he resolves on
rewards or punishments accordingly.

Having given you these necessary Distinctions, I shall next apply them to the
case in hand, in these following Propositions.

1. It is in the glass of the word and creatures that in this life we must know
God: and so according to the nature of man we ascribe to him Understanding and
will, removing all the imperfections that we can, because we are capable of no
higher Positive conceptions of him.

2. And on the same grounds we do (with the Scripture) distinguish between the
acts of Gods will, as diversified from the respects of the objects, though as
to Gods essence they are all one.

3. And the boldlyer; because that when we speak of Christ, we have the more
ground for it from his humane nature.

4. And thus we say that the simple Complacency, Will or Love of God is to all
that is Naturally, or Morally good, according to the nature and degree of its
goodness. And so he has pleasure in the Conversion and Salvation of all, which
yet will never come to pass.

5. And God as Ruler and Lawgiver of the world, has so far a Practical Will
for their salvation, as to make them a free Deed of Gift of Christ and Life,
and an act of Oblivion for all their sins, so be it they will not unthankfully
reject it; and to command his Messengers to offer this Gift to all the world,
and persuade them to accept it. And so he does all that as Lawgiver or
Promiser belongs to him to do for their salvation.

6. But yet he resolves as Lawgiver, that they that will not turn shall dye:
And as Judge, when their day of grace is past, he will execute that Decree.

7. So that he thus unfeignedly wills the Conversion of those that never will
be Converted, but not as Absolute Lord, with the fullest efficacious
Resolution, nor as a thing which he resolves shall undoubtedly come to pass,
or would engage all his power to accomplish. It is in the power of a Prince to
set a guard upon a Murderer to see that he shall not murder and be hanged. But
if upon good reason he forbear this, and do but send to his subjects, and warn
and entreat them not to be murderers, I hope he may well say that he would not
have them murder and be hanged; he takes no pleasure in it, but rather that
they forbear and live. And if he do more for some, upon some special reason, he
is not bound to do so by all. The King may well say to all the Murderers and
Felons in the Land, [ I have no pleasure in your death, but rather that you
would obey my Laws and live: but If you will not, I am resolved for all this
that you shall die.] The Judge may truly say to the Thief or Murderer, [ Alas
man, I have no delight in thy death: I had rather thou had kept the Law, and
saved thy life; but seeing thou will not, I must condemn thee, or else I should
be unjust.] So though God have no Pleasure in your damnation, and therefore
calls upon you to Return and Live, yet he has Pleasure in the demonstration of
his own Justice, and the executing his Laws, and therefore he is for all this
fully resolved, that if you will not be Converted, you shall be Condemned. If
God were so much against the death of the wicked, as that he were resolved to
do all that he can to hinder it, then no man should be Condemned: whereas
Christ tells you that few will be saved. But so far God is against your
damnation, as that he will teach you, and warn you, and set before you life and
death, and offer you your choice, and command his Ministers to entreat you not
to damn your selves, but accept his Mercy, and so to leave you without excuse;
but if this will not do, and if still you be Unconverted, he professes to you,
he is resolved of your damnation, and has commanded us to say to you in his
name, Verse 8. O wicked man, thou shall surely die! And Christ has little less
then sworn it over and over, with a Verily, verily, except ye be Converted, and
born again, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 18.3. John 3.3.
Mark, that he says, [ You cannot] It is in vain to hope for it, and in vain to
dream that God is willing of it; for it is a thing that cannot be.

In a word you see then the meaning of the Text, that God the great Lawgiver
of the world does take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that
they Turn and Live; though yet he be resolved that none shall Live but those
that Turn; and as Judge, even delights in Justice and manifesting his hatred
of sin; though not in their misery which they have brought upon themselves in
it self considered.

2. And for the proofs of the point, I shall be very brief in them, because I
suppose you easily believe it already.

1. The very gracious nature of God proclaimed Exodus 34.6. and 20.6. and
frequently elsewhere, may assure you of this, that he has no Pleasure in your
death.

2. If God had more pleasure in thy Death then in thy Conversion and Life, he
would not have so frequently commanded thee in his word, to Turn; he would not
have made thee such promises of Life, if thou will but Turn; he would not have
persuaded thee to it by so many Reasons. The tenor of his Gospel proves the
point.

3. And his Commission that he has given to the Ministers of the Gospel, does
fully prove it. If God had taken more pleasure in thy damnation, then in thy
Conversion and Salvation, he would never have charged us to offer you Mercy,
and to teach you the Way of Life both publicly and privately, and to entreat
and beseech you to turn and live; to acquaint you with your sins, and foretell
you of your danger, and to do all that possibly we can for your Conversion; and
to continue patiently so doing, though you should hate us, or abuse us for our
pains. Would God have done this, and appointed his Ordinances for your good, if
he had taken Pleasure in your death?

4. It is proved also by the course of his providence. If God had rather you
were damned then Converted and Saved, he would not second his word with his
works, and entice you by his daily kindness to himself, and give you all the
mercies of this life which are his means to lead you to Repentance, Romans 2.4.
and bring you so often under his rod, to force you into your wits; he would not
set so many examples before your eyes; no nor wait on you so patiently as he
does from day to day, and year to year. These be not signs of one that takes
pleasure in your death. If this had been his delight, how easily could he have
had thee long ago in Hell? How often before this could he have caught thee away
in the midst of thy sins, with a curse, or oath, or lie in thy mouth, in thy
ignorance and pride, and sensuality? when thou wast last in thy drunkenness, or
last deriding the ways of God, how easily could he have stopped thy breath, and
tamed thee with his Plagues, and made thee sober in another world! Alas, how
small a matter is it for the Lord Almighty to rule the tongue of the prophanest
railer, and tie the hands of the most malicious persecutor, or calm the fury of
the bitterest of his enemies, and make them know that they are but worms? If he
should but frown upon thee, thou would drop into thy grave. If he gave
Commission to one of his Angels to go and destroy ten thousand sinners, how
quickly would it be done! How easily can he lay thee on thy bed of languishing,
and make thee lie roaring there in pain; and make thee eat the words of
reproach which thou have spoken against his Servants, his Word, his Worship and
his holy Ways? And make thee send to beg their prayers whom thou did despise
in thy presumption? How easily can he lay that flesh under gripes and groans,
and make it too weak to hold thy soul, and make it more loathsome then the dung
of the earth? That flesh which now must have what it loves, and must not be
displeased though God be displeased; but must be humoured in meats, and drink,
and clothes, whatever God say to the contrary, how quickly would the frowns of
God consume it? When thou wast passionately defending thy sin, and quarrelling
with them that would have drawn thee from it, and showing thy spleen against
the reprover, and pleading for the works of darkness; how easily could God have
snatched thee away in a moment, and set thee before his dreadful Majesty, where
thou should see ten thousand times ten thousand of glorious Angels waiting on
his throne? and have called thee there to plead thy cause, and asked thee, What
have thou now to say against thy Creator, his Truth, his Servants, or his holy
ways? Now plead thy cause, and make the best of it that thou can. Now what
can thou say in excuse of thy sin? Now give account of thy worldliness and
fleshly life, of thy time, of all the mercies thou have had. O how thy stubborn
heart would have melted, and thy proud looks be taken down, and thy countenance
be appaled, and thy stout words turned into speechless silence, or dreadful
cries, if God had but set thee thus at his Bar, and pleaded his own cause with
thee, which thou have here so maliciously pleaded against! How easily can he at
any time say to thy guilty soul, [ Come away and live in that flesh no more
till the resurrection] and it cannot resist? A word of his mouth would take off
the poise of thy present life, and then all thy parts and powers would stand
still: and if he say unto thee, [ Live no longer: or live in Hell] thou could
not disobey.

But God has yet done none of this; but has patiently forborne thee, and
mercifully upheld thee; and given thee that breath which thou did breath out
against him, and given those Mercies which thou did sacrifice to thy flesh,
and afforded thee that provision, which thou spentest to satisfy thy greedy
throat; he gave thee every minute of that time, which thou did waste in
idleness, or drunkenness, or worldliness: and does not all this Patience and
Mercy show that he desired not thy damnation? Can the candle burn without the
oil? Can your houses stand without the earth to bear them? As well as you can
live an hour without the support of God. And why did he so long support thy
life, but to see when thou would bethink thee of the folly of thy ways, and
return and live? Will any man purposely put arms into his enemies hands to
resist him? or hold the Candle to a Murderer that is killing his children, or
to an idle servant that Plays or sleeps the while. Surely it is to see whether
thou will at last Return and Live, that God has so long waited on thee.

5. It is further proved by the sufferings of his Son, that God takes no
pleasure in the death of the wicked: would he have ransomed them from death at
so dear a rate? Would he have astonished Angels and men by his condescension?
Would God have dwelt in flesh, and have come in the form of a servant, and have
assumed humanity into one person with the Godhead, and would Christ have lived
a life of suffering, and dyed a cursed death for sinners, if he had rather
taken pleasure in their death? Suppose you saw him but so busy in preaching
and healing them, as you find him in Mark 3.21. or so long in fasting, as in
Mat. 4. or all night in prayer, as in Luke 6.12. or praying with the drops of
blood trickling from him instead of sweat, as Luke 22.44. or suffering a cursed
death upon the Cross, and pouring out his soul as a sacrifice for our sins:
Would you have thought these the signs of one that delighted in the death of
the wicked?

And think not to extenuate it by saying that this was only for his Elect. For
it was thy sin, and the sin of all the world that lay upon our Redeemer, and
his sacrifice and satisfaction is sufficient for all, and the fruits of it are
offered to one as well as another: but it is true, that it was never the intent
of his mind to pardon and save any that would not by faith and repentance be
Converted. If you had seen and heard him weeping and bemoaning the state of a
disobedient impenitent people, Luke 19.41, 42. or complaining of their
stubborness, as Mat. 23.37. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thy chil^ren together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not? Or if you had seen and heard him on the Cross praying
for his persecutors, [ Father forgive them, for they know not what they do]
would you have suspected that he had delighted in the death of the wicked; even
of those that perish by their wilful unbelief? When God has so loved (not
only loved, but so loved) the world, as to give his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, (by an effectual faith) should not perish, but have
everlasting life: I think he has hereby proved against the malice of men and
devils, that he takes no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but had rather
that they would Turn and Live:

6. Lastly, if all this will not yet satisfy you, take his own word, that
knows best his own mind, or at least believe his oath: but this leads me up
to the fourth Doctrine.

Doct. 4. THE Lord has confirmed it to us by his Oath, that he has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that he Turn and Live: that he may
leave man no pretense to question the truth of it.
If you dare question his word, I hope you dare not question his oath. As
Christ has solemnly protested, that the unregenerate and Unconverted cannot
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.3. John 3.3. So God has sworn that
his pleasure is not in their death, but in their Conversion and Life. And as
the Apostle says, Heb. 6.13, 16, 17, 18. Because he can swear by no greater
then himself, he says, As I live, etc. For men verily swear by the greater,
and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of strife; wherein God willing
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of Promise the immutability of his
counsel, confirmed it by on oath, that by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled
for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us, which we have as an Anchor of
the soul both sure and steadfast. If there be any man that cannot reconcile this
truth with the Doctrine of Predestination, or the actual damnation of the
wicked, that is his own ignorance: he has no pretense left to deny or question
therefore the truth of the point in hand: For this is confirmed by the Oath of
God, and therefore must not be distorted to reduce it to other points: but
doubtful points must rather be reduced to it, and certain truths must be
believed to agree with it, though our shallow brains do hardly discern the
agreeement.

Use.
I Do now entreat thee, if thou be an Unconverted sinner that hear these
words, that thou would ponder a little upon the forementioned Doctrines, and
bethink thy self awhile, who it is that takes pleasure in thy sin and
damnation? Certainly it is not God: he has sworn for his part that he takes no
pleasure in it. And I know it is not the pleasing of him that you intend in it.
You dare not say, that you drink, and swear and neglect holy duties, and,
quench the motions of the Spirit, to please God. That were as if you should
reproach the Prince, and break his Laws, and seek his death, and say you did
all this to please him.

Who is it then that takes Pleasure in your sin and death? Not any that bear
the image of God: for they must be like-manded to him. God knows its small
pleasure to your faithful Teachers, to see you serve your deadly enemy, and
madly venture your eternal state, and wilfully run into the flames of Hell. Its
small pleasure to them to see upon your souls (in the sad effects) such
blindness and hard-heartedness, and carelessness, and presumption, such
wilfulness in evil, and such unteachableness, and stifness against the ways of
life and peace: they know these are marks of death and of the wrath of God, and
they know from the word of God, what is like to be the end of them: And
therefore it is no more Pleasure to them, then to a tender Physician to see the
Plague-marks break out upon his Patient. Alas, to foresee your everlasting
Torments, and know not how to prevent them! To see how near you are to hell,
and we cannot make you believe it, and consider it! To see how easily, how
certainly you might escape, if we knew but how to make you willing! How fair you
are for everlasting salvation, if you would but Turn and do your best, and make
it the care and business of your lives: but you will not do it. If our lives
lay on it we cannot persuade you to it. We study day and night what to say to
you, that may convince you and persuade you, and yet it is undone: we lay
before you the word of God, and show you the very Chapter and verse where it is
written, that you cannot be Saved except you be Converted; and yet we leave the
most of you as we find you: We hope you will believe the word of God, though
you believe not us; and that you will regard it when we show you the plain
Scripture for it: but we hope in vain, and labor in vain, as to any saving
change upon your hearts. And do you think that this is a pleasant thing to us?
Many a time in secret prayer we are fain to complain to God with sad hearts, [
Alas Lord, we have spoken to them in thy name, but they little regard us: we
have told them what thou bidst us tell them concerning the danger of an
unconverted state, but they do not believe us: We have told them that thou have
protested, that there is no peace to the wicked, Isaiah 48.22. and 57.21. but
the worst of them all will scarce believe that they are wicked: we have showed
them thy word, where thou have said, that if they live after the flesh they
shall die, Romans 8.13. but they say they will believe in thee, when they will
not believe thee: and that they will trust in thee, when they give no credit to
thy word; and when they hope that the threatenings of thy word are false, they
will yet call this a hoping in God: and though we show them where thou have
said, that when a wicked man dies all his hopes perish, yet cannot we persuade
them from their deceitful hopes, Prove. 11.7. We tell them what a base
unprofitable thing sin is; but they love it, and therefore will not leave it.
We tell them how dear they buy this pleasure, and what they must pay for it in
everlasting torment, and they bless themselves, and will not believe it, but
will do as the most do, and because God is merciful, they will not believe him,
but will venture their souls, come on it what will we tel^ them how ready the
Lord is to receive them, and this does but make them delay their repentance,
and be bolder in their sin. Some of them say they purpose to repent, but they
are still the same; and some say, they do repent already when yet they are not
Converted from their sins. We exhort them, we entreat them* we offer them our
help; but we cannot prevail with them: but they that were drunkards are
drunkards still, and they that were voluptuous flesh pleasing wretches, are
such still; and they that were worldlings, are wordlings still; and they that
were ignorant, and proud and self-conceited, are so still. Few of them will see
and confess their sin, and fewer will forsake it, but comfort themselves that
all men are sinners, as if there were no difference between a Converted sinner
and an Unconverted: Some of them will not come near us, when we are willing to
instruct them, but think they know enough already, and need not our
instruction; and some of them will give us the hearing, and do what their list:
and most of them are like dead men that cannot fe^l; so that when we tell them
of the matters of everlasting consequence, we cannot get a word of it to their
hearts. If we do not obey them, and humor them in baptizing the children of
the most obstinately wicked, and giving them the Lords Supper, and doing all
that they would have us, though never so much against the word of God, they
will hate us, and rail at us: but if we beseech them but to confess and forsake
their sins, and save their souls, they will not do it. We tell them, if they
will but Turn, we will deny them none of the Ordinances of God, neither Baptism
to their children, nor the Lords Supper to themselves: but they will not hear
us: they would have us to disobey God, and damn our own souls, to please them,
and yet they will not turn and save their own souls to please God. They are
wiser in their own eyes then all their Teachers; they rage, and are confident
in their own way; and if we would never so fain, we cannot change them. Lord,
this is the case of our miserable neighbors, and we cannot help it: we see
them ready to drop into hell, and we cannot help it: we know if they would
unfeignedly turn they might be saved; but we cannot persuade them: if we would
beg it of them on our knees, we cannot persuade them to it: if we would beg it
of them with tears, we cannot persuade them; and what more can we do?

These are the secret complaints and moans that many a poor Minister is fain to
make. And do you think that he has any Pleasure in this? Is it a Pleasure to
him to see you go on in sin, and cannot stop you? to see you so miserable, and
cannot so much as make you sensible of it? to see you merry, when you are not
sure to be an hour out of Hell? to think what you must for ever suffer, because
you will not Turn? and to think what an everlasting life of Glory you wilfully
despise and cast away? What sadder thing can you bring to their hearts? and how
can you devise to grieve them more?

Who is it then that you Pleasure by your sin and death? It is none of your
understanding godly friends: Alas it is the grief of their souls to see your
misery; and they lament you many a time when you give them little thanks for
it, and when you have not hearts to lament your selves.

Who is it then that takes Pleasure in your sin? It is none but the three great
enemies of God, whom you renou^ced in your Baptism, and now are turned falsely
to serve.

1. The Devil indeed takes pleasure in your sin and death: For this is the very
end of all his temptations For this he watches night and day: You cannot
devise to please him better, then to go on in sin: How glad is he when he sees
thee going to the Alehouse or other sin? and when he hears thee curse, or
swear, or rail? How glad is he when he heare^h thee revile the Minister that
would draw thee from thy sin, and help to save thee? These are his delight.

2. The wicked also are delighted in it: For it is agreeable to their nature.

3. But I know for all this that it is not the pleasing of the Devil that you
intend, even when you please him: but it is your own flesh, the greatest and
most dangerous enemy, that you intend to please. It is the flesh that would be
pampered, that would be pleased in meat, and drink, and clothing, that would
be pleased in your company, and pleased in applause and credit with the world,
and pleased in sports, and lost, and idleness: this is the gulf that devoureth
all. This is the very god that you serve, (for the Scripture says of such,
that their bellies are their gods, Phil. 3.18.)

But I beseech you stay a little and consider the business.

1. Quest. Should your flesh be pleased before your Maker? Will you displease
the Lord, and displease your Teachers, and your godly friends, and all to
please your brutish appetites, or sensual desires? Is not God worthy to be the
Ruler of your flesh? If he shall not Rule it, he will not save it: you cannot
in reason expect that he should.

2. Qu. Your flesh is pleased with your sin: but is your conscience pleased?
Does not it grudge within you, and tell you sometimes that all is not well, and
that your case is not so safe as you make it to be? and should not your soul
and conscience be pleased before that corruptible flesh?

3. Quest. But is not your flesh preparing for its own displeasure also? it
loves the bait, but does it love the hook? It loves the strong drink and sweet
morsels, it loves its case and sports, and merriment; it loves to be rich and
well spoken of by men, and to be some body in the world: but does it love the
curse of God? Does it love to stand trembling before his Bar, and to be judged
to everlasting fire? Does it love to be tormented with the Devils for ever?
Take all together; for there is no separating sin and hell, but only by faith
and true Conversion; if you will keep one, you must have the other. If Death
and Hell be pleasant to you, no wonder then if you go on in sin; but if they be
not (as I am sure they be not) then what if sin were never so pleasant, is it
worth the loss of Life Eternal? Is a little drink, or meat, or ease, is the
good words of sinners, is the riches of this world to be valued above the Joys
of heaven? Or are they worth the suffering of Eternal fire? Sirs, these
questions should be considered, before you go any further, by every man that
has Reason to consider, and that believes he has a soul to save or lose.

Well, the Lord here swears that he has no Pleasure in your Death, but
rather that you would Turn and Live: if yet you will go on, and Dye rather then
Turn, remember it was not to Please God that you did it: it was to Please the
world, and to please your selves. And if men will damn themselves to please
themselves, and run into endless Torments for Delight, and have not the wit,
the hearts, the grace, to hearken to God or man that would reclaim them, what
remedy! but they must take what they get by it, and repent it in another
manner, when it is too late! Before I proceed any further in the Application, I
shall come to the next Doctrine, which gives me a fuller ground for it.

Doct. 5. SO earnest is God for the Conversion of sinners, that he doubleth his
commands and exhortations with vehemence; Turn ye, Turn ye, Why will ye Dye?
This Doctrine is the Application of the former, as by a Use of Exhortation,
and accordingly I shall handle it. Is there ever an Unconverted sinner that
hears these vehement words of God? Is there ever a man or woman in this
Assembly that is yet a stranger to the renewing sanctifying work of the Holy
Ghost? (It is an happy Assembly if it be not so with the most.) Hearken then to
the voice of your maker, and Turn to him by Christ without delay. Would you
know the will of God? Why this is his will, that you presently Turn. Shall the
living God send so earnest a Message to his creatures, and should they not
obey? Hearken then all you that live after the flesh: the Lord that gave thee
thy breath and being, has sent a message to thee from heaven; and this is his
Message, [ Turn ye, Turn ye, why will you die?] He that has ears to hear let
him hear. Shall the voice of the Eternal Majesty be neglected? If he do but
terribly thunder, thou art afraid. O but this voice does more nearly concern
thee. If he did but tell thee thou shall die to morrow, thou would not make
light of it. O but this word concerns thy life or death everlasting. It is
both a Command and an Exhortation. As if he had said to thee, [ I charge thee
upon the allegiance that thou owe to me thy Creator and Redeemer, that thou
renounce the flesh, the world, and the Devil, and Turn to me that thou may
Live. I condescend to entreat thee, as thou either love or fear him that
made thee; as thou love thine own life, even thine everlasting Life, Turn and
Live; as ever thou would escape eternal misery Turn, Turn, for why will thou
die?] And is there a heart in man, in a reasonable creature, that can once
refuse such a Message, such a Command, such an Exhortation as this? O what a
thing then is the heart of man!

Hearken then all that love themselves, and all that regard your own salvation.
Here is the joyfullest Message that ever was sent to the ears of man. Turn ye,
Turn ye, why will you die? You are not yet shut up under desperstion. Here is
mercy offered you, Turn and you shall have it. O Sirs, with what glad and
Joyful hearts should you receive this tidings. I know this is not the first
time that you have heard it; but how have you regarded it, or how do you regard
it now? Hear all you ignorant, careless sinners, the word of the Lord! Hear all
you worldlings, you sensual flesh-pleasers; you gluttons, and drunkards, and
whore-mongers, and swearers; you railers and backbiters, slanderers and liars;
Turn ye, Turn ye, why will you die?

Hear all you cold and outside professors, and all that are strangers to the
life of Christ, and never knew the power of his Cross and Resurrection, and
never felt your hearts warmed with his Love, and live not on him as the
strength of your souls, Turn ye, Turn ye, why will you die?

Hear all that are void of the Love of God, whose hearts are not toward him,
nor taken up with the Hopes of glory, but set more by your earthly prosperity
and delights, then by the Joys of Heaven; all you that are Religious but a
little on the by, and give God no more then your flesh can spare; that have not
denied your carnal selves, and forsaken all that you have for Christ, in the
estimation and grounded resolution of your souls, but have any one thing in the
world so dear to you, that you cannot spare it for Christ, if he require it,
but will rather venture on his displeasure then forsake it, Turn ye, Turn ye;
Why will you die?

If you never heard it, or observed it before, remember that you were told from
the Word of God this day, that if you will but Turn, you may Live; and if you
will not Turn, you shall surely die.

What now will you do Sirs? What is your resolution? Will you Turn, or will you
not? Halt not any longer between two opinions: if the Lord he God, follow him:
if your flesh be God, then serve it still. If Heaven be better then earth and
fleshly pleasures, come away then, and seek a better Country, and lay up your
treasure where rust and mothe^ do not corrupt, and thieves cannot break through
and steal, and be awakened at last with all your might, to seek the Kingdom
that cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28. and to employ your lives on an higher design,
and turn the stream of your cares and labors another way then formerly you
have done. But if earth be better then heaven, or will do more for you, or last
you longer, then keep it, and make your best of it, and follow it still. Sirs,
are you resolved what to do? if you be not, I will set a few more moving
Considerations before you, to see if Reason will make you resolve.

Consider first, What preparations Mercy has made for your salvation: and what
pity it is that any man should be damned after all this. The time was when the
flaming sword was in the way, and the curse of Gods Law would have kept thee
back, if thou had been never so willing to turn to God: The time was when thy
self and all the friends that thou have in the world, could never have procured
thee the pardon of thy sins past, though thou had never so much lamented and
reformed them* But Christ has removed this impediment by the ransom of his
blood. The time was that God was wholly unreconciled, as being not satisfied
for the violation of his Law: But now he is so far satisfied and reconciled, as
that he has made thee a free Act of Oblivion, and a free deed of Gift of
Christ and Life, and offers it to thee, and entreats thee to accept it, and
it may be thine if thou will. For, he was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, and has committed to us the word of actual reconciliation, 2 Cor.
5.18, 19. Sinners, we are commanded to do this Message to you all, as from the
Lord, [ Come, for all things are ready] Luke 14.17. Are all things ready, and
are you unready? God is Ready to entertain you, and pardon all that you have
done against him, if you will but come. As long as you have sinned, as wilfully
as you have sinned, as hainously as you have sinned, he is ready to cast all
behind his back, if you will but come. Though you have been Prodigals, and run
away from God, and have staid so long; he is ready even to meet you, and
embrace you in his arms; and rejoice in your Conversion, if you will but Turn.
Even the earthly worldling, the swinish drunkard, may find God ready to bid
them welcome, if they will but come. Does not this turn thy heart within thee?
O sinner, if thou have an heart of flesh, and not of stone in thee, methinks
this should melt it. Shall the dreadful infinite Majesty of heaven even wait
for thy returning, and be ready to receive thee, who have abused him, and
forgotten him so long? Shall he delight in thy Conversion, that might at any
time glorify his Justice in thy damnation, and yet does it not melt thy heart
within thee, and art thou not yet ready to come in? Have thou not as much
reason to be ready to come, as God has to invite thee, and bid thee welcome?

But that is not all: Christ has done his part on the Cross, and made such way
for thee to the Father, that on his account thou may be welcome if thou will
come. And yet art thou not Ready?

A Pardon is Ready, expressly granted and offered thee in the Gospel. And yet
art thou unready?

The Ministers of the Gospel are Ready to assist thee, to instruct thee, and
pronounce the absolving words of peace to thy soul; they are Ready to pray for
thee, and to seal up thy pardon by the administration of the holy Sacrament;
And yet art thou not ready?

A^l that fear God about thee are Ready to rejoice in thy Conversion, and to
receive thee into the Communion of Saints, and to give thee the right hand of
fellowship, yea though thou had been one that had been cast out of their
society: they dare not but forgive where God forgiveth, when it is manifest to
them by thy confession and amendment: they dare not so much as hit thee in the
teeth with thy former sins, because they know that God will not upbraid thee
with them. If thou had been never so scandalous, if thou would but heartily
be Converted and come in, they would not refuse thee, let the world say what
they would against it. And are all these ready to receive thee, and yet art
thou not ready to come in?

Yea, Heaven it self is Ready; the Lord will receive thee into the glory of his
Saints: as vile a beast as thou have been, if thou will but be cleansed, thou
may have a place before his throne: his Angels will be ready to guard thy
soul to the place of Joy, if thou do but unfeignedly come in. And is God ready,
the Sacrifice of Christ Ready, the Promise Ready, and Pardon Ready? are
Ministers Ready, and the People of God Ready, and Heaven it self Ready, and
Angels Ready, and all these but waiting for thy Conversion; and yet art thou
not Ready? What not Ready to live, when thou have been dead so long? not Ready
to come to thy right understanding, (as the Prodigal is said to come to
himself, Luke 15.17.) when thou have been besides thy self so long? Not ready
to be saved, when thou art even ready to be condemned? Art thou not ready to
lay hold on Christ that would deliver thee, when thou art even ready to drown
and sink into damnation? Art thou not ready to be saved from Hell, when thou
art even ready to be cast remedilesly into it? Alas man, do thou know what
thou do! if thou die unconverted, there is no doubt to be made of thy
damnation: and thou art not sure to live an hour: And yet art thou not ready to
turn and to come in? O miserable wretch! have thou not served the flesh and the
Devil long enough? Yet have thou not had enough of sin? Is it so good to thee?
or so profitable for thee? Do thou know what it is, that thou would yet
have more of it? Have thou had so many calls, and so many mercies, and so many
blows, and so many examples? have thou seen so many laid in the grave, and yet
art thou not ready to let go thy sins and come to Christ? What! after so many
convictions, and gripes of Conscience: after so many purposes and promises, art
thou not yet ready to turn and live? Oh that thy eyes, thy heart were opened to
know how fair an offer is now made to thee! and what a Joyful message it is
that we are sent on, to bid thee come: for all things are ready.

2. Consider also what Calls thou have to Turn and Live. How many, how loud,
how earnest, how dreadful, and yet what encourageing joyful Calls?

For the principal Inviter, it is God himself. He that commands Heaven and
Earth, commands thee to turn; and presently without delay to turn* He
commands the Sun to run its course, and to rise upon thee every morning; and
though it be so glorious a creature and many times bigger then all the earth,
yet it obeys him, and fails not one minute of its appointed time. He
commands all the planets and the orbs of Heaven, and they obey; He commands
the Sea to ebb and flow, and the whole Creation to keep its course, and all
obey him: The Angels of heaven obey his will, when he sends them to Minister to
such silly worms as we on earth, Hebrews 1.14. And yet if he command but a
sinner to Turn, He will not obey him: He only thinks himself wiser then God,
and He cavils and pleads the cause of sin, and will not away. If the Lord
Almighty say the word, the Heavens and all therein obey him: but if he call but
a drunkard out of an Alehouse, he will not obey; or if he call a worldly
fleshly sinner to deny himself, and mortify the flesh, and set his heart on a
better inheritance, he will not obey.

If thou had any love in thee, thou would know the voice, and say, Oh this
is my Fathers Call! how can I find in my heart to disobey? For the sheep of
Christ do know and hear his voice, and they follow him, and he gives them
eternal life, John 10.4. If thou had any spiritual life and sense in thee, at
least thou would say, this Call is the dreadful voice of God, and who dare
disobey? For says the Prophet, Amos 3.8. The Lion has roared, who will not
fear? God is not as man that thou should dally and play with him: Remember
what he said to Paul at his Conversion [ It is hard for thee to kick against
the pricks] Act. 9.5. Will thou yet go on and despise his word, and resist his
Spirit, and stop thine ear against his Call? Who is it that will have the worst
of this? Do thou know whom thou disobeyest and contendest with, and what thou
art doing? It were a far wiser and easier task for thee to contend with the
thorns, and spurn them with thy bare feet, and beat them with thy bare hands,
or put thy head into the burning fire. Be not deceived, God will not be mocked,
Galat. 6.7. Whoever else be mocked, God will not: you were better play with the
fire in your thatch, then with the fire of his burning wrath. For our God is a
consuming fire, Hebrews 12.29. O how unmeet a match art thou for God! It is a
fearful thing to fall into his hands, Hebrews 10.31. and therefore it is a
fearful thing to contend with him or resist him. As you love your souls, take
heed what you do. What will you say if he begin in wrath to plead with you?
What will you do if he take you once in hand? Will you then strive against his
Judgment, as now you do against his grace; faith the Lord, Isa. 27.4, 5. Fury
is not in me: (that is, I delight not to destroy you: I do it as it were
unwillingly: but yet) who would set the briars and thorns against me in battle?
I would go through them: I would burn them together. Or let him take hold of my
strength that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me.] Its
an unequal combat for the briars and stubble to make war with the fire.

As thus you see, Who it is that calls you, that should move you to hear his
Call and Turn, so consider also, by what instruments, and how often and how
earnestly he does it.

1. Every le^f of the blessed Book of God has as it were a voice, and calls
out unto thee, Turn and live, Turn or thou will die. How can thou open it,
and read a leaf, or hear a Chapter, and not perceive God bids thee Turn?

It is the voice of every Sermon that thou hear: For what else is the scope
and drift of all, but to call and persuade, and entreat thee for to Turn?

3. It is the voice of many a motion of the Spirit, that secretly speaks over
these words again, and urges thee to Turn.

4. It is likely sometime it is the voice of thy own Conscience. Art thou not
sometime convinced that all is not well with thee? and does not conscience tell
thee that thou must be a new man, and take a new course, and often call upon
thee to Return?

5. It is the voice of the gracious examples of the Godly. When thou see them
live a heavenly life, and fly from the sin which is thy delight, this really
Calls on thee to Turn.

6. It is the voice of all the Works of God. For they also are Gods books, that
teach thee this lesson, by showing thee his Greatness, and Wisdom, and
Goodness, and Calling thee to observe them, and admire the Creator, Psalm. 19.1,
2. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work; Day unto Day utters Speech, night unto night shows Knowledge. Every
time the Sun rises upon thee, it really calls thee to Turn: as if it should
say, [ What do I travel and compass the world for, but to declare to men the
Glory of their Maker, and to light them to do his work? And do I still find
thee doing the work of sin, and sleeping out thy life in negligence? Awake thou
that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light,
Ephesians. 5.14. The night is spent, the day is at hand: it is now high time to
awake out of sleep: Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us
put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting
and drunkeness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying:
but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.11, 12, 13, 14. (This Text was the means of
Austins Coversion.)

7. It is the voice of every Mercy thou do possess. If thou could but hear
and understand them, they all cry out unto thee, Turn. Why does the earth bear
thee but to seek and serve the Lord? why does it afford thee its fruits but to
serve him? Why does the air afford thee breath, but to serve him? Why do all
creatures serve thee with their labors and their lives, but that thou might
serve the Lord of them and thee? Why does he give thee time, and health, and
strength, but for to serve him? Why have thou meat, and drink, and clothes,
but for his service? Have thou any thing which thou have not received? And if
thou did receive them, its reason thou should bethink thee, from whom, and
to what end and use thou did receive them. Did thou never cry to him for
help in thy distress? and did thou not then understand that it was thy part
to Turn and serve him if he would deliver thee? He has done his part, and
spared thee yet longer, and tried thee another and another year: and yet do
thou not Turn? You know the Parable of the unfruitful fig tree, Luke 13.6, 7,
8, 9. When the Lord had said, Cut it down; why cumbreth it the ground? he was
entreated to try it one year longer, and then if it proved not fruitful, to cut
it down. Christ himself there makes the application twice over, ver. 3. and 5.
[ Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish.] How many years has God
looked for the fruits of Love and Holiness from thee, and has found none? and
yet he has spared thee. How many a time by thy wilful ignorance and
carelessness, and disobedience, have thou provoked Justice to say, Cut him down,
why cumbereth he the ground? And yet mercy has prevailed, and Patience has
forborne the killing damning blow, to this day. If thou had the understanding
of a man within thee, thou would know that all this calls thee to Turn.
Do thou think thou shall still esca^e the Judgment of God? Or despisest thou
the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing
that the goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? but after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every man
according to his deeds, Romans 2.3, 4.5, 6.

8. Moreover, it is the voice of every affliction to call thee to make haste
and Turn. Sickness and pain cry Turn; and poverty, and loss of friends, and
every twig of the chastising rod, cry Turn; and yet will thou not hearken to
the Call? These have come near thee, and made thee feel; they have made thee
groan, and can they not make thee Turn?

9. The very frame of thy Nature and being it self bespeaketh thy Return. Why
have thou Reason, but to Rule thy flesh, and serve thy Lord? Why have thou an
understanding soul, but to learn and know his will, and do it? Why have thou an
heart within thee that can love, and fear, and desire, but that thou should
fear him, and love him, and desire after him?

10. Yea thine own engagements by promise to the Lord do call upon thee to Turn
and serve him. Thou have bound thy self to him by a Baptismal Covenant, and
renounced the world, the flesh, and the Devil; this thou have confirmed by the
profession of Christianity, and renewed it at Sacraments and in times of
affliction: And will thou promise and vow, and never perform, and Turn to God?

Lay all these together now, and see what should be the issue. The holy
Scripture calls upon thee to Turn; the Ministers of Christ do call upon thee to
Turn, The Spirit cries Turn, thy Conscience cries Turn: the godly by
persuasions and examples cry Turn: the whole world and all the creatures
therein that are presented to thy consideration cry Turn: The patient
forbearance of God cries Turn: All the Mercies which thou receivest cry Turn;
The rod of Gods chastisements cries Turn: Thy reason and the frame of thy
nature bespeaks thy Turning: and so do all thy Promises to God. And yet art
thou not resolved to Turn?

3. Moreover, poor hard hearted sinner! Did thou ever consider, upon what
terms thou stand all this while with him that calls on thee for to Turn?
Thou art his own, and owe him thy self and all thou have; and may he not
Command his own? Thou art his absolute servant, and should serve no other
Master. Thou stand at his Mercy, and thy life is in his hand; and he is
resolved to save thee upon no other terms; thou had many malicious spiritual
enemies, that would be glad if God would but forsake thee, and let them alone
with thee, and leave thee to their will: how quickly would they deal with thee
in another manner? And thou can not be delivered from them but by Turning
unto God. Thou art fallen under his wrath by thy sin already: and thou know
not how long his patience will yet wait. Perhaps this is the last year; perhaps
the last day; his sword is even at thy heart, while the word is in thine ear;
and if thou Turn not, thou art a dead and undone man. Were thy eyes but open to
see where thou stand, even upon the brink of hell, and to see how many
thousands are there already that did not turn, thou would see that its time
to look about thee.

Well Sirs, look inwards now and tell me, How are your hearts affected with
these offers of the Lord? You hear what is his mind, he delights not in your
death: he calls to you, Turn, turn: its a fearful sign, if all this move thee
not, or do but half move thee; and much more if it make thee more careless in
thy misery, because thou hear of the mercifulness of God. The working of the
medicine will partly tell us whether there be any hope of the Cure. O what glad
tidings would it be to those that are now in Hell, if they had but such a
Message from God! What a joyful word would it be to hear this [ Turn and Live:]
Yea what a welcome word would it be to thy self when thou have felt that wrath
of God but an hour! Or if after a thousand, or ten thousand years torment, thou
could but hear such a word from God, [ Turn and Live.] and yet will thou now
neglect it, and suffer us to return without our errand?

Behold sinners, we are set here as the Messengers of the Lord, to set before
you Life and Death* What say you? which of them will you choose? Christ
stands as it were by thee, with Heaven in one hand, and Hell in the other,
and offers thee thy choice; which will thou choose? The voice of the Lord
makes the Rocks to tremble, Psalm 20. and is it nothing to hear him threaten
thee, if thou will not Turn? Do thou not understand and feel this voice, [
Turn ye, Turn ye, Why will ye die?] Why, it is the voice of Love, of infinite
Love, of thy best and kindest friend, as thou might easily perceive by the
motion: and yet can thou neglect it? It is the voice of pity and compassion.
The Lord sees whither thou art going better then thou do, which makes him
call after thee, Turn, Turn: He sees what will become of thee, if thou turn
not: He thinks with himself, Ah this poor sinner will cast himself into
endless torments, if he do not Turn: I must in Justice deal with him according
to my righteous Law; and therefore he calls after thee, Turn, Turn O sinner!
if you did but know the thousandth part as well as God does, the danger that is
near you, and the misery that you are running into, we should have no more need
to call after you to Turn.

Moreover, this voice that calls to thee, is the same that has prevailed
with thousands already, and called all to heaven that are now there* And they
would not now for a thousand worlds that they had made light of it, and not
Turned to God. Now what are they possessing that Turned at Gods Call? Now they
perceive that it was indeed the voice of Love, that meant them no more harm
then their salvation. And if thou will obey the same Call, thou shall come to
the same Happiness. There be millions that must for ever lament that they
Turned not, but there is never a soul in Heaven that is sorry that they were
Converted.

Well Sirs, are you yet resolved, or are you not? Do I need to say any more to
you? What will you do? will you Turn, or not? Speak man in thy heart to God,
though thou speak not out to me: Speak, left he take thy silence for a denial.
Speak quickly, lest he never make thee the like offer more. Speak resolvedly,
and not waveringly; for he will have no Indifferents to be his Followers. Say
in thy heart now, without any more delay, even before thou stir hence, [ By the
Grace of God, I am resolved presently to turn. And because I know my own
insufficiency, I am resolved to wait on God for his Grace, and to follow him in
his ways, and forsake my former courses and companions, and give up my self to
the guidance of the Lord.

Sirs, You are not shut up in the darkness of Heathenism, nor in the
desperation of the damned: Life is before you: and you may have it on
reasonable terms if you will: yea on free-cost, if you will accept it. The way
of God lies plain before you; the Church is open to you: the company of the
godly is open to you; you may have Christ and pardon, and Holiness, if you
will. What say you? Will you, or will you not? If you say nay, or say nothing,
and still go on, God is witness, and this Congregation is witness, and your own
Consciences are witness, how fair an offer you had this day. Remember, you
might have had Christ, and would not. Remember, when you have lost it, that you
might have had eternal Life as well as others, and would not: and all because
you would not Turn.

But let us come to the next Doctrine, and hear your Reasons.

Doct 6. The Lord condescendeth to reason the case with Unconverted sinners,
and to ask them why they will die?
A strange Disputation it is, both as to the Controversy, and as to the
Disputants. 1. The Controversy or Question propounded to dispute of, is, Why
wicked men will damn themselves? Or, Why they will rather die then Turn?
Whether they have any sufficient reason for so doing?

2. The Disputants are God and * man: the most Holy God, and wicked unconverted
sinners.

1. Is it not a strange Thing which God does seem here to suppose, that any man
should be willing to die, and be damned? Yea that this should be the case of
all the wicked; that is, of the greatest part of the world; but you will say,
This cannot be; for nature desires the preservation and felicity of it self,
and the wicked are more selfish then others, and not less; and therefore how
can any man be willing to be damned?

To which I answer, 1. It is a certain Truth. that no man can be willing of any
evil as evil, but only as ^t has some appearance of good; much less can any
man be willing to be eternally tormented. Misery as such is desired by none. 2.
But yet for all that it is most true which God here teaches us, that the cause
why the wicked die and are damned, is because they will die and be damned. And
this is true in several respects.

1. Because they will go the way that leads to Hell; though they are told by
God and man, whether it goes, and where it ends; and though God has so often
professed in his word, that if they hold on in that way, they shall be
condemned: and that they shall not be saved unless they Turn. Isa. 48.22. and
57.21. There is no Peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked.] Isa. 59 8. The way
of Peace they know not; there is no Judgment in their goings; They have made
them crooked paths: Whosoever goes therein shall not know Peace.] They have
the word and the Oath of the living God for it; that if they will not Turn,
they shall not enter into his Rest. And yet wicked they are, and wicked they
will be, let God and man say what they will; Fleshly they are, and fleshly they
will be: Worldlings they are, and Worldlings they will be: though God has told
them that the Love of the world is enmity to God, and that if any man love the
world, (in that measure) the love of the Father is not in him, James 4.4. 1
John 2.15. so that consequentially these men are willing to be damned, though
not directly: They are willing of the way to Hell, and Love the certain cause
of their torment, though they be not willing of Hell it self, and do not love
the pain which they must endure.

Is not this the Truth of your case Sirs? You would not burn in Hell: But you
will kindle the fire by your sin, and cast your selves into it: you would not
be tormented with Devils for ever; But you will do that which will certainly
procure it, in despite of all that can be said against it. It is just as if you
would say, I will drink this rats-bane, or other poison, but yet I will not
die. I will cast my self headlong from the top of a steeple, but yet I will not
kill my self; I will thrust this knife into my heart, but yet I will not take
away my life. I will put this fire into the thatch of my house, but yet I will
not burn it. Just so it is with wicked men; they will be wicked; and they will
live after the flesh and the world, and yet they would not be damned. But do
you not know that the means do lead unto the end? and that God has by his
righteous Law concluded that you must repent or perish? He that will take
poison, may as well say plainly, I will kill my self: for it will prove no
better in the end: Though perhaps he loved it for the sweetness of the Sugar
that was mixed with it, and would not be persuaded that it was poison, but that
he might take it and do well enough: But it is not his conceits, and
confidence, that will save his life. So if you will be Drunkards, or
Fornicators, or worldlings, or live after the flesh, you may as well say
plainly, we will be damned: For so you shall be unless you Turn; would you not
rebuke the folly of a thief or murderer, that would say, [ I will steall, and
kill, but I will not be hanged,] when he knows that if he do the one, the Judge
in justice will see that the other be done? If he say, I will steal and murder,
he may as well say plainly, I will be hanged. So if you will go on in a carnal
life, you may as well say plainly, we will go to Hell.

2. Moreover, The wicked will not use those means, without which there is no
hope of their Salvation: He that will not eat, may as well say plainly he will
not live, unless he can tell how to live without meat; He that will not go his
journey, may as well say plainly, he will not come to the end. He that falls
into the water and will not come out, nor suffer another to help him out, may
as well say plainly he will be drowned; So if you be carnal and ungodly, and
will not be converted, nor use the means by which you should be converted, but
think it more ado then needs, you may as well say plainly, you will be damned.
For if you have found out a way to be saved without Conversion, you have done
that which never was done before.

3. Yea, this is not all, but the wicked are unwilling, even of salvation it
self. Though they may desire somewhat which they call by the name of Heaven,
yet Heaven it self, considered in the true nature of the felicity, they desire
not: Yea their hearts are quite against it. Heaven is a state of perfect
holiness, and of continual Love, and Praise to God, And the wicked have no
heart to this. The imperfect Love, and Praise, and holiness which is here to be
attained, they have no mind of: Much less of that which is so much greater. The
joys of Heaven are of so pure and spiritual a nature, that the heart of the
wicked cannot truly desire them.

So that by this time you may see on what ground it is that God supposes that
the wicked are willing of their own destruction: They will not turn, though
they must Turn or die, they will rather venture on certain misery, then be
converted; and then to quiet themselves in their sin, they will make themselves
believe that they shall nevertheless escape.

2. And as the Controversy is matter of wonder (that ever men should be such
enemies to themselves, as wilfully to cast away their souls) so are the
Disputants too. That God should stoop so low, as thus to plead the case with
man; and that man should be so strangely blind and obstinate, as to need all
this in so plain a case, yea and to resist all this, when their own salvation
lies upon the issue.

No wonder if they will not hear us that are men, when they will not hear the
Lord himself. As God says, Ezekiel. 3.7. when he sent the Prophet to the
Israelites, [ The house of Israel will not hearken unto thee: For they will not
hearken unto me; For all the house of Israel are impudent and hardhearted.] No
wonder if they can plead against a Minister, or a godly Neighbor, when they
will plead against the Lord himself, even against the plainest passages of his
word, and think that they have Reason on their side. When they weary the Lord
with their words, they say, wherein have we wearied him? Mal. 2.17. The Priests
that despised his name, durst ask, Wherein have we despised thy name? And when
they polluted his Altar, and made the Table of the Lord contemp^ible, they
durst say Wherein have we polluted thee? Mal. 1.6, 7. But, [ Woe unto him (says
the Lord) that striveth with his Maker! Let the Potsheards strive with the
Potsheards of the earth; Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it; What
make thou?] Isa. 45.9.

Quest. But why is it that God will reason the Cause with man?

Answ. 1. Because that man being a reasonable creature, is accordingly to be
dealt with, and by Reason to be persuaded and overcome. God has therefore
endued them with Reason, that they might use it for him. One would think a
reasonable creature should not go against the clearest and greatest Reason in
the world, when it is set before him.

2. At least men shall see that God did require nothing of them that was
unreasonable; but that whatever he commands them, and whatever he forbids
them, he has all the right Reason in the world on his side; and they have good
Reason to obey him; but none to disobey. And thus even the damned shall be
forced to justify God. and confess that it was but Reason that they should
have turned to him; and they shall be forced to condemn themselves, and confess
that they had little reason to cast away themselves by the neglecting of his
Grace in the day of their visitation.

Use.
LOOK up your best and strongest Reasons, sinners, if you will make good your
way; You see now with whom you have to deal. What say thou, Unconverted
sensual wretch? Dare thou venture upon a dispute with God? Art thou able to
confute him? Art thou ready to enter the lists? God asks thee, Why will thou
die? Art thou furnished with a sufficient answer? Will thou undertake to prove
that God is mistaken, and that thou art in the right? O what an undertaking is
that! Why, either he or you is mistaken, when he is for your Conversion, and
you are against it; He calls upon you to Turn, and you will not; He bids you do
it presently, even to day, while it is called to day, and you delay, and think
it time enough hereafter. He says, it must be a total change, and you must be
holy, and new creatures, and born again; and you think that less may serve the
turn, and that its enough to patch up the old man, without becoming New. Who is
in the right now? God or you? God calls on you to Turn and to Live an holy
Life; and you will not; by your disobedient lives, it appears you will not. If
you will, why do you not? Why have you not done it all this while? and why do
you not fall upon it yet? Your Wills have the command of your lives. We may
certainly conclude that you are unwilling to turn when you do not Turn. And why
will you not? Can you give any Reason for it that is worthy to be called a
Reason?

I that am but a worm, your fellow creature, of a shallow capacity, dare
challenge the wisest of you all* to reason the case with me, while I plead my
Makers cause: And I need not be discouraged, when I know I plead but the cause
that God pleads, and contend for him that will have the best at last. Had I
but these two General Grounds against you, I am sure that you have no good
Reason on your side.

1. I am sure it can be no good Reason, which is against the God of Truth and
Reason. It cannot be Light that is contrary to the Sun: There is no knowledge
in any Creature, but what it had from God, and therefore none can be wiser then
God. It were damnable presumption for the highest Angel to compare with his
Creator. What is it then for a lump of dirt, an ignorant sot, that knows not
himself, nor his own soul, that knows but little of the things which he
sees, yea that is more ignorant then many of his neighbors, to set himself
against the wisdom of the Lord? It is one of the fullest discoveries of the
horrible wickedness of carnal men, and the stark madness of such in sin, that
so silly a mole dare contradict his Maker, and call in question the word of
God. Yea that those people in our Parishes, that are so beastly ignorant, that
they cannot give us a reasonable answer concerning the very Principles of
Religion, are yet so wise in their own conceit, that they dare question the
plainest truths of God, yea contradict them, and cavil against them, when they
can scarce speak sense, and will believe them no further then agrees with
their foolish wisdom.

2. And a^ I know that God must needs be in the right, so I know the Case is so
palpable and gross which he pleads against, that no man can have reason for
i^. Is it possible that a man can have any Reason to break his Masters Laws?
and reason to dishonor the Lord of Glory? and reason to abuse the Lord that
bought him? Is it possible that a man can have any good reason to damn his own
Immortal soul? Mark the Lords question [ Turn ye, Turn ye, Why will you die?]
Is eternal death a thing to be de desired? Are you in love with Hell? What
reason have you wilfully to perish? If you think you have some reason to sin,
should you not remember that death is the wages of sin? Romans 6.23. and think
whether you have any Reason to undo your selves body and soul for ever. You
should not only ask whether you love the Adder, but whether you love the sting.
It is such a thing for a man to cast away his everlasting happiness, and to sin
against God, that no good reason can be given for it: but the more any man
pleads for it, the madder he shows himself to be. Had you a Lord-ship or a
Kingdom offered you for every sin that you commit, it were not reason, but
madness to accept it. Could you by every sin obtain the highest thing on earth
that flesh desires, it were of no considerable value to persuade you in reason
to commit it. If it were to please your greatest or dearest friends, or to obey
the greatest Prince on earth, or to save your lives, or to escape the greatest
earthly Misery, all these are of no consideration, to draw a man in reason to
the committing of one sin. If it were a right hand, or a right eye that would
hinder your salvation, it is the gainfullest way to cast it away, rather then
to go to Hell to save it. For there is no saving a part, when you lose the
whole. So exceeding great are the matters of Eternity, that nothing in this
world deserves once to be named in comparison with them: Nor can any earthly
thing, though it were Life, or Crowns, or Kingdoms, be a reasonable excuse for
the neglect of matters of such higher and Everlasting Consequence. A man can
have no reason to cross his ultimate End. Heaven is such a thing, that if you
lose it, nothing can supply the want, or make up your loss; And Hell is such a
thing that if you suffer it, nothing can remove your misery, or give you ease
and comfort. And therefore nothing can be a valuable consideration to excuse
you for neglecting your own salvation: For says our Savior, What shall it
profit a man to win all the world, and lose his own soul? Mark 8.36.

Oh Sirs, that you did but know what matters they are that we are now speaking
to you of! The Saints in Heaven have other kind of thoughts of these things. If
the Devil could come to them that live in the sight and love of God, and should
offer them a cup of Ale, or a Whore, or merry company, or sports, to tice them
away from God and Glory, I pray you tell me, how do you think they would
entertain the motion? Nay, or if he should offer them to be Kings on the earth:
Do you think this would tice them down from Heaven! O with what hatred and holy
scorn would they disdain and reject the motion! And why should not you do so,
that have Heaven opened to your faith, if you had but faith to see it? There Is
never a soul in hell but knows by this time, that it was a mad exchange to let
go heaven for fleshly pleasure; and that it is not a little mirth, or Pleasure,
or worldly riches, or Honor, or the good Will or Word of men, that will quench
Hellfire, or make him a saver that loses his soul. O if you had heard what I
believe, if you had seen what I believe, and that on the credit of the word of
God, you would say there can be no reason to warrant a man to damn his soul:
You durst not sleep quietly another night before you had resolved to Turn and
Live.

If you see a man put his hand into the fire till it burn off, you will marvail at
it: but this is a thing that a man may have Reason for, as Bishop Cranmer had
when he burnt off his hand for subscribing to Popery. If you see a man cut off
a leg or an arm, its a sad sight; but this is a thing that a man may have good
reason for: as many a man does it to save his life. If you see a man give his
body to be burnt to ashes, and to be tormented with strappado's and racks, and
refuse deliverance when it is offered: this is a hard case to flesh and blood.
But this a man may have good reason for; as you may see in Heb. 11.33, 34, 35,
36. and as many an hundred Martyrs have done. But for a man to forsake the Lord
that made him, and for a man to run into the fire of Hell, when he is told of
it, and entreated to Turn that he may be saved; this is a thing that can have
no Reason in the world, that is Reason indeed, to justify or excuse it. For
Heaven will pay for the loss of any thing that we can lose to get it, or for
any labor which we bestow for it. But nothing can pay for the loss of Heaven.

I beseech you now let this word come nearer to your hearts. As you are
convinced that you have no Reason to destroy your selves, so tell me what
Reason have you to refuse to Turn, and live to God? What Reason has the
veriest worldling, or drunkard, or ignorant careless sinner of you all, why you
should not be as holy as any you know, and be as careful for your souls as any
other. Will not hell be as hot to you as to others? Should not your own souls
be as dear to you as theirs to them? Has not God as much authority over you?
Why then will you not become a sanctified people as well as they?

O Sirs, when God brings the matter down to the very Principles of nature,
and shows you that you have no more reason to be undgodly, then you have to
damn your own souls; if yet you will not understand and Turn, it seems a
Desperate case that you are in.

And now either you have Reason for what you do, or you have not. If not; will
you go on against Reason it self? Will you do that which you have no Reason
for? But if you think you have, produce them, and make the best of your matter.
Reason the case a little with me, your fellow creature, which is far easier
then to reason the case with God. Tell me man here before the Lord, as if thou
were to die this hour, Why should thou not resolve to Turn this day, before
thou stir from the place thou stand in? What Reason have thou to deny, or to
delay? Have thou any Reason that satisfies thine own conscience for it? Or any
that thou dare own and plead at the bar of God? If thou have, let us hear
them; bring them forth, and make them good? But alas, what poor stuff, what
nonsense instead of reason, do we daily hear from ungodly men? But for their
necessity I should be ashamed to name them.

1. One says, If none shall be saved but such Converted and Sanctified ones as
you talk of, then heaven would be but empty; then God help a great many.

Answ. What! it seems you think that God does not know, or else that he is not
to be believed! Measure not all by your selves; God has thousands and millions
of his sanctified ones: but yet they are few in comparison of the world, as
Christ himself has told us, Matthew 7.13, 14. Luke 12.32. It better beseems
you to make that use of this truth which Christ teaches you; Strive to enter
in at the strait gate; for strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that
leads unto life, and few there be that find it; but wide is the gate, and
broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many they be that go in
thereat.] Luke 13.22, 23, 24. [ Fear not little flock (says Christ to his
sanctified ones) for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom,
Luke 12 32.

Object. 2. I am sure if such as I go to Hell, we shall have store of company.

Answ. And will that be any ease or comfort to you? Or do you think you may not
have company enough in Heaven? Will you be undone for company? Or will you not
believe that God will execute his threatenings because they be so many that are
guilty? All these are silly unreasonable conceits.

Object. 3. But are not all men sinners, even the best of you all?

Answ. But all are not unconverted sinners. The godly live not in gross sin,
and their very infirmities are their grief, and burden, which they daily long,
and pray, and strive to be rid of. Sin has not dominion over them.

Object. 4. I do not see that Professors are any better then other men; They
will overreach, and oppress, and are as Covetous as any.

Answ. Whatever hypocrites are, its not so with those that are sanctified. God
has thousands and thousands that are otherwise: Though the malicious world
does accuse them of what they can never prove, and of that which never entered
into their hearts. And commonly they charge them with heart-sins, which none
can see but God; because they can charge them with no such wickedness in their
lives, as they are guilty of themselves.

Object. 5. But I am no whoremonger, nor drunkard, nor oppressor, and therefore
why should you call upon me to be Converted?

Answ. As if you were not born after the flesh, and had not lived after the
flesh as well as other^* Is it not as great a sin as any of these, for a man to
have an earthly mind, and to love the world above God, and to have an
unbelieving unhumbled heart? Nay, let me tell you more: that many persons that
avoid disgraceful sins, are as fast glued to the world, and as much slaves to
the flesh, and as strange to God, and a verse to heaven in their more civil
course, as others are in their more shameful notorious sins.

Object. 6. But I mean nobody any harm, nor do no harm: and why then should God
condemn me?

Answ. Is it no harm to neglect the Lord that made thee, and the work for which
thou came into the world, and to prefer the creature before the Creator, and
to neglect the grace that is daily offered there? It is the depth of thy
sinfulness to be so insensible of it: The dead feel not that they are dead. If
once thou were made alive, thou would see more amiss in thy self, and marvel
at thy self for making so light of it.

Object. 7. I think you would make men mad under pretense of Converting them:
It is enough to rack the brains of simple people to muse so much on matters too
high for them.

Answ. 1. Can you be madder then you are already? or at least can there be a
more dangerous madness, then to neglect your everlasting welfare, and wilfully
undo your selves? 2. A man is never well in his wits till he be converted: He
never knows God, nor knows sin, nor knows Christ, nor knows the world, nor
himself, nor what his business is on earth, so as to set himself about it, till
he be converted. The Scripture says that the wicked are unreasonable men, 2
These. 3.2. and that the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God, 1 Cor.
1.20. and Luke 15.17. its said of the Prodigal, that when he came to himself he
resolved to Return. Its a wise world* when men will disobey God and run to Hell
for fear of being out of their wits.

2. What is there in the work that Christ calls you to, that should drive a man
out of his wits? Is it the Loving of God, and calling upon him, and comfortable
thinking of the glory to come, and the forsaking of our sins, and loving one
another, and delighting our selves in the service of God? are these such things
as should make men mad?

3. And whereas you say that these matters are too high for us, you accuse God
himself for making this our work, and giving us his word, and commanding all
that will be blessed to meditate in it day and night. Are the matters which we
were made for, and which we live for, too high for us to meddle with? This is
plainly to unman us, and to make beasts of us, as if we were like them, that
must meddle with no higher matters, then what belongs to flesh and earth. If
heaven be too high for you to think on and provide for, it will be too high for
you ever to possess.

4. If God should sometimes suffer any weak-headed person to be distracted by
thinking of eternal things, this is because they misunderstand them, and run
without a guide: and of the two I had rather be in the case of such a one, then
of the mad unconverted world, that take their distraction to be their wisdom.

Object. 8. I do not th^nk that God cares so much what men think, or speak, or
do, as to make so great a matter of it.

Answ. It seems then you take the word of God to be false, and then what will
you believe? But your own reason might teach you better, if you believe not the
Scriptures: For you see God set not so light by us, but that he vouchsafed to
make us, and still preserves us, and daily upholdeth us, and provideth for us:
And will any wise man make a curious frame for nothing? will you make or buy a
Clock or Watch, and daily look to it, and not care whether it go true or false?
Surely if you believe not a particular eye of providence observing your hearts
and lives, you cannot believe or expect any paricular providence to observe
your wants and trouble, to relieve You. And if God had so little cared for you
as you imagine, you would never have lived till now: An hundred diseases would
have striven which should first destroy you; Yea the Devils would have haunted
you, and fetched you away alive, as the great fishes devour the less, and as
Ravenous birds and beasts devour others. You cannot think that God made man for
no end or use: And if he made him for any, it was sure for himself. And can you
think he cares not whether his ends be accomplished, and whether we do the work
that we are made for?

Yea by this Atheistical objection you make God to have made and upheld all the
world in vain. For what are all other lower Creatures for, but for man? What
does the earth but bear us, and nourish us? and the beasts do serve us with
their labors and lives, and so of the rest. And has God made so glorious a
habitation, and set man to dwell in it, and made all his servants, and now does
he look for nothing at his hands? nor care how he thinks, or speaks, or lives?
This is most unreasonable.

Object. 9. It was a better world when men did not make so much ado in Religion.

Answ. It has ever been the custom to praise the times past. That world that
you speak of, was wont to say, it was a better world in their forefathers
days, and so did they of their forefathers: This is but an old custom;
because we all feel the evil of our own times, but we see not that which was
before us.

3. Perhaps you speak as you think: Worldlings think the world is at the best
when it is agreeable to their minds: and when they have most mirth and worldly
pleasure. And I doubt not but the Devil as well as you, would say, that then it
was a better world: for then he had more service, and less disturbance. But the
world is at the best, when God is most loved, regarded and obeyed. And how else
will you know when the world is good or bad but by this?

Object. 10. There are so many ways and Religions that we know not which to be
of, and therefore we will be even as we are.

Answ. Because there are many, will you be of that way that you may be sure is
wrong? None are further out of the way, then worldly, fleshly, Unconverted
sinners. For they do not only err in this or that opinion, as many sects do,
but in the very scope and drift of their lives. If you were going a journey
that your life lay on, would you stop or turn again, because you met with some
cross ways, or because you saw some travelers go the horse way, and some the
foot way, and some perhaps break over the hedge, yea and some miss the way? or
would you not rather be the more careful to enquire the way? If you have some
servants that know not how to do your work right, and some that are unfaithful,
would you take it well at any of the rest that would therefore be idle and do
you no service because they see the rest so bad?

Object. 11. I do not see that it goes any better with those that are so godly
then with other men They are as poor, and in as much trouble as others.

Answ. And perhaps in much more, when God sees it meet. They take not earthly
prosperity for their wages. They have laid up their treasure and hopes in
another world, or else they are not Christians indeed. The less they have, the
more is behind; and they are content to wait till then.

Object. 12. When you have said all that you can, I am resolved tohope well,
and trust in God, and do as well as I can, and not make so much ado.

Answ. 1. Is that doing as well as you can, when you will not Turn to God, but
your heart is against his holy and diligent service? It is as well as you will
indeed: but that's your misery.

2. My desire is, that you should Hope and Trust in God: But for what is it
that you will Hope? Is it to be saved, if you turn and be sanctified? For this
you have Gods promise: and therefore hope for it and spare not. But if you Hope
to be saved without Conversion and an Holy Life, this is not to Hope in God,
but in Satan or your selves. For God has given you no such promise, but told
you the contrary: but its Satan and self-love that made you such promises, and
raised you to such Hopes.

Well, If these and such as these be all you have to say against Conversion and
an Holy Life, your All is Nothng, and worse then Nothing: And if these and such
as these seem Reasons sufficient to persuade you to forsake God, and cast your
selves into Hell, the Lord deliver us from such Reasons, and from such blind
understandings, and from such senseless hardened hearts. Dare you stand to ever
an one of these Reasons at the Bar of God? Do you think it will then serve
your turn to say, Lord I did not Turn because I had so much to do in the world,
or because I did not like the lives of some professors, or because I saw men of
so many minds. O how easily will the light of that day confound and shame such
reasonings as these? Had you the world to look after? Let the world which you
served now pay your wages, and save you if it can? Had you not a better world
to look after first? And were you not commanded to seek first Gods Kingdom and
Righteousness, and promised, that other things should be added to you? Mat.
6.33. And were you not told, that godliness was profitable to all things,
having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Did
the sins of professors hinder you? you should rather have been the more
heedful, and learned by their falls to beware, and have been the more careful,
and not the more careless: It was the Scripture, and not their lives, that was
your Rule. Did the many opinions of the world hinder you? Why, the Scripture
that was your Rule did teach you but one way, and that was the right way: If
you had followed that even in so much as was plain and easy, you should never
have miscarried. Will not such Answers as these confound and silence you? If
these will not, God has those that will: when he asks the man, Mat. 22.12.
Friend, how came thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment? that is,
What do thou in my Church among professed Christians, without an holy heart
and life? What answer did he make? Why the text says, He was speechless: he
had nothing to say. The clearness of the case, and the Majesty of God will then
easily stop the mouths of the most confident of you, though you will not be put
down by any thing that we can say to you now, but will make good your cause, be
it never so bad. I know already that never a Reason that now you can give, will
do you any good at last, when your case must be opened before the Lord and all
the world.

Nay, I scarce think that your own Consciences are well satisfied with your
Reasons. For if they are, it seems then you have not so much as a Purpose to
Repent. But if you do purpose to Repent, it seems you do not put much
confidence in your Reasons which you bring against it.

What say you yet Unconverted sinners? Have you any good Reason to give, why
you should not Turn, and presently Turn with all your hearts? Or will you go to
Hell in despite of Reason it self? Bethink you what you do in time; for it
will shortly be too late to bethink you. Can you find any fault with God or his
work, or wages? Is he a bad Master? Is the Devil whom you serve, a better? or
is the flesh a better? Is there any harm in an holy life? is a life of
worldliness and ungodliness better? Do you think in your Consciences that it
would do you any harm to be Converted and live an holy life? What harm can it
do you? Is it harm to you to have the Spirit of Christ within you? and to have
a cleansed purified heart? If it be bad to be Holy, why does God say, Be ye
holy, for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Leviticus 20.7. Is it evil to be like
God? Is it not said that God made man in his image? Why this Holiness is his
Image: This Adam lost, and this Christ by his Word and Spirit would restore to
you, as he does to all that he will save. Why were you Baptized into the Holy
Ghost, and why do you Baptize your children into the Holy Ghost as your
Sanctifier, if you will not be sanctified by him, but think it an hurt to you
to be sanctified? Tell me truly, as before the Lord, Though you are loath to
live an Holy life, had you not rather die in the case of those that do so then
of others? If you were to die this day, had you not rather die in the case of a
Conveted man, then of the Unconverted? of an holy and heavenly man, then of a
carnal earthly man? and would you not say as Balaam, Numb. 23.10. Let me die
the death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like his.] And why will you
not now be of the mind that you will be of then? First or last you must come to
this, either to be Converted, or wish you had been, when it is to late.

But what is it that you are afraid of losing if you Turn? Is it your friends?
you will but change them: God will be your friend, and Christ, and the Spirit
will be your friend, and every Christian will be your friend. You will get one
friend that will stand you in more stead then all the friends in the world
could have done. The friends you lose would but have ticed you to hell, but
could not have delivered you: But the friend you get, will save you from hell,
and bring you to his own eternal Rest.

Is it your pleasures that you are afraid of losing? You think you shall never
have a merry day again, if once you be Converted. Alas, that you should think
it a greater pleasure to live in foolish sports and merriments, and please your
flesh, then to live in the Believing thoughts of glory, and in the love of God,
and in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, in which the state
of grace consists, Romans 14.17. If it be a greater pleasure to you to think
of your Lands and inheritance (if you were Lords of all the Country) then it is
to a child to play for pins; why should it not be a greater Joy to you to think
of the Kingdom of Heaven being yours, then of all the riches or pleasure of the
world? As it is but foolish childishness that makes children so delight in
gawds, that they would not leave them for all your Lands: so it is but foolish
worldliness, and fleshliness, and wickedness, that makes you so much delight in
your houses, and lands, and meat, and drink, and ease, and honor, as that you
would not part with them for the heavenly delights. But what will you do for
pleasure when these are gone? Do you not think of that? When your pleasures end
in horror, and go out with a stinking snuff, the Pleasures of the Saints are
then at the best. I have had my self but a little taste of the heavenly
pleasures in the forethoughts of the blessed approaching day, and in the
present persuasions of the Love of God in Christ; but I have taken too deep a
draught of earthly pleasures (so that you may see, if I be partial, it is on
your side;) and yet I must profess from that little experience, that there is
no comparison; there is more joy to be had in a day (if the Sun of life shine
clear upon us) in the state of Holiness, then in an whole life of sinful
pleasures. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of God, then to dwell in
the Tents of wickedness, Psalm 84.10. A day in his Courts is better then a
thousand anywhere else, Psalm. 84.10. The mirth of the wicked is like the
laughter of a mad man that knows not his own misery: and therefore Solomon
faith of such laughter, It is mad; and of mirth, What does it? Eccles. 2.2. And
Eccles. 7.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to
go to the house of feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the living
will lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better then laughter: for by the sadness of
the countenance, the heart is made better. The heart of the wise is in the
house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth: It is
better to hear the rebuke of the wise, then to hear the song of fools: For as
the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool.] All the
pleasures of fleshly things, is but like the scratching of a man that has the
itch: It is his disease that makes him desire it; and a wise man had rather be
without his pleasure and be troubled with his itch. Your loudest laughter is
but like that of a man that is tickled; he laughs when he has no cause of joy.
And it is a wiser thing for a man to give all his estate and his life to be
tickled to make him laugh, then for you to part with the Love of God, and the
comforts of Holiness, and the Hopes of Heaven, and to cast your selves into
damnation, that you may have your flesh tickled with the pleasures of sin for a
little while. Judge as you are men, whether this be a wise man's part. It is but
your carnal unsanctified nature that makes an holy life seem grievous to you,
and a course of sensuality seem more delightful. If you will but Turn, the Holy
Ghost will give you another nature, and inclination; and then it will be more
pleasant to you to be rid of your sin, then now it is to keep it; and you will
then say, that you know not what a comfortable life was till now, and that it
was never well with you, till God and Holiness were your delight.

Quest. BUT how comes it to pass that men should be so unreasonable in the
matters of their salvation? they have wit enough in other matters. What makes
them so loath to be Converted, that there should need so many words in so plain
a case, and all will not do, but the most will live and de Unconverted?

Answ. To name them only in a few words, the causes are these.

1. Men are naturally in Love with earth and flesh. They are born sinners, and
their nature has an enmity to God and godliness, as the Nature of the Serpent
has to a man: And when all that we can say goes against an habitual
inclination of their natures, no marvail if it little prevail.

2. They are in Darkness, and know not the very things which they hear. Like a
man that was born blind, and hears an high commendation of the light: but what
will bearing do, unless he see it? They know not what God is, nor what is the
power of the Cross of Christ, nor what the Spirit of holiness is, nor what it
is to live in love by faith: They know not the certainty, and suitableness, and
excellency of the heavenly inheritance. They know not what Conversion, and an
holy mind and Conversation is, even when they hear of it. They are in a mist of
ignorance. They are lost and bewildred in sin: like a man that has lost
himself in the night, and knows not where he is, nor how to come to himself
again, till the daylight do recover him.

3. They are wilfully confident that they need no Conversion, but some partial
amendment, but that they are in the way to heaven already, and are Converted
when they are not. And if you meet a man that is quite out of his way, you may
long enough call on him to turn back again, if he will not believe you that he
is out of his way.

4. They are become slaves to their flesh, and drowned in the world to make
provision for it. Their lusts, and passions, and appetites have distracted
them, and got such an hand over them, that they cannot tell how to deny them,
nor how to mind any thing else. So that the drunkard says, I love a cup of
good d^ink, and I cannot forbear it. The glutton says, I love good ^hear, and
I cannot forbear. The fornicator says, I love to have my lust fulfilled, and I
cannot forbear. And the gamester loves to have his sports, and he cannot
forbear. So that they are become even captivated slayes to their flesh, and
their (...) wilfulness is become an impotency; and what they would not do, they
say they cannot. And the worldling is so taken up with earthly things, that he
has neither heart, nor mind, nor time for heavenly: but as in Phara^^s d^eam,
Genesis 41.4. the lean kine did eat up the fat ones; so this lean and barren earth
does eat up all the thoughts of heaven.

5. Some are so carried away by the stream of evil company, that they are
possessed with hard thoughts of a godly life, by hearing them speak against it;
or at least, they think they may venture to do as they see most do: and so they
hold on in their sinful ways; and when one is cut off and cast into Hell, and
another snatched away from among them to the same condemnation, it does not much
daunt them, because they see not whither they are gone; poor wretches, they
hold on in their ungodliness, for all this; for they little know that their
companions are now lamenting it in torments. In Luke 16. the rich man in hell
would fain have had one to warn his five Brethren, left they should come to
that place of torment. Its like he knew their minds and lives, and knew that
they were hasting thither, and little dreamt that he was there, yea and would
little have believed one that would have told them so. I remember a passage
that a Gentleman yet living told me he saw upon a bridge over Severn: Mr. R.
Rowly of S^rew bury upon A^ham-bridge.
A man was driving a flock of fat lambs, and something meeting them and
hindering their passage, one of the Lambs leapt upon the wall of the bridge and
his legs slipping from under him, he fell into the stream: the rest seeing him,
did one after one leap over the bridge into the stream, and were all, or almost
all drowned; Those that were behind did little know what was become of them
that were gone before, but thought they might venture to follow their
companions: but as soon as ever they were over the wall, and falling headlong,
the case was altered. Even so it is with Unconverted Carnal men. One dies by
them and drops into hell, and another follows the same way; and yet they will
go after them, because they think not whether they are gone. Oh but when death
has once opened their eyes, and they see what is on the other side of the wall,
even in another world, then what would they give to be where they were!

6. Moreover, they have a subtle malicious enemy, that is unseen of them, and
plays his game in the dark; and it is his principal business to hinder their
Conversion, and therefore to keep them where they are, by persuading them not
to believe the Scriptures, or not to trouble their minds with these matters; or
by persuading them to think ill of a godly life, or to think that its more ado
then needs, and that they may be saved without Conversion, and without all this
stir; and that God is so merciful that he will not damn any such as they; or at
least that they may stay a little longer, and take their pleasure and follow
the world a little longer yet, and then let it go and repent hereafter. And by
such juggling deluding cheats as these, the Devil keeps the most in his
captivity, and leads them to his misery.

These, and such like impediments as these, do keep so many thousands
Unconverted, when God has done so much, and Christ has suffered so much, and
Ministers have said so much for their Conversion; when their Reasons are
silenced, and they are not able to answer the Lord that calls after them, [
Turn ye, Turn ye, Why will you die?] yet all comes to nothing with the greatest
part of them; and they leave us no more to do after all, but to sit down and
lament their wilful misery.

I Have now showed you the Reasonableness of Gods commands, and the
unreasonableness of wicked men's disobedience. If nothing will serve turn, but
men will yet refuse to Turn, we are next to consider, who it is long of if they
be damned. And this brings me up to the last Doctrine, which is;

Doct. 7. THAT if after all this men will not Turn, it is not long of God that
they are condemned, but of themselves, even their own wilfulness. They die
because they will die: that is, because they will not Turn.
If you will go to hell, what remedy! God here acquits himself of your blood:
it shall not lie on him if you be lost. A negligent Minister may draw it upon
him; and those that encourage you, or hinder you not in sin, may draw it upon
them; but be sure of it, it shall not lie upon God. Says the Lord concerning
his unprofitable Vineyard, Isaiah 5.1, 2, 3, 4. [ Judge I pray you betwixt me
and my Vineyard: What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not
done in it? When he had planted it in a fruitful soil, and fenced it, and
gathered out the stones, and planted it with the choicest Vine: What should he
have done more to it? He has made you men, and endued you with Reason; he has
furnished you with all external necessaries; all creatures are at your service.
He has given you a righteous perfect Law. When you had broke it, and undone
your selves, he had pity on you, and sent his Son by a miracle of
condescending mercy to die for you, and be a sacrifice for your sins, and he
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. The Lord Jesus has made you a
deed of gift of himself, and eternal life with him, on the condition you will
but accept it and return. He has on this reasonable condition offered you the
free pardon of all your sins; he has written this in his Word, and sealed it
by his Spirit, and sent it you by his Ministers; they have made the offer to
you an hundred and an hundred times, and called you to accept it, and to turn
to God. They have in his name entreated you, and reasoned the case with you,
and answered all your frivolous objections. He has long waited on you, and
slaid your leisure, and suffered you to abuse him to his face. He has
mercifully sustained you in the midst of your sin; he has compassed you about
with all sorts of mercies: He has also intermixed afflictions to mind you of
you folly, and call you to your wits; And his spirit has been often striving
with your hearts, and saying there, [ Turn sinner, Turn to him that calls
thee; Whither art thou going; What art thou doing? Do thou know what will be
the end? How long will thou hate thy friends, and love thine enemies? when will thou let go all and Turn, and deliver up thy self to God, and give thy Redeemer
the possession of thy soul? When shall it once be?] These pleadings have been
used with thee. And when thou have delayed, thou have been urged to make have,
and God has called to thee, [ To day, while it is called to day, harden not
thy heart; Why not now without any more delay? Life has been set before you;
The Joys of Heaven have been opened to you in the Gospel: The Certainty of
them has been manifested: The certainty of the everlasting Torments of the
damned has been declared to you: Unless you would have had a sight of Heaven
and Hell, what could you desi^^ more? Christ has been as it were set forth
crucified before your eyes, Gal. 3.1. You have been an hundred times told that
you are but lost men till you come unto him; As often have you been told of the
evil of sin, of the vanity of sin, the world, and all the pleasures and wealth
it can afford; of the shortness and uncertainty of your lives, and the endless
duration of the Joy or Torment of the life to come. All this, and more then
this have you been told, and told again, even till you were a weary of hearing
it, and till you could make the lighter of it, because you had so often heard
it; like the Smiths dog, that is brought by custom to sleep under the noise of
the hammers, and when the sparks do fly about his ears: and though all this
have not converted you, yet you are alive, and might have mercy to this day, if
you had but hearts to entertain it. And now let Reason it self be Judge;
whether it be long of God or you, if after all this you be unconverted and be
damned. If you die now, it is because you will die. What should be said more to
you? Or what course should be taken, that is liker to prevail? Are you able to
say and make it good, We would fain have been converted and become new
creatures, but we would not; we would fain have forsaken our sins, but could
not; we would have changed our company, and our thoughts, and our discourse,
but we could not. Why could you not if you would? What hindered you, but the
wickedness of your hearts? Who forced you to sin? or who did hold you back from
Duty? Had not you the same teaching, and time, and liberty to be godly as your
godly neighbors had? Why then could not you have been godly as well as they?
Were the Church-doors shut against you? or did you not keep away your selves?
or fit and sleep, or hear as if you did not hear? Did God put in any exceptions
against you in his word, when he invited sinners to return, and when he
promised mercy to those that do return?] Did he say, [ I will pardon all that
repent except thee?] Did he shut you out from the liberty of his holy worship?
Did he forbid you to pray to him any more then others? You know he did not. God
did not drive you away from him, but you forsook him, and run away your selves.
And when he called you to him, you would not come. If God had excepted you out
of the general promise and offer of mercy, or had said to you, [ Stand off, I
will have nothing to do with such as you: Pray not to me, for I will not hear
you: If you repent never so much, and cry for mercy never so much, I will not
regard you;] If God had left you nothing to trust to, but desperation, then you
had had a fair excuse. You migh have said, [ To what end should I repent and
turn, when it will do no good?] But this was not your case. You might have had
Christ to be your Lord and Savior, your Head and Husband, as well as others:
and you would not; because you felt not your selves sick enough for the
Physician, and because you could not spare your disease: In your hearts you
said as those rebels, Luke 19.14. [ We will not have this man to reign over
us.] Christ would have gathered you under the wings of his salvation, and you
would not, Mat. 23.37. What desires of your welfare did the Lord express in
his holy word? With what compassion did he stand over you and say, [ O that my
people had hearkened unto me, and that they had walked in my ways! Psalm.
81.13. O that there were such a heart in this people that they would fear me,
and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them and with
their children for ever! Deuteronomy. 5.20. [ O that they were wise, that they
understood this! and that they would consider their latter end!] Deuteronomy. 32.29.
He would have been your God, and done all for you that your souls could well
desire; but you loved the world and your flesh above him and therefore you
would not hearken to him: though you complemented with him, and gave him high
titles, yet when it came to the closing, you would have none of him, Psalm.
81.11, 12. No marvel then if he gave you up to your own hearts lusts, and you
walked in your own counsels.] He condescended to reason and plead the case with
you, and ask you [ What is there in me or my service that you should be so much
against me! What harm have I done thee sinner! Have I deserved this unkind
dealing at thy hand? Many mercies have I showed thee; for which of them do
thou thus despise me? Is it I, or is it Satan that is thy enemy? Is it I, or is
it thy carnal self that would undo thee? Is it an holy life, or a life of sin
that thou have cause to fly from? If thou be undone, thou procurest this to thy
self by forsaking me the Lord that would have saved thee: Jer. 2.17. Does not
thy own wickedness correct thee, and thy sin reprove thee; that thou may see
that it is an evil and bitter thing that thou have forsaken me? Jer. 2.19. What
iniquity have you found in me, that you have followed after vanity and forsaken
me? Ier. 2.5, 6.] He calls out as it were to the bruits to hear the
controversy he has against you^ Mic. 2.3, 4, 5 Hear O ye mountains the Lords
controversy, and ye strong foundations of the earth: for the Lord has a
Controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel. O my people what
have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me:
for I brought thee up out of Egypt, and redeemed thee, etc. Hear O heavens, and
give ear O earth, for the Lord has spoken. I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his Masters cr^b: but Israel does not kn^w, my people does not consider! Ah
sinful Nation! a people laden with iniquity, a Seed of evil doers! etc. Isaiah
1.2, 3, 4. [ Do you thus requite the Lord O foolish people and unwise? Is not
he thy Father that bought thee? Has he not made thee and established thee?
Deuteronomy. 32.6.] When he saw that you forsook him even for nothing, and turned away
from your Lord and Life, to hunt after the chafe and feathers of the world, he
told you of your folly, and called you to a more profitable employment, Isa.
55.1, 2, 3. [ Wherefore do you spend your money for that which is not bread,
and your labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness.
Enclin^ your (...) and (...) unto me; hear and yo^^ (...) shall live, and I
will make an ^verlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David; --
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon, ver. 6, 7.] And so Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. And when you
would not hear, what complaints have you put him to, charging it on you as your
wilfulness and stubbornness, Ier. 2.12, 13. [ Be astonished O heavens at this,
and be horribly afraid. -- For my people have committed two evils, they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters; and hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisterns that can hold no water.] Many a time has Christ proclaimed that free
invitation to you, Revel. 22.17. Let him that is a thirst come: and whoever
will, let him take the water of life freely.] But you put him to complain after
all his offers, [ They will not come to me that they may have life, John 5.40.]
He has invited you to feast with him in the Kingdom of his grace, and you have
had excuses from your grounds, and your cattle, and your worldly business, and
when you would not come, you have said you could not: and provoked him to
resolve that you should never taste of his Supper, Luke 14.15, to 25.] And who
is it long of now but your selves? and what can you say is the chief cause of
your damnation, but your own Wills? You would be damned. The whole case is laid
open by Christ himself, Prove. 1. from the 20. to the end. [ Wisdom cries
without, she utters her voice in the streets, she cries in the chief place
of Concourse, -- How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and the
scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my
reproofs: behold I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words
unto you. Because I have called and ye refused; I have stretched out my hands,
and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none
of my reproofs: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes: when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you: then shall they call upon
me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord.
They would none of my counsels: they despised all my reproof: Therefore shall
they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
For the turning away of the simple shall stay them, and the prosperity of fools
shall destroy them. But who so hearkeneth to me shall dwell safely, and shall
be quiet from the fear of evil.] I thought best to recite the whole text at
large to you, because it does so fully show the cause of the destruction of the
wicked. It is not because God would not teach them, but because they would not
learn. It is not because God would not Call them, but because they would not
Turn at his reproof. Their wilfulness is their undoing.

Use.
FRom what has been said, you may further learn these following things.

1. From hence you may see, not only what blasphemy and impiety it is, to lay
the blame of men's destruction upon God, but also how unfit these wicked
wretches are to bring in such a charge against their Maker. They cry out upon
God, and say, He gives them not grace, and his threatenings are severe, and God
forbid that all should be damned that be not Converted and Sanctified; and they
think it hard measure that a short sin should have an endless suffering; and if
they be damned, they say, they cannot help it: When in the mean time, they are
busy about their own destruction, even cutting the throat of their own souls,
and will not be persuaded to hold their hands They think God were cruel if he
should damn them; and yet they are so cruel to themselves that they will run
into the fire of Hell; when God has told them it is a little before them, and
neither entreaties, nor threatenings, nor any thing that can be said, will stop
them. We see them almost undone: Their careless, worldly, fleshly lives do tell
us that they are in the power of the Devil: we know if they die before they are
Converted, all the world cannot save them; and knowing the uncertainty of their
lives, we are afraid every day lest they drop into the fire. And therefore we
entreat them to pity their own souls, and not to undo themselves when mercy is
at hand; and they will not hear us. We entreat them to cast away their sin, and
come to Christ without delay, and to have some mercy on themselves; but they
will have none. And yet they think that God must be cruel if he condemn them. O
wilful wretched sinners! It is not God that is cruel to you: it is you that are
cruel to your selves. You are told you must Turn or burn and yet you Turn not.
You are told that if you will needs keep your sins, you shall keep the Curse of
God with them: and yet you will keep them. You are told that there is no way to
Happiness but by Holiness, and yet you will not be Holy. What would you have
God say more to you? What would you have him do with his Mercy? He offers it
you, and you will not have it. You are in the ditch of sin and misery, and he
would give you his hand to help you out, and you refuse his help: he would
cleanse you of your sins, and you had rather keep them. You love your lust, and
love your gluttony, and sports, and drunkenness, and will not let them go.
Would you have him bring you to Heaven whether you will or no? Or would you
have him bring you and your sins to heaven together? Why, that is an
impossibility; you may as well expect he should turn the Sun into Darkness.
What! an unsanctified fleshly heart be in Heaven; it cannot be: There enters
nothing that is unclean, Revel. 21.27. For what Communion has light with
darkness, or Christ with Belial? 2 Corinthians. 6.14, 15. All the day long has he
stretched out his hand to a disobedient and gain saying people, Romans 10.25.
What will you do now? Will you cry to God for mercy! why God calls upon you
to have mercy upon your selves, and you will not. Ministers see the poisoned
cup in the drunkards hand, and tell him, There is poison in it, and desire him
to have Mercy on his soul, and forbear, and he will not hear us; drink it he
must and will: he loves it, and therefore though Hell come next, he says, he
cannot help it. What should one say to such men as these? We tell the ungodly
careless worldling, It is not such a life that will serve the turn, or ever
bring you to Heaven. If a Bear were at your back you would mend your pace; and
when the curse of God is at your back, and Satan and Hell are at your back will
you not stir, but ask what needs all this ado? Is an immortal soul of no more
worth? O have mercy upon your selves! But they will have no mercy on
themselves, nor once regard us. We tell them, the end will be bitter. Who can
dwell with the everlasting fire? And yet they will have no mercy upon
themselves. And yet will these shameless wretches say, that God is more
merciful then to condemn them, when it is themselves that cruelly and
unmercifully run upon Condemnation; and if we should go to them with our hats
in our hands and entreat them, we cannot stop them. If we should fall down on
our knees to them, we cannot stop them; but to Hell they will, and yet will not
believe that they are going thither. If we beg of them for the sake of God that
made them, and preserves them; for the sake of Christ that dyed for them; for
the sake of their own poor souls, to pity themselves and go no further in the
way to Hell; but come to Christ while his arms are open, and enter into a state
of life while the door stands open, and now take mercy while mercy may be had;
they will not be persuaded. If we should die for it, we cannot get them so much
as now and then to consider with themselves of the matter, and to Turn. And yet
they can say, I hope God will be merciful. Did you ever consider what he says,
Isa. 27.11. [ It is a people of no understanding; therefore he that made them
will not have mercy on them, and he has formed them, will show them no
favor.] If another man will not cloth you when you are naked, and feed you
when you are hungry, you will say he is unmerciful. If he should cast you into
prison, or beat and torment you, you would say, he is unmerciful. And yet you
will do a thousand times more against your selves, even cast away both soul and
body for ever, and never complain of your own unmercifulness. Yea and God that
waited upon you all the while with his mercy, must be taken to be unmerciful,
if he punish you after all this. Unless the holy God of Heaven will give these
wretches leave to trample upon his Sons blood, and with the Jews, as it were
again to spit in his face, and do despite to the Spirit of grace, and make a
jest of sin, and a mock at holiness, and set more light by saving mercy, then
by the filth of their fleshly pleasures, and unless after all this he will save
them by the mercy which they cast away, and would none of, God himself must be
called unmerciful by them. But he will be justified when he Judges, and he
will not stand or fall at the bar of a sinful worm.

I know there are many particular cavils that are brought by them against the
Lord, but I shall not here stay to answer them particularly, having done it
already in in my Treatise of Judgment, to which I shall refer them. Had the
disputing part of the world been as careful to avoid sin and destruction, as
they have been busy in searching after the cause of them, and forward
indirectly to impute it to God, they might have exercised their wits more
profitably, and have less wronged God, and sped better themselves. When so ugly
a monster as sin is within us, and so heavy a thing as punishment is on us, and
so dreadful a thing as Hell is before us, one would think it should be an easy
question, who is in the fault, and whether God or man be the principal or
culpable cause* Some men are such favorable Judges of themselves, that they
are proner to accuse the Infinite Perfection and Goodness it self, then their
own hearts: and imitate their first parents that said, The Serpent tempted me,
and the woman that thou gave me, gave unto me, and I did eat;] secretly
implying that God was the cause. So say they, [ The understanding that thou
gave me, was unable to discern; the will that thou gave me, was unable to
make a better choice; the objects which thou diast set before me, did entice
me; the temptation which thou did permit to assault me, prevailed against me.
And some are so loath to think that God can make a self-determining creature,
that they dare not deny him that which they take to be his prerogative, to be
the determiner of the will in every sin, as the first efficient immediate
physical cause. And many could be content to acquit God from so much causing of
evil, if they could but reconcile it with his being the chief cause of good; as
if truths must be no longer truths, then we are able to see them in their
perfect order and coherence: because our r^velled wits cannot set them right
together, nor assign each truth its proper place, we presume to conclude that
some must be cast away. This is the fruit of proud self-conceitedness, when men
receive not Gods truths as a child his lesson, in an holy submission to the
omniscience of our Teacher, but as Censurers that are too wise to learn.

Object. But we cannot Convert our selves till God Convert us: we can do
nothing without his grace: It is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy.

Answ. 1. God has two degrees of mercy to show: the mercy of Conversion first;
and the mercy of Salvation list: the latter he will give to none but those that
will and run, and has promised it to them only. The former is to make them
willing that were unwilling: and though your own willing and endeavors deserve
not this grace, yet your wilful refusal deserves that it should be denied to
you. Your disabily is your very unwillingness it self, which excuses not your
sin, but makes it the greater. You could Turn if you were but truly willing:
and if your wills themselves are so corrupted, that nothing but effectual grace
will move them, you have the more cause to seek for that grace, and yield to
it, and do what you can in the use of means, and not neglect it, or set against
it. Do what you are able first, and then complain of God for denying you grace
if you have cause.

Object. But you seem to intimate all this while that man has free will.

Answer. The dispute about free will is beyond your capacity; I shall therefore
now trouble you with no more but this about it. Your will is naturally a free,
that is, a self-determining faculty, but it is vitiously inclined, and backward
to good, and therefore we see by sad experience that it has not a virtuous
moral freedom. But that is the wickedness of it, which deserves the
punishment. And I pray you let us not befool our selves with opinions. Let the
case be your own. If you have an enemy so malicious, that he falls upon you,
and beats you every time he meets you, and takes away the lives of your
children, will you excuse him because he says, [ I have not free will, it is
my nature; I cannot choose unless God give me grace.] If you have a servant
that robs you, will you take such an answer from him? Might not every Thief
and Murderer that is hanged it the Assize give such an answer, [ I have not
free will; I cannot change my own heart: what can I do without Gods grace?] and
shall they therefore be acquit? If not, why then should you think to be acquit
for a course of sin against the Lord?

2. FRom hence also you may observe these three things together. 1. What a
subtle tempter Satan is. 2. What a deceitful thing sin is. 3. What a foolish
creature corrupted man is. A subtle tempter indeed, that can persuade the
greatest part of the world to go wilfully into ever^asting fire, when they have
so many warnings and disswasives as they have. A deceitful thing is sin indeed,
that can bewitch so many thousands to put with everlasting life, for a thing so
base and utterly unworthy! A foolish creature is man indeed, that will be so
cheated of his salvation for nothing; yea for a known nothing: and that by an
enemy, and a known enemy. You would think it impossible that any man in his
wits should be persuaded for a trifle to cast himself into the fire, or water,
or into a coal-pit, to the destruction of his life. And yet men will be enticed
to cast themselves into Hell. If your natural lives were in your own hands,
that you should not die till you would kill your selves; how long would most of
you live? And yet when your everlasting life is so far in your own hands under
God, that you cannot be undone till you undo your selves, how few of you will
forbear your own undoing? Ah what a silly thing is man! and what a bewitching
and befooling thing is sin?

3. FRom hence also you may learn, that it is no great wonder if wicked men be
hinderers of others in the way to heaven, and would have as many Unconverted as
they can, and would draw them into sin, and keep them (...) it! Can you expect
that they should have any mercy on others, that have none upon themselves? and
that they should much stick at ^he destruction of others, that ^^ck not to
destroy themselves? They do no worse by others then ^hey do by themselves.

4. LAstly, you may hence learn, that the greatest enemy to man is himself; and
the greatest judgment in this life that can befall him, is to be left to
himself; and that the great work that Grace has to do, is to save us from our
selves, and the greatest accusations and complaints of men should be against
themselves; and that the greatest work that we have to do our selves, is to
resist our selves; and the greatest enemy that we should daily pray, and watch,
and strive against, is our own carnal hearts and wills; and the greatest part
of your work, if you would do good to others, and help them to heaven, is to
save them from themselves, even from their own blind understandings, and
corrupted wills, and perverse affections, and violent passions, and unruly
senses. I only name all these for brevity sake, and leave them to your further
consideration.

WELL Sirs, now we have found out the great Delinquent and Murderer of souls,
(even men's selves, their own wills) what remains but that you judge according
to the evidence, and confess this great iniquity before the Lord, and be
humbled for it, and do so no more? To these three ends distinctly, I shall add
a few words more. 1. Further to convince you. 2. To humble you. And 3. To
reform you, if there be yet any hope.

1. We know so much of the exceeding gracious nature of God, who is willing to
do good, and delights to show mercy, that we have no reason to suspect him of
being the culpable cause of our death, or to call him cruel: He made all good,
and he preserves and maintains all; the eyes of all things do wait upon him;
and he gives them their meat in due season; he opens his hand, and
satisfies the desires of all the living, Psalm 145.15, 16. He is not only
righteous in all his ways, (and therefore will deal justly) and holy in all
his works, (and therefore not the author of sin) but [ he is also good to all,
and his tender mercies are over all his works.] Psalm. 145.17, 9.

But as for man, we know his mind is dark, his will perverse, his affections
carry him so headlong, that he is fitted by his folly and corruption to such a
work as the destroying of himself. If you saw a Lamb lie killed in the way,
would you sooner suspect the sheep, or the dog, or woolf, to be the author of
it, if they both stood by? or if you see an house broken and the people
murdered, would you sooner suspect the Prince or Judge, that is wise and just,
and had no need; or a known Thief or Murderer? I say therefore as James 1.13,
14, 15. Let no man say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts be any man, (to draw him to sin)
But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin when it is
finished brings forth death.] You see here, that sin is the brat of your own
concupiscence, and not to be fathered on God; and that death is the offspring
of your own sin, and the fruit which it will yield you as soon as it is ripe.
You have a treasure of evil in your selves as a spider has of poison: from
whence you are bringing forth hurt to your selves and spinning such webs as
en^^ngle your own souls. Your Nature shows, its you that are the cause.

2. Its evident that you are your own destroyers, in that you are so Ready to
entertain any Temptation almost that is offered you. Satan is scarce readier to
move you to any evil, then you are ready to hear, and do as he would have you.
If he would tempt your understanding to error and prejud^ce, you yield. If he
would hinder you from good resolutions, it is soon done. If he would cool any
good desires or affections, it is soon done. If he would kindle any lust or
vile affections and desires in you, it is soon done: if he will put you on to
evil thoughts, or words, or deeds, you are so free that he needs not rod or
spur: if he would keep you from holy thoughts, and words, and ways, a little
does it; you need no curb. You examine not his suggestions, nor resist them
with any resolution, nor cast them out as he casts them in, nor quench the
sparks which he endeavors to kindle: but you set in with him, and meet him
half way, and embrace his motions, and tempt him to tempt you. And its easy to
catch such greedy fish that are ranging for a bait, and will take the bare hook.

3. Your destruction is evidently long of your selves, in that you Resist all
that would help to save you, and would do you good, or hinder you from undoing
your selves God would help and save you by his word, and you resist it, it is
too strict for you. He would sanctify you by his Spirit, and you resist, and
quench it. If any man reprove you for your sin, you fly in his face with evil
words; and if he would draw you to an holy life, and tell you of your present
danger, you give him little thanks, but either bid him look to himself, he
shall not answer for you; or else at best, you put him off with an heartless
thanks, and will not Turn when you are persuaded. If Ministers would privately
instruct and help you, you will not come at them; your unhumbled souls do feel
but little need of their help. If they would Catechize you, you are too old to
be Catechized, though you are not too old to be ignorant and unholy. Whatever
they can say to you for your good, you are so self-conceited and wise in your
own eyes, (even in the depth of ignorance) that you will regard nothing that
agrees not with your present conceits, but contradict your Teachers, as if you
were wiser then they; you resist all that they can say to you, by your
ignorance and wilfulness, and foolish Cavils, and shifting evasions, and
unthankful rejections, so that no good that is offered can find any welcome
acceptance and entertainment with you.

4. Moreover its apparent that you are self-destroyers, in that you draw the
matter of your sin and destruction even from the blessed God himself. You like
not the contrivances of his Wisdom: You like not his Justice, but take it for
cruelty: You like not his Holiness, but are ready to think he is such a one as
your selves, Psalm. 50.21. and makes as light of sin as you: You like not his
Truth, but would have his Threanings, even his peremptory Threatenings prove
false. And his goodness which you seem most highly to approve, you partly
resist, as it would lead you to repentance; and partly abuse, to the
strengthening of you sin, as if you might the freelyer sin, because God is
Merciful, and because his Grace does so much abound.

Yea you fetch destruction from ^he blessed Redeemer, and Death from the Lord
of life himself. And nothing more emboldneth you in sin, then that Christ has
died for you; as if now the danger of death were over, and you might boldly
venture: As if Christ were become a servant to Satan and your sins, and must
wait upon you while you are abusing him: and because he is become the Physician
of souls, and he is able to save to the utmost all that come to God by him, you
think he must suffer you to refuse his help, and throw away his Medicines, and
must save you whether you will come to God by him or no: so that a great part
of your sins are occasioned by your bold presumption, upon the death of Christ.

Not considering that he came to redeem his people from their sins, and to
sanctify them a peculiar people to himself, and to conform them in Holiness to
the image of their heavenly Father and to their head, Mat. 1.21. Tit. 2.14. 1
Pet. 1.15, 16. Col. 3.10, 11. Phil. 3.9, 10.

6. You also fetch your own destruction from all the providence and works of
God. When you think of his eternal foreknowledge and Decrees, it is to harden
you in your sin, or possess your minds with quarrelling thoughts, as if his
Decrees might spare you the labor of repentance and an holy life, or else were
the cause of your sin and death. If he afflict you, you repine: If he prosper
you, you the more forget him, and are the backwarder to the thoughts of the
life to come. If the wicked prosper, you forget the end that will set all
reckonings strait, and are ready to think, its as good be wicked as godly. And
thus you draw your death from all.

7. And the like you do from all the Creatures and mercies of God to you. He
gives them to you as the tokens of his love, and furniture for his service,
and you turn them against him, to the pleasing of your flesh. You eat and drink
to please your appetite, and not for the glory of God, and to enable you for
his work. Your clothes you abuse to pride. Your Riches draw your hearts from
heaven, Phil. 3.18. Your honors and applause do puff you up: If you have
health and strength, it makes you more secure and forget your end. Yea other
men's mercies are abused by you to your hurt. If you see their honors and
dignity, you are provoked to envy them. If you see their riches, you are ready
to covet them. If you look upon beauty, you are stirred up to lust, and its
well if godliness be not an eye-fore to you.

8. The very gifts that God bestows on you, and the Ordinances of grace which
he has instituted for his Church, you turn to sin. If you have better parts
then others, you grow proud and self-conceited: if you have but common gifts,
you take them for special Grace. You take the bare hearing of your duty for so
good a work, as if it would excuse you for not obeying it. Your Prayers are
turned into sin, because you regard iniquity in your hearts, Psalm 66.18. and
depart not from iniquity when you call on the name of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2.19.
Your prayers are abominable, because you turn away your ear from hearing the
Law, Prove. 28.9. And are more ready to offer the Sacrifice of fools, (thinking
you do God some special service) then to hear his word and obey it, Eccles.
5.1. You examine not your selves before you receive the Supper of the Lord, but
not discerning the Lords body, do eat and drink judgment to your selves, 1
Cor. 11.28, 29.

9. Yea the persons that you converse with, and all their actions, you make the
occasions of your sin and destruction. If they live in the fear of God, you
hate them. If they live ungodlily, you imitate them: if the wicked are many,
you think you may the more boldly follow them; if the godly be few, you are the
more emboldened to despise them. If they walk exactly, you think they are too
precise; if one of them fall in a particular temptation, you stumble upon them,
and turn away from holiness, because that others are imperfectly holy: as if
you were warranted to break your necks, because some others have by their
heedlesness sprained a sinnew or put out a bone. If an hypocrite discover
himself, you say, They are all alike, and think your selves as honest as the
best. A Professor can scarce slip into any miscarriage, but because he cuts his
finger, you think you may boldly cut your throats. If ministers deal plainly
with you, you say they rail. If they speak gently or coldly, you either sleep
under them, or are little more affected then the seats you sit upon. If any
errors creep into the Church, some greedily entertain them, and others
reproach the Christian Doctrine for them, which is most against them. And if we
would draw you from any ancient rooted error, which can but plead two, or
three, or six, or seven hundred years custom, you are as much offended with a
motion for Reformation, as if you were to lose you lives by it, and hold fast
old errors, while you cry out against new ones. Scarce a difference can arise
among the ministers of the Gospel, but you will fetch your own death from it.
And you will not hear, or at least not obey the unquestionable Doctrine of any
thing that jumps not with your conceits: One will not hear a Minister, because
he reads his Sermon: and another will not hear him, because he does not read
them. One will not hear him, because he says the Lords prayer: and another
will not hear him, because he does not use it. One will not hear them that are
for Episcopacy: and another will not hear them that are against it. And thus I
might show it you in many other cases, how you turn all that comes near you to
your own destruction, so clear is it that the ungodly are self-destroyers, and
that their perdition is of themselves.

ME thinks, now upon the consideration of what is said, and the review of your
own ways, you should bethink you what you have done, and be ashamed and deeply
humbled to remember it. If you be not, I pray you consider these following
truths.

1. To be your own destroyers, is to sin against the deepest principle in your
Natures, even the principle of self preservation. Every thing naturally
desires or inclines to its own felicity, welfare or perfection. And will
you set your selves to your own destruction? When you are commanded to love
your neighbors as your selves, it is supposed that you naturally love your
selves. But if you love your neighbors no better then your selves, it seems
you would have all the world be damned.

2. How extremely do you cross your own intentions! I know you intend not your
own damnation, even when you are procuring it; you think you are but doing good
to your selves, by gratifying the desires of your flesh. But alas, it is but as
a draught of cold water in a burning fever, or as the scratching of an itching
wildfire, which increases the disease and pain. If indeed you would have
pleasure, or profit, or honor, seek them where they are to be found, and do
not hunt after them in the way to hell.

3. What pity is it, that you should do that against your selves, which none
else in earth or hell can do! If all the world were combined against you, or
all the Devils in Hell were combined against you, they could not destroy you
without your selves, nor make you sin but by your own consent. And will you do
that against your selves which no one else can do? you have hateful thoughts of
the Devil, because he is your enemy, and endeavors your destruction. And
will you be worse then Devils to your selves? Why thus it is with you, if you
had hearts to understand it: when you run into sin, and run from godliness, and
refuse to turn at the Call of God, you do more against your own souls, then men
or devils could do besides. And if you should set your selves, and bend your
wits to do your selves the greatest mischief, you could not devise to do a
greater.

4. You are false to the trust that God has reposed in you. He has much
entrusted you with your own salvation: and will you betray your trust? He has
set you with all diligence to keep your hearts: and is this the keeping of
them? Prove. 4.23.

5. You do even forbid all others to pity you, when you will have no pity on
your selves: if you cry to God in the time of your calamity, for Mercy, Mercy;
what can you expect, but that he should thrust you away, and say, [ Nay thou
would not have mercy on thy self: who brought this upon thee but thy own
wilfulness?] And if your Brethren see you everlastingly in misery, how shall
they pity you that were your own destroyers, and would not be dissuaded?

6. It will everlastingly make you your own Tormenters in Hell to think on it,
that you brought your selves wilfully to that misery. O what a griping thought
it will be for ever to think with your selves, [That this was your own doing!
That you were warned of this day, and warned again, but it would not do. That
you wilfully sinned; and wilfully turned away from God: That you had time as
well as others, but you abused it: You had Teachers as well as others, but you
refused their instructions: You had holy examples, but you did not imitate
them: You were offered Christ, and Grace, and Glory, as well as others; but you
had more mind of your fleshly pleasures: You had a price in your hands, but you
had not an heart to lay it out, Proverbs 17.16. Can it choose but torment you
to think of this your present folly? O that your eyes were opened to see what
you have done in the wilful wronging of your own souls! and that you better
understood those words of God, Pro. 8, 33, 34, 35, 36. Hear instruction and be
wise, and refuse it not: Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at
my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors: For who so finds me, finds
life, and shall obtain the favor of the Lord. But he that sins against me,
wrongeth his own soul: All they that hate me, love death.]

AND now I am come to the Conclusion of this work; my heart is troubled to
think how I shall leave you; lest after this the flesh should still deceive
you, and the world and the Devil should keep you asleep, and I should leave you
as I find you, till you awake in Hell; Though in care of your poor souls, I am
afraid of this, as knowing the obstinacy of a carnal heart, yet I can say with
the Prophet Jeremy, 17.16. [ I have not desired the woeful day, the Lord
knows.] I have not with James and John desired that fire might come from
heaven to consume them that refused Jesus Christ, Luke 9.54. But it is the
preventing of the eternal fire that I have been all this while endeavoring:
and O that it had been a needless work! That God and conscience might have been
as willing to spare me this labor, as some of you could have been. Dear
friends! I am so loath you should lie in everlasting fire, and be shut out of
Heaven, if it be possible to prevent it, that I shall once more ask you, What
do you now resolve? Will you Turn or Die? I look upon you as a Physician on his
Patient in a dangerous disease: that says to him [ Though you are far gone,
take this medicine, and forbear but these few things that are hurtful to you,
and I dare warrant your life; but if you will not do this, you are but a dead
man.] What would you think of such a man, if the Physician and all the friends
he has cannot persuade him to take one medicine to save his life, or to
forbear one or two poisonous things that would kill him? This is your case. As
far as you are gone in sin, do but now Turn and Come to Christ, and take his
Remedies, and your souls shall live. Cast up your deadly sins by Repentance,
and return not to the poisonous vomit any more, and you shall do well. But yet
if it were your bodies that we had to deal with, we might partly know what to
do for you, though you would not consent. You might be held or bound, while the
medicine were poured down your throats, and hurtful things might be kept from
you. But about your souls it cannot so so, we cannot Convert you against your
wills. There is no carrying mad men to Heaven in fetters. You may be Condemned
against your wills, because you sinned with your wills: but you cannot be saved
against your wills. The wisdom of God has thought meet to lay men's salvation
or destruction exceeding much upon the choice of their own wills, that no man
shall come to heaven, that chose not the way to heaven; and no man shall come
to hell, but shall be forced to say, I have the thing I chose: my own will did
bring me hither. Now if I could but get you to be willing, to be thoroughly, and
resolvedly, and Habitually willing, the work were more then half done. And
alas, must we lose our friends, and must they lose their God, their happiness,
their souls for want of this? O God forbid! It is a strange thing to me, that
men are so inhuman^ and stupid in the greatest matters that in lesser things
are very civil and courteous, and good neighbors. For ought I know, I have the
Love of all, or almost all my neighbors, so far, that if I should send to ever
a man in the Town, or Parish, or Country, and request a reasonable courtesy of
them, they would grant it me: And yet when I come to request of them the
greatest matter in the world for themselves and not for me, I can have nothing
of many of them but a patient hearing. I know not whether people think a man in
the pulpit is in good sadness or not, and means as he speaks: For I think I
have few neighbor, but if I were sitting familiarly with them, and telling
them of what I have seen, or done, or known in ^he world, they would believe
me, and regard what I say; But when I tell thee from the infallible word of
God, what they themselves shall see and know in the world to come, they show by
their ^^^ves that they do either not beleve it, or not much regard it. If I met
ever an one of them on the way, and told them, Yonder is (...) Cole pit, or
there is a quicksand, or there are thieves lie in wait for you; I could persuade
them to turn by: But when I tell them, that Satan lies in wait for them, and
that sin is poison to them, and that Hell is not a matter to be jested with:
they go on as if they did not hear me. Truly neighbors, I am in as good
earnest with you in the Pulpit, as I am in any familiar discourse; and if ever
you will regard me, I beseech you let it be here. I think there is never a man
of you all, but if my own soul lay at your wills, you would be willing to save
it (though ^ cannot promise that you would leave your sin, for it.) Tell me*
thou Drunkard, that art so crue^ to me that speaks to thee, that thou would
not forbear a few cups of drink, if thou knew it would save my soul from
Hell? Had thou rather I did burn there for ever then thou should live
soberly as other men do? If so, may I not say, thou art an unmerciful monster,
and not a man? If I came hungry or naked to one of your doors, would you not
part with more then a cup of drink to relieve me? I am confident you would: If
it were to save my life, I know you would (some of you) hazard your own. And
yet will you not be entreated to part with your sensual pleasures for your own
salvation? Would thou forbear an hundred cups of drink man, to save my life
if it were in thy power, and will thou not do it to save thy own soul? I
profess to you Sirs, I am as hearty a beggar with you this day for the saving
of your own souls, as I would be for my own supply if I were forced to come a
begging to your doors. And therefore if you would hear me then, hear me now. If
you would pity me then, be entreated now to pity your selves. I do again
beseech you, as if it were on my bended knees, that you would hearken to your
Redeemer, and turn that you may live. All you that have lived in ignorance, and
carelessness, and presumption to this day: All you that have been drowned in the
cares of the world, and have no mind of God and eternal Glory: all you that are
enslaved to your fleshly desires of meats and drinks, and sports, and lusts:
and all you that know not the necessity of holiness, and never were acquainted
with the Sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost upon your souls; that never
embraced your blessed Redeemer by a lively faith, and admiring and thankfu^
apprehensions of his love, and that never felt an higher estimation of God and
Heaven, and an hear^ier Love to them then to your fleshly prosperity and the
things below. I earnestly beseech you not only for my sake, but for the Lords
sake, and for your souls sakes, that you go not on one day longer in your
former condition, but look about you, and cry to God for converting grace, that
you may be made new creatures, and may escape the plagues that are a little
before you. And if ever you will do any thing for me, grant me this request, to
Turn from your evil ways and live. Deny me any thing that ever I shall ask you
for my self, if you will but grant me this. And if you deny me this, I care not
for any thing else that you would grant me. Nay as ever you will do any thing
at the request of the Lord that made you and redeemed you, deny him not this:
For if you deny him this, he cares for nothing that you shall grant him. As
ever you would have him hear your prayers, and grant your requests, and do for
you at the hour of death and day of judgment, or in any of your extremities,
deny not his request now in the day of your prosperity. Oh Sirs, believe it,
Death and Judgment, and Heaven and Hell are other matters when you come near
them, then they seem to carnal eyes afar off. Then you would hear such a
message as I bring you with more awakened regardful hearts.

WELL, though I cannot hope so well of all, will hope that some of you are by
this time purposing to Turn and Live; and that you are ready to ask me, as the
Jews did Peter, Acts 2.37. when they were pricked in their hearts, and said,
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? How might we come to be truly converted? We
are willing, if we did but know our duty. God forbid that we should choose
destruction, by refusing conversion, as hitherto we have done.]

If these be the thoughts and purposes of your hearts, I say of you as God did
of a promising people, Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29. [ They have well said, all that they
have spoken; O that there were such an heart in them that they would fear me
and keep all my commandments always!] Your Purposes are good: O that there be
but an heart in you to perform these purposes! And in hope hereof I shall
gladly give you direction what to do, and that but briefly, that you may the
easier Remember it for your Practice.

DIRECTION I.
IF you would be converted and saved, labor to understand the necessity and
true Nature of Conversion: For what, and from what, and to what, and by what it
is that you must Turn.

Consider in what a lamentable condition you are till the hour of your
conversion, that you may see it is not a state to be rested in. You are under
the guilt of all the sins that ever you committed; and under the wrath of God,
and the curse of his Law; you are bondslaves to the Devil, and daily employed
in his work, against the Lord, your selves, and others: you are spiritually
dead and deformed, as being void of the holy life, and nature, and image, of
the Lord. You are unfit for any holy work and do nothing that is truly pleasing
unto God. You are without any promise or assurance of his p^otection: and live
in continual danger of his Justice, not knowing what hour you may be snatched
away to Hell, and most certain to be damned if you die in that condition. And
nothing short of Conversion can prevent it. What ever civilities, or
amendments, or virtues are short of true conversion, will never procure the
saving of your souls. Keep the true sense of this natural misery, and so of the
necessity of Conversion on your hearts.

And then you must understand what it is to be converted: It is to have a New
Heart or Disposition, and a New Conversation.

Quest. 1. For what must you Turn?

Answ. For these ends following, which you may attain: 1. You shall immediately
be made living Members of Christ, and have interest in him, and be renewed
after the Image of God, and be adorned with all his graces, and quickened with a
new and heavenly life, and lived from the tyranny of Satan, and the dominion
of sin, and be justified from the curse of the Law, and have the pardon of all
the sins of your whole lives, and be accepted of God, and made his Sons, and
have liberty with boldness to call him Father, and go to him by prayer in all
your needs, with a promise of acceptance; you shall have the Holy Ghost to
dwell in you* to s^nctifie and guide you: you shall have part in the
brotherhood, communion and prayers of the Saints: You shall be fitted for Gods
service, and be freed from the Dominion of sin, and be useful and a blessing
to the place where you live; and shall have the promise of this life, and that
which is to come. You shall want nothing that is truly good for you, and your
necessary afflictions you shall be enabled to bear; you may have some taste of
communion with God in the Spirit, especially in all holy Ordinances, where God
prepares a feast for your souls; shall be heirs of heaven while you live on
earth, and may for-see by faith the everlasting glory, and so may live and die
in peace; and you will never be so low, but your happiness will be incomparably
greater then your misery.

How precious is every one of these blessings, which I do but briefly name, and
which in this life you may receive!

And then 2. at death your souls shall go to Christ, and at the day of
judgment both soul and body shall be Justified and Glorified, and enter into
your Masters Joy: where your happiness will consist in these particulars.

1. You shall be perfected your selves: your mortal bodies shall be made
immortal, and the corruptible shall put on incorruption; you shall no more be
hungry, or thirsty, or weary, or sick: nor shall you need to fear either shame,
or sorrow, or death, or hell. Your souls shall be perfectly freed from sin, and
perfectly fitted for the knowledge, and love, and praises of the Lord.

2. Your employment shall be to behold your glorified Redeemer, with all your
holy fellow. Citizens of Heaven: and to see the Glory of the most blessed God,
and to Love him perfectly, and be beloved by him, and to praise him
everlastingly.

3. Your glory will contribute to the glory of the new Jerusalem, the City of
the Living God, which is more then to have a private felicity to your selves.

4. Your Glory will contribute to the Glorifying of your Redeemer, who will
everlastingly be magnified and pleased in you that are the travail of his soul:
and this is more then the Glorifying of your selves.

5. And the eternal Majesty, the living God, will be glorified in your Glory:
both as he is magnified by your praises, and as he communicates of his glory
and goodness to you, and as he is plea^ed in you, and in the accomplishment of
his glorious works, in the glory of the ^ew Jerusalem, and of his Son.

All this the poo^est beggar of you that is Converted, shall Certainly and
E^^l^sly enjoy.

2. You see For what you must Turn: Next you must understand, From what you
must Turn: And that is, (in a word) From your Carnal Self, which is the End of
all the Unconverted. From the flesh that would be pleased before God, and would
still be enticing you thereto. From the world, that is the bait: And from the
Devil, that is the Angler for souls and the deceiver. And so from all known and
wilful sin.

3. Next you must know To what you must Turn: And that is, To God as your End.
To Christ as the way to the Father: To Holiness as the way appointed you by
Christ: And so to the use of all the helps and means of grace afforded you by
the Lord.

4. Lastly, you must know By what you must Turn. And that is, by Christ as the
only Redeemer, and Intercessor: And by the Holy Ghost as the Sanctifier: And by
the Word as his Instrument or Means: And by Faith and Repentance as the means
and duties on your part to be performed. All this is of necessity.

DIRECTION II.
IF you will be Converted and Saved, be much in secret serious Consideration.
Inconsiderateness undoes the world. Withdraw your selves often into retired
secrecy, and there bethink you of the end why you were made, of the life you
have lived, the time you have lost, the sin you have committed: of the love,
and sufferings, and fullness of Christ; of the danger you are in; of the
nearness of death and judgment; and of the certainty and excellency of the
Joys of Heaven; and of the certainty and terror of the torments of Hell; and
the Eternity of both: and of the necessity of Conversion and an holy life.
Steep your hearts in such Considerations as these.

DIRECTION III.
IF you will be Converted and Saved, attend upon the word of God, which is the
ordinary means. Read the Scripture, or hear it read, and other holy writings
that do apply it constantly: attend on the public preaching of the Word. As
God will lighten the world by the Sun, and not by himself alone without it: So
will he Convert and save men by his Ministers, who are the Lights of the world,
Acts 26.17, 18. Mat. 5.14. When he has miraculously humbled Paul, he sends
him to Ananias, Acts 9.10. and when he ha^h sent an Angel to ^o^nelius, it is
but to bid him send for Peter, who must tell him what he is to believe and do.

DIRECTION IV.
BEtake your self to God in a course of earnest constant Prayer: Confess and
lament your former lives, and beg his grace to illuminate and Convert you.
Beseech him to pardon what is past, and to give you his Spirit, and change your
hearts and lives, and lead you in his ways, and save you from temptations. And
ply this work daily and be not weary of it.

DIRECTION V.
PResently give over your known and wil^ul sins. Make a st^nd and go that way
no further. Be drunk no more: but avoid the place and occasion of it. Cast away
your lusts and sinful pleasures with detestation. Curse, and swear, and rail no
more: and if you have wronged any, restore, as Zacheus did. If you will commit
again your old sins, what blessing can you expect on the means for your
Conversion?

DIRECTION VI.
PResently, if possible, change your Company, if it have hitherto been bad. Not
by forsaking your necessary Relations, but your unnecessary sinful companions;
and join your selves with those that fear the Lord, and enquire of them the way
to heaven, Acts 9.19, 26. Psalm. 15.4.

DIRECTION VII.
DEliver up your selves to the Lord Jesus as the Physician of your souls; that
he may pardon you by his blood, and sanctify you by his Spirit, by his word
and Ministers, the instruments of the Spirit. He is the way, the truth and the
life; there is no coming to the Father but by him, John 14.6. Nor is there any
other name under heaven, by which you can be saved, Acts 4.12. Study therefore
his Person and Natures, and what he has done and suffered for you; and what he
is to you: and what he will be, and how he is fitted to the full supply of all
your necessities.

DIRECTION. VIII.
IF you mean indeed to Turn and Live, Do it speedily, without delay. If you be
not willing to Turn to day, you be not willing to do it at all. Remember, you
are all this while in your blood: under the guilt of many thousand sins, and
under Gods wrath, and you stand at the very brink of hell; there is but a step
between you and death. And this is not a case for a man that is well in his
wits to be quiet in. Up therefore presently and fly as for your lives: as you
would be gone out of your house if it were all on fire over your head. O if you
did but know what continual danger you live in, and what daily unspeakable loss
you do sustain, and wha^ a safer and sweeter life you might live, you would not
stand tr^fl^ng, but presently turn. Multitudes miscarry that wilful^y de^ay
when they are convinced that it must be done. Your lives are short and
uncertain: and what a case are you in if you die before you throu^hly turn! You
have staid too long already: and wronged God too long; sin gets strength and
rooting while you delay. Your Conversion will grow more hard and doubtful. You
have much to do; and therefore put not all off to the last, lest God forsake
you, and give you up to your selves, and then you are undone for ever.

DIRECTION IX.
IF you will Turn and Live, do it unreservedly, absolutely and universally
Think not to capitulate with Christ, and devide your heart betwixt him and the
world; and to part with some sins, and keep the rest; and to let go that which
your flesh can spare. This is but self-deluding: you must in heart and
resolution forsake all that you have, or else you cannot be his Disciples, Luke
14.26, 33. If you will not take God and Heaven for your portion* and lay all
below at the feet of Christ, but you must needs also have your good things
here, and have an earthly portion, and God and Glory is not enough for you; it
is in vain to dream of salvation on these terms: For it will not be. If you
seem never so Religious, if yet it be but a Carn^l Religiousness, and the
fleshes prosperity, or pleasure, or safety be still ex^epted in your
devotedness to God, this is as certain a way to death as open profaneness,
though it be more plausible.

DIRECTION X.
IF you will Turn and Live, do it Resolvedly, and stand not still deliberating,
as if it were a doubtful case. Stand not wavering as if you were yet uncertain,
whether God or the flesh be the better Master: or whether Heaven or Hell be the
better End; or whether sin or holiness be the better way. But away with your
former lusts, and presently, habitually, fixedly Resolve: Be not one day of one
mind, and the next of another; but be at a point with all the world, and
Resolvedly give up your selves and all you have to God. Now while you are
reading or hearing this Resolve. Before you sleep another night Resolve. Before
you stir from the place Resolve. Before Satan have time to take you off,
Resolve. You never Turn indeed till you do Resolve; and that with a firm
unchangeable Resolution.

So much for the Directions.

AND now I have done my part in this work, that you may Turn at the Call of God
and Live. What will become of it, I cannot tell. I have cast the seed at Gods
command; but it is not in my power to give the increase. I can go no further
with my message: I cannot bring it to your hearts, not make it work. I cannot
do your parts for your, to entertain it and consider of it Nor I cannot do Gods
part, by opening your heart^ to cause you to entertain it: Nor can I show you
Heaven or Hell to your eyesight, nor give you new and tender hearts. If I knew
what more to do for your Conversion, I hope I should do it

But (...) thou that art the gracious Father of Spirits, that have sworn th^n
delightest not in the death of the wicked, but rather that they Turn and Live,
deny not thy blessi^g to the^e Persuasions and Directions; and suffer not thine
enemies to triumph in thy sight; and the great deceiver of souls, to prevail
against the Son, thy Spirit, and thy Word. O pity poor Unconverted sinners,
that have not hearts to pity or help themselves. Command the blind to see, and
the deaf to hear, and the dead to live: and let not sin and death be able to
resist thee. Awaken the secure; Resolve the u^resolved; Confirm the wavering:
and let the eyes of sinners that read these lines, be next employed in weeping
over their sins; and bring them to themselves and to thy Son, before their sin
have brought them to perdition. If thou say but the word, these poor endeavors
shall prosper to the winning of many a soul to their everlasting Joy, and thine
everlasting glory, Amen.

Finitur,
1656. December. 31.

