Against the Revolt to A Foreign Jurisdiction, Which would be to England its
PERJURY, CHVRCH-RVINE, and SLAVERY.

In Two Parts.

I. The History of Men's Endeavors to introduce it. II. The Confutation of all
Pretenses for it.
Fully stating the Controversy, and Proving, That there is no Sovereign Power
of Legislation, Judgment and Execution over the whole Church on Earth,
Aristocratical or Monarchical, but only Christ: Especially against the
Aristocratists who place it in a Council or College.

By RICHARD BAXTER, an Earnest Desirer of the Churches Concord, and therefore
an Enemy to all false Terms, and Dividing Engines, and Self-exalting Sects; and
a Defender of Christ's own assigned Terms, which take in all the true
Christians in the World, and are Injurious or Cruel to none.

To be offered to the next Convocation, beseeching them to own the Doctrine of
Foreign Communion, but to note with Renunciation the Doctrine of Foreign
Jurisdiction, and to Vindicate the Reformed Church of England, from the Guilt
and Suspicion which the French and Innovators injuriously seek to fasten on
them.

Luke 22.24, 25, 26. And there was a strife among them which of them should be
accounted the Greatest: And he said to them, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them, and they that exercise Authority upon them are called
Benefactors: But ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest among you, let him
be as the Younger, and he that is chief as he that does serve.

1 Thessalonians. 5.12. We beseech you Brethren to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, 13. And to esteem them very
highly in love for their work sake; and be at Peace among your selves.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and (...) Crow^^ at the lower
end of Cheapfi^^ near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

To the Reverend and deservedly Honored Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON Dean of St. Paul's
Church.
Reverend Sir,
THE Message on which this Epistle comes to you is, to entreat you to Present
this Treatise to the next Convocation, and to endeavor their public
renunciation of Foreign Jurisdiction, and their censure of the Books that are
written here for it. The Reasons of my request are,

I. The Canons condemn them, that deny the Convocation to be the Church of
England Representative: And they that have written for and promoted this
Doctrine and Design, have not only been Chief Men in the Church, but have
labored to fasten their Doctrine on the Church, which yet before the time of
Bishop Laud, the Church disclaimed and openly condemned; and took Foreign
Bishops and Councils, for Brethren and a laudable means of Communion, while
they did their proper work, but not by Jurisdiction to be the Governors of us,
and all Christian Kings and Kingdoms as their Subjects. And who can be
Ignorant, that when at the present the Papist Bishops are very Many to One
Protestant Bishop, they will accordingly carry it by their Votes in Councils:
And if the Major Vote be the Collegium Pastorum, that have the Chief Government
in the Interval of Councils, we are now Subjects to the Bishops and Church of
Rome: And if (...) Roman Petrus Primus must call the next Council, (or there
must be none till all Christian Kings agree to call it) the present College is
like to be long the Universal Aristocracy.

The Representative Church of England is so nearly concerned in this great
Matter, both for the moment of it, and the imputation of this Design unto it,
that we cannot think they will lightly pass it by without their censure.

Which will be the more expected because of the Owning of Dr. Beveridge's
Sermon to them, which I have here examined.

Dr. Whitby's Reconciler of Protestants escaped not the Oxford censure; and we
hope the Representative Church of England, will not be more favorable to
Subjection, which is more than Reconciling to the Foreign Papists: Lest they
cherish the Suspicion that the desire of so much Concord with France in Church
Constitution and Government, will intimate a preparation to another Relation to
them, which England cannot bear with ease.

And we are loath to be disabled to confute the Separatists, that will never be
reconciled to the Church of England, if they can say that it is revolted to a
Subjection to the Papists.

But why should we doubt whether the Convocation will renounce that which both
themselves and all the Church and Kingdom are Sworn against, even all
Ecclesiastical Foreign Jurisdiction.

II. The Reasons why I presume to desire you to be the Man that shall present
this Book and Motion to them, Are 1. Because it is said that Custom makes the
Dean of Paul's usually to be chosen the Prolocutor to the Lower House. I speak
but by hearsay, having never been one of them: (For the Clergy of London
choosing Mr. Calamy and Me for their Clerks, of that Convocation that made the
Materials of the late differencing Impositions, Bishop Sheldon by Prerogative
excluded us to our great Ease: and so the City of London consented not by their
Clerks to any of those Acts.)

2. And you are the Man that Published that Excellent Book of Dr. Isaac Barrow,
which unanswerably (against Mr. Thorndike and such others) confuted the
Pretenses to a Foreign Jurisdiction.

3. And you are known to be so firm a Friend to Love, Concord and Peace, (like
your Father in Law Bishop Wilkins, who once by appointment treated, and agreed
with us in a Uniting Form of Concord) that I may confidently expect your best
Assistance.

If any should be so adverse to this Necessary Work as to turn it off by
diverting to Accusation against me, or the Nonconformists, I pray tell them how
impertinent that is to the present Business: And if it be needful, show them my
Treatise for National Churches, and that of Episcopacy; and my English
Nonconformity stated and argued: And whereas I am said to have refused a
Bishopric because I was against Epis^opacy, be it known that in 1661, ^he
Pacificators never offered any thing lower than Archbishop Usher's Model of the
Primitive Episcopacy: and when the King's Declaration ^anted us less, we
Published a ^hankful Acceptance. And I gave (...) Writing the Reasons of my
Refusal to the Lord Chancellor Hyde, That If that Declaration were Confirmed by
a Law, I would be no Bishop, because I would not disable my self to persuade as
many as I could to Conformity, by drawing them to say that I did it for my own
Ends. Which Answer satisfied the Lord Chancellor. I think every Bishopric in
England has Buried many of its Bishops since my refusal; who am now near Dying
in the 76th Year of a Painful Life; and entreat you though I be Dead to do this
Office, for the Endangered Church of England, and for your truly honoring
Brother,

Ri. Baxter.

TO THE READER.
THis Book being Written at several times, most of it many Years ago, and some
lately, and answering many Persons who use the same Arguments, it has one
blemish which I am ashamed of in the review: that is, The too often repeating the
same things; especially in my four Letters to Bishop Guning, occasioned by our
often repeating them in Conference. The thing is usual in long Disputations, (as
in the Schoolmen, in Dr. Twisse Vind. Great. and such others, the Adversary
making it needful;) But I am far from justifying it: Had I intended it as one
orderly Treatise at first, and not written the Parts on several Occasions, or
had I yet Time and Strength to have cast it into a more regular shape it might
have been partly amended: But I had rather it came out thus than not at all:
Whoever is displeased at it, by guilt or different judgment, I will please my
Conscience, whose Peace I find possible and quietting, while such Men's has
been neither hitherto to me.

I know that Age and Natural Weakness, has been part of the Cause of my
forgetting often that I had written the same before. But while I confess this
Infirmity, I will tell the Reader two Stories for his use of it.

I read in a great Man that often repeating in the Pulpit the same thing, was a
sign to the Hearers, that their Teacher spoke not crudely and rashly that he
had never digested or well studied, nor light things that he valued not: but
that which he thought necessary and had long considered.

I heard of a Preacher that would needs have his Servant tell him what Men said
of his Preaching: And being urged (but loath) he said, They say, Sir, that you
very often repeat the same things, And to tell you the truth, I think it is too
true: For the last Day you repeated that which you had said diverse Days before:
Says his Master, Tell me what it was? He Paused a while, and said, I remember
not the words now: Says his Master, Did thou so understand them as to tell
me the Matter and meaning of them? But he could tell neither: Nay then, says
his Master, I will repeat them yet again for thy sake, and such as thou art:
Till they are understood and remembered I have not said them often enough. God be
merciful to us Sinners.

THE CONTENTS Of the First Part.
AN Historical Preface. Chap. I. The Protestant Church of England is against
all Humane Universal Sovereignty, Monarchical and Aristocratical, and against
all Foreign Jurisdiction. Chap. II. This whole Kingdom and Church is swor^
against all Foreign Jurisdiction, and against all Endeavors to alter the
Government; and must not be Perjured. Chap. III. What Endeavors were used by
Papists to bring England under a Foreign Jurisdiction in King James's time. The
Bishop of Ambrun and others wrong him. Chap. IV. Of the Papists Endeavors in
K. Charles time, and the great Injury they did him especially the Irish.
Maimburgh Declaration of the Duchess of York. Chap. V. The Foreign Leaders of
the English Conciliators who are for a Foreign Jurisdiction. Gerson for the
sufficiency of Christ's Law to rule the Church. Chap. VI. Grotius's Judgment in
his own words. Chap. VII. The several sorts of Peacemakers about Popish
Controversies. Chap. VIII. The Doctrine of Archbishop Bromhall defending
Grotius. Chap. IX. The Judgment of Archbishop Laud, as delivered, 1. By Dr.
Heylin. 2. By himself. Chap. X. Dr. Peter Heylin's own Judgment. Chap. XI. The
Judgment of Mr. Herbert Thorndike. Chap. XII. The Judgment of Dr. Sparrow
Bishop of Norwich, and diverse others. Chap. XIII. Bishop Sam. Parker's
Judgment. Chap. XIV. Dr. Saywell's Arguments for a Foreign Jurisdiction
considered. Chap. XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII. Four Letters to Bishop Guning about a
Foreign Jurisdiction. Chap. XIX. Mr. H. Dodwell's Leviathan again Anatomized;
and his Second Part considered, called A Discourse for One Altar and One
Priesthood. Chap. XX. Of Dean Th. Pierce (and Dr. Ham^nd cited by him.) Chap.
XXI. That this sort of Prelatists who have been for a Coalition with the French
or Roman Church, have been the great Agents of all the Di^iding, Silencing,
Persecuting Laws, which have brought and kept us these 27 Years in our lacerate
sta^e. Chap. XXII. How they have been stopped, and what Danger there is yet of
them. Chap. XXIII. Postscript against Dr. Beveridge's Convocation Sermon.
An Historical Prologue, as a Key to understand our English Differences.
I. IT is a dreadful Instance of the sottish deceivableness of Mankind, that
one of the most happy Kingdoms on Earth, should be almost consumed by their own
hands, in Divisions infamous through the World, and that to this very day the
Cause and Matter of them, is not known (except by the contrivers, among our
selves) by such who madly continue the Divisions. Nor is it known who is in the
fault, but they strive on, accusing one another. And it is one of the saddest
notices in this World, that studious Learned Pastors that are grown old in
Studies, and profess all to be devoted to Truth and Love, are so far from
having skill and will to heal us, that they are the men that cause the wound,
and keep ^t open, and are greater hinderers of our Concord and Peace, than
Princes, Lords, or any Seculars: And what one judges the certain Cause of the
Worlds Divisions, another as confidently judges the only way to heal them: And
both sides confess while they lay it on each other, that it is the Clergy that
are the deadliest Enemies of Peace.

II. It is not the noise of Drums and Trumpets, which tells an Army the causes
of the War: The Masters of the War can choose their own Trumpeters, and talk
loudest of that which they would have divert men from the true cause.
Episcopacy, and Liturgy, and Ceremonies, and Conformity, are the things that
make the greatest noise. But Jewel, Bilson, Hooker, etc. differed not about
these, nor Sir Edwin Sandys, the Author of Europae Speculum: Nor the English
Clergy and Parliaments in Bishop Abbots days, who were of their mind, when the
Differences began to rise and threaten us.

III. It Is certain that the fundamental, universal Quarrel through the World,
is between the followers of Cain and Abel, the Serpents and the Woman's Seed, or
the Servants of Satan and of Christ: For the carnal mind is enmity to God, and
neither is nor can be subject to his Law. Selfishness is the sum of wickedness;
and Holiness of Moral good. Uniting in one God is possible and safe: But to the
selfish there are as many Religions and Ways, as sandy self-interest requires.
Good men will do good, and bad men will do evil, under every Form of
Government: Because Great-Good men are so rare, to keep Bad men from doing
hurt, is not the smallest use of Laws. Good men of different Opinions can live
in Love and Peace. I never knew any called Puritanes, who did not love and
honor such Conformists, as Bishop Jewel, A. Bishop Grindal, A. Bishop Abbot,
A. Bishop Usher, Bishop Davenant, and many such; and such as Mr. Bolton, Dr.
Sibbs, Dr. Preston, Mr. Whateley, and all such other; yea while they wrote
against some of them (as Bishop Morton, Hall, Downame, etc.) But what are the
particular Quarrels?

IV. Departing from the only Center and Test of Universal Concord, and devising
an Universal Humane Sovereignty, has set the World into mortal Discord, on
pretense of being the only way to Concord. Christ only is the Head, the King,
and Lawgiver, and Judge of the whole World: The Law of Nature, and sacred
inspired Apostolical Scriptures, are his only Universal Law. Pastors by the
Word, and Princes by the Sword (conjoined where it may be) rule under him only
in their several Provinces. God made the largeness of the Roman Empire a
Receptive Means of the happy propagation of Christianity. Man's nature is prone
to selfishness and ambition: By degrees those humors, and the Wisdom of the
World, conformed the Episcopal Government to the Civil, and made those Bishops
highest, who dwelt in the Cities where the Secular Rulers were highest. The
Churches had before used to serve God in Concord, and to Assemble for
Consultation when Concord required it. The Emperors therefore exalted the great
Bishops, not to Govern alone, but to preside in these Assemblies. The first
General Council had been called as a rational means to cure the shameful
threatening Discords of the Churches, without the formality of any President,
save the Emperor and a temporary Moderator: But three Patriarchs were soon set
up, and after made five, and other Bishops in different degrees of grandeur:
The great and shaking dangers bred by Religious Factions, were ordered to be
decided by Assemblies of Bishops, when changes were made in the Cities of the
Empire, the Rule of conforming the Church to the Civil Government bred a
competition between Rome and Constantinople, because of the translating of the
Imperial Seat. They grew higher and higher; and whenever any Emperor of
Constantinople fell out with his own Patriarch, he either put him out, or
favored the pre-eminence of the Bishop of Rome to curb him: But usually his
own Bishop being at his command, he favored his Interest against the Roman:
And it being the Law of their Councils called General, that the five Patriarchs
must be there, by themselves, or their Delegates, and the Emperors calling the
Councils (upon great occasions) they called them in some Eastern City for the
most part, and the main Body of the Councils were the Greek Bishops, very few
of the Western being there, nor the Pope himself, nor at C. P. Conc. 1. so much
as any Legate.

When the Patriarch of Alexandria, who was the third, fell out with him of
Constantinople, he would extol the Roman Pre-eminence to strengthen himself:
And when the East had Arian persecuting Emperors and Bishops, the Orthodox
would fly for countenance to the Orthodox Emperor and Bishop in the West: But
usually the other four Patriarchs in Councils concurred, and the Roman Clergy
were a small part of their Councils.

But these Councils dolefully disagreeing, became a Church Militant, and on
pretense of agreeing, the Churches tore them all to pieces, and all upon two
occasions: 1. WHO SHOULD BE GREATEST, or please the greatest for worldly
Interest? 2. WHO SHOULD PASS FOR ORTHODOX, when after the Arian and Macedonian
Heresies, much of the strife was about ambiguous words: Till at last the
Division of the Churches, the Degeneracy of the Clergy, the Badness of
Emperors, and the Rebellion of Generals, and Mutinies of Soldiers, delivered
up the Empire to the Infidels. And the Bishop of Rome became the Chief Rebel,
and set up the French in the Western Empire, against his Lawful Prince, and
furthered the Division of the Empire to its Ruin. But this Division occasioned
an Universal Claim.

V. In all the old Contests it never came into the mind of the Emperors or the
Councils, to set up a Government over all the World, but only in the Empire:
They never Summoned the Bishops of all the World but only of the Empire (and
not most of them.) As I have often said, The Subscriptions yet tell us that it
was the Bishops of the Roman Provinces. But the Empire being large, they used
sometime the swelling phrase of totius Orbis, meaning Orbis Romani: And the
Greek Patriarchs never dreamed of a Jus Divinum, or Establishment by Christ, or
his Apostles, much less of an Universal Power: For they all knew that
Constantinople had no such pretense, being a new Erected Seat; And they were
not so impudent as to profess to set a Humane Law against a Divine: And the
Roman Bishop long went no higher, nor ever used that Argument against
Constantinople [My Power is of God and yours but of Men] which had been most
obvious and unresistible, and therefore would have been used, had it been true
and then believed.

But at last, from the Name of Saint Peter's Successor, the Pope began a double
new Claim. 1. TO A DIVINE RIGHT. 2. TO THE GOVERNMENT OF ALL THE WORLD (of
Christians at least.) And the breaking of the Empire necessitated him to this
pretense which his ambition had obscurely before begun. For else, 1. His old
power had died, when he was no Member of the Empire, and so from under the
ancient Government and Laws: And all must have been built on a new uncertain
Foundation. 2. And when all the old Eastern Empire was gone, his Power and
Primacy would have been confined to a narrow compass. Wherefore he served his
present interest; 1. By setting up the French Empire, and 2. By pretending to a
right of Universal Sovereignty over the World as the Successor of St. Peter.

For a General has no strength without his Army, who must have their Part in
the Fight, the Victory, and the Prey: Popes always ruled but in and by these
Councils: These therefore must, as Church Parliaments have their Power in the
Universal Sovereignty, and the Pope as Universal Monarch must Rule not
absolutely; but in and by these Lawmakers and their Laws.

How this Land was brought to Popery by degrees, and how much the most
Religious Men did toward it, I must not tell Historically lest I be too long.
He that reads but Beda, and Malmesbury, and Huntington, and Hoveden, and
Matthew Paris, may see how the Roman Grandeur drew on the change, and how good
people took the advancement of the Bishops in Wealth and Power, and the Number
and Endowments of Monasteries to be the chief strength of the Christian Church,
while Princes were hardly restrained from Rapacity, Sacrilege, and from the
Crimes that commonly breed in worldly Power, Wealth and Pleasure. The
wickedness of some Princes made the Power of the Prelates seem necessary to
bridle them: And then better Princes took it for their Chief Piety to advance
them, who were all taken for sacred Persons, Men of God: And after the Saxons
overthrow of the Britains, the Country being Heathens, and long in
Converting, it must needs be that ignorance must be predominant for a long
time: And the Cure of it was greatly hindered by the continual Wars of the
Saxon Kings among themselves, and after by the Danish Wars and Conquest.

And under the Normans the Bishops were grown so strong by their dependence on
the Pope, who was then grown to the height of his Usurpation, as that they
were almost in continual Contests with their Kings. The Ignorance of the
English Clergy was so great that the Kings were put to fetch their chief
Bishops from other Lands, where they had got more learning than was found at
home, and so had been trained up in the height of Popery: And even those that
were the most Famous for Learning and such Piety as then prevailed, were yet
most Zealously addicted to the Pope, and learnt of Rome to strive for Grandeur.

Wilfrid of York who is magnified by Malmesbury and others after Beda, was so
zealous to be the sole Bishop in that large Northern Country, when the King
and the A. Bishop of Canterbury said there was work enough for four, and
decreed a division, that in resistance of the King and the A. Bishop he
appealed to the Pope, and went diverse times himself to Rome, and once at
Seventy years of age, rather than have his vast Bishopric divided.

And when by his better skill in Computation he prevailed against the Holy
Scots for the Roman time of Easter, the Merit of that, and that he was the
first that brought in singing by Antiphons, and the Benedictine Monkery were
good works which he pleaded against diminishing his Bishopric: W. Malmesbury,
p. 151.

The most Learned were placed at Canterbury, Viz, Odo, Dunstane, specially
Lanfranke, Anselme, etc. whose Miracles by the Monks are magnified beyond
belief, which tended much to advance their Interest. But what the generality of
the Bishops were long, judge by these words of Malmesbury de gest. Pont. li. 1.
p. 116. [speaking how Stigandus got both the Bishoprics of Winchester and
Canterbury, and how Sacrilegious and Wicked a Life he lived, selling
Bishoprics and Abbeys, of unbounded Ambition and Covetousness, adds, [ Sed ego
conjicio illum non judicio sed errore peccare, quod homo illiteratus (sicuti
plerique and pene omnes tunc temporis Angliae Episcopi) nesciret quantum
deliquerit, rem Ecclesiasticorum negotiorum sicut publicorum actitari
existimans,] that is, [ But I conjecture that he sinned not knowingly but by
error; That being an Illiterate Man, (as most and almost all the Bishops of
England then were) he knew not how much he transgressed; thinking that Church
matters were to be managed like Public matters.] (that is secular.) And this
was in good K. Edward's Reign, and at the Conquest. And is it any wonder if
such Bishops brought in Popery. And though the Conqueror strove not till he was
settled, he and his Son after him were fain to be resolute in defending
themselves against their own Prelates and the Pope: And though Hen. 1. wisely
ordered them, the Bishops that had Sworn to be true to the Empress his
Daughter, broke their Oath, and after swore to K. Stephen against her, and
brake that Oath, and swear to her again, and brake that Oath, and again turned
to Stephen, and his own Brother the Bishop of Winchester led the way: And no
wonder when they were great enough to Build suddenly the many great Castles, (
Sherburne, Salisbury, Devises, Malmesbury, etc. which he surprised.) And when
Hen. 2. succeeded Stephen after long bloody Wars, with the greatest advantage
of a Powerful Government, yet was he not able to master his own Bishops
strengthened by the Pope. Who feared not openly to tell him as Thomas of
Canterbury did, [ Certum esse Reges potestatem suam ab Ecclesia accipere, and
non ipsam ab illis sed a Christo, etc. Hoveden, Hen. 2. p. 285.]

VI. But the General and his Army, the Universal Church-Monarch and his
Church-Parliament could not well agree. Many hundred years the Roman
Church-Monarch having the Preferments in his power, got Councillors to his
mind, who were as ready to be militant against Princes, and Peace, as he to
command it: Till at last the Monarch by a packt bribed Clergy having got
possession of a Power like to absolute, disgraced it with a succession of such
Monsters of wickedness, as the most flattering of their Historians declare to
be unworthy to be named in the Catalogue. And they had so often two Popes at
once, filling the World with blood, while by the Sword they tried their Cause,
and at last three Popes (and says Wernerus in Fasc. Temp. once six at once
that were then, and had been Popes) some Kingdoms being for one, and some for
another, that the Christian World could no longer bear the mischievous effect,
France having one Pope, and Italy and Germany another, expose the Nations to
blood, and the Christian Religion to decay and scorn: Till necessity forced the
Emperor of Germany and other Princes, first by the Council of Constance, and
after by that at Basil, to overtop, depose and correct the Popes.

VII. But when the Councils were ended, though a Decennial Council was decreed,
and all means used to prevent relapse, the chief Executive Power in the
intervals being in the Monarch (the Pope) and it being the Pope, and not the
Councils that gave Preferments, all the Councils Decrees against Absoluteness,
and for Decennial Councils proved but empty words. The worldly Bishops clave to
the Pope. Eugenius 4. condemned and Deposed as an Heretic, Simoniack, etc.
continued in despite of his deposers, and their succession is from him to this
day. The Greeks by necessity were forced a while to countenance a debauched
Council at Florence, to undo what the other Councils had done, (who are there
pronounced Rebellious Church-Parliaments, who would have changed the Universal
Monarchy;) But being cheated, they went home, and had so sad entertainment by
the Greek Church, as made them repent, and wish they had hearkened to their
Marcus Ephesus.

VIII. Things returning to the old channel of Tyranny and Corruption, and their
Clergy not reforming, Reformers got a double advantage, 1. By the sense of the
need of Reformation, which the two Church Parliaments, Constance and Basil
(after Pisa) had left upon the Peoples minds, with the general murmur at their
frustration. 2. The horrid Corruption of the Clergy by gross Ignorance,
palpable Errors, Pride, Covetousness, and almost all iniquity, which made even
nature loath them: Whereupon the old Bohemian complaints were reassumed, and
Tecelius's Indulgences provoking Luther, he awakened the University of
Wittenburg, and they the Princes and Learned men of Germany.

IX. At their first awakening, they coming newly out of darkness, were sensible
of little but the gross sort of corruptions, which men of common sense and
morality might perceive: And few had studied the case of a Pretended Universal
Jurisdiction, being bred up in the Reverence of that Church Unity for which it
was pretended: But one Truth let in another till the case became very commonly
understood.

Accordingly men fell into three Parties. 1. The worldly Clergy was against
Church-Parliaments, unless such as would obey the Pope, and against
Reformation, saying, The Pope was fittest to do what was to be done, for
Councils and Popular Humors would never know where to stop, but would break
down all the Churches strength and glory. 2. Luther's Party (after their riper
thoughts) were for such a Reformation as consisted in a nullifying of the Papal
Church and Separation from it, as no True Church, but the Seat of Antichrist.
3. A moderate sort of Papists were for reforming of many things in the Roman
Church, but not for nullifying it. They were for reconciling the two Parties,
and for submissive Conformity, but not for Separation. Such were Julius Pslug,
Sidonius, and Agricola, who drew up the Interim, and also Erasmus, Cassander,
Ar. Baldwin, Wicelius, etc. And in France the great Chancellor Michael
Hospitalias, Thuanus, and many of their most excellent Lawyers and
Parliament Men, and some Bishops and Divines.

These men being offended at the Separating part of the Reformation, were taken
with the notion of Unity and Government, but understood not the true state of
the Controversy, and were of two minds among themselves. 1. Some had long had
an untryed notion by Tradition, that the Church throughout the World was One
Body Politic under one Humane Government. 2. Others never thought of that, but
having seen a submission of all the Western Churches to the Pope, thought a
Separation unlawful.

X. But the case of the Separation, which they understood not who blamed it,
was this.

The Reformers took the Universal Church in all the Earth to have no Head,
King, or Sovereign Governor but Christ, none else having the least show of
true capacity or right; and therefore that none had an Universal Legislative,
Judicial or Executive Power: And a Church-Soveraignty was a more irrational
conceit than a Civil Sovereignty over all the Earth: And an Aristocracy of
Bishops more irrational than a Papal Monarchy. Therefore they professed not to
separate from Papists as Christians, or from any of their Societies as parts of
Christ's Church; but to renounce, deny, and separate from their new Usurped
Church-Species or Form, as it is feigned to be an Universal Humane Sovereign
with his Subjects. Had they never corrupted other Doctrine or Worship this
Church-Species of Universal Sovereignty, is to be separated from.

2. And with all, the Reformers found, that though they could have submitted to
Patriarchs as a Humane Power set up by Princes, had they Governed according to
the Laws of Christ, yet 1. It being but a Humane Power, 2. And one Prince
having no right to set up a Patriarch over another Princes Subjects, 3. And the
Roman Patriarch claiming also the Universal Sovereignty, or part of it in
Councils; 4. And having corrupted Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, they took
it to be their duty to renounce also the Pope's Patriarchal Government; and for
all Christians to obey Christ's Universal Laws alone, and the Local Laws circa
sacra left to man's Legislation, of the particular Princes and States where
they live. And not to place Universal Unity or Concord in any Usurping Humane
Sovereign, or their Laws, or mutable circumstances: And, had those excellent
moderate Papists before-named, well studied this point of Universal
Sovereignty, it is like they had forsaken Rome.

XI. When the Pope thought to satisfy the World, and confound the Reformation
by the Council of Trent, the Cardinal of Lorain, and the French consented not
to much that they there did; but stuck to the Councils of Constance and Basil,
lest they should lose the Liberties of the Gallican Church: So that it was long
e're that Nation seemed to own the Council of Trent, and never did it heartily
and universally; but continued at some further distance from the Absoluteness
of the Pope than Italy or Spain. And to this day they continue to maintain, 1.
That the Pope has no Power over the King in Temporals: 2. That he has no
Power to Depose Kings: 3. That General Councils are so far above him as to
reform him and his disorders 4. That he is not Infallible alone, but in
conjunction with the Church or Councils. And though some have spoken and
written against the first and second, Barclay and many others have confuted
them, and the Parliaments have burnt their Books. And this is the Moderate
Popery of France.

Well may I call them Papists still; for, 1. They renounce not a Humane
Universal Church Sovereignty. 2. They allow the Pope to call Councils, and
Preside, and to be the principium Vnitatis, and Patriarch of the West. 3. They
know that when no Church-Parliaments are in being, the Universal Executive
Power must be continued, or the Universal Policy be dissolved: Therefore they
allow the Pope a Right of Universal Government according to the Canons, but not
Arbitrary; and therefore not above Councils: So that if those that are for the
King Ruling by Law, and making Laws only in and by Parliaments, be yet for
Monarchy then Council. Constan. Basil, and the French are yet for Popery.

As to our Reformation it is so fully recorded by many and newly by that
excellent and moderate Historian Dr. Burnet, that for the time he writes I
shall only transcribe a few Notes out of his Abridgment.

Page 87. The Oaths which the Bishops swore to the Pope and the King were found
so inconsistent, as it appeared both could not be kept; which caused the Popes
to be dismissed.

Page 113. An Act was made for Election and Consecration of Bishops; in short,
The King to name one, and the Dean and Chapter in twelve days to return an
Election of the person named by the King --

Page 138. Cranmer, Tonstall, Clark and Goodrik. Bishops being called to give
their Opinion of the Emperors Power to call Councils said, That though ancient
Councils were called by the Roman Emperors, yet that was done by reason of the
extent of their Monarchy that was now ceased: But since other Princes had an
entire Monarchy within their Dominions: Yet if one or more of those Princes
should agree to call a Council to a good intent, and desire the concurrence of
the rest, they were bound by the rule of CHARITY to agree to it.

Page 139. Cranmer said -- that this Authority of General Councils flowed not
from the Number of Bishops, but from the Matter of their decisions; which were
received with an Universal Consent; for there were many more Bishops at Arimini
-- than at Nice or Constantinople, etc. Christ had named no Head of the whole
Church, as God had named no Head of the World --

In Queen Elizabeth's Reign 1559. the Divines appointed to dispute against the
Papist Bishops in their second paper maintain, That every Church had power to
reform it self: This they founded on the Epistles of Paul to the particular
Churches, and St. John to the Angels of the Seven Churches: In the first three
Ages there were no General Councils, but every Bishop in his Diocese, or such
few Bishops as could assemble together, condemned Heresies, determined Matters
that were contested; so did also the Orthodox after Arrianisme had so
overspread the World that even the Sea of Rome was defiled with it.

Page 358. A Bill that came to nothing was for empowering thirty two Persons to
revise the Ecclesiastical Laws: But as this last was then let fall, so to the
great prejudice of this Church, it has slept ever since.

For before this p. 129, 130. l. 2. In King Edward's Reign Bucer's Opinion was
asked about the review of the Common Prayer Book: He wished there might not be
only a denunciation against scandalous Persons that came to the Sacrament, but
a Discipline to exclude them: That the Habits might be laid aside, etc. -- At
the same time he understood that the King expected a New Years Gift from him,
of a Book written particularly for his own use: So he made a Book for him
concerning the Kingdom of Christ: He pressed much the setting up a strict
Discipline, the Sanctification of the Lords day, the appointing many days of
Fasting, and that Pluralities and Non-residence might be effectually condemned;
that Children might be Catechized, that the reverence due to Churches might be
preserved, that the Pastoral Function might be restored to what it ought to be,
that Bishops might throw off Secular Affairs, and take care of their Diocesses,
and Govern them by the advice of their Presbyters; that there might be Rural
Bishops over twenty or thirty Parishes, and that Provincial Councils might meet
twice a year; that Church Lands be restored, and a fourth part assigned to the
poor; -- that care be taken for Education of Youth and for repressing Luxury,
that the Law be reformed, and no Office sold but given to the most deserving,
that none be put in Prison upon slight offenses -- The young King was much
pleased with these advices: And upon that began himself to form a Scheme for
amending many things, etc. -- It appears by it that he intended to set up a
Church Discipline, and settle a Method for breeding Youth --

Page 361, 362, li. 4. To return to Queen Elizabeth, the Changes are recited,
and he adds, [ The liberty given to explain in what sense the Oath of
Supremacy was taken, gave a great evidence of the Moderation of the Queens
Government; that she would not lay snares for her people, which is always a
sign of a Wicked and Tyrannical Prince. But the Queen reckoned that if such
comprehensive Methods could be found out as would once bring her people under
any Union, though perhaps there might remain a great diversity of Opinion, that
would wear off with the present Age, and in the next Generation all would be of
one mind.

Page 363. The Empowering Lay men to deprive Churchmen, or Excommunicate,
could not be easily excused; but was as justifiable as the Commissions to
Lay-Chancellors for those things were. There are 9400 Benefices in England, but
of all these the Number of those (viz. Papists) who chose to resign rather than
take the Oath was very inconsiderable. Fourteen Bishops, Six Abbots, Twelve
Deans, Twelve Archdeacons, Fifteen Heads of Colleges, Fifty Prebendaries, and
Eighty Rectors was the whole number of those that were turned out: But it was
believed that the greatest part complied against their Consciences, and would
have been ready for another turn, if the Queen had died while that Race of
Incumbents lived, and the next Successor had been of another Religion.

Read what he says of Mr. Parker's great unwillingness to be A. Bishop, and
the threatening else to Imprison him. p. 363, 364, etc.

I conclude with that honest Note, p. 369. [ There was one thing yet wanting to
complete the Reformation of this Church, which was the restoring a Primitive
Discipline against scandalous Persons, the stablishing the Government of the
Church in Ecclesiastical hands, and taking it out of Lay hands who have so long
profaned it -- So that the dreadfullest of all Censures is now become most
scorned and despised. See the rest.

The Papists in Queen Elizabeth's days sometime strove by Treasons the recovery
of their Power; and secretly strove by Policy to divide the Protestants, and to
root out those that were most against them. The Ministers unhappily fell into
these Parties. 1. Some were for the Grandeur of the Bishops, and for strict
observance of Liturgy and Ceremonies, and against Parochial Discipline; and
these prevailed with the Queen. 2. Some were against Diocesan Bishops and
Ceremonies, and some things in the Liturgy, and were for Parish Discipline: And
these were called Nonconformists and Puritans. 3. Melancthon and Bucer had
prevailed with some others, who were indifferent as to Bishops, and most of the
Ceremonies and Forms, but Zealous for Parish Discipline and a godly Life, and
for using things indifferent only indifferently, to Edification, and not to the
hinderance of the Ministry of refusers. And Bucer's Scripta Anglicana written
for K. Edward, which urged this Parish Discipline with great Zeal and Judgment,
prevailed with a great part of the Queens Council, and of the Protestant
Nobility and Gentry; but most of the Clergy were of the two first mentioned
Opinions, called Extremes by others.

4. All the Parliaments that were called in Queen Elizabeth's time were still
suspicious that Popery would keep too much strength by the peoples Ignorance
and Impiety, for want of good Preaching and godly Living in the Ministry: And
therefore were usually complaining of the Bishops (especially Whitguift) for
silencing so many Nonconforming Preachers, and keeping up so many Pluralists,
and so many mere Readers: And they were often attempting a Reformation of this,
and to have restored the Nonconformists, and united the godly Protestants: But
by the Bishops Counsel the Queen still restrained them, and charged them not to
meddle with Ecclesiastical Matters, as belonging to her; In Sir Simond Dewes
Journals you may see the many attempts and her constant prohibition and
restraint: And Parliaments were loath to offend her, or make any breach,
remembering how great a deliverance they had by her from Queen Mary's
Persecutions. Though they grudged at the Imprisonment of Mr. Strickland and
others that had spoke earnestly for Reformation, of Bishops Affairs, and the
Ministry, yet they bore it patiently because of what they did enjoy. One of
their strongest attempts you may read in their Petition of Sixteen Articles in
Sir Sim. Dewes, An. 1584, and 1585. page 357. which is well worth the reading:
But it was not endured.

But she long endured the Popish Bishops in their Seats, though in Parliament
the A Bishop of York, the Bishop of London, the Bishops of Worcester, Landaff,
Coventree, Oxford, Chester, the Abbot of Westminster were against the Bill for
the Supremacy and abolishing Popery. See Sir S. Dewes p. 28. and p. 23. also
the Bishops of Winchester, Carlisle, Exceter. Which patience of hers mentioned
put Sir S. D. the Historian on the recital of so large a Catalogue of Records
for the Kings Power against the Pope and Usurping Bishops as is worth the
reading, page 24.

5. Also for many years the Papists came to our Temples, till the Pope forbad
them: But the Parliament men much differed about this: Some would have all men
forced to the Sacrament: Others would have them forced to hear some allowed
Teachers, but not to be compelled to the Sacrament, because it is the investing
of men in the Pardon of sin and right to Salvation, which no unwilling Person
is capable of. Of this see in the foresaid Author, p. 177. the Excellent Speech
of Mr. Aglionke, and of others.

I mention this because the late Reconcilers have made the mixture of Papists
and Protestants in Communion the first ten years of the Queen to be the
desirable state to which they would have had us reduced. Of which more anon.

But the Queen here also restrained them, and would have all left to her and
the Bishops.

Mr. Yelverton told them how perilous a President it might prove for worser
times for the Parliament to be so restrained; Where (says he) there was such
fullness of Power, as even the right of the Crown was to be determined, and by
warrant whereof we had so resolved, that to say the Parliament had no Power to
determine of the Crown was High Treason. Ibid. page 176.

6. The Invasion 1588, and many Treasons, and the Popes Excommunications,
increased the Parliaments Zeal against Popery, and the Clergies also. And when
the Case of the Queen of Scots was referred to the Council of the Parliament,
they earnestly urged the Queen by many Reasons, to execute the Sentence of
Death which was past upon her; seeing while the Papists hoped for her Reign,
neither the Life of the Queen nor the Kingdom could be safe. See Sir S. D'
Ewes, page 400, etc.

These were their apprehensions then of Popery.

7. In K. James's time the horrid Powder Plot to have blown up King and
Parliament, and the Murder of Two Kings in France successively, H. 3. and H. 4.
and other Inhumanities, increased this Kingdoms Zeal against Popery. As the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were made for their discovery, so multitudes
of Learned Men were employed in confuting their pretended Sovereignty and
manifold Errors. And the common Preachers had ordinarily in their Sermons One
Use, as they called it, for the Confutation of the Papists. Besides that the
Homilies and Jewels writings against them were to be in every Church. And as
many of the Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's first time were such as had been
Exiles and Suffered by the Papists, so many both in her days and K. James's,
were Learned and Godly Men, who remembered former times, and were greatly
desirous of the Extirpation of Popery, and of the increase of able Preachers,
and of the Concord of Protestants to that End. And the Books of Martyrs written
by John Fox being common in all parts of the Land, increased the peoples hatred
of Religious cruelty. But some few Bishops (specially A. Bishop Whitguift and
Bancroft) exceeded the rest in their prosecution of the Nonconformists; And
though before by connivance they had enjoyed more quietness, yet when once the
Canon was made and Executed for Subscribing that [ there is nothing contrary to
the Word of God in the Liturgy, etc.] and the Excommunicating Canons, five,
six, seven, etc. the reconciliation of the Protestants seemed hopeless.

Yet even the hottest prosecuting Bishops were firm Adversaries to Popery; yea
Whitguift thought Arminianism came so near it, as made him consent to the
ill-framed Lambeth Articles. And that unhappy Controversy called Arminian
(which I have largely proved to be over-aggravated on both sides for want of a
distinct way of Examination, in my Cath. Theol.) increased the Division much.
The Jesuits being most hated by the Protestants, the Arminians were taken to
incline to Popery, though the Dominicans who had been on the contrary side, had
been the Bloody Masters of the Inquisition. And when our English Arminians were
accused of approaching Popery, it inclined some of them to think more
favorably of a Reconciliation with those whom they were likened to. And the
Papists never ceased their diligence, secret or open, for the restoration of
their Foreign Jurisdiction and their Errors.

XII. The Councils at the Laterane, Lions, and others having so set up the Pope
above Kings, as that those whom he Excommunicates may be deposed, and are then
no Kings: And their Most Learned Doctors writing this, the Pope came to lay
much of his strength upon King-killing; and it has proved too successful: Had
it been only against Rebellion, Kings had their defense: But what can one do
against a Desperado, who is promised Preferment if he escape, and taught, if he
so die for the service of the Church, to look for as much greater a Reward than
Martyrs, as his service is more voluntary, and of more public benefit than
theirs? When Henry the Third was so murdered in France, Henry the Fourth turned
Papist, it is like much for fear. And when the first Knife had but struck out
his Teeth, the next dispatched him. King James here was not a fearless man: He
had known of the many Treasons which Queen Elizabeth escaped. The Powder Plot
thundered to him, though it took not fire. King Henry's Stabs did yet speak
louder. He was told, This shall be your End; think not to escape; Instruments
will be found who prefer the Church before their Lives, if you repent not. What
a strait now is a King in, whose Life is thus at the mercy of a thousand
deluded desperate Slaves of the Pope! That which kindles revenging anger in a
Kingdom or Senate, may rationally cause fear in a single man: For it is easier
to kill a King, than a Kingdom or a multitude.

XIII. The unhappy Differences about the five Articles in Belgio (in which I am
past doubt both Parties there were much to be blamed) involved the Learned Hugo
Grotius in sufferings: The Contra-Remonstrants were too violent, and trusted to
the Sword of the Prince of Orange; and Grotius being condemned to Imprisonment,
and by his Wife got out in a Trunk, on pretense of carrying away his Books,
becoming the Queen of Swedens Resident Ambassador in France, no doubt
exasperated, and falling into intimate acquaintance with the French Jesuits,
especially Petavius, grew to that approbation of the Moderate French Popery,
which I have here after proved, and to that desire of reducing the Protestants
to them, which not only Valesius Orat. in Obit. Petavii, but his own Writings
fully testify. And his design was to bring Rome as the Mistress Church, to
Rule, not arbitrarily, but by the Canons of Councils, securing the Right of
Kings and Bishops, and casting aside the Schoolmens subtle vain Disputes, and
reforming the bad lives of the Clergy, and some small mutable things; and in
this to draw in the Church of France, and England to agree, and the Queen of
Sweden, and if possible the Lutherans, and to crush the Calvinists as
unreconcileable: And he tells us how many in England favored what he did,
though those whom he miscalleth Brownists were against it.

IV. The Church of England and the Parliament being before discontented at the
Marriage-Articles as to Toleration, and at the Popes Agents and Nuntio's here
in London, were much more offended at the changes suddenly made by Bishop Laud.
The blotting out the name of the Pope and Antichrist, and the Zeal for Altars
and Bowings, and the report of a Treaty for Union with Rome, Printed by some
with the particulars, and their conceit that Arminianism looked toward Popery,
and the casting out many Conformable Ministers, and many such things,
especially when they thought the Liberty of their Persons, and their Properties
had been Invaded, and that A. Bishop Laud, and the new Clergy Men, ( Sibthorp,
Mainwaring, Heylin, etc.) were the Cause of all; I say, These things raising in
men a dread of Popery our greater distances were here begun: And though in A.
Bishop Abbot's days the Church of England was against the Syncretism, and few
went with Bishop Laud at first, he afterward got many to adhere to him. He
that would see all the Case in an unsuspected Author, let him read Dr. Heylins
Life of A. B. Laud, where he shall find much of the proceedings, and the
Articles and Reasons of the Treaty with the Papists. And if he add Laud's
Trial, and Rushworth's Collections, he may see more. Heylin tells us that the
Design was but to bring the Papists in to us, by removing that which kept them
out: They that feared a Toleration of Papists did much more fear a
Comprehension or Coalition, though their Conversion they desired: For they knew
that they must still be Members of the false Universal Papal Kingdom, and that
we must in the greatest points come to them, who without changing their
Religion could not come to us: And if we could hardly now keep out the Pope,
what should we do when he had got so much more advantage of us? Besides all
other Changes we must change our very Church-species, or else we should not be
of the same Church, though we sat in the same Seats: For a Church which is but
a subject part of a Sovereign greater Church, is no more of the same species
with one that is subject to no other (but Christ) than our Cities are of the
same species with a Kingdom.

XVI. These distances between the old Churchmen and the Laudians having
increased to that which they came to in 1641. suddenly on October. 23. the Irish
Rebellion Murdering two hundred thousand, and Fame threatening their coming
into England, cast the Nation into so great fear of the Papists, and next of
Bishop Laud's new Clergy who were supposed to be for a Coalition, as was the
Cause (wherever I came) of Men's conceit of the necessity of defensive Arms;
and this was increased by two or three Opinions which many were then guilty of,
who had not Learning enough to know which side was right according to the Law.

One of their Opinions was, That the Law of Nature is the Law of God. Another
was that no men have Authority to abrogate it. Another was that the Law of
Nature inclines men to Love their Lives, and to private Self-defence. Another
was that every Kingdom or Nation has by the Law of God in Nature, a right of
public Self-defence against professed Enemies and apparent danger of its
destruction. And another was, that They whose professed Religion obliges them on
pain of Damnation to do their best to exterminate or destroy the Body of the
Kingdom (are to be taken for its professed Enemies, if they renounce not that
obligation: Especially if they or their Confederates Murder two hundred
thousand Fellow Subjects, and apparently strive for power over the rest. These
Opinions being then received, and by many ill-applyed, things then ran to what
we saw.

XVII. When the old Churchmen and Parliament on one side, (and we know who on
the other side) began the War, necessity caused them to call in the Scots as
Auxiliaries, who brought in the Covenant and attempted Illegally the Change of
the Church Government; and all after falling into the hands of Cromwell and his
Army, the King destroyed, the Parliament pulled down, and other unthought of
Changes which we saw, Discord and War grew odious to the Nation. And we longed
to be reconciled to those that we had differed from especially in matters of
Religion.

Among others more considerable, I attempted in Worcestershire a Reconciliation
with them. I tried first with my Neighbors: The Gentry that I spoke with of
the Royal Party, professed willingness, and that they desired but the Security
of the Essentials of Episcopacy. Dr. Good and Dr. Warmstrie with others of them
Subscribed their approbation to our Agreement: When I tried with others
distant, Bishop Usher easily consented, Bishop Brownrig on somewhat harder
terms, but such as would have healed us; Dr. Hammond on harder yet, but yet
such as we could have born save that he left all to the uncertain determination
of a Convocation. Put shortly Dr. Warmstrie withdrew his Consent, and as the
reason of it sent me a Writing against our Agreement, saying, It was a
confederacy with Schism, and laboring to prove that they were no Ministers or
Churches which had not Episcopal Ordination, and much more to that effect. I
wrote a full answer to it, which satisfied all that I showed it to, but did not
publish it. The writing answered was Dr. Peter Guning's, now Bishop of Eli.
Presently I found this opinion, That they were no true Ministers or Churches
that had not an uninterrupted Succession of Diocesane Ordination from the
Apostles, but that they were true Ministers and Churches that had Roman
Ordination, became the stop to our desired Agreement, and I saw that it
proclaimed an utter renunciation of the Reformed Churches which have no such
Succession, and yet a Coalition with the Roman Clergy, though the Bishops of
Rome have had the most notorious intercisions. And having read Grotius his
Discussio Apologetici Rivetiani in which he more plainly pleads for Canonical
Popery, than he had done in his Votum, or Consultatio, etc. I thought I was
bound in Conscience to give notice to the Royalists of the Grotian Party and
Design, and after printed a small Collection out of Grotius his own words:
These Dr. Pierce wrote against, and others were offended at. But in the Second
Part of my Key for Catholics, I showed the utter impossibility of this Conceit
of Sovereign Government by General Councils.

. XVIII. When God was pleased by the restoration of the King to raise Men's
hopes of Protestant Agreement, I need not repeat what was done toward it;
among many worthier Persons by my Self, the Earl of Manchester and the Earl of
Orery first making from us the motion to His Majesty, who readily consented,
and granted us the healing Terms expressed in His gracious Declaration of
Ecclesiastical Affairs 1661; for which the London Ministers subscribed a
Thanksgiving, and the House of Commons gave him their Public Thanks, as making
for the Public Concord. But when the King under the Broad Seal granted a
Commission to many on both Sides, to treat and agree of such Alterations of the
Liturgy as were necessary to tender Consciences, and the Bishops and their Drs.
yielded not to the least, but to the last maintained that none were necessary
for them; I saw in the Manner and the Issue with whom it was that we had to do,
and consequently what England must expect. I easily perceived that much more
would be imposed. For I saw what some intended, and I could conjecture what
must be the Means: But others went further than they. If I my self had been of
the opinion that a Syncretism or Coalition with the Church of France on
Grotius's terms had been the way of Church Concord most pleasing to God, and
that all were intolerable Schismatics that united not on these terms, as
Members of one Universal Church, under one humane Sovereignty. It Is like I
should have done my best to accomplish these things following, at least, if I
were also of the temper of those of that Mind which I have known.

I. I should have labored to render all those as odious and contemptible as I
could, that had been against the Coalition.

II. It Is like I should have done what I could to Silence all those Ministers
that were likest to hinder my Design.

III. It Is like I should have desired if less would not do this, that more
might be imposed on them, that it might be effectually done.

IV. It Is like I should have done all that I could to Banish them far enough
from the Ears and Presence and Acquaintance of Rulers, that we might represent
them at our pleasure, and they might not answer for themselves.

V. If all this would not do, were I sufficiently hardened, It Is like I should
endeavor to break all those that will not bend, and to ruin them utterly, and
lay them in Jailes with Rogues, and make men believe that they are intolerable
Persons deserving worse, and that all this is Mercy to them.

VI. It Is like that were I of that mind and temper, I should make it my chief
design to make a tender Conscience a Scorn, and to drive it out of Esteem and
Power, and then there would be little in the rest to hinder my desires; I might
expect that they would all take my Pills whom I could first get to swallow as
big a thing.

VII. I would make the great noise about Episcopacy, Liturgy and Conformity,
and not say a word till all were ready of a Coalition with the French Papists
or Roman Church.

VIII. I would (as Dr. Heylin) call this a Drawing in the Papists to us, when
we had opened the Door wide enough for their Universal Sovereignty, and I would
not call it a going over to them.

IX. It Is like I should learn of Grotius, to call none Papists but only those
that count all good and lawful that the Popes do, or as Dr. Saywell, disown
none but the Jesuited Party, and then I would detest and rant against Papists
as hotly as any of them all.

X. I would not put any Oath or Profession of Popery, or of an Universal
foreign Jurisdiction on any of the Lay Communicants, nor on the Inferior Clergy
till they were ripe for it: It Is gently said of Dr. Saywell, What Bishop puts
you to own the Power of General Councils before he will give you the Sacrament?
If the Bishops will but own and be subject to a foreign Jurisdiction, and the
Clergy only to the Bishops at first, and the Laity to that Clergy and Bishop;
the Chain is strong enough at present, we need no more.

XI. I will Prognosticate no further conditionally of my self, but whoever is
engaged in such work, above all cannot spare the Engine of Historical Untruths.
Against those that may not be heard speak for themselves, nor be acquainted
with them that hear the report, this must do the greatest part of the work; it
cannot be probably done without it: Perjury is a thing that I will not meddle
with.

XII. They must make the Differences of Protestants as odious as they can, and
make men believe that they are running mad for want of Catholic Government and
Unity, and as a late Book called An Address, etc. tell them that lately there
were an Hundred and forty several Sects, (and if it be denied, it is but
proving so many Complexions.)

XIII. Above all, they must say nothing for the Pope himself, but only for
General Councils, advancing their Honor by making odious all that they
Condemned, and by the Reverence that Protestants have expressed to the best as
means of Concord: And they must be sure to confound Concord and Government,
Communion and Subjection.

XIV. And they must be sure to keep the Ministry; partly in hope of Preferment,
and partly in servile Dependence, and specially to Corrupt the Universities,
that part may be Ignorant and Vicious, and part ambitious Militants; And when
once all these have got into Church Livings, let the Dislikers get them out if
they can.

XV. Some have ever found it of great use to Altering-designs, to represent all
that are against it as Rebellious, and make Rulers believe that they are their
Enemies. And when our King here has done so much by the Act of Oblivion, and
advancing the late Duke of Albemarle, and acknowledging the Service of him and
his Army, and many others who formerly fought against him, I cannot but suspect
some Altering design in them that would still rub the old Sores, and fetch
thence Materials for all their Purposes. (If I may mix ridiculous things with
terrible,) that as the Drunken Man easing his Bladder by a running Conduit,
stood half the day there in a mingent posture, complaining to Passengers that
his Water would not stop, because he still heard the Conduit run; so if they
can but make the Nation Drunk or Melancholic, the noise of nothing but War,
and Rebellion, and Blood, will make them think that their Blood is still
running.

XVI. And beyond Sea, the Papists have found it the greatest Expedient to their
Successes, to keep Great Men from Study, and Learning, yea, and from Conscience
and Sobriety, and train them up with Sport, and Wine and Women, and Debauchery,
and ranting Jollity, and scorns at Conscience and Preciseness, that they may
not discern their own interest, nor have understanding enough to see the Snare,
but may tamely put their foot in the Stocks and under pretense of Universal
Concord and Government, make themselves the Subjects of a foreign Usurpation.
And if the Pope may but govern till the next General Council, it will be like a
Lease of many Hundred Years, as good as a Fee-simple; And may he but Rule all
as Patriarch and Principium Vnitatis by the Canons already made, it will be as
good as the Guardianship of Infants, that will never call the Guardian to
Account.

. XIX. I must say after all this, that I love the French Church much better
than the Italian, and if we must all be Papists, had rather we were French
Papists, of the two. And yet that I more fear the French Papists than the
Italians. For the Italian Party are at so visible a distance, that they can
design no way for their advantage but a Toleration (unless they could get the
Government) And their Toleration would a while but make the Nation better know
them, and more dislike them: But the French Party cry down Toleration, and
trust wholly to a Coalition and to force: They hope to do their work before its
known what they are doing: They will cry down Popery, meaning only the Pope's
absolute Power above Councils: It is but abating the Latin Service,
Transubstantiation, Priests Marriage, granting the Cup to the Laity, and two or
three more such things, and crying up nothing but the Name of the Church of
England (though changed by Subjection to a Foreign Jurisdiction) and then
crying up Obedience and Conformity to it, and crying down Schism as an
intolerable thing, and the Papists shall seem to turn to us, and not we to
them, and then no Dissenter shall be suffered. Mr. Thorndikes Book of
forbearance of Penalties, tells us of no other hope of sufferance, but on
supposition that we all agree in subjection to the thing called, The Universal
Political Church. And a Learned Tribe by Interest and Opinion engaged in the
Cause may be ready by confident triumphant Writings and Disputes to make good
all this, and scorn and tread down Gainsayers as Schismatics. And the
Coalition will take in the parts and labors of those that now are called
Papists, who are trained up in Militant Arts.

XX. But as long as God and the King are against them, we need not much fear
the Success of their Endeavors: Such a Care has the King had to secure the
Land against all suspicion of Popery in himself, that a severe penalty is to be
inflicted on any that shall so defame him: Yea he has passed Acts for the
Clergy, Corporations, Vestries, the Militia, Nonconformists, in which they are
all obliged by Promise or Oath never to Endeavor any Alteration of the
Government of Church and State: And again I say, what sober Man can be so
sottish as to think that to subject the King, Clergy, and whole Kingdom to the
Foreign Jurisdiction of a pretended Universal Sovereignty (Monarchical,
Aristocratical or Mixed) is no alteration of the Government of the Church, yea
of the Church-specifying Form.

XXI. This is a great secondary reason why we cannot be for such a change
because we cannot Consent that Church, Vestries, Corporations, Militia, etc.
should be all perfidious or perjured: Yea all the Land that have taken the Oath
of Supremacy against all Foreign Jurisdiction. We accuse not others but excuse
our selves: Yea what Crime is it against King and Kingdom, to make them the
Subjects of a Foreign Power, I leave to other men to enquire.

XXII. God seems purposely to have confounded them in their Design, by
leaving them no Materials for their Fabric. I can imagine no pretenses of
possibility but in some of these following ways. 1. That it is the College of
Bishops diffused over the Earth that must exercise Legislation and Judgment by
Consent, or by Majority of Votes: And I shall never fear the prevalency of this
Opinion, till an Epidemical Madness turns us into a Bedlam.

2. That it must be a true General Council that must Govern us: And this is no
more to be expected than that all the World fall under one Monarch, or that all
Christians save one Kingdom Apostatize; which God prevent.

3. That Patriarchs with such Metropolitans as they will call, be taken for the
Governing Representers of all the Bishops and Churches on Earth. But there is
no possibility left us of this way: For it must be either by the five old
Patriarchs or by new ones. 1. If the old ones, Gods Judgments have made that
way unpracticable. 1. The Cities of Antioch and Alexandria are destroyed, where
two of the Patriarchs should be Bishops. 2. The Turk is Lord of four of the old
Patriarchal Seats; and none can be chosen, rule, or come to Councils without
his Consent. And he can get almost whom he will Chosen, and so the Turk should
be our Chief Church Governor. And the Places are bought with Money, and the
Possessors answerable. Ludolphus tells us that the Patriarch of Alexandria is
some unlearned ignorant Person that scarce knows Letters, and that Men are
made Clergymen there against their wills, all Men shunning the Office because
of the Sufferings from the Turk which they must undergo. They have no just
Qualification, Election or Power: There are three nominal Patriarchs of Antioch
chosen by three several Parties, besides the Popes. They are utterly uncertain
which of them is right, or rather certain that none of them are or can be such.
All the four Nominal Patriarchs are against the Romans, and several against
each other: And many of the chief Christian Churches own none of them as their
Governors, and none own them all as such.

And must our Kings and Kingdoms be Subjects of ignorant Subjects of the Turk,
because once Men were advanced to high Titles over Towns now destroyed, in one
Christian Empire now dissolved or turned Mahometans.

4. There is therefore but one way left, which is for the Pope and his Privy
Council of Cardinals to be the standing Governor, by Judgment and Execution,
and to call when Princes force him to it, such European Councils as he can, and
(as he does) to make four Nominal Patriarchs (of Constable. Alex. Antioch and
Jerusalem) as Men make Kings, Queens, and Bishops on a Chess-board, and to call
these General Councils, as he did that at Trent, and to keep the people
ignorant enough to believe it.

As for the making of a sort of new Patriarchs there must go so much to agree
who they shall be among all Christian Princes and Nations, and then to prove
that they are the true Representers of all others, and that the Representers or
represented have any Universal Legislative Power, that I am in no Expectations
of any such Sovereignty. I have proved against Mr. Hooker that the Body of the
people as such are not the Givers of the Power of their Govern ours, nd
therefore cannot give power to an Universal Supreme.

XXIII. When I had seen all Mr. Thorndikes Books, and Dr. Heylins, and some
other such, and A. Bishop Bramhall's Book against me, with a long and vehement
reproving Preface, I purposed to have again detected the design, and have
answered that Book. But my Bookseller Nevill Simons told me that Mr. Roger
Lestrange then Overseer of the Press, came to him and vehemently protested that
he would ruin him if he printed my Answer to it: And when it might not be
Printed I forbore to Write it.

Since then among others Mr. Dodwell has appeared with most Voluminous
confidence, whom I have answered; who I doubt not will want neither Ink, Paper,
Words or Face for a reply.

My Conference with Bishop Guning I thought it against the Rules of Converse to
publish. But his Chaplain Dr. Saywell, Master of a College in Cambridge, whom
I take for his Mouth, being himself present, has published what he would have
the World to believe of our Discourse, in a Book against me, for Universal
Jurisdiction: And therefore he has put some necessity on me to publish the
Truth, which I am confident will not be to the Readers loss of time, who will
peruse it. When I had sent him my Book of Concord, he sent me Dr. Saywell's
first, by Dr. Crowther, of which I wrote to him my sense. On this he desired me
to come speak with him, which having done three several days, I thought it meet
at Night to Recollect our Discourse and send him the Sum of all in Letters,
that neither he might forget it, or any Man misrepresent it. These four Letters
I have therefore here annexed, and with them an answer to Dr. Saywell's Reasons
for a Foreign Jurisdiction.

XXIV. I am so far from charging the Church of England with the guilt of this
Doctrine or Design, that I prove that the Church of England is utterly against
it. But then by that Church I do not mean any Men that can get height and
confidence enough to call themselves the Church of England; but those that
adhere to the Articles of Religion, the Doctrine, Worship and Government by Law
Established.

XXV. And I am so far from uncharitable Censures of the Men whom I thus
confute, that I profess that I believe Mr. Thorndike, Bishop Guning, Mr.
Dodwell, etc. to be Men that do what they do in an Erroneous Zeal for Unity and
Government, and are Men of great Labor, Learning, and Temperance, and
Religious in their way: And I have the same Charity and Honor for many French
Papists, yea for such Papal Flatterers as Baronius who joined with Philip
Nerius in his first Oratorian Exercises and Conventicles: Yea I cannot think
that they that burn and torment Men for Religion, could live in quietness, if
they did not confidently think that it is an acceptable Service to God. And I
fear not still to profess that were it in my power, I would have no hurt done
to any Papist which is not necessary to our own defense.

But I must say that I much more honor such as Gerson, Ferus, Espencaeus,
Monlucius, Erasmus, Vives, Cassander, Hospitalius, Thuanus, etc. who among
Papists drew nearer the Reformers, than such among us as having better Company
and Helps draw fromward them, and nearer to the Deformers.

XVI. And as to you, Reverend Brethren Conformists, who are true to the True
Church of England; I humbly crave of you but three things. I. That you will by
hard study and Ministerial diligence and holiness of life, keep up to your
power the common Interest of Christianity, of Faith and serious Piety and
Charity. II. That you will heartily promote the Concord of all godly
Protestants, and therein follow such measures as Christ himself has given us,
and as you would have others use toward you. III. That you will openly and
faithfully disown the dangerous Error of Universal Legislative and Judicial
Sovereignty, and bringing the King, and Church, and Kingdom under any Foreign
Jurisdiction, Monarchical, Aristocratical or Mixed; and never stigmatize the
Church of England and your sacred Order with the odious brand of
Persidiousness, after so many Imposed and Received Subscriptions, Professions
and Oaths, against all Endeavors to alter the Government of Church or State.

XVII. And as to the Nations fears of future Popish Sovereignty, for my part I
meddle no further than 1. To do the work of my own Office and Day, 2. And to
pray hard for the Nations Preservation, 3. And to trust God, and hope that he
will perfect his wonders in such a deliverance, as shall confirm our belief of
his special care and providence for his Church.

But I must tell you that such Reasons as Bishop Gunings Chaplains, should not
be thought strong enough to make you so secure, as to abate the fervor of your
prayers. His words are these (more congruous far to him than to you and me)
page 282, 283. [The only means that is left to preserve our Nation from
destruction, and to secure us from the danger of Popery, is to suppress all
Conventicles, etc. -- Being by this method provided against having our People
seduced by the Papists, which as yet they are in great danger of -- the next
thing is to consider how to prevent violence, that those be not murdered and
undone that cannot be persuaded to submit. Now to secure this, His Majestes
gracious promises to conform any Bills that were thought necessary to preserve
the Established Religion, that did not entrench on the Succession of the Crown,
do make the way very easy; if our People were united among themselves, and in
the Religion of the Church of England. For matters may be so ordered, that all
Officers Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military, and all that are employed in Power
and Authority, of any kind, be persons both of known Loyalty to the Crown, and
yet faithful Sons of the Church, and firm to the Established Religion: And the
Laws that they act by may be so explained, in favor of those that Conform to
the Public Worship, and the discouragement of all Dissenters, that we must
reasonably be secure from any violence that the Papists can offer to force our
submission: For when All our Bishops and Clergy are under strict Obligations
and Oaths, and the People are guided by them; and all Officers, Civil and
Military, are firm to the same Interest, and under severe penalties, if they
act any thing to the contrary: Then what probable danger can there be of any
violence or disturbance, to force us out of our Religion, when all things are
thus secured, and the Power of External Execution is generally in the hands of
men of our own Persuasion. Nay moreover, the Prince himself will by his
Coronation Oath be obliged to maintain the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom so
Established.]

I am not of a Calling fit to debate the Reasons of these Reverend Fathers;
some will read them with a Plaudite; some with a Ridete; some with a Cavete,
and I with an Orate: And he that will abate the fervor of his prayers by such
securing words, is one whose Prayers England is not much beholden to. The words
with all their designs are edifying, as Diagnostick and Prognostic. I only
say, [ Seeing we receive a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear; for our God
is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28, 29.]

March 28. 1682.

Chap. I. The Protestant Church of England is against all Humane Universal
Sovereignty, Monarchical or Aristocratical; and so against all Foreign Church
Jurisdiction.
I Prove this, I. From the Oath of Supremacy, which says thus:

I do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, That the King's Highness
is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other His Highness
Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or
Causes as Temporal. And that No Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or
Potentate, has, or ought to have ANY JURISDICTION, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. And
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign Jurisdiction,
Privileges, Pre-eminence and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united or annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm.

Here all the Kingdom swears, That none have, or ought to have any Jurisdiction
here, who is Foreign. Yet some Papists have been encouraged to take this Oath,
by this Evasion.

Obj. No Jurisdiction is here disclaimed of Foreigners, but what belongs to
the King: But Spiritual Jurisdiction, called the Power of the Keys, belongs not
to the King: Ergo.

Ans. For securing the King's Jurisdiction, All Foreign Jurisdiction is
renounced; signifying that there is no such thing as a Jurisdiction over this
Realm, but the King's and his Officers. The Power of the Keys, or Spiritual
Power, is not properly a Jurisdiction, as that word includes Legislation, but
only a Preaching of Christ's Laws, and administering his Sacraments, and judging
of men's capacity for Communion according to those Laws of Christ: And this
under the Coercive Government of the King. Much like that of a Tutor in a
College, or a Physician in his Hospital. What can be more expressly said than
this here, that [No Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, have,
or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or
Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.] Is that of Pope or
Councils neither Ecclesiastical nor Spiritual? Is not the word [ Prelate]
purposely put in to exclude that Power hence which Prelates claim? Though the
King claim not the Power of the Keys, he knew that by the claim of that Power
the Pope and Councils of Foreigners had been the disturbers of his Government:
And therefore all theirs here is excluded as a necessary means to secure his
own.

1. Popes and Councils have claimed a Legislative Power over us and all the
Church: But the Laws of this Land know no such but in Christ over all, and in
King and Parliament under him over this Land: And therefore the Oath excludes
the Power claimed by Popes and Councils.

2. As to Judicial Power, these Foreigners claim a Power of Judging who in
England shall be taken for a true Bishop and Minister; who shall have Tithes,
Church Lands and Temples; whether the Kings, Lords, and all Subjects, shall be
judged capable of Church Communion, or be Excommunicate: And our Laws declaring
that all this Foreign Claim is Usurpation, fully proves that it was the sense
of the Oath to exclude them.

They claim also a Power of Judging who shall pass here for Orthodox, and who
for Heretics: And in their Laws the consequence is, who shall be burned for a
Heretic, or be exterminated, or after Excommunication deposed from their
Dominions, and their Subjects absolved from their Allegiance? But certainly the
Oath excludes them from all this.

The most of the Papists claim no Power directly due to their Pope, but that
which they call Ecclesiastical or Spiritual (the rest is but by consequence,
and in ordine ad Spiritualia:) But if this be not excluded in the Oath, then
they intended not to exclude the Papacy: And then what was the Oath made for,
or what sense has it, or what use? And who can believe this?

If the meaning of the Oath be not to exclude the Pope's Ecclesiastical Power,
then they that take it may yet hold that the Pope is Head of all the Churches
on Earth, and has the Authority to call, and dissolve, and approve, or
reprobate General Councils, and may Ordain Bishops for England, and his
Ordinations and his Missionaries be here received, and Appeals made to him, and
Obedience sworn to him, his Excommunications, Indulgences, imposed Penances,
Silencings, Absolutions, Prohibitions here received: All which our Statutes,
Articles, Canons, etc. show notoriously to be false. It is evident therefore
that this Oath renounceth all Foreign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

II. The second proof is from many Acts of Parliament: Those which prohibit all
that receive Orders beyond Sea from the Pope, or any Papists, to come into
England, on pain of death: Those that forbid the Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline both of Popes and Councils: The words of 25 H. 8. c. 21. are these.

Whereas this Realm recognizing no Superior under God but the King, has been,
and is free from Subjection to any man's Laws, but only such as have been
devised, made and ordained within this Realm for the wealth thereof, or to such
other as the People of this Realm, have taken at their free liberty by their
own consent to be used among them, and have bound themselves by long use and
custom to the observance of the same; not to the observance of the Laws of any
Foreign Prince, Potentate or Prelate; but as to the accustomed and ancient
Laws of this Realm, originally Established as Laws of the same, by the said
sufferance, consent and custom, and none otherwise: It stands therefore with
natural equity and good reason, etc. that they may abrogate them, etc.

Moreover the Laws of England determine, that no Canons are here obligatory, or
are Laws, unless made such by King and Parliament. And if it be true which
Heylin, and some others say, that the Pope's Canon-Laws are all here in force
still, except those that are contrary to some Laws of the Realm, that is but as
the Roman Civil Law is in force; not as a Law of the Pope or old Romans, but as
made Laws to us by King and Parliament. The Roman Senate and Emperor give us
the Matter of the Civil Law, and the Pope and Councils of the Canon Law; but
the Sovereign Power here gives them the Form of a Law; as the King coineth
Foreign Silver.

III. The Articles of Religion prove the same. 1. The twenty first Article
says,

General Councils may not be gathered together without the Commandment and Will
of Princes: And when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
Assembly of Men, whereof all be not governed by the Spirit and Word of God)
they may err and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining to God:
Wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary to Salvation, have neither
strength nor Authority unless it may be declared that they are taken out of the
Holy Scriptures.

Here note, 1. That General Councils (so called) in the Empire, had no power to
meet, much less to Rule, without the Commandment of Princes. And so those
called by the Emperor had no power over the Subjects of other Princes.

2. And true Universal Councils will never be Lawfully called, till either all
the Earth have One Humane Monarch, or all the Heathen, Infidel, Mohammedan,
Papist, Heretical and Protestant Princes agree to call them: For one has not
Power over the Dominions of all the rest. And so the Aristocratical Party put
the whole Church under an impossible and non-existent unifying and governing
Power.

3. That which may be proved a Duty out of God's Word, was such before any Pope
or Council made Laws for it. So that if their Commands herein are any more than
declarative, and subservient to God's Laws (as the Crying of a Proclamation, or
as a Justices Warrant,) God has forestalled them by his Laws, and theirs come
too late.

And if all the Power that Councils or Bishops have as to Legislation, be to
make Laws unnecessary to Salvation, it were to be wished they had never made
those that are hindrances to Salvation, and set the Churches together by the
Ears, and have divided them these 1200 Years and more. Surely our English
Canons 5, 6, 7, 8, which Excommunicate so many faithful Christians, do much
hinder Salvation, if they be not necessary to it.

But it is apparent that they take their Laws to be necessary to Salvation; 1.
Who say All are Schismatics that obey them not; and that such Schismatics are
Mortal Sinners in a state of Damnation. They that make their Canonical
Obedience necessary to avoid Schism, and that necessary to Salvation, make the
said Canonical Obedience necessary to Salvation. But, etc.

2. And one would think that they that torment, and burn Men, and silence
Ministers for not obeying their Canons, made them necessary to Salvation.

The 34th Article says, That [ every Particular or National Church has
Authority to Ordain. Change, or Abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church,
ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all things be done to edifying.]

And if so, they that may abolish the Rites ordained by General Councils, or
Popes, are not their Subjects: nor is this Power of making and abolishing Rites
reserved to them, nor can they deprive any National or Particular Church of
this their own Power.

The 36th Article says, That [The Book of Consecration of Archbishops,
Bishops, and Ordaining of Priests, etc. does [ Contain all things necessary
thereto.]

But nothing in that Book does make it necessary that English Bishops or
Priests receive their Power or Office from any Foreigners, Pope, Council or
Bishops; which yet must be necessary if they be their Subjects.

The 37th Article says, That [Though the Queen has not the Power of
administering the Word and Sacraments, yet she is not, nor ought not to be
subject to any foreign Jurisdiction; And that the Bishop of Rome has no
Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.] And if so, then he has no Patriarchal
Jurisdiction here; nor have foreign Councils any.

IV. King Edw. 6. Injunctions say, That [No manner of Obedience or Subjection
is due to the Bishop of Rome within this Realm.] Therefore not as to a
Patriarch, President or Principium Vnitatis.

V. Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions say, [No manner of Obedience or Subjection is
due to any such foreign Power -- And Admonit. [No other foreign Power shall or
ought to have any Authority over them.]

VI. The Reformatio Legum Ecclesiast. c. 9, 10, 11.14, 15. are full proof:
There the Reformers professing reverence to the 4 first General Councils as
holding sound Doctrine, add [Quibus tamen non aliter fidem nostram obligandam
esse censemus, nisi quate^us ex S. Scripturis confirmari possint: Nam concilia
nonnulla interdum errasse, and contraria inter se desinivisse, partim in
actionibus juris, partim etiam in fide manifestum est. Itaque legantur Concilia
quidem, cum honor and Christiana reverentia, sed interim ad Scripturarum piam,
certam, rectamque regulam examinentur.

C. 15. Orthodoxorum Patrum etiam authoritatem minime censemus esse
contemnendam; sunt enim permulta ab illis praeclare and utiliter dicta: ut
tamen ex eorum Sententia de Sacris Literis judicetur, non admittimus: Debent
enim sacrae literae, nobis omnis Doctrinae Christianae and regulae esse and
judices. Quin and ipsi Patres tantum honoris sibi deferri recusarunt, saepius
admonentes lectorem ut tantisper suas admittat sententias and interpretationes,
quoad cum sacris literis consentire eas animadverterit.

Et de Haeres. c. 1. Illorum intolerabilis est error qui totius Christiani
orbis universam Ecclesiam solius Episcopi Romani principatu contineri volunt.
Nos enim eam quae cerni potest Ecclesiam sic definimus, ut omnium coetus sit
fidelium hominum, in quo S. Scriptura sincere docetur; and Sacramenta (saltem
his eorum partibus quae necessaria sunt) juxta Christi praescriptum
administrnetur.

Et de Judic. Cont. Haeres. c. 1. Appellatio reo conceditur ab Episcopo ad
Archiepiscopum, and ab Archiepiscopo a^ Regiam personam ( but no further) Vid.
de Eccles. c. 10. de Episc. Potestate.

Et page 190. Rex tam in Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Clericos, and alias
Ministros quam in Laicos intra sua regna and dominia plenissimam jurisdictionem
tam civilem quam Ecclesiasticam habet, and exercere potest: Cum omnis
Jurisdictio tum Ecclesiastica tum secularis ab eo tanquam ex uno and eodem
font derivantur.

Et de Appell. c. 11. There Is no Appeal to any above or beyond the King,
judging by a Provin^ial Council, or Select Bishops.]

Though the King died before these were made Laws, they tell us the Church of
England's since.

VII. To save transcribing, I desire the Reader ^o peruse that notable Letter
of King Henry the ^th to the Archbishop of York: It is the first in the second
Part of the Caballa of Letters; well worth the reading, to our purpose.

VIII. The Liturgy for Nov. 1. called the Pope Antichrist, And the Homilies to
the same since: And the Convocation in Ireland, Art. 8. 1615. So does the
Parliament of England, in the Act ^or the Subsidy 3 Jacobi, of the Clergy. And
^ure they that took him for Antichrist, thought (...) not that as Pope or
Patriarch he had any ruling ^ower here.

IX. The Apology of the Church of England ^n Jewel's Works, (ordered to be kept
in all the ^arish Churches) says, Page 708.

[Of a truth even those greatest Councils, and where most Assemblies of People
ever were, (whereof these Men use to make such exceeding reckoning) compare
them with all the Churches which throughout the World acknowledge and profess
the Name of Christ, and what else I pray you can they seem to be but certain
Private Councils of Bishops, and Provincial Synods? For admit peradventure
Italy, France, Spain, England, Germany, Denmark, Scotland, met together; If
there want Asia, Greece, Armenia, Persia, Media, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Ethiopia,
India, Mauritania, in all which Places there be both many Christians, and many
Bishops, how can any Man, being in his right Mind, think such a Council to be a
General Council?]

Page 629. It Is proved that Councils have been so factious and tyrannical, that
good Men have justly refused to come at them.

Page 593. But the Gospel has been carried on without and against Councils;
and Councils been against the Truth.

And Jewel, Page 486. shows that [Councils have been against Councils, and
the Arrian Heretics had more Councils than the Christians.] and shows their
uncertainty.

Page 19. As to the Authority of Councils, Augustine says, [Ipsa plenaria
Concilia saepe Priora ^ posterioribus emandantur.

And of the Succession and Ordination of Bishops, he says, Page 131. [If there
were not one of them (that turned from Popery) or of us left alive, yet would
not therefore the whole Church of England fly to Lovaine. Tertullian says,
Nonne and Laici sacerdotes sumus. -- Ubi Ecclesiastici Ordinis non est
Consessus, and offert and tingit sacerdos qui est solus. Sed and ubi tres sunt,
Ecclesia est, licet Laici. And frequently he says, The Church is found among
few, as well as among many.] And he was for Lay Men's Baptizing.

X. The first Canon commands Preachers Four times a Year to declare [That All
usurped and foreign Power (forasmuch as the same has no Establishment nor
Ground by the Law of God) is for most just Causes taken away and abolished. And
that therefore, No manner of Obedience or Subjection within His Majesty's
Realms and Dominions is due to any such foreign Power.

The 12th Canon Excommunicateth ipso facto any that shall affirm, That it is
lawful for any (...) of Ministers to join together and make (...), Orders or
Constitutions, in Causes Ecclesiastical, without the King's Authority, and
shall submit themselves to be ruled and governed by them.] Therefore none may
go beyond Sea to Councils without his Authority. And the Canons of Foreigners
are not to be made a Rule without his Authority. And is not other Princes
Authority as necessary in their Dominions?

The Canon which bids Prayer 55th describes [ Christ's holy Catholic Church
to be the whole Congregation of Christian People dispersed throughout the whole
World.] But such a Church has no Legislative or Judicial Power.

XI. The Controversy is about an Article of Faith, [I believe the holy
Catholic Church.] The Humanists say, It is an universal Political Society,
Governed by one humane Supreme, (Monarch, Aristocracy or mixed) under Christ.
Protestants say, It has no universal supreme Ruler but Christ. Now the
Generality of Protestant English and transmarine, who write on the Creed,
expound this Article accordingly in the Protestant sense; as he that will
peruse their Books may find; which shows what is the sense of the Church of
England.

XII. Though King Edw. VI. was but a Youth when he wrote his sharp Book against
Popery, (lately printed.) It shows what his Tutors and the Clergy of his
time, who were called the Church, then thought of these Matters.

XIII. If the Parliaments of England all the days of Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and King Charles I. and II. knew what was the Doctrine of the Church of
England about a Foreign Jurisdiction, it is easy to gather it in their Votes,
and Acts. Let him that would know whether they were for a Coalition with the
French on such terms, read Sir Simon Dewes Journals, Rushworths Collections, or
Prins Introduction ad annum 1621. or any other true Historian, and he will see
how far they were from owning any Foreign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But the
contrary minded would make the World believe that all these Parliaments were of
some Sect differing from the Church of England. But what call they the Church
of England but that part of the Clergy who conform to the Laws: And did not the
Lawmakers understand the Laws?

Or if they more regard the sense of the Clergy, let them read A. Bishop
Abbot's very plain and bold Letter to the King, in Prin's Introduct. page 39,
40. and Dr. Hackwell's, etc. and they may know what was then the sense of the
Clergy: With whom concurred the Bishops of Ireland: Insomuch that Bishop
Downame expressing his sense of the Papists there, and his contrary desires,
presumed to add, [ And let all the people say Amen;] at which the Church rang
with the Amen. And though he was questioned in England for it, he came safe
off. His Neighbor Bishops also declaring Popery to be Idolatry, and the Pope
Antichrist.

XIV. The Bishops and chief Writers of England have taken the Pope to be the
Antichrist; Cranmer, Whitguift, Parker, Grindall, Abbot, all A. Bishops of
Canterbury; Usher, Downame, Jewel, Andrews, Bilson, Latimer, Hooper, Farrar,
Ridley, Robert Abbot, Hall, Allig, and abundance more Bishops: The Martyrs,
Sutcliffe, Fulke, Sharp, Whittaker, Willet, Crakenthorp, and most of our
Writers against Popery. Sure then they were for none of his Jurisdiction here.

XV. The Prayers have been and are to this day added in the end both to our
Bibles and Common Prayer Books, which show how far the Church of England was
from desiring a Coalition with the Papists by submitting to any Foreign
Jurisdiction: They say to God, [Confound Satan and Antichrist, with all
Hirelings, whom thou have already cast off into a reprobate sense, that they
may not by Sects, Schisms, Heresies, and Errors, disquiet thy little Flock. And
because, O Lord, we be fallen into the latter days and dangerous times, wherein
Ignorance has got the upper hand, and Satan by his Ministers seeks by all
means to quench the light of thy Gospel, we beseech thee to maintain thy Cause
against those ravening Wolves, and strengthen all thy Servants whom they keep
in Prison and Bondage. Let not thy long-suffering be an occasion either to
increase their tyranny, or to discourage thy Children, etc.]

Though A. Bishop Laud put out all these Prayers from the Scots new Liturgy, we
had never had them still bound with ours to this day if the Church of England
had not at first approved them.

There is also a Confession of Faith found with them, describing the Catholic
Church as we do.

XVI. The Oath called Et Caetera of 1640. says that [The Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England contains all things necessary to
Salvation.] Therefore Obedience to any Foreign Jurisdiction is not necessary
to Salvation: And therefore not necessary to the avoiding of Schism, or any
Damning Sin.

XVII. The Church of England holds that no Foreigners (Pope or Prelates)
have Judicial Power to pronounce the King of England a Heretic. Or
Excommunicate, (though as Bishop Andrews says in Tortura Torti even a Deacon
may refuse to deliver him the Sacrament if incapable, much more that Pastor
whom he chooses to deliver it him.) For it is known by sad experience how dismal
the Consequences are; exposing the lives of the Excommunicate to danger among
them that believe the Pope and his Councils, and rendering them dishonored and
contemned by their Subjects: We know how many Emperors have been deposed as
Excommunicate, and what Queen Elizabeth's Excommunication tended to; And if our
Laws make it Treason to publish such an Excommunication, sure the Lawmakers
believed not that either Pope or Prelates had a Judicial Power to do it. In
Prin's Introduct. p. 121. the Papists that were unwilling to be the
Executioners, had no better plea, than [That no Council had yet judged the King
to be a Heretic.] But Protestants deny that any Council has a Judicial Power
so to judge him, though all Men have a Discerning Power to judge with whom they
should hold Communion.

But if our Defenders of a Foreign Power say true, then the Universal Judge
(Pope or Prelates) may Judge and Excommunicate Kings who they think deserve it.
And if so, not only Justice, but Humanity requires that such Kings be first
heard speak for themselves, and answer their Accusers Face to Face. And this
can seldom be well done by proxy, as the Prelates will not Excommunicate the
Proxies or Advocates only. And must all Emperors and Kings travel no Man knows
whither or how far to answer every such accusation, and that at the Bar of a
Priest, that is Subject to another Prince, (perhaps his Enemy;) And if it be at
an Universal Council, the King of England may be Summoned to America or
Constantinople, at nearest, if they must be indifferently called together.

XVIII. The Church of England is not for Popery, but against it: But the
Doctrine of an Universal Church Sovereign under Christ, is Popery; by the
Confession of Protestants and Papists. I. Protestants ordinarily rank the
Papists into these sorts, differing from each other. 1. Those that place the
Universal Supreme Power in the Pope alone, (which are most of the Italians that
dwell near him.) 2. Those that place it in a Pope and General Council agreeing,
(which are the greatest number.) 3. Those that place it in a General Council as
above the Pope, especially if they disagree. 4. Those that place it in the
Universal Church real or diffusive. See Dr. Challoner in his Creed Ecclesiam
Catholicam, describing these four sorts of Papists.

II. And the Papists themselves number all the same differences, as you may see
in Bellarmine at large.

Of the first Opinion is Valentia in Thom. To. 3. Disp. 1. p. 7. 45. and diverse
others both Jesuits, Friars and Seculars. And Albert. Pighius has written an
unanswerable Book against the Supremacy of Councils. But Bellarmine himself
says, of this way, [Vsque ad hanc diem quaestio superest etiam inter
Catholicos. Lib. 2. de Council. c. 13. And they that have different Sovereigns
have different Churches.

Of the second Opinion are the greatest number of their Doctors.

Of the third Opinion (for a Councils Supremacy above and against the Pope in
case of disagreement) were the Councils of Constance and Basil; And says
Bellarmine, Joh. Gerson, Petr. de Alliaco. Card. Cameracensis, Jacobus
Almanius, Card. Nicol. Cusanus, Card. Florentinus, Panormitanus, Toslatus
Abulensis, and multitudes more; with Oviedo, Okam, etc. and the Parisians and
French Church: And the Pope and Jesuits will not say that all these are
Protestants, or none of the Roman Church: And the Church of England never took
them for any other than Papists.

XIX. The small Book called Deus and Rex, which is approved by the Church of
England, may give the Reader satisfaction herein.

XX. The common strain of the most approved Doctors of the Church in their
Licensed Books against the Papists, disclaimeth all Foreign Jurisdiction of
Pope or Prelates.

1. Bishop Jewel I before cited.

2. Bishop Bilson is too large to be recited. Of Christian Subj. p. 229. [To
Councils (says he) such as the Church of Christ was wont by the help of her
Religious Princes to call, we owe Communion and brotherly Concord, so long as
they make no breach in Faith and Christian Charity; Subjection and Servitude we
owe them none.] See more p. 270, 271, 272, 273, etc. of the Errors and
Contradictions of General Councils, and how the major Vote obliges us not to
follow them.

And page 233. [The Title and Authority of A. Bishops and Patriarchs was not
ordained by the Commandment of Christ or his Apostles, but the Bishops long
after, when the Church began to be troubled with Dissentions, were contented to
link themselves together in every Province to suffer one -- to assemble the
rest. "Page 261. The Bishops speaking the Word of God, Princes as well as
others must yield Obedience: But if Bishops pass their Commission, and speak
beside the Word of God, what they list, both Prince and People may despise them.

3. Dr. Fulke on Ephesians. 1. 5. shows that the Church has no Head but Christ,
and no man can be so much as a Ministerial Head.

4. Dr. Reynolds against Heart proves, that none but Christ can be the Head of
Government any more than the Head of Influence.

5. Dr. Whitaker against Stapleton de sacra Script. page 128. He shows his
Ignorance as worthy to sit among the Catechumens, that instead of Believing
that there is a Catholic Church, puts [ believing what the Catholic says and
believes [sic tu, ut novam tuam fidem defendas n^vos articulos condis, etiam
non haeresis sed perfidiae Magisteres] I believe that there is a holy Catholic
Church, but that I must believe all that it believes and teaches, I believe
not. Augustine appealed from the Nicene Council to the Scripture. We receive
not the Baptism of Infants from the Authority of the Church, but from the
Scripture. And page 103. he shows that [Councils have erred, and corrected
one another, and are more uncertain than the Scripture. And page 50. [The Peace
of the Church is better secured by referring all to the Scripture than to the
Church.

Page 501. The Catholic Church in the Creed is invisible, and known only by
Faith.

6. See Bishop Hall's, No Peace with Rome, and his Letter to Laud. It is
tedious to cite all in Willet, Slater, Prideaux, Abbot, Marton, Crakenthorp,
Challoner, White, and the rest to this purpose.

It is most notorious, that the Church of England was against all Foreign
Jurisdiction of Pope or Prelates as over this Land.

To cite a multitude of such Testimonies, would but needlessly swell the Book,
and weary the Reader.

Chap. II. The whole Kingdom and Church is sworn against all Foreign
Jurisdiction, and all alteration of Government in Church and State: And ought
not to be stigmatized with PERJURY.
1. THat the whole Church and Kingdom is under such Oaths is visible.

I. The Oath of Supremacy before cited against All Foreign Jurisdiction is put
upon all the Land.

II. The Oath called Et caetera 1640. is against Change of Government, and was
taken by many.

III. The Act of Uniformity obliges the whole Ministry to subscribe against
all endeavors to alter the Government.

IV. The Oxford Act of Confinement swears all Nonconformists (and more) never
to endeavor any Alteration of Government in Church or State.

V. The Vestry Act swears all the Parish Vestries to the same.

VI. The Corporation Act swears all the Cities and Corporations of England to
the same; that is, All in Power and Trust as to Government.

VII. The Militia Act swears all the Soldiers of the Land to the same.

So that it is undeniable that all the Kingdom is sworn never to endeavor any
Alteration of Government in Church or State, and also expressly against all
Foreign Jurisdiction.

2. That it is not only an Alteration, but even an Alteration of the very
Species or Constitution of Church and State Government, to bring the Land under
the Foreign Jurisdiction either of Pope, Prince or Prelates, I have proved by
it self; and to any man of understanding, it needs no proof.

3. That Church and State, and the whole Land ought not be wilfully perjured,
is clear. 1. It is so heinous a sin against God, as is like to bring down
destructive vengeance: He that threatens it even in the Tables of Stone: The
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain: And Perjury is
the chief taking his Name in vain, to confirm a Lie. And if this threatening
reach to every individual, what will become of perjured Church and Kingdom? The
Lord is the avenger of all such crimes: And it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of this God, who is a consuming fire.

II. Perjury is a direct dissolution of Societies: Mutual Trust is their
concernment: Utter Distrust is a Virtual death or war King and People are tied
to each other by Oaths: Majors and chief Officers, and Judges are tied to
fidelity by Oaths. The Bishops swear their Clergy to them, (though old Canons
condemned it:) Loose this Bond, and what are Societies? Who can trust him that
makes no conscience of the Obligation of Oaths, any more than an Enemy?

III. It depriveth the King of a necessary means of security for his life. If
all conscience of the Oaths of Allegiance were gone, it is supposed that the
conscience of Loyalty would be gone. And many a Traitor would study how to kill
Kings secretly without danger to themselves, or to make it good by strength and
numbers.

IV. It depriveth all the Subjects of necessary Security for Estate, Name or
Life. If Church and State should openly be perjured, who can expect that all
Individuals should stick at it? But rather that every Man that has an Enemy,
or has either Wealth or Place which another desires, should presently be
Sworn to the Gallows or the Block? It were far better dwell among Toads,
Snakes, and Adders, or Wolves and Bears against whom a Man has some defense:
Homo homini Lupus, would be turned into Homo homini Diabolus.

V. It would make us incapable of Trust, Traffic, and Friendship with any
Foreign Land: Open National Perjury is so odious against the Light and Law of
Nature, that Englishmen would be to other Lands, as Man-eating Canibals are to
us. None could treat with us or trust us.

VI. This would be a most heinous wrong to the King, to have the History of his
Reign so odiously blotted to all Posterity, as that under him the Land should
be turned to Diabolism, and made the hatred and scorn of all the Earth; when
God had honored it with so many Blessings above most others.

VII. It would render Popery it self more odious than it is, as if it lived by
the most horrid crimes, and must revive by National Perjury: And would confirm
those self-conceited Whimsical Expositors of Rev. 13. that think the mark in
the Forehead imposed upon all that must buy and sell, and be Freemen is PERjury
with PERsecution; and that dream that the Letters of the Name of the Beast, are
not to be understood merely Numerally, but Materially and Nominally, and that
(...). xi, sigma-tau are our Chapter and St. conjoined by a Serpentine [X] or [
and] to signify that our Swearing and Forswearing was for [ Church and State.]
Yea and the more odious fancy of another Name in them will become their Sport.

VIII. It would make the Nonconformists say that never Men on Earth were dealt
with so inhumanely, and Challenge the World to give any such instance in any
History, Christian, Mohammedan or Pagan, if the same men that have reviled them
as Rebellious, and endeavored their Imprisonment and utter Ruin for not
Swearing never to endeavor any alteration of Government, should all this while
be designing the alteration of it, and first to make all men abjure it, and
after to bring them to it. The Dissenters scruple not Swearing never to
Endeavor the Altering of the State, Government, nor of the Church as in the
Hands of such Pastors as Christ or his Apostles instituted; nor any Reformation
by Sedition or unlawful Means: But they durst not absolutely abjure all Lawful
Endeavor, to take the Church Keys out of Laymens Hands, and to have more
Bishops than one to many score or hundred Churches, etc. And if we must lie in
Jails as Rogues for refusing this for fear of Perjury, and yet the Reverend or
other Prosecuters should so far alter all the Government of Church and State as
to bring all the Land under a Foreign Jurisdiction, Legislative, Judicial and
Executive, and to make King, Parliament, Clergy and People the Subjects of the
Pope, or which is more base, of a Court or College of Prelates who are almost
all Subjects to Foreign Papists, Mahometans and Heathens, of whom few dare
disobey their Lords and Princes, this would be such a thing as Humane Language
has no words significant enough to describe.

4. Obj. Sinful Oaths bind none, and must be broken.

Ans. 1. Sinful Oaths involve Men in the dreadful guilt of Perjury.

2. Oaths sinfully imposed and taken, yet bind to Lawful Matter.

3. If these Oaths be sinful, why were they imposed? Shall the same Men urge
all to take them, and then say, You may break them as being sinful?

4. It is not sinful to Swear Loyalty and Self-defence against foreign Enemies
or Usurpers.

Obj. 2. Luther and your other Reformers broke their Vow of Chastity and
Obedience to the Pope, and defended it.

Answ. 1. You think they did ill, and will that justify you?

2. To obey a Pope, that is by Usurpation a Vice-Christ, or King of all the
World, is a great Sin, and they that Swear it, are no more bound to it, than
they that Swear Murder or Treason. And the Vow of Chastity becomes unlawful to
those that have not the Power of Continence. But for those that had, let them
justify them from Perjury that can: I cannot.

3. The Perjury of a few Individuals, and of a Kingdom, vastly differ.

4. They took that Oath in ignorance, thinking they had done well. But those
that I now speak to, at once reviled them that took it not, and did their best
to lay it on all the Land, and yet were then for a Foreign Jurisdiction, and
designed or desired that all that took it might after break it.

But these Objectors show us that there is no Sin so odious and inhumane, which
Learned and Reverend Men may not plead for, under a Name and Mask of Virtue,
Loyalty, Piety, and the Churches Good and Service.

Obj. The Laws may repeal these Oaths.

Answ. That will but free new Men from taking them; but not those that have
already Sworn from keeping them in all the lawful parts.

Chap. III. What Endeavors have been used by the more Moderate Papists to
bring England under a Foreign Jurisdiction in King James's time.
. 1. I Will not meddle now with their violent Attempts abroad and at home, nor
so much as name them. (Commonly Known) It is not my design to speak or act
offensively, but defensively: Their ways of Wit and Deceit have been many, and
among others pretended Motions for a Coalition has not been the least: And
their injurious Pretenses that our Rulers have been inclined to them, as
knowing how much that may do with the ignorant sequacious Multitude.

. 2. I. In Queen Elizabeth's days, they much persuaded her that to go as far
from the Church of Rome as the Anti-Papists desired, would cross her Interest,
and make the reduction of the Kingdom impossible, who were all Papists but as
it were the other day.

II. In King James's time, they would fain have conquered him by the fear of
Murder, when he heard of the Murder of two King's of France, H. 3. and H. 4.
that had greater defensive Powers than he: And the Powder Plot was yet more
frightful: And continued threatenings more.

And he showed his peaceable Disposition in promoting the Spanish and French
Matches for his Son: and especially if it be true that Rushworth and other
Historians say, that He, and his Son, and his Council took their Oaths for a
Toleration; ^n the words recorded by them.

. 3. And to make People believe that he was ^t the heart a Papist, the Bishop
of Ambrun boasts of his success in a Conference with him, published in French
in Mr. D'ageant, printed at Grenoble 1668. where in Page 173, 174, 175, 176,
177, 178. he tells this Story. (It Is like the Archbishop told it to ingratiate
himself with Cardinal Richlieu, to whom he sent it, and would not scruple
aggravation.) Afterward there was a good understanding between the two Crowns:
The King of England at the request of the K of France, did often remit the
ordinary severities used against the Catholics in England: He was even
well-pleased with the Proposals that were secretly made to him by the King of
France, in order to the reducing of him into the bosom of the Church. Insomuch,
that after several Conferences held for that Effect, by the consent of his
Majesty, without communicating any thing of that matter to his Council, for
fear that the business being known should have been obstructed; The Archbishop
of Ambrun passed into England, as if it had been without Design, in the Habit
and under the Name of a Counselor of the Parliament of Grenoble, whose
curiosity had incited him to see England. He had no sooner Landed at Dover, but
the Duke of Buckingham came to meet him, and having saluted him thus whispered
in his Ear [ Sir, who call your self a Counselor of Grenoble, but are the
Archbishop of Ambrun, you are welcome into these Kingdoms. You need not change
your Name nor your Quality, for here you shall receive nothing but Honor, and
especially from the King my Master, who has a most high Esteem of you.] Indeed
the King of England used him most Kindly, and granted him many Favors on
behalf of the Catholics, and even permitted him in the French Embassador's
Lodgings where was a great Assembly to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation
to the Catholics, the Doors being open, There were near Eighteen thousand
Persons who received that Sacrament, and yet no man said any thing to them as
they went in at the Gate, nor no where else. Although there were many of the
English always standing in the Street beholding the Ceremony. During his abode,
he had many Conferences with that King, who having come to agreement in all the
controverted Points, he wrote a long Letter to the Pope by a Catholic
Gentleman, his Subject, whom he sent secretly of purpose, by which Letter he
acknowledged him to be the Vicar General of Jesus Christ, on Earth, the
Universal Father of Christians, and the Head of all the Catholics; assuring
him that after he had made sufficient provision with respect to the things
agreed on, he would open^^ declare himself: In the mean time; he pro^^^ed him
not to suffer any more to make search in his Kingdom for the Priests which were
sent over by his Holiness, and the most Christian King, provided they were no
Jesuits, whom he said he could not trust for many Reasons, chiefly because he
counted them to have been the Authors of the Powder Plot, by which they had
designed to have blown him up in his Parliament. In his Letter among other
things, he entreated the Pope to grant that the Church Lands which had become
part of the Patrimony of the principal Houses in England might not be taken
from them; that on the contrary, they might be permitted to possess them;
because if it should be otherwise, there might arise trouble on that account.
He said also, that nothing hindered him from declaring himself presently, but
that he desired to bring the King of Denmark his Brother-in-Law with him; whom
he had in order to that end, but under another pretense, prayed to come over
into England, where he hoped to Convert him with himself. That in so doing he
should secure the Peace of his Kingdoms, which otherwise he could hardly keep
in Peace, and that they two joined in the same Design, would draw with them
almost all the North. The Duke of Buckingham and the Gentleman, whom he sent to
Rome, were the only Persons of his Subjects to whom he had made known this
design. But the Death of King James, which put a stop to this Negotiation, put
a stop to the Effect of it, which was a matter of great Grief to his Holiness,
and the King of France.] Thus far Deageant: At the End of his Book is a
Narrative of the Archbishop of Ambrun of his Voyage into England, written to
Cardinal Richlieu. In which he speaks much to the like purpose, as done 1624.
adding, That the King told him with great freedom the affection he had for the
Catholic Faith, and was so particular as not to omit any thing, insomuch that
he told me, that from his Childhood his Masters perceiving his inclinations
thereto, he had run great hazards of being assassinated.) The rest is, That the
King resolved to settle Liberty of Conscience by calling an Assembly of Trusty
English and Foreign Divines at Dover or Boloigne.

I have recited this to show that as they are not wanting in Art and Industry,
so they abuse the Name of Princes to promote their Cause. Who can tell but much
of this is Lies? And if King James to prevent Butchery, gave them a few fair
words, it is like they added more of their own. And if he used the Papists
kindly, as being against Cruelty, they were the more unexcusable that would
have destroyed him, and could not be kept in Peace.

. 4. Yet do the Papists make people beyond Sea believe that they live here
under constant Martyrdom! Sure if History be to be believed, the Articles of
King James and his Son, our late King, about the Spanish and French Matches, do
acquit both Kings from any just Accusation of Cruelty against the Papists.
Rushworth aftermentioned thus recites the private Articles of the first Match,
Page 86, 87, 88.

1. Particular Laws made against Roman Catholics, under which other Vassals of
our Realm are not comprehended, and general Laws under which all are equally
comprised, if repugnant to the Romish Religion, shall not any time hereafter by
any means or chance whatever, directly or indirectly, be commanded to be put in
Execution against the said Roman Catholics: And we will cause that our Council
shall take the same Oath, as far as it pertains to them, and belongs to the
Execution which by them and their Ministers is to be exercised.

2. That no other Laws shall hereafter be made anew against the said Roman
Catholics; but that there shall be a perpetual Toleration of the Roman
Catholic Religion within Private Houses throughout all Our Realms and
Dominions; which We will have to be understood as well of Our Kingdoms of
Scotland and Ireland, as in England; which shall be Granted to them in manner
and form as is Capitulated, Decreed, and Granted in the Articles of the Treaty
concerning the Marriage.

3. That neither by Us, nor by any other interposed Person whatsoever, directly
or indirectly, privately or publicly, will We Treat or Attempt any thing with
the most renowned Lady Infanta Donna Maria, which shall be repugnant to the
Roman Catholic Religion: Neither will We by any means persuade her that she
should ever renounce or relinquish the same, in Substance or Form, or that she
should do any thing repugnant or contrary to those things which are contained
in the Treaty of Marriage.

4. That We and the Prince of Wales will interpose Our Authority, and will do
as much as in Us shall lie, that the Parliament shall approve, confirm and
ratify all and singular Articles, in favor of the Roman Catholics,
capitulated between the most renowned Kings, by reason of this Marriage: And
that the said Parliament shall Revoke and Abrogate particular Laws made against
the said Roman Catholics, to whose observance also the rest of Our Subjects
and Vassals are not obliged; as likewise the general Laws under which all are
equally comprehended, to wit, as to the Roman Catholics, if they be such as is
aforesaid, which are repugnant to the Roman Catholic Religion. And that
hereafter we will not consent that the said Parliament shall ever at any time
enact or write any other, or new Laws against Roman Catholics.

Moreover, I Charles Prince of Wales engage my self (and promise, that the most
Illustrious King of Great Britain my most honored Lord and Father shall do the
same both by word and writing) that all those things which are contained in the
foregoing Articles, and concern as well the Suspension as the Abrogation of the
Laws made against the Roman Catholics shall within three years infallibly take
effect, and sooner if it be possible, which we will have to lie upon our
Conscience and Royal Honor; that I will interceed with the most Illustrious
King of Great Britain my Father, that the ten years of the Education of the
Children which shall be Born of this Marriage with the most Illustrious Lady
Infanta their Mother, accorded in the Twenty third Article (which term the Pope
of Rome desires to have prorogued to twelve years) may be lengthened to the
said term. And I Promise freely of my own accord and Swear that if it so happen
that the entire power of disposing of this matter be devolved to me, I will
also grant and approve the said term.

Further, I Prince of Wales oblige my self upon my Faith to the Catholic King,
that as often as the Illustrious Lady Infanta shall require that I should give
ear to Divines or others whom her Highness shall be pleased to employ in matter
of the Roman Religion, I will hearken to them willingly without all difficulty,
and laying aside all excuse. And for further caution in point of free exercise
of the Catholic Religion and Suspension of the Laws abovenamed, I Charles
Prince of Wales Promise and take upon me, in the word of a King, that the
things above-promised and treated concerning those matters shall take effect
and be put in execution as well in the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, as of
England.

The Privy Councillors Oath, says the same Author, was this.

I A. B. do Swear that I will truly and fully observe as much as belongs to
me all and every the Articles which are contained in the treaty of Marriage
between the most Gracious Charles Prince of Wales and the most Gracious Lady
Donna Maria Infanta of Spain: Likewise I Swear that I will neither commit to
Execution nor Cause to be Executed by my self or any inferior Officer serving
me, any Laws against any Roman Catholics whatsoever, nor will execute any
punishment inflicted by those Laws, but in all things which belong to me will
faithfully observe, his Majesty's word given on that behalf.]

I have recited this to show that the Papists deceive Foreigners, when they
tell them that they lived here under cruel Persecution. And yet let none think
that the King turned Papist: For all this was on condition of the Spanish Match
which was broken: And the King well knew that the Parliament would never
consent to it.

But his own words may satisfy us in this: For, says Rushworth, [The King
called a Parliament 1623. (when the Match was broken) and says to them, [It
has been talked of my remisness in maintenance of Religion, and suspicion of a
Toleration: But as God shall judge me, I never thought nor meant, nor ever in
word expressed any thing that savoured of it.] But the stinging Petition
against the Papists (as the King called it) which this Parliament offered him
showed still what they were against.

If the Papists say these Articles frustrate prove no forbearance of Severities
against us; Rushworth answers them saying, page 156. of the French Match, [In
November. the Articles were Sworn to by King James, Prince Charles, and the
French King. The Articles concerning Religion were not much short of those for
the Spanish Match.] And page 173. [That the English Catholics should be no
more searched after, nor molested for their Religion.]

5. And they have the less reason to accuse the King of Cruelty, or yet to
report that he was in Heart a Papist, when he rather endured their displeasure
than he would turn to them, and yet endured the disgust both of the Churchmen
and Parliament than he would lay by his Clemency toward them. The Commons,
says Rushworth page 213. An. 1625. censured Mr. Ri. Montague for endeavoring
to reconcile England and Rome and to alienate the Kings Affections from his
well-affected Subjects.

And the A. Bishop Abbot wrote this Letter to the King.

May it please your Majesty,
I have been too long silent, and am afraid by my silence I have neglected the
Duty of the place it has pleased God to call me to, and your Majesty to place
me in. But now I humbly crave leave I may discharge my Conscience toward God,
and my Duty to your Majesty: And therefore I beseech you freely to give me
leave to deliver my self, and then let your Majesty do with me what you please.
Your Majesty has propounded a Toleration of Religion. I beseech you take into
consideration what your Act is, what the consequence may be. By your Act you
labor to set up the most and Heretical Doctrine of the Church of Rome, the
Whore of Babylon: How hateful it will be to God, and grievous to your good
Subjects the Professors of the Gospel, that your Majesty who has often
Disputed and Learnedly Written against those Heretics, should now show your
self a Patron of those wicked Doctrines, which your Pen has told the World,
and your Conscience tells your self, are Superstitious, Idolatrous, and
Detestable. And hereunto I add, what you have done in sending the Prince into
Spain, without the consent of your Council, and Privity and Approbation of your
People: And though you have a Charge and Interest in the Prince as Son of your
Flesh, yet have the people a greater as Son of the Kingdom, upon whom next
after your Majesty are their Eyes fixed and their welfare depends. And so
tenderly is his going apprehended, as (believe it) however his return may be
safe, yet the Drawers of him into this Action, so dangerous to himself, so
desperate to the Kingdom, will not pass away unquestioned, unpunished. Besides
this Toleration which you endeavor to set up by your Proclamation, cannot be
done without a Parliament, unless your Majesty will let your Subjects see that
you will take to your self ability to throw down the Laws of your Land at your
pleasure: What dreadful consequents these things may draw afterward, I beseech
your Majesty to consider: And above all, lest by this Toleration
discountenancing the true Profession of the Gospel, wherewith God has blessed
us, and this Kingdom has so long flourished under it, your Majesty do not draw
upon this Kingdom in General and your self in particular Gods heavy wrath and
indignation. Thus in discharge of my Duty toward God, and your Majesty, and
the place of my Calling, I have taken humble leave to deliver my Conscience.
Now Sir do what you please with me.


Thus you see what difficulties the King went through to avoid all show of
Cruelty to the Roman Sect; when at the same time the Canons Excommunicated
Protestants that affirmed any thing to be unlawful in the Liturgy, Ceremonies,
or Church Government, and the Laws were in force against them.

Chap. IV. Of the Papists Endeavors in the time of King Charles the First, and
the great wrong they did him.
. 1. THE same method they still continued, 1. In vain they subtly labored to
have perverted the King. 2. And then pretended their great sufferings to
procure Indulgence. 3. And secretly gave out that the King was for them, to
draw on others that they thought would be still of the Kings Religion.

2. When he was in Spain the Bishop of Couchen a Trained Veterane, and Head of
the Inquisition was chosen to take the charge of laboring his Conversion, and
Carolus Boverius wrote to him that Book for Church Monarchy, which is now
extant: And the Pope wrote to him an insinuating Letter; to which this answer
as returned by the Prince is recorded by Prin as out of Mr. De Chesne the King
of France his Geographer, and by the Caballa of Letters, and by Rushworth, who
says the Latin Copy was preserved by some then in Spain at the Treaty, and
this following in the Caballa is but an ill Translation of it.

Most Holy Father,
I received the dispatch from your Holiness with great content, and with that
respect which the Piety and Care wherewith your Holiness writes does require.
It was an unspeakable pleasure to me to read the generous Exploits of the Kings
my Predecessors, in whose Memory Posterity has not given those Praises and
Elogies of Honor as were due to them. I believe that your Holiness has set
their Examples before my Eyes to the end I might imitate them in all my
Actions: For in truth they have often exposed their Estates and Lives for the
Exaltation of the Holy Chair. And the Courage wherewith they have assaulted the
Enemies of the Cross of Jesus Christ, has not been less than the Care and
Thought which I have to the End that the Peace and Intelligence which has
hitherto been wanting in Christendom might be bound with a true and strong
Concord. For as the common Enemy of Peace still watches to put hatred and
dissension among Christian Princes, so I believe that the Glory of God requires
that we should endeavor to unite them. And I do not esteem it a greater honor
to be descended from so great Princes, than to imitate them in the Zeal of
their Piety. In which it helps me very much to have known the mind and will of
our thrice honored Lord and Father, and the Holy Intentions of his Catholic
Majesty, to give a happy concurrence to so laudable a Design. For it grieveth
him exceedingly to see the great evils that grow from the Divisions of
Christian Princes, which the Wisdom of your Holiness foresaw, when it judged
the Marriage which you pleased to design between the Infanta of Spain and my
self to be necessary to procure so great a good. For it is very certain I shall
never be so extremely affectionate to any thing in the World, as to endeavor
alliance with a Prince that has the same apprehension of the true Religion
with my self. Therefore I entreat your Holiness to believe that I have been
always very far from Novelties, or to be a partizan of any Faction, against the
Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion. But on the contrary I have sought all
occasions to take away the suspicion that might rest upon me. And that I will
employ my self for the time to come to have but one Religion and one Faith;
seeing we all believe in one Jesus Christ: Having resolved in my self, to spare
nothing that I have in the World, and to suffer all manner of discommodities,
even to the hazarding of my Estate and Life for a thing so well pleasing to
God: It rests only that I thank your Holiness for the permission you have
pleased to afford me. And I pray God to give you a Blessed Health, and his
Glory after so much pains which your Holiness takes in his Church. Signed,

Charles Steward.


3. Read Rushworth's Copy p. 82, 83. whether is most current I know not, but
this much shows that the Papists complaint of cruel usage here is unjust. And
lest any believe them that say King Charles was at the Heart a Papist, let them
note, 1. How many and strong temptations he frustrated. 2. That when he wrote
this he was in their power. 3. That here is no promise to subject himself to a
Foreign Jurisdiction, but to endeavor Peace and Concord; which may better be
by drawing the Papists to us, than by coming to them. The truest Adversaries to
Popery are the greatest Lovers of true Concord and Peace.

4. All the lenity that was showed them after here, and the agency of Panzani,
Con. etc. I pass by, lest my recital be misunderstood. The Reader may see
enough if not too much in Rushworth, and in Prin's Introduction, etc. I only
add that this King who was so Zealous for Concord, and that overcame so many
Temptations to Popery distant and in his Bosom, and was so firm as not to fear
to grant them the audience promised, yet was so much against all cruelty to
them, that he suffered very much for his Lenity and Clemency to them, both from
themselves and from the Protestants. But the most odious injury that ever they
did him, was by pretending his Commission for that most inhumane War and
Massacre in Ireland; when in time of peace they suddenly Murdered two hundred
thousand, and told Men that they had the Kings Commission to rise as for him
that was wronged by his Parliament; the very fame of this horrid Murder, and
the words of the many Fugitives that escaped in Beggary into England (assisted
by the Charity of the Duchess of Ormond and others) and the English Papists
going in to the King was the main cause that filled the Parliaments Armies: I
well remember it cast people into such a fear that England should be used like
Ireland, that all over the Countries, the people often sat up, and durst not go
to Bed, for fear lest the Papists should rise and Murder them. And this is all
that the Papists have yet got by their Bloody Cruelty, to necessitate people in
fear to take them for their Mortal Foes. Bishop Morley says in his Letter to
the Duchess of York p. 6, 7. That by raising and spreading malicious and
scandalous reports against the King that he was a Papist and intended to bring
in Popery, on that account only they raised many thousands against him, without
whose assistance they could never have overpowered him, and oppressed him as
they did: And the success they had thereby against the Father, encouraged them
to make use of the same Engine against his Son, by giving it out that the King
by living so long abroad in Popish Countries was so corrupted in his Religion,
that if he were suffered to return, he would bring in Popery along with him. So
that with this groundless fear I found many considerable and very much
interested Persons possessed when I was sent into England, about two Months
before the Kings return; most of which time I spent in undeceiving all I met
with, especially the Heads and Leaders of the Presbyterian and Independent
Parties, (who seemed to be most afraid of such a Change) by assuring them that
those misreports they had heard of the King and his Brothers were nothing else
but the malicious Inventions of those that were in fact or consent the
Murderers of his Father -- For to my certain knowledge (said I) who was almost
always an Eyewitness of their actions, the King and both his Brothers, etc.]

And he was confident that this was the case of the Duchess of York, and that
the Papists falsely gave it out that she was theirs to draw people to them.

And what then could have been more injurious to King Charles the First, than
this boast and report of the Irish Murderers. By which they would make him to
have so dreadfully begun; for the rebellion was October. 23. 1641. and Edgehill
Fight the same day 1642. And hereby they have given the Scots occasion to
publish to posterity these Scandalous words in their Books against the
Cromwellians called, Truth its Manifest, printed 1645. page 17, 19. [The King
seeing he was stopped by the Scots first in their own Country, next in
England, to carry on his great design takes the Irish Papishs by the hand
rather than be always disappointed, and they willingly undertake to levy Arms
for his Service, that is, for the Romish Cause, the Kings design being
subservient to the Roman Cause, though he abused thinks otherwise, and believes
that Rome serves to his purpose: But to begin the work they must make sure of
all the Protestants, if they cannot otherwise by Murdering and Massacring them
-- p. 19. The next recourse was to the Irish Papists, his good Friends, to whom
from Scotland a Commission is dispatched under the Great Seal (which Seal was
at that instant time in the Kings own Custody) of that Kingdom to hasten
according to former agreement, the raising of the Irish in Arms who no sooner
receive this new Order but they break out, etc.] And I am not willing to
believe this.

A report so dishonorable to the King, his Life, his Arms, his Death, and to
all that fought for him, that the Fifth Commandment forbids us to believe it,
though the Scots should say, They saw the Sealed Commissions: Yea though I had
seen them my self; seeing it is possible for the Irish to Counterfeit the Scots
Broad Seal.

But by this it appears what wrong the King had by the Irish boasting of his
Commission, and the Papists pretending to more countenance than he gave them.

4. And as the said R. Bishop of Winchester was confident they slandered the
Duchess of York in her Life, so he conjectureth that the Jesuit Maimbrough
has done since her death, and that some of them devised the Confession which
he printeth as hers, which he professes to be false as to the accusation of
himself. The words of Maimbrough translated are these.

A Declaration of the Duchess of York, translated out of Maimbourg's Histoire
du Calvinisme.
A Person Educated in the Church of England, and as much instructed in her
Doctrine (according to the Opinion of the most able Divines of her Party) as
her Condition and Capacity could admit, ought to expect to be the Object of
public censure, when she quits her Religion to embrace that of the Church of
Rome. And as I freely confess that I have been one of her greatest Enemies, if
not in effect at least in will, I have thought it reasonable, that for the
satisfaction of my Friends, I should declare the Motives and Reasons of my
Conversion, and of the so sudden and unexpected change of my Religion, yet
without engaging my self in the Questions and Objections which might be made on
this Occasion.

I Protest in the presence of Almighty God, that since my return into England,
no Person whatsoever, has directly or indirectly, persuaded me to embrace the
Catholic Religion: It is a favor which I owe to the alone Mercy of God; I
dare not even think that the Prayers which I have made him every day since my
return from France and Flanders, to beg of him to discover to me the Truth have
obtained for me.

It is very true, that having seen the Fervor and the Devotion of the
Catholics of those Countries, and feeling that I had none of it, or very
little, I have never ceased since that time to ask of God the Grace, that if I
were not of the true Religion, I might be so before I died.

Nevertheless I had not the least doubt but that the Belief of the Church of
England was the true, and I never had any scruple or trouble of Conscience on
this Occasion until November last, that I began to read Dr. Heylin's History of
the Reformation, which is much esteemed; and whereof the reading in the Opinion
of all the able Men of the Kingdom, is sufficient to free the Conscience from
all Scruples and Doubts which might arise about Religion. But for my part far
from finding in that History what was said of it, I found to the contrary that
by reading of it; it only made me see the most horrible Sacriledges that were
ever heard spoken of, and that it was not sufficient to satisfy an indifferent
understanding, nor to persuade it that we had the least foundation or
appearance of reason for changing the ancient Face of the Church, and
renouncing the Catholic Religion.

I noted in that History first, that Henry the Eighth quitted not the Communion
of the Church of Rome, nor opposed the Authority of the Pope; but because he
would not let him put away the Queen his Wife, to Marry another. 2. That King
Edward the Sixth being yet a Child, his Uncle who governed him abusing the
Royal Authority, which he had in his hand, enriched himself by appropriating to
himself and his Family the Lands and Goods of the Church. 3. That Queen
Elizabeth not being the lawful Heir of the Crown, could not keep the unjust
Possession which she had taken but by renouncing the true Church, because the
Purity and Rectitude of her Doctrine was not consistent with the Usurpation of
the Kingdom of Great Britain.

I could not conceive, much less believe, that the holy Spirit which governs
the true Church, should be the Author of the Three Points that I now noted,
which have been the only Foundation of the Subversion of the ancient Religion,
to favor the Licentiousness of Henry the Eighth, the Usurpation of Queen
Elizabeth, and the Ambition mixed with the extreme Avarice of the Uncle of
Edward the Sixth. Neither could I understand how the Bishops, who boast that
they had no other design ^n separating themselves from the Communion of the
Church of Rome, but to endeavor the re-establishing of the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Primitive Church, have not thought of this pretended
Reformation, but while Henry the Eighth attempted a Separation from the Roman
Church, that he might satisfy his guilty Pleasures.

All these Reflections having busied my Mind after the reading of that History,
I endeavored to ^nstruct my self in the Points controverted between ^s and the
Catholics: I examined them the most ^xactly that I could by the Scripture it
self, and though I thought not my self sufficient for under^tanding it well, I
found nevertheless some things which appeared to me so clear, so easy to be
un^erstood, that I have a thousand times wondered that I have been so long
without reflecting on them.

I was particularly and strongly convinced of the ^eal Presence of Jesus Christ
in the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, of the Infallibility of the Church,
Confession, and Prayer for the Dead. I was willing to confer of these Matters
by way of Discourse with the two most able Bishops that we ^ave in England, and
both confessed to me ingenuously, that there are many things in the Church of
Rome which it was to be wished that the Church of England had still observed,
as Confession, which it could not be denied but that God had commanded it, and
Prayer for the Dead, which is one of the most authentic and ancient Practices
of the Christian Religion; But as to themselves, they made use thereof in
private, without making public profession thereof.

As I pressed one of these Bishops upon the other Points of Controversy, and
principally on the real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Holy Sacrament of the
Altar, he answered me freely, That were he a Catholic, he would not change
Religion, but that having been educated in a Church in which he believed there
was all that was necessary to Salvation, and there having received his Baptism,
he thought he could not quit it without great Scandal.

All this Discourse served but to increase the ardent desire which I had to
become a Catholic, and I felt inward pains and horrible disquiets after the
Conversation I had with these two Bishops.

Nevertheless that I might not precipitate in an Affair of this Importance, and
where my Salvation was concerned, I endeavored to satisfy my self entirely. I
prayed God with all my heart to calm my troubled Mind by making me to know the
Truth, the search of which had caused my trouble. Being in this Condition, I
went at Christmas to the Kings Chapel to receive the Sacrament, which put my
Soul into new troubles, which continued till I discovered my state of Mind to a
Catholic, who to procure me the repose and tranquillity which I wished, caused
a good Priest to come to me, and he was the first Ecclesiastic, with whom I
conferred of my inward condition and the affairs of my Soul. The more I spoke
with him, the more I found my self inwardly persuaded and strengthened by the
Grace of the Holy Spirit to change Religion.

As I could not doubt of the truth of the words of Jesus Christ, which assures
us that the Holy Sacrament contains his Flesh and his Blood; I could not easily
believe that he who is truth it self, had permitted that the Communion under
one kind had been introduced into his Church, in which and with which he has
promised to dwell to the end of the World, if it suffices not for the
Salvation of them who communicate under one kind only.

To conclude, I am not able to enter into Dispute with any on these great
Truths, and though I were, I would not engage my self further than in a
Discourse of a few words, and without contesting to express simply the Motives
and Reasons of my Conversion.

I call God to witness, who knows the secret of Men's hearts, that I had never
thought of changing Religion if I had believed I might obtain Salvation by
continuing in the state I was by my Birth and Education, and I think it is not
necessary that I here declare that it was not Interest, nor prospect of Honors,
or of any fading and perishable Profits which have persuaded me thereunto,
seeing that on the contrary by changing Religion, I exposed my self to the
hazard of losing both my Friends and my Credit; and freely to confess the
truth, I considered and examined often, whether it was not more expedient for
me to keep my Friends, my Rank, and my Credit in the Court, by continuing in
the Exercise of the Religion of the Church of England, than quit all these
things in a view and hope of the good things of the life to come; but thorough
the Mercy of God, which inl^ghtens those that seek it, I felt no pain or
difficulty in making the choice I have. I shall only say that all my fear has
been, lest the poor Catholics of this Country should suffer much on the
occasion of my Conversion, and that God should nor give me the Grace to suffee
patiently with them the Disgraces and Afflictions of this Life to merit the
Eternal. At St. James the 8 th of August, 1670.

Postscript.
BUt since the first writing of this, the Public Matter of Fact has taught
the World how little Cause those that he calls the Heads of the Presbyterians
and Independants, or any others, had to believe Bishop Morley's confident
Testimony, of one or other; Or honest Mr. Gache's Letter to me, or the rest of
the French Letters published with it by Lauderdale. I cannot forget Dr.
Morley's words to my self in Jan. 1659. before King Charles II. came in, that
most on this side the Alps would join with the Church of England, were it not
for the blocks that Calvin had laid in the way; And this he knew by his
converse with them. But this Coalition was not to be our becoming Papists, (
quoad nomen) but France forsooth, if not Flanders too, would turn Protestants
(as they have done.)

I knew not when I writ this Book, 1. Of King James's Paper published as found
in King Charles the Second's Pocket, and the Testimonies that he died a Papist,
nor what was witnessed of his Engagement for them. 2. I knew not of what King
James the Second would after be and do. 3. I knew not of Archbishop Bramhall's
Letter, Printed by Dr. Parre in Archbishop Usher's Life, confidently assuring
Archbishop Usher, that on his certain Information, the Papists in 1647. got
into Cromwell's Army, and confederated with the Papists at Oxford in the King's
Army to have the King put to Death: And whether they sent beyond Sea for
Approbation, and obtained it.

Chap. V. The foreign Leaders of the English Conciliaters, who are for
introducing a foreign Jurisdiction.
. 1. THe horrid Confusions in the Roman Church by two and three Popes at once
(some Kingdoms cleaving to one, and some to another) constrained the Emperor
and diverse Princes to call a Council called General, for remedy. The Popes
being by this Council condemned and deposed, it could not be expected that they
should approve them and consent: so that the Council was necessitated (though
cross to late Custom) to declare their Power to be above the Popes, so far as
to judge and depose him if he deserve it: This way went the Councils of Pisa,
Constance, and Basil. But the Pope's Upholders still stuck to him, and said,
Parliaments may as well depose Kings. The Body cannot cut off the Head. And
Eugenius 4th, though condemned by the Council and deposed as a Heretic,
Simonist, Blasphemer, etc. kept Possession, and their Church succeeds him to
this day.

. 2. This opinion for the Church Diffusive represented in a Council being above
the Pope, was kept alive in Bohemia, France and other Countries, and in
Luther's time did much further his Reformation; by encouraging Princes and
People to disobey the Pope. And Luther at the first seemed to go but little
further: But afterward quite cast off the Pope, and denied all his Claim of
universal or foreign Jurisdiction.

. 3. Some that joined with Luther in reforming many Abuses, thought that the
whole World (or Church) must have one Humane Head or Governor in Religion, and
that we must not separate from subjection to the Pope, but only keep him to
govern by Church Canons, and not Arbitrarily, as being singulis major, but
universis minor. And so the Controversy came to be the same as between
Monarchs that will be above Law, and those that are limited by the Laws. The
Italians and some others are for the first; but the French and some others are
only for his limited Power. Of these in Luther's time were Erasmus, Julius
Pflug., Sidonius, Agricola, the Authors of the Interim, and Wicelius,
Cassander, Haffmeister, and after Fr. Baldwin, and diverse others. And in France
some excellent Lawyers, yet more moderate, as the Chancellor Mich. Hospitalius,
Thu^nus, and a great Party with them.

. 4. Joh. Gerson Chancellor, and a Member of the Council of Constance before
these, was so moderate (though he was for burning Hus and Jerome of Prague)
that in the great Point of the sufficiency of God's own Laws, he condemns
even most of these Moderators. I will insert his words in Sermon in die
Circumcisionis Domini habito Trasconae coram Papae (in the Pope's own hearing.)

[Schismatis praesentis sedationem invenire non sufficient leges humanae jam
conditae, nisi superior Lex Divina vivae and architectonica consulatur. Quod
forte non satis actum est usque in praesens: Obliget quod ait Dominus in Isaia,
Timuerunt me mandato hominum, and doctrinis; ideo ecce ego addam ut
admirationem faciam populo huic miraculo grandi and stupendo; Peribit enim
sapientia a sapientibus ejus, and intellectus prudentium ejus abscondetur: Ex
quo loco sumpsit Jesus illud improperium contra Pharisaeos quod irritum
faciebant mandatum Dei propter suas traditiones. Audirent utinam ista auribus
suis hi qui legem Evangelicam, legem Divinam cum professoribus suis deserentes,
humanis traditionibus incumbant toti, adeo ut ad superiorem legem illam oculos
attollere vel non valiant ex ruditate, vel nolint ex iniquitate, vel negligant
ex inerti segnitie, cum tamen rebus leges humanae non sufficient; prout in
schismate praesente compertum videtur; and ad Legis divinae radicem and
interpretationem Consultatio referatur, and secundum eam conscientia formetur
necesse est, Quid autem mali, quid periculi, quid Confusionis attulerit
contemptus sacrae Scripturae; utique SVFFICIENTIS PRO REGIMINE ecclesiae
Alioquin Christus fuisset Legislator imperfectus: Interrogetur experientia,
consideretur clerus, cui desponsari debuerat Sapientia quae de sursum est,
purifica and pudica; an ipse fornicatus est cum adultera illa meretricula,
sapientia terrena, animali, diabolica: Status insuper ecclesiae nonne factus
est totus brutalis and monstrosus? ubi coelum deorsum, hoc est, id quod
spirituale est, and terra sursum, spiritus serviens and caro dominans:
Principale accessorium, and accessorium principale; usque ad hoc ut quidam
delirare non dubitent quod per inventiones humanas etiam melius, quam per legem
divinam and Evangelicam regeretur: Quasi minus sit anima quam Corpus, and
spiritualis quam carnalis fructus: Haec assertio per meam fidem blasphema est;
nedum falsa. Evangelica quippe doctrina per suos professores dilatavit
Ecclesiam usque in Coelum, quam filii Agur exquirentes sapientiam quae de terra
est detruserunt usque in coenum: Et quod ex toto non corruerit est ex gratia
Dei and salvatoris nostri. Haec ego loquor eo liberius quia mihi Conscius sum,
non ex quaestu, non ambitu, non ad laudem propriam meae professionis, sed pro
assertione veritatis and utilit^^e publica haec dicere.

O happy England, if Protestants had been as much in this against Popery and
Error.

. 5. And here the Roman Deceivers and some peaceable Men of them, have joined
to draw us to them on Pretenses of Peace and Reconciliation. Some honest
peaceable Men have been destroyed by the rest for their Moderation. The
Learned Moderator that we have had, was M. Ant. de dominis Archbishop of
Spalato, whose Books de Republ. Eccles. are full of both Learning and Judgment,
and so moderate that I cannot call him a Papist: Though being enticed to Rome
again by flattery, he perished by their Cruelty.

What Leander was, I am not fully acquainted. Fr. de Sancta Clara alias
Davenport, was a real Papist, and designed on the pretense of Reconciliation to
draw us over to them; And has showed more acquaintance with Scotus and other
Schoolmen, than with the Protestants in his attempt to reconcile our Articles
to their Doctrine.

Dr. Morley Bishop of Winchester tells us, That in his Conference with the
Jesuit F. Darcy, he would have drawn him to them, by persuading him that they
are not unreconcileable but can abate us many things; P. 5. [The Father
replied, that perhaps we should not find them so stiff in all Points: for in
things of Positive and Ecclesiastical Constitution only, the Church might in
order to Christian Peace alter something which she had before Established; and
he doubted not but she would: And his Instances were, the Latin Service, the
Sacrament under one Species, and the Caelibate of Priests; But as for Matters
of Faith, they could not alter or abate any thing, instancing in the Point of
the Churches Infallibility.

And this is their ordinary Opinion, and yet they would not grant the Cup to
the Bohemians, and to this day the Churches Peace has not prevailed with them
for such Alterations as they say are in their Power.

What of this Kind they offered in the Treaty with Archbishop Laud we shall see
after.

The Book called The Catholic Moderator, goes this way.

But no man has attempted it with so much ability of Judgment and Success of
late as Hugo Grotius, in his Votum Pro Pace, Consultatio and Notes on
Cassander, his Annotations on the Revelations, and De Antichristo, and his
Writings against Rivet. The Dutch dealt hardly with him as an Arminian, and
Judged him to perpetual Imprisonment, (when they had not such another Man among
them) from which his Wife delivered him, getting him carried out in a Trunk, on
pretense of carrying from him his Arminian Books. And being escaped into France
he was intimate with the Learned Jesuits, especially Petavius, and made the
Queen of Sweden's Ambassador, who shortly after turned Papist, and is yet
living at Rome: And it is no censoriousness to suspect that his great
exasperation might have influence on his judgment.

And because he is the Man whom our English Defenders of a foreign Jurisdiction
own, I will next tell you what his late judgment was in his own words.

I confess I have a far greater honor for those Men that were bred in Popery
and are Moderators, than for those being bred Protestants revolt from
Reformation to a Coalition. I doubt not but Gerson, was a very holy Man:
Cassander seems to have been an excellent Pious learned Man: And I doubt
whether most of our nominal Protestants that are for a foreign Jurisdiction be
near so moderate as he. He often (as de Officio Pii Viri, p. 788, 789, etc)
makes the Church of Rome to be but a part of the Universal Church: He
maintains (that some called Schismatics, are not indeed departed from the
Church for departing from Rome, as long as they depart not from Christ the Head
of the Church: and that only defection of Love, and not diversity of Rites and
Opinions cuts Men off from Christ! And that as long as they are joined to
Christ the Head by sound belief of him, and by the Bond of Charity and Peace,
they are joined to the Church, and are not to be taken for Schismatics and
Aliens from the Church, though they be rejected and seem separated from their
Society and Communion, by another more powerful part of the Church, which does
obtain the Government. (How much more moderate and sound is Cassander, than
such as Mr. Dodwell.) And Page 791. he says the same of the Oriental Churches,
and the Ethiopians that are not under the Pope. And he still speaks so
cautelously, that it is not easy to understand how far he took the Papacy to
be necessary. Yet sometime he only excuses the unwilling departers from Rome,
and asserteth, Consult. de Pont. Romans p 931. That it is not alien from the
consent of the ancient Church, that Obedience to our Chief or Supreme Rector
the Successor of St. Peter in Governing and Feeding the Church, is required to
the Unity of this external Church: And it is not only Primacy of Order, but
Obedience to one Chief Ruler that he Pleads for. And in his Epistle to
Lindanus, and frequently he still professes only to desire some Reformation in
the Roman Church, but never to depart from it, nor own those that do.

Chap. VI. Grotius's Judgment in his own Words.
. 1. TO give you Grotius's Judgment to the full, would be to transcribe many
Books: I shall choose some plain Passages.

Discussione Apologet. Rivet. p. 255. Those that knew Grotius, knew that he
always wished for the restitution of Christians into one and the same Body. So
they are: even of that one Body of which Christ is Head.
But he sometime thought even after he was known to the most excellent Vairius,
that it might be begun by a Conjunction of the Protestants among themselves:
Afterward he saw that this was altogether unfeasible; because, besides that
the Genius of almost all the Calvinists is most alien from all Peace, the
Protestants are not joined among themselves by any common Government of the
Church, They are united in all the 7 terms of Unity required, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
They desire not to be of any Universal Body but Christ's, no more than under one
Monarch of the World.
which are the Causes that the Parties made cannot be gathered into one Body of
Protestants, yea and that more and more Parties are ready to rise out of them.
Wherefore Grotius now absolutely judges, and many with him, that the
Protestants cannot be joined among themselves unless at once they be joined to
them that cohere to the Sea of Rome, without which there can be no common
Government hoped for in the Church. Nor in Kingdoms neither under one Man or
Senate; But they have a better Union.
Therefore he wishes that the Division which fell out, and the Causes of that
Division were taken away. The Primacy of the Bishop of Rome according to the
Canons, is none of these, etc.

Ib. P. 185. Grotius professes that he will so interpret Scripture, God
favoring him, and Pious Men being consulted, that he cross not the Rule
delivered by himself, and by the Council of Trent, etc.

P. 239. The Augustane Confession commodiously explained has scarce any thing
which may not be reconciled with those Opinions which are received with the
Catholics by Authority of Antiquity and of Synods as may be known out of
Cassander and Hoffmeister. And there are among the Jesuits also that think not
otherwise.

P. 71. (The Churches that join with Rome have not only the Scriptures, but the
Opinions explained in the Councils, and the Popes decree against Pelagius, etc.
They have also received the egregious Constitutions of Councils and Fathers, in
which there is abundantly enough for the Correction of Vices: But all use them
not as they ought: And this is it that all the Lovers of Piety and Peace would
have corrected (as Borromaeus did.)

Page 18. Speaking of false Doctrine, [These are the things which, thanks be to
God, the Catholics do not thus believe, though many that call themselves
Catholics so live as if they did believe them. But Protestants (so live) (by
force of their Opinions, and Catholics by the decay of Discipline.

Page 95. What was long ago the judgment of the Church of Rome, the Mistress of
others, we may best know by the Epistles of the Roman Bishops to the Africans
and French, to which Grotius will subscribe with a willing mind.

Page 7. They accuse the Bull of Pius Quintus, that it has Articles besides
those of the Creed; but the Synod of Dort has more. -- But these in the Bull
are New as Dr. Rivet will have it. But very many Learned Men think otherwise,
that they are not new, if they be rightly understood, and that this appears
by the places both of Holy Scripture, and of such as have ever been of great
Authority in the Church, which are cited in the Margin of the Canons of Trent.

Page 35. And this is it which the Synod of Trent says, That in that Sacrament
Jesus Christ true God and truly Man, is really and substantially contained
under the form of those sensible things: Yet not according to the Natural
manner of existing, but Sacramentally, and by that way of existing, which
though we cannot express in words, yet may we by Cogitation illustrated by
Faith be certain that to God it is possible. (The Councils expressions are,
that [ There is made a change of the whole substance of the Bread into the
Body, and of the whole substance of Wine into the Blood; Which Conversion the
Catholic calls Transubstantiation.

Page 79. When the Synod of Trent says, That the Sacrament is to be adored
with Divine Worship it, intends no more, but that the Son of God himself is to
be adored.

Page 14. Grotius distinguishes between the Opinions of School men, which
oblige no Man, (for says Melchior Canus our Church allows us great liberty)
and therefore could give no just cause of departing (as the Protestants did)
and between those things that are defined by Councils.

Even by that of Trent: The Acts of which if any Man read with a mind propense
to peace, he will find that they may be explained fitly and agreeably to the
places of Holy Scripture and of the ancient Doctors that are put in the Margin.
And if besides this by the care of Bishops and Kings those things be taken away
which contradict that holy Doctrine, and were brought in by evil Manners, and
not by Authority of Councils or old Tradition, then Grotius and many more with
him will have that with which they may be content.]

Val. pro pace, That which he blames is. 1. The School-mens liberty of
disputing, and Opinions not agreeable to Councils. 2. And the Pride,
Covetousness, and ill Lives of the Prelates and others (which all sober Jesuits
and Papists blame.)

Page 16. That the labors of Grotius for the peace of the Church were not
displeasing to many equal Men, many know at Paris, and many in all France, many
in Poland, and Germany, and not a few in England, that are placid, and Lovers
of peace: For as for the now-raging Brownists and others like them, with whom
Dr. Rivet better agrees than with the Bishops of England, who can desire to
please them that is not touched with their Venom?]

And whereas you may find Grotius and his Adherents yet disclaiming Popery, and
saying, They are no Papists, he tells you his meaning, Ib. p. 15. [In that
Epistle Grotius by Papists meant those that without any difference do approve
of all the sayings and doings of the Pope, for Honor and Lucres sake as is
usual.]

By this description I suppose that many Popes even of late were no Papists,
such as condemned the Acts and Persons of their Predecessors, and such as
censured Liberius and Honorius, nor Adrian the sixth, that says a Pope may be
a Heretic; nor Baronius, Binnius, Genebrard, that exclaim against many of
them: Nor Bellarmine, nor Queen Mary, nor More or Fisher, nor Bonner, nor
Gardener, nor any that ever I met with.

But others more moderately call only those Papists that are for the Popes
Power above Councils: And so the French are none; nor the Councils of Constance
and Basil were none: Grotius adds p. 45. that By Papists he does not mean
them that saving the Rights of Kings and Bishops do give to the Pope or Bishop
of Rome that Primacy which ancient Customs and Canons, and the Edicts of
ancient Emperors and Kings assign them; which Primacy is not so much the
Bishops, as the Roman Churches preferred before all other by common consent. So
Liberius the Bishop being so lapsed that he was dead to the Church, the Church
of Rome retained its right and defended the Cause of the Universal Church.]

Ans. If it be a Primacy of Name and Honor only without any Governing Power,
it is nothing to our case. But seeing it is a Governing Primacy that he means, 1.
It Is against the right of Kings and Kingdoms, that Foreigners claim
Jurisdiction over them. 2. Emperors never gave Popes or Councils power over
other Princes Dominions, nor could give any such. 3. Nor did ancient Councils,
nor could do. Who gave it them? And who knows to what Councils he will limit
this power? Councils these thousand years have been for much of Popery. 4. If
Common Consent give this power, it binds not the Dissenters.

The Judgment of others concerning Grotius.

1. Vincentius wrote a Book called Grotius Papizans.

2. Claud. Saravius an Eminent Parliament Man in Paris in his Epistles, p. 52,
53. ad Gron. says, [Heri invisi Legatum -- De ejus libro and libello postremis
interrogatus respondet plane Mileterio consona: Romanam fidem esse veram and
sinceram, solosque clericorum mores degeneres schismati dedisse locum.
Adferebatque plura in hanc sententiam. Quid dicam? Merito quod falso olim Paulo
Festus, [(...), etc.] Sed haec tibi soli. Infensissimus est Riveto. Est sane in
praecipiti in quo diu stare non licet. Deploro veris lacrymis tantam jacturam:
Deumque ex animo supplex veneror ut illi spiritum suum mentemque meliorem det.

And in another Epistle to Salmasius p. 196. he says, being asked his Judgment
of his last Books, [Tantum abest ut omnia probem, ut vix aliquid in co
reperiocui sine condition calculum apponam meum. Verissime dixit ille qui
dixit Grotium papizare. Vix tamen in isto scripto aliquid legi quod mirarer,
quodve (...) occurreret. Nunquid enim omnes istiusmodi authoris lucubrationes
erga Papistarum errores perpetuam (...) and (...) erga Jesuitas amorem, erga
nos plusquam vatinianum odium produnt and clamant. In voto quod ejus nomen
praeferebat an veritus est haec (...) profiteri?

And how far he was familiar with Grotius he ^ells us p. 248. Ad Vincent.
Fabrit. [Cum eo nempe Communicaveram vel solebam mea fere omnia,] etc.

And what Salmasius thought of him these words of Saravius ad Salmas. intimate.

Ex quo a vera orbita in religionis negotio deflexit, captasti occasionem toto
biennio antequam sato fungeretur, eum illudendi, certe irritandi.

I have formerly said that worthy Mr. Ereskin yet living, (since dead) told me
that Petavius told him that Grotius was resolved to have declared himself for
the Church of Rome, and joined with them if he had returned safe from the
Journey he died in.

Henr. Valesius in his Funeral Oration on Petavius says, p. 684. Bates^i
Collect. [Quid non praestitit ut clarissimum Virum Hugonem Grotium ad
Catholica^ Communionem adduceret? Erat ille quidem minime a nobis alienus, and
poene noster, quippe qui doctrinan Tridentim Concilii in omnibus sese amplecti
palam profiteretur. Id unum supererat, ut Ecclesiae Sacrari^m ingressus
Communionem nostram Sociaretur. Quod ille nescio quas ob causas dum ad
Catholicae fidei umtatem plurimos secum sperat adducere Consulto differebat.

But I make no other men's, but his own words the Index of his Faith.

Chap. VII. Of the several sorts of Conciliators or Peacemakers about our
Controversies with the Papists.
1. IF any shall think that I who have spent so much time and labor for the
Churches peace, am now against it, or would raise dishonorable suspicions, on
any just endeavors to that end, they will utterly mistake me.

There are diverse sorts of Endeavors for peace with the Papists, by real
Protestants.

2. I. The old Conformists that prevailed against the Dissenters in Queen
Elizabeth's days, were for going no further from the Papists than they needs
must, lest they gave them occasion of accusation.

II. Since then many Men have taken notice that many of our Doctrinal
Controversies consist more in ambiguous words, and misunderstanding of each
other than most on either side imagine: And they have endeavored the lessening
of such Controversies by better Explications and stating of the Case: In this
kind Spalatensis and Bishop W. Forbes have done very Learnedly, but in some
things yielded a great deal too far. Camero, Amiraldus, Capellus, Testardus,
the Theses Salmurienses and Sed^nenses have done much: But no Man so much as
Lude Le Blank in his Theses, which he sent me his desire here to publish. To
these I adjoin my self, as (among many other Writings) in my Catholic Theology
and Methodus Theologiae I have openly and largely showed the World. And no
Censures have deterred me from this honest and necessary way of pacification.

III. But there are others that would on pretense of Peace take in many of
their Errors in Doctrine, Government and Worship; But yet are for no Foreign
Jurisdiction.

IV. But those that I now write against go further, and some under the Name of
a Prince, Patriarch, and the Principium Vnitatis Catholicae would come under
the Pope, some by pretense of the power of General Councils, or an Universal
College of all Bishops, and some by these and Patriarchs conjunct, would bring
us under a Foreign Jurisdiction, and contrive an Union on some French terms.
And would to this end let in abundance of corruptions in Discipline and Worship
on pretense of Obedience to the Canons of Councils. Yea some condemn those as
Schismatics, yea as in a state of Damnation who are not in these matters of
their mind. It is these that I am against.

3. While I oppose these, I still own my foresaid reconciling Books, and no
reproach of those that run into a contrary extreme shall ever drive me from the
true terms of Peace, nor to desire any cruelty against them, or any of their
Sufferings but what necessary defense (of Soul and Body) require: And though my
Exposition of the Revelation have offended many, upon far closer study of it
since, I am not less but more persuaded that Pagan Rome was Babylon, and that
John Fox (Martyrol. Vol. I. p. III. who took his Oath of a Divine Revelation to
him, which brought him to take the Pagan Empire for the Beast with Seven Heads
and Ten Horns, and to expound the Times and Thousand years accordingly) is much
to be regarded: But if I be uncertain of such points, I will rather suspend my
Judgment, than in uncertainty venture on any thing that is against Christian
Love and Peace. I hold Communion with the Romans in Christianity, though not in
Popery: I take all true Christians among them for Part of the Catholic Church
of Christ, though I take their pretended Catholic Church as Headed by the
Pope, for no Church of Christ at all, nor as Headed by any Usurping Humane Head
whatsoever.

Chap. VIII. The Doctrine of Archbishop Bromhall [in defense of Grotius in his
Book called, His Vindication of himself and the Episcopal Clergy from the
Presbyterian Charge of Popery, as managed by Mr. Baxter in his Treatise of the
Grotian Religion, I fiercely Prefaced by a Dignitary of the Church. ( Parker.)
1. I mean to give you his own words, and pass by his mistakes against my self.
Only saying, That it was not fairly done to affirm that I numbered him with the
Papists, or those that designed to bring in Popery, when I had no such words,
yea and praising him, excepted him from that number, only dissenting from his
too near approach: But whether he except himself, his words will best show.

2. Page 20, 21. he says, [I will endeavor to give some light what was the
Religion of Grotius: He was in affection a Friend and in desire a true Son of
the Church of England: And on his Death bed recomended that Church as it was
Legally Established to his Wife, and such other of his Family as were then
about him, obliging them by his Authority to adhere firmly to it so far as they
had opportunity. They that Record his death say that he died in Rostok in his
too hasty passage from Sweden toward is Wife then absent; Quistorpius Pastor
of Rostok being with him: Yet this Bishop knew Grotius: Who says true I know
not.


Page 81. [I know no Member of the Greek Church that give them (the Popes)
either more or less than I do. How much that is see in their Patriarch
Jeremias, and in the Council at Florence.


Page 82. To wave their last four hundred years determinations is implicitly
to renounce all the necessary Causes of this great Schism. And to rest
satisfied with their old Patriarchal Power and Dignity, and Primacy of Order
(which is another part of my Proposition, is to quit the Modern Papacy both
Name and Thing. The very worst of Popery was brought in by Hildebrand long
before four hundred years last: And he that can receive all that their Councils
brought in till 1256. need not stick at any of the rest save
Transubstantiation: We cannot obey the Pope as Patriarch and Universal Primate,
though he would quit the last four hundred years additions: Nor think this a
quitting Popery.


Page 84. In the first place if the Bishop of Rome were reduced from his
Universality of Sovereign Jurisdiction Jure Divino, to his Principium Vnitatis,
and his Court regulated by the Canons of the Fathers, which was the sense of
the Councils of Constance and Basil, and is desired by many Roman Catholics as
well as we. 2. If the Creed or necessary Points of Faith were reduced to what
they were in the time of the four first Ecumenical Councils according to the
Decree of the third General Council, Did the third tie us to the fourth?
admitting no additional Articles but only necessary Explications, and those to
be made by the Authority of a General Council, or one so General as can be
Convocated. That was well put in. But by whom Convocated?
And lastly, Supposing that some things from whence offense has been either
given or taken -- I say in case these three things were accorded -- whether
Christians might not live in an Holy Communion, and come in the same public
Worship of God, free from all Schismatical Separation of themselves one from
another, etc.

We have no Controversy with the Church of Rome about a Primacy of Order, but
a Supremacy of Power. Over Councils.
I shall declare my sense in four Conclusions. 1. That St. Peter had a fixed
Chair at Antioch, and after at Rome is a truth which no Man who gives any
credit to the Ancient Fathers and Councils can either deny or well doubt of.

2. That St. Peter had a Primacy of Order among the Apostles is the unanimous
voice, etc.

3. Some Fathers and Schoolmen who were no Sworn Vassals to the Roman Bishops
affirm that this Primacy of Order is affixed to the Chair of St. Peter's
Successors for ever, etc.

Page 107. They who made the Bishop of Rome a Patriarch were the Primitive
Fathers, not excluding the Apostles and Christian Emperors and Ecumenical
Councils: What Laws they made in this case we are bound to obey for Conscience
sake (till they be repealed lawfully) by virtue of the Law of Christ. Did
Christ make the Subjects of the Roman Emperors perpetual Lawmakers to other
Princes and all the World? Or to that Empire when it is dissolved?


Page 104. (To my Objection that all Protestants must then pass for
Schismatics that take not the Pope for Principium Vnitatis and Patriarch, etc.
he answers [still weaker and weaker: -- Must a Man quit his just right
because some dislike it? Their dislike is scandal taken; but the quitting of
that which is right for their satisfaction should be the scandal given: Whether
is the worse? 1. How are they forced to fall under the reproach of
Schismatics? If they be forced any way, it is by their own wilful Humors or
erroneous Conscience: Others force them not. 2. I would have him consider which
is worse and the more dangerous condition, for Christians to fall under the
reproach of Schismatics -- or to fall into Schism it self. Whosoever shall
oppose the just Power of a Lawful Patriarch lawfully proceeding is a material
Schismatic.]

Reader, I forbear confuting these things by the way, being now but on the
Historical relation of their Judgments. You see how great necessity (to avoid
Schism) they place in our subjection to a Foreign Jurisdiction. The
Confutation you shall have of all together.

Chap. IX. The Judgment of Archbishop Laud, as delivered by Dr. Heylin, and by
himself.
. 1. IN the Life of Archbishop Laud, Page 414, 415, 416, 412. [Touching the
Design of working a Reconciliation betwixt us and Rome, I find it charged on
him by another Writer ( Fuller Chapter Hist. lib. 11. p. 217.) who holds it as
unlawful to be undertaken, as it was impossible to be effected -- Answ. If it
be a Crime it is Novum Crimen of a New stamp, never coined before. -- As to the
Impossibility, many Men of Eminence for Parts and Piety have thought otherwise
-- ( Spalatensis and Sancta Clara are named as Reconcilers.) And if without
prejudice to the Truth, the Controversies might have been composed, it is most
probable that other Protestant Churches would have sued by their Agents to be
included in the Peace. If not, the Church of England had lost nothing by it, as
being hated by the Calvinists, and not loved by the Lutherans.

Admitting then that such a Reconciliation was endeavored betwixt the Agents
of both Churches, Let us next see what our great Statesmen have discoursed upon
that particular, on what terms the Agreement was to have been made, and how far
they proceeded in it. And first, the Book entitled, The Pope's Nuntio,
affirmed to have been written by the Venetian Ambassador at his being in
England does discourse thus: As to a Reconciliation, says he, between the
Churches of England and Rome, there were made some general Propositions and
Overtures by the Archbishop's Agents, they assuring that his Grace was very
much disposed thereto: and that if it was not accomplished in his Lifetime; it
would prove a work of more difficulty after his Death; that in very truth for
the last three Years the Archbishop had introduced some Innovations,
approaching nearer the Rites and Forms of Rome: That the Bishop of Chichester,
a great Confident of his Grace, the Lord Treasurer, and Eight other Bishops of
his Grace's Party, did most passionately desire a Reconciliation with the
Church of Rome. That they did day by day recede from their ancient Tenets to
accommodate with the Church of Rome. That therefore the Pope on his part ought
to make some Steps to meet them, and the Court of Rome remit something of its
rigor in Doctrine, or otherwise no accord would be. The Composition on both
Sides in so good a forwardness before Pauzani left the Kingdom, that the
Archbishop and the Bishop of Chichester had often said that there were but two
sorts of People like to hinder the Reconciliation, the Puritans among the
Protestants, and the Jesuits among the Catholics.

Let us see the Judgment and Relation of another Author in a Gloss or Comment
on the former, entitled, The English Pope, Printed at London the same Year
1643. And he will tell us that after Con had undertook the managing of Affairs,
the Matter began to grow toward some Agreement. The King required, says he,
such a Dispensation from the Pope, as his Catholic Subjects might resort to
the Protestant Church, and take the Oaths of Supremacy and Fidelity; and that
the Pope's Jurisdiction should be declared to be but of Human Right. And so far
had the Pope consented, that whatsoever did concern the King, should have been
really performed so far as other Catholic Princes do usually enjoy and expect
as their due: and so far as the Bishops were to be Independent both from King
and Pope. There was no fear of breach on the Pope's part: So that upon the
Point the Pope was to content himself with us in England, with a Priority
instead of a Superiority over other Bishops, and with a Primacy instead of a
Supremacy in these parts of Christendom: which I conceive no man of Learning
and Sobriety would have grudged to grant him: It was also condescended to in
the Name of the Pope, that Marriage might be permitted to Priests, that the
Communion might be administered sub utraque specie, and the Liturgy be
officiated in the English Tongue; And though the Author adds not long after
that it was to be suspected that so far as the inferior Clergy and the People
were concerned, the after-performance was to be left to the Pope's discretion,
yet this was but his own suspicion without any ground at all. And to obtain a
Reconciliation on these Advantages, the Archbishop had all the reason in the
world to do as he did, in ordering the Lord's Table to be set where the Altar
stood, and making the accustomed reverence in all approaches toward it and
accesses to it, and in beautifying and adorning Churches, and celebrating
Divine Service with all due Solemnities: in taking Care that all offensive and
exasperating Passages should be expunged out of all such Books as were brought
to the Press; and for reducing the extravagancy of some Opinions to an evener
temper. His Majesty had the like reason also for tolerating lawful Recreations
on the Sundays and Holidays, the rigorous restraint whereof had made some
Papists think (those most especially of the vulgar sort whom it most concerned)
that all honest Pastimes were incompatible with our Religion. And if he
approved auricular Confession and showed himself willing to introduce it into
the use of the Church, as both our Authors say he did, it is no more than what
the Liturgy commends to the care of the Penitent (though we find not the word
Auricular in it) and what the Canons have provided for in the point of security
for such as shall be willing to Confess themselves. But whereas we are told by
one of our Authors that the King should say, he would use force to make it be
received, were it not for fear of Sedition among the People; yet it is but in
one of our Authors neither, who has no other Author for it, but a nameless
Doctor. And in the way to so happy an Agreement (though they all stand accused
for it by The English Pope, p. 15) Sparrow may be excused for Pleading for
Auricular Confession, and Watts for Penance, Heylin for Adoration toward the
Altar, and Mountague for such a qualified Praying to Saints as his Book
maintains against the Papists.

If you would know how far they had proceeded toward this happy
Reconciliation, the Pope's Nuntio will assure us thus: That the Universities,
Bishops and Divines of this Realm, did daily embrace Catholic Opinions, though
they professed not so much with Pen or Mouth for fear of the Puritans. For
example, they held that the Church of Rome is a true Church, that the Pope is
Superior to all Bishops; that to him it pertains to call General Councils;
that it is lawful to Pray for the Souls of the Departed; that Altars ought to be
erected of Stone; In sum, that they believed all that is taught by the Church,
but not by the Court of Rome. Another of their Authors tells us, that those
among us of greatest Worth, Learning and Authority began to love Temper and
Moderation, that their Doctrines began to be altered in many things, for which
their Progenitors forsook the visible Church of Christ: As for example, The
Pope not Antichrist, Prayers for the Dead, Limbus Patrum, Pictures, that the
Church has Authority in determining Controversies of Faith, and to interpret
Scripture; About Free Will, Predestination, Universal Grace, that all our Works
are not Sins; Merit of good Works, inherent Justice, that Faith alone does not
justify; Charity to be preferred before knowledge; the authority of
Traditions; Commandments possible to be kept; that in Exposition of Scripture
they are by Canon bound to follow the Fathers; And that the once fearful Names
of Priests and Altars are used willingly in their Talk and Writings,] In which
Compliances, so far forth as they speak the truth (for in some Points, through
Ignorance of the one, and Malice of the other, they are much mistaken) there is
scarce any thing which may not well consist with the established (though for a
time discontinued) Doctrine of the Church of England, the Articles whereof, as
the same Jesuit has observed, seem patient or ambitious rather of some sense,
wherein they may seem Catholic* And such a sense is put upon them by him that
calls himself Franciscus a Sancta Clara, as before was said. And if upon such
Compliances as those before, on the part of the English, the Conditions offered
by the Pope might have been Confirmed, who sees not that the greatest benefit
of the Reconciliation must have redounded to this Church, to the King and
People. His Majesty's Security provided for by the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, so far as it concerned his Temporal Power, And Men taught to be
Perjured, by taking in Foreign Ecclesiastical Power.
The Bishops of England to be Independent on the Pope of Rome. And yet Obey his
Councils Canons.
The Clergy to be permitted the use of Marriage, the People to receive the
Communion in both Kinds, and all Divine Offices officiated in the English
Tongue; no Innovation made in Doctrine, but only in qualifying some
Expressions, and discharging some Outlandish Glosses that were put upon them:
And seeing this, what Man could be so void of Charity, so uncompassionate of
the Miseries and Distractions of Christendom, as not to wish from the very
bottom of his Soul that the Reconciliation had proceeded on so good terms; as
not to magnify the Men to succeeding Ages, who were the Instrument Authors of
so great a Bles^ing. Christ has given us a sufficient Law for the Government
of the Church; else, says Gerson, he were not a perfect Lawgiver: Must we be
beholden to the Pope for leaving us a little of that which Christ gave us? Who
gave him Power to take any of it from us? Would our Conciliators have magnified
the Men that for the Peace of England would have agreed with Cromwell to allow
the King the Isle of Wight, or W^les* Or to have made a Law that every Highway
Robber shall re^urn ^ne half to the Owner? And with what Conscience could the
Subjects of Christ have obeyed all the rest of the Usurpers sinful Canons?
So far Dr. Heylin, who was the Archbishop's Intimate and Agent.

Archbishop Laud's own words as laid down in his Book defended by Dr.
Stillingfleet.
1. The Archbishop disclaimeth the Divine Institution and the Infallibility of
General Councils: But he thinks we must allow them [external Obedience; and
that honor and privilege which all other GREAT COURTS have; that there be a
Declaration of the invalidity of their Decrees, as well as of the LAWS of other
Courts, before private Men can take Liberty to refuse Obedience. Part. 3. c. 2.

And page 540. It does not follow because the Church may err, that therefore
she may not govern. For the Church has not only a Pastoral Power to Teach and
Direct, but a Praetorian Power to control and censure too, where Errors and
Crimes are against fundamental Points, or of great Consequence.] Thus the
Archbishop.

It is the Universal Church and Councils that he speaks of. But, 1. There is no
such thing on Earth as he calls the Church, that is, One Universal Aristocracy
that has Power of Governing all the Christian World in one Council or
otherwise, as one Supreme.

2. General Councils of diverse Kingdoms over all the World, are no more a Court
than the Assembly at Nimeguen was.

3. No Obedience is due to them, but only consent for Concord, so far as their
Canons tend to true Concord, and that by virtue of Christ's Law, for Peace and
Concord. Obedience has no formal Object but Authoritatem Imperantis; But
Assemblies for Concord have no Imperium.

4. No Clergyman as such has any but Pastoral and Teaching Power, and as a
Tutor to order his own School. The Power of the Keys is no other.

5. Men's holding and renouncing of Communion with other Persons or Churches may
be without Governing Power. I am not Governor of all that I hold or renounce
Communion with. No Bishops have power Judicially to determine of Individuals,
who shall have Communion with every Parish Church on Earth: If they have, they
must hear them all speak for themselves before they judge them (in or out.)
They are not Governors of foreign Kings and Kingdoms, though in their
Government of their particular Churches they must all agree to observe one
Rule, that is, Christ's Laws.

6. There never was an Universal Council of all the Churches, but only of one
Empire (a part of that) nor ever will be, till the Church be so destroyed as to
be brought into a narrow space (which God forbid).

As to Dr. Stillingfleet's Defense of all this, I take him not to approve of
all that he blames not: And if he did, I believe on second thoughts he will
more retract this than* he did his Irenicon.

Chap. X. Dr. Peter Heylin's own Judgment.
. 1. BEcause we come newly from repeating Dr. Heylin's words of Archbishop
Laud, though they fully show his own Judgment, I will ^^ere annex some more.

1. There is a Book written by a Papist, called Historical Collections of the
Reformation, gathered most out of Dr. Heylin's own words (and some ^ut of
others) describing the Reformers and Reformation so odiously, as greatly
serves the Priests to turn Protestants to their Church: And ^s the Jesuit
Maymbourgh makes Dr. Heylin's Writings to have Converted the late Duchess of
York, it is like it was this Collection out of him.

2. In his Book on the Creed, speaking of the Catholic Church, he says,

Page 407. Such is the Ambition of the Pope of Rome, that unless he may be
taken for the Catholic Church, he passes not for being reckoned a Church at
all: And yet this is of the two the Lovelier Error. Better the Church be all
Head, than no Head at all: And such a Church that is all Body and no Head at
all have some of our Reformers modelled in their late Platforms.].

Answ. Is Christ no Head at all? Or is any other Person or Court capable of
Governing all Christians on Earth? All Protestants hold that the whole Church
has no Head but Christ.

Page 408. Speaking still of the Catholic Church he says [The Government of
the Church not being Monarchical, as our Masters of the Church of Rome would
have it, nor Democratical as the Fathers of the Presbytery, and Brethren of the
Independency have given it out, both in their Practice and their Platform, it
must be Aristocratical.

Answ. This is a gross Slander of the Presbyterians and Independents. Did ever
the Presbyterians or Independents say, that All Christians on Earth must Govern
the whole Church* in one Meeting* or by Delegates? where be the Laws that any
of them pretend all Christians made? Or the Judgments they past on any Persons
after exploration? The Presbyterians are for an Aristocratical Government of
National Churches, and some few Independents are for popular Government in
single Congregations; but no further.

2. Is the Church now Governed by One Aristocracy, that is, per Optimates that
are One Persona Politica by Vote ruling all the Christian World? Where is their
Meeting? What be their Laws? Whom do they so try and judge? An Universal
Governing Aristocracy is more impossible and irrational than an Universal
Monarchy Civil or Ecclesiastical. Every Bishop and Presbytery Governing his own
Church, and these keeping Concord by just Correspondency, is no liker an
Universal Aristocracy, than an Assembly of Princes for Concordant Government of
their Dominions, or than all the Mayors and Justices ruling their several
Corporations and Provinces make the Government of England Aristocratical.

Page 409. Says he, [Every Bishop, wherever he be fixed and resident, has
like St. Paul an universal Care over all the Churches, which since they could
not exercise by personal Conferences, they did it in the Primitive times,
before they had the benefit of General Councils, by Letters, Messengers, and
Agents for the Communicating of their Counsel, and imparting their Advice one
to another as the emergent Occasions of the Church did require the same. These
Letters they called Literas formatas and Communicatorias.

Answ. Thus Bishop Gunning and others. But, 1. St. Paul's Apostolic Power
enabled him to do the Work of an Apostle (which is, to plant Churches in as
much of the World as they could, and deliver them Christ's Doctrine and Laws
infallibly as receiving them by sight and hearing or miraculous revelation.)
And this Power each Apostle could exercise singly, and not only by Voting as
part of a College; the Spirit of Christ teaching them all the same Doctrine.
But Bishops have no such Office or Power.

2. There are several ways of expressing a Care of all the Churches. Every
Christian must do it by private Endeavors. Every Official Preacher by
Preaching where he is called. Every Pastor by guiding his Flock in Concord with
all true Christians, in the things which Christ has made necessary to their
Concord: And if Archbishops have right to a larger Province, they must do it in
their proper Province, per parts, and not as one Aristocracy.

3. It is granted, that as all Christians and Bishops must have a Love to all
the Churches, and a Care to do them good in their several Places, so Concord in
things necessary is a great means of that good, and the ancient Pastors
endeavored it by Messages, Letters and Synods; and so must we. But what
Universal Laws were made by Literae formatae? What formal Judgments were past
by them? Where did the Writers meet first to hear the Accused and examine
Witnesses? Or must all believe the report of every single Pastor? And was it
all the Bishops on Earth, or a major part, that wrote these Legislative and
Judicial Letters? What strange things can some Men gather from mere Communion
and Concord? Bishops had then a Necessity of getting the common consent of as
many of their Order as they could, to make their Government of force to the
People, that were all Volunteers, and not constrained by any Magistrate? And
it is useful still to the same end.

4. And we grant them that every Bishop and Presbyter, that gives counsel to
other Churches does not do it as a mere private Man, but as a Bishop: that is,
One that by Office is authorized to give such Pastoral advice to such as he is
called to give it to; But not as one that has the charge of Governing other
Men's Flocks, or is a Member of an Aristocratical, Supreme Senate, Parliament,
Court, or Voting States. Suppose each Hospital have its allowed Physician, who
in doubtful Cases consulteth with many others; Their counsel is the counsel of
Physicians; that is, of Men licensed for that Work and Care: But it proves
them not to have any proper Governing Power over his Hospital or Patients.

5. If every Bishop be a Governor not only in, but of the whole World or
Church, it is either Singly, or Collectively as part of a Governing Company. If
singly, it is a monstrous Body that has so many thousand Universal Heads. If
collectively, then no one is a Supreme Governor, but a part of that Body which
is such. And no one on Earth can act as such a part of One Aristocracy, without
presence with the rest, hearing what they say, and what Actors and Witnesses
say, and gathering Votes.

Page 411. He confesses out of Socrates about the Emperors Power in Church
Matters, that [ from the time in which Emperors received the Faith, Ecclesiae
negotia ex eorum nutu pendere vis^ sunt Socr. l. 5. Proem.

And if so, why is Mr. Morice angry with me for saying, That Bishops used in
Councils much to follow the Emperors minds. 2. And then it will be but an odd
Universal Legislative and Judicial Sovereign Power over all the World, which
depends on the consent of so many Princes, Protestants, Papists, Mahometans
Heathens, Jacobites, Nestorians, etc. as a General Council must be called by or
depend on. And it will be an endless Controversy, what Princes have or have
not a Power to consent or dissent, that their Subjects shall go to such
Councils. But also Consultation, is not Government.

Chap. XI. The Judgment of Mr. Herbert Thorndike, a late Eminent Divine of the
Church of England.
1. MR. Thorndike has written so much on this Subject that I need no more than
refer the Reader to his Books, for the discovery of his mind. The sum of his
late Writings (these thirty years past) is to call us all into one visible
Catholic Church which is unified by one Humane Government of all, out of which
nothing will excuse us from Schism, or make our failing tolerable. His
arguments for an Universal Aristocracy answered by Dr. Izaak Barrow in the end
of his Treatise of Supremacy, I will not here recite, because they are there so
fully and learnedly confuted.

2. In his [ Just Weights and Measures] he tells us that the Church of Rome
being a true Church, Reformation lies in Restoration, and not in Separation.
Confusion. 1. The form denominateth: The Church of Rome which we separate from
is a pretended Sovereignty over all Christians. This is no true Church of
Christ. 2. But we separate not from them in point of Christianity. But 1. From
their Usurpation. 2. And other Sins.


Page 5. he says, [Who will take upon him to show us that the Worship of the
Host in the Papists is Idolatry.

Page 6, 7. They that separate from the Church of Rome as Idolaters are thereby
Schismatics before God.

For in plain terms we make our selves Schismatics by grounding our
Reformation on this pretense.

Should this Church declare that the Change which we call Reformation is
grounded on this supposition, I must then acknowledge that we are Schismatics.

Chapter 2. Is to disprove them that make the Pope Antichrist, and Papists
Idolaters, and show that the supposition of one Catholic Visible Church, is
the ground of all Communion and supposed to Reformation. And Chapter 3. Nothing to
be changed but on that Ground of such Visible Unity.

Chapter 5. If our Lord trust his Disciples and their Successors with the Rule of
his Church, he trusts them also to make Laws for the Ruling of it -- These
Laws are as Visible as the Laws of any Kingdom or Commonwealth that is or ever
was are Visible -- I maintain the Popes Canon Law (and the same is to be said
of the Canon Law, by which the Patriarch of Constantinople now Governs the
Eastern Church) to be derived from those Rules whereby the Disciples of our
Lord and their Successors governed the Primitive Church in Unity. -- The power
of Giving Laws to the Church; the power of Dispensing the Exchequer which God
has provided for the Church, are in the Governors of the Church; and the power
of admitting into and excluding out. It Is a Visible Society founded by God
under the Name of the Catholic Church, on the command of holding Communion
with it.

Page 41. The Church in the form which I state it is a standing Synod, able by
the consent of the Chief Churches, containing the consent of their resorts to
conclude the whole.

Page 48. The Church of Rome has and ought to have when it shall please to
hear reason, a Regular pre-eminence, over the rest of Christendom in these
Western parts. And he that is able to judge and willing to consider shall find
that Pre eminence the Only Reasonable means to preserve so great a Body in
Unity. And therefore I am not my self tied to justify Henry the Eighth in
disclaiming all such pre-eminence.

Page 48. That the difference may be visible between the Infinite and the
Regular Power of the Pope.

Page 91. The perpetual Rule of the Church makes them Heretics to the Church
that Communicate with Heretics and Schismatics that Communicate with
Schismatics. And having before made the Church of England Schismatics he
makes all Schismatics that Communicate with it.


Page 94. The Flesh and Blood of Christ by Incarnation, the Elements by
Consecration being united to the Spirit, that is, the Godhead of Christ, become
both One Sacramentally, by being both One with the Spirit or Godhead, to the
conveying of Gods Spirit to a Christian.

Page 125. The worshipping the Host in the Papacy is not Idolatry.

Page 132. He says that the Oath of Supremacy is but to exclude the Popes
Temporal power: But because the words seem to exclude the power of General
Councils, of which the Pope is and ought to be the chief Member, of necessity
the Law gives great offense: And that offense is the sin of the Kingdom, and
calls for Gods Vengeance on it; which though all are involved in the account in
the other World will lie on them, which may change it and will not.

Page 134. But the authority of those Divines of this Church who have declared
the sense of the Oath of Supremacy with public allowance are now alleged by
the Papists themselves to infer that the matter of it is lawful (as excluding
only the Popes Civil Power.)

Page 141. We receive the Body and Blood of Christ, and by consequence his
Spirit Hypostatically united to the same, to enable us to perform.

Page 149. The Church of Rome cannot be charged with Idolatry. The Pope cannot
be Antichrist.

Chapter 22. The Reformation pretended is abominable and Apostasy, and the usual
Preaching a hinderance to Salvation; and new Homilies to be formed to restrain
Preaching.

Page 146. I confess I can hope for no good end of any dispute without
supposing the sense of the Articles of One Catholic Church, which has carried
us through this discourse, for the Principle on which all matter in debate is
to be tried.

P. 214. And often he professes that Presbyters not ordained by Bishops, baptize
and give the Eucharist, void of the Effect of a Sacrament, and only by
Sacrilege -- speaks against killing and and banishing -- [But this will
require the like Moderation to be extended to the Recusants of the Church of
Rome, (p. 234.) The Recusants being for the most part of the Good Families of
the Nation, will take it for a part of their Nobility freely to profess
themselves in their Religion; if they understand themselves: Whereas the
Sectaries, being people of mean quality for the most part, cannot be presumed
to stand on their reputation so much.

In his Book called The Forbearance of Penalties, c. 3. p. 12, 13. he makes the
foundation of all Union to be the Government and Laws of the Church as visibly
Catholic, which Laws must be one and the same, the violating whereof is the
forfeiture of the same (Communion.) And here I crave leave to call All Canons,
All Customs of the Church, whether concerning the Rites of God's Service, or
other Observations, by one and the same name of Laws of the Church.

P. 23. As for the Canons of the Church, it was never necessary to the
maintenance of Commumunion that the same Customs should be held in all parts of
the Church. It was only necessary the several Customs should be held by the
same Authority. That the same Authority instituted several Customs; for so they
might be changed by the same Authority, and yet Unity remain.

Whereas questioning the Authority by questioning whether the acts of it be
agreeable to God's Law or not, how should Unity be maintained? It is manifest
that they (the Fathers) could not have agreed in the Laws of the Church, if any
had excepted against any thing used in any part of the Church, as if God's Law
had been infringed by it. -- It follows of necessity, that nothing can be
disowned by this Church as contrary to God's Law, which holds by the
Primitive Church. Here is 1. An Universal Legislative Power over all the Church
on Earth. 2. This Power is in Councils, of which the Pope is the chief Member;
and the only reasonable means of the Union of so great a Body, is his Regular
Power as distinct from Infinite Power. 3. All the Canons Rites and Customs, are
these Laws of the Church. 4. All Kings and Kingdoms are bound to obey them. 5.
No man must question whether these Laws or Customs, or any of them are contrary
to God's Law. 6. The men that must have this Absolute Power over all the Kings
and Kingdoms on Earth, that will be Christian, are themselves the Subjects of
the Turks, the Moore, the Emperor of Abassia, the Persian, the Emperor of
Indastan, called the Mogal, the Kings of Poland, Hungary, Spain, France,
England, Denmark, Sweden, the Emperor of Germany, and abundance more; when it is
known that few Bishops are chosen in any of these Countries Mahometans or
Papists, but such as the Princes like, and that they dare not go against their
wills in any great matter. 7. Their minds are known already, and consequently
what they would do in Councils, if all these Princes would agree to call an
Universal Council. The Major Vote, if it were called in Mesopotamia, or that
way would be such as Rome calls Heretics: If called in Greece it would be
Greeks: If in Italy, or Germany, or France, they would be Papists; no where
Protestants. Few would travel above a thousand miles to the Council. 8. Though
one would think that this platform of Governing the whole Earth, could be
believed by no man in his wits, yet you see Learned men are so far deceived:
And it is by judging of the World by the Old Roman Empire. There indeed
Councils were Nationally General: They were Courts: They had Legislative Power
and Pretorian Command: None might appeal from them for Relief in Foro Humano.
Emperors gave them this Power. It was but rational, over their own Subjects:
What Power had they over others? The Convocation in England, or the General
Assembly in Scotland may be made and called a Court by the King: But France or
Spain were never Governed by them, nor took them to be over them unquestionable
Legislators: Yea, I believe King and Parliament at home are not so subject to
their Laws.


Page 27. He says (as Mr. Dodwell) It is agreed on by the whole Church, that
Baptism in Heresy or Schism (that is, when a man gives up himself to the
Communion of Heretics or Schismatics by receiving Baptism from them) though
it may be true Baptism, and not to be repeated, yet it is not available to
Salvation, making him accessory to Heresy or Schism that is so Baptized. And
are not these unmerciful men that will let men take up with a damning Baptism,
and will not rebaptize them that they may have a saving Baptism, which yet they
hold necessary to Salvation? They fear Anabaptism it seems more than men's
Damnation.


Page 28. The promise of Baptism is not available, unless it be deposited with
the true Church, nor to him that continues not in the true Church that may
exact the promise deposited with it. The true Church that is an Usurped Power
of Universal Legislation, is here made by him and Mr. Dodwell as necessary to
Salvation as Christ, and more than the holy Scriptures. But what will now
become of all the Papists that (by dispensation) come in to Protestant
Churches? They also are all damned as Schismatics for communicating with them;
unless he forgot to except them that the Pope dispenses with.


Page 33. [It is out of love to the Reformation that I insist on such a
Principle as may serve to reunite us with the Church of Rome; being well
assured that we can never be well reunited with our selves otherwise. Yet not
only the Reformation, but the common Christianity must needs be lost in the
divisions, which will never have an end otherwise. How much wiser are these men
than Christ and St. Paul, who made it the duty of all that were baptized
Christians, to live as one Body of Christ in Love? Him that is weak in the
faith receive, but not to doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1. The Kingdom of God
is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
men.


Page 111. [If it be said that it is not visible where those Usurpations took
place, I shall allow all the time which the Code of the Canons contains, which
Pope Adrian sent to Charles the Great, page 128. which I would have this Church
to own. This yet is some mercy to us: But is it as your grant? 1. How will this
stand with all that you have written for the continued Universal Legislative
Church? Did it cease at Charles the Great's time? and yet are all damned that
are not subject to it? 2. How shall we be sure that the Canons bind us till
Adrian's time, and not since? 3. But Sir, we take him for a Papist that is for
all the Canons and Customs till Charles the Great: And there are many things
before that which we cannot Conform to without renouncing the Laws and
sufficient Government of Christ, which we cannot do upon such pitiful
reasonings as yours.


In Mr. Thorndike's large folio Book, there is yet much more for his Universal
Legislative Aristocracy mixed with Regular Papacy. The sum of all is, The Pope
Governing at least in the West by the Canons in the intervals of General
Councils (that is, always,) and as the chief Member with Councils making Laws
for all the World. Thus the French and Italian Papists differ whether the Pope
shall Govern the World as the King of Poland does his Land; or, say some, as
the Duke of Venice, or rather as the King of France. But Protestants know no
such thing as an Universal Legislative Church, nor owns any Universal Laws but
Gods; unless you mean Nationally Universal, as in the Empire Councils and Laws
were called. I refer you again to Dr. Barrows Confutation of the rest of Mr.
Thorndikes.

Chap. XII. The Judgment of Dr. Sparrow Bishop of Norwich, and diverse others.
BIshop Sparrow Pref. to Collect. [ As my Father sent me, so send I you. Here
committing the Government of the Church to his Apostles, our Lord Commissions
them with the same Power that was committed to him, for that purpose when he
was on Earth; with the same necessary standing Power that he had exercised as
Man for the good of the Church. The standing Power of the Head or Sovereign,
and that of Official Ministers much differ.
Less cannot in reason be thought to be granted, than all Power necessary for
the well and peaceable Government of the Church. And such a power is this of
Making Laws. All necessary power since Christ by his Apostles published his
Universal Laws, is but that all Ministers in their several Churches guide the
Flocks by these Laws of Christ, and teach them the people, and determine of
incidental Circumstances pro loco and tempore; and not to make new Universal
Laws.
This is a Commission in general for making Laws: Then in particular for making
Articles and Decisions of Doctrines controverted the power is more explicit
and express, Mat. 28. All power is given me: Go therefore and teach all
Nations, that is, with authority and by virtue of the power given me. And what
is it to teach the Truth with authority, but to command and oblige all people
to receive the Truth so taught? Christ expressly limiteth the Apostles to teach
the Churches what he had commanded them, and promises to give them the Spirit
to bring all to their remembrance, and lead them to all Truth.
And this power was not given to the Apostles persons only; for Christ then
promised to be with them in that Office to the end of the World; that is, to
them and their Successors in the Pastoral Office: To the Apostles or Bishops
that should succeed them to the end of the World. When the King send^ out
Judges and Justices he does not make them Kings or Legislators. The Apostles
had the Spirit for promulgating and recording Christ's Laws: Others have it only
to preserve and teach them, and rule by them, and not to make more such, as if
they were insufficient, and Christian Religion were still to be changed by new
additions, and were half Divine and half Humane: Gods Word and the Bishops in
medley.
To this One holy Church our Lord committed in trust the most holy Faith, etc.
commanding under penalties and censures all her Children to receive that sense,
and to profess it in such expressive words and forms as may directly determine
the doubt. Thus she did in the great Nicene Council -- This authority in
determining Doubts and Controversies the Church has practiced in ALL AGES, and
her constant practice is the best Interpreter of her right. The three first
Ages had no General Councils: The three next had National or Imperial General
Councils. The thousand years last past (which you include in [ All Ages] had
such Councils and practices as prove not her right. Else why do not you now
practice accordingly? -- Bishop Guning owneth but six General Councils, which
were all but in three Ages. And others but four, and none that I know of but
eight, who do not openly profess Popery.

Has Christ given any new commands since those which he sent the Apostles to
deliver? Have you any more of his commands to give us than the Apostles
delivered in their times? If you may make new ones, you have more than
Apostolic power, which was to teach whatever Christ commanded them. He is with
them to the end of the World. 1. In blessing the Word delivered and recorded by
them. 2. In blessing those that teach it. But not those that add to it the
supplement of their own Universal Laws.

And which is the Church that in all Ages (th^se thousand years) have had this
power? Three parts of the Christian World say, It is not the Roman. The Roman
Church say, It is not the Greeks. Both say, It is not they in Abassi^, Egypt,
Mesopotamia, Armenia, Georgia, etc. The Protestants confess it is not they. And
is obedience to an unknowable Power necessary to Concord and Salvation?




I shall not tire the Reader with the needless recitation of many more late
Divines that lived since 1630. enough are known. Those that have defended
Grotius of late I pass no judgment on; you may read their own Books and judge
as you see cause; viz. Dr. Thomas Pierce now Dean of Salisbury, and the famous
Preface to Archbishop Bromhall's Book against me, etc. I fear all this History
is needless. Men now laugh at me for proving by Men's writings their endeavors
to subject the King and Kingdom to a Foreign Jurisdiction, when they say it is
more sensibly and dreadfully proving it self.

Chap. XIII. Dr. Parker's Judgment (since Bishop of Oxford.)
THE last mentioned Author Dr. Sam. Parker, besides what he has said against
me in his large Preface before Archbishop Bromhall's Book, has since gone so
far beyond all his Fellows, that finding himself unable to answer this Argument
otherwise, [The World must not have one Universal Humane Civil Governor (King
or Aristocracy) ergo, It must not have one Humane Priest or Church Governor]
desperately denies the Antecedent, and says, that though de facto the Kings
of the Earth have not one Sovereign over them all (that is mere Man) they ought
to have. Audite Reges. I cannot conjecture who he means unless it be the
Pope, and he be of Cardinal Bertrand's mind, that God had not been wise if he
had not made one Man a Vice-God, or his Deputy to Rule all the World: For sure
he never dreamed that all Kings and States on Earth would meet or voluntarily
agree to choose one Universal King over them.

I met newly with an extraordinary Wit, who says that after the Conflagration,
in the Millennium of the New Heaven and Earth, Christ or his Viceroy will
triumphantly Rule, etc. But 1. I never read before of a Viceroy after the
Conflagration, which he says will first consume Antichrist. 2. I know not how
much of the New World he assigns to this Viceroy's Government; for if Gog and
Magog after cover the Earth, and the New Generation be numerous, (which he
thinks the Earth will bring forth like lower Animals,) it may be the New
Jerusalem may be so small that one Viceroy may Rule it. 3. But sure that holy
Generation will make Government and Obedience far easier things than now they
are.

Chap. XIV. Dr. Saywell's Arguments for a Foreign Jurisdiction considered.
1. THis Dr. (who I may well suppose speaks his Lord and Masters sense) is so
open as to let us know, 1. That it is the Popes Power above General Council^,
which they call Popery. 2. And that they join with the conciliar Party in point
of Church Government, and so take not them for Papists, who hold not that
Sovereignty of the Pope, but only his Primacy. 3. That it is but the Jesuited
Party of the Church of Rome, which they renounce. 4. That they also renounce
all Nonconforming Protestants as a Jesuited Party. So that he would tempt us to
believe what some affirm that their design has long been to subdue the Jesuits
and Reformed Churches (or rather destroy these) and to strike up a Union with
the French, and maintain that they are no Papists as to Government. But though
the Power of old Protestants in England were never so much subdued to them,
methinks the Jesuits Interest in France should resist them, unless the Jesuits
themselves be (as some vainly think) fallen out with the Pope, and then it will
be the Jesuited Party which these Men will own.

. 2. But to his Arguments, [Page 342. Mr. B. says, I have earnestly desired
and searched to know the proof of such a Legislative Universal Power, and I
cannot find it. But if Mr. B. would seriously consider these Texts, he might
find that obedience is due to the Church, Mat. 18. If he neglect to hear the
Church let him be to thee as an Heathen Man and a Publican. Now as one private
Man may ne^lect to hear the Episcopal Church to which he belongs, so the
Episcopal, Provincial and National Church may also prove Heretical, and neglect
to hear the Catholic Church; but the Universal Church can never fa^l, for the
Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it. And if more Persons, or
particular Churches give offense by Heresy, Schism, etc. the Church Universal,
or the rest of the Bishops may reprove them for it, and then there is no reason
why one Man should be censured and many go fr^e; and consequently our Savior
has established the Authority of his Church over all Christians, as well
particular Churches as private Men.

Ans. 1. Let us try this Argument by the like. (God has commanded obedience to
Kings, and said, He that will not hear the King and Judge, shall be put to
death. But Kings and their Kingdoms may be Criminal: And if private men must
obey Authority* or be put to death, so must Kings and Kingdoms? Why should they
escape? Therefore all Kings and Kingdoms must obey One Universal Humane King or
Kingdom under Christ.] Do you think this is true? No; There is no such
Universal Humane Empire. Monarchical or Aristocratical. No Mortal Men are
capable of it, any more than of Ruling the World in the Moon, or the Fish in
the Sea, (but of a part only.) So there is no such Universal Church Power; but
particular there is.

As to your reason, I answer, God is the Universal King* and he only is the
punisher of all Sovereign Powers, whether Monarchs, Aristocracies or Mixed.
(which I have ever asserted, though the Lying Spirit has feigned the
contrary.) God has several ways to Rule and Judge them here, and his final
Judgment is at hand. And the case is like with National Churches, save that
their own Princes may punish offending Clergymen.

2. One Person or Nation may renounce Communion with another as Heretical,
without any Ruling Power over them: And the other may do the same by them
(deserving it) Am I a Governor or Legislator over every one that I may refuse
to eat or pray with as a Brother.

3. That there is no Humane Universal Church which has power to Govern a
National Church, as the Bishops may their Flocks, is proved. 1. They cannot
have the Authority who have not so much as a Natural Capacity: But none have a
Natural Capacity to Govern all the Christian World: Ergo none have such
Authority.

2. They have not the Authority who have not the Obligation to use it in such
Government. (For an Office contains Authority and Obligation.) But none are
obliged to Govern all the Christian World: Ergo, etc.

For the Minor, 1. None are obliged to Impossibilities: But, etc.

2. None are obliged without some obliging Law: But there is no Law obliging
any to Govern all the Christian World: Ergo.

3. If they are obliged, they are condemned if they do it not: But none do Rule
all the Christian World: He confesses none have done it since the sixth
General Council, that is, these thousand years (and more by one.) And does he
not Damn the Bishops of all the World then for neglecting their great Duty a
thousand years together?

If he say, that Others made Canons enough before, I answer, 1. If they have
had no such work to do these thousand years, then there was no Office, or
Obligation or Power to do it.

2. It was then only those that made the Laws that had that Sovereignty. The
Dead are no Rulers; and so the Church has had no Sovereign since.

2. If he say, They since Ruled by the old Laws, I answer, 1. That was not by
Legislation, but Execution. 2. They never Ruled the Universal Church as one
Sovereign Power by the old Laws, but only per parts in their several
Provinces, as Justices and Mayors Rule the Kingdom, without Sovereignty.

Arg. 3* That which never was claimed till the Papal Usurpation, was not
instituted by God: But a Sovereign Government of the Unive^sal Church on Earth
was never claimed till the Papal Usurpation: Ergo.

That Councils were only General as to one Empire, and called only in one
Empire, and pretended to Govern that Empire, and not all the World, I have
fully proved against Johnson.

Arg. 4. Those that must Rule all the Christian World, must teach them. (For
the Pastoral Government is by the Word.) But no one (Person or Aristocracy) are
the Teachers of all the World. Who have pretended to it but the Papacy?

Arg. 5. If any Sovereign may Rule England and all other Churches as a Bishop
rules his Flock, then that Sovereign Power, may when they judge it deserved
Excommunicate the King and all the Kingdom, and silence all the Bishops and
Ministers, and forbid all Church Communion (as Popes and their Councils have
done.) But the consequence is false -- Ergo --

Arg. 6. If any have such power, they must be such as people may have access
to, to decide their Causes, and may hear their Accusations, Defenses,
Witnesses: But so cannot the Universal Church of Bishops: They confess these
thousand years they met not in Council; and whither else should we carry our
Witnesses? and where else should we expect their sentence? Paul's charge was, 1
These. 5.12, 13. Know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you, and esteem them very highly in Love for their work sake --
But we cannot know all the Bishops over the Earth, that never were among us.

An unknown Judge cannot be obeyed: That is, One whom we cannot know to be
indeed our Judge: But it is impossible for us now to know what number of
Bishops, and who, must be called the Universal Judge.

And an unknown sentence cannot be obeyed; but it is impossible for us to know
the sentence of the Majority of the Bishops on Earth, about any case to be
judged by them these thousand years.

But enough is said of this already: And Dr. Barrow has utterly confounded
your pleas for Foreign Jurisdiction.

Pastors and Churches may Reprove one another, who Govern not one another.

And do you think we are so sottish as not to see, that your College and
Council must have some to call them together, or to gather Votes, and preside,
and approve? And that the question will be only of the Degree of the Popes
power, and whether the French sort of Popery be best?

2. Dr. S. adds, p. 343. [So the Scripture plainly tells us elsewhere that
Churches of Kingdoms and Nations have a Sovereignty over them, to which they
must yield Obedience, Isa. 60 12. where the Prophet speaking of the Christian
Church says, The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, yea
those Nations shall be utterly wasted. If Nations and Kingdoms must serve the
Church, then she has Authority to Command their Obedience in things that
belong to Peace and Holiness]

Ans. I confess Campanella de Re^no Dei does thus make the Papacy the Fifth
Monarchy, and confidently brings many such Texts for their Clergies Universal
power. But, 1. Is it the King of the Church or the People that must be obeyed?
The people have no Ruling Power. And if it be the Sovereign the question is,
Who that is? Protestants say, It is only Christ: And the Text plainly means,
[ The Nation that will not serve Christ the Head of the Church for the good of
his Body, shall perish.] But the Italians say, It is the Pope and Council, and
the French, That it is the Council and Pope (as President and Prime Patriarch)
that is here meant.

2. This may be discerned by considering, Who it i^ that is to destroy such
Nations: It is Christ as the second Psalm shows; If it were the Pope and
Council you threaten all Nations as terribly as Bellarmine does.

3. And what is the perishing and wasting here meant? No doubt, their Souls
that rebel against Christ shall perish, and he will also punish Bodies and
Kingdoms as such. Put does any of all this belong to the Bishops? None of it.
1. Excommunicating is their destroying work: But the Heathen and Infidel
Nations are not to be Excommunicated? What have you to do to judge them that
are without? Will you cast them out that never were in? 2. And destruction by
the Sword is no Bishop's Work.

4. And when is it that all Nations that obey not shall utterly perish? We see
that 19 parts in 30, says Brierwood, of the World are Heathens and Mahometans,
and yet prosper: Ever since Abraham's days till now the Church is a small part
of the World. And it is not by any Power of the Church Governors that the
Souls of Infidels perish, but by themselves. And their Kingdoms are unlikely to
be destroyed till Christ's second coming. And if it be his destroying them at
his Judgment that is meant, that proves no Power in the Church against them.

But I confess you tell us what to fear: and whence it is that the French
Protestants suffer. They must utterly perish that obey not a Governing
Universal Sovereignty? Nay, not only French Subjects by their Lawful King, but
Protestants States and Kingdoms that thought they had no Sovereign but their
own proper one and Christ* But this is in Ordine ad Spiritualia. Yet, O you
intend no Cruelty.

. 3. Page 344. He tells us of the Churches Power to decide Controversies, and of
the Council, Act. 15.

Answ. A multitude of Protestant Writers have long ago answered all this. 1.
The word [ Church] is ambiguous. When Christ and his twelve Apostles were on
Earth, they were the Church (as to Rule.) And then the Universal Church met in
a House together, celebrated the Sacrament together, etc. Must they do so now?
It was no General Council that met, Act. 15. unless you will say that there
dwelt a General Council at Jerusalem as long as the Apostles dwelt there. None
of the Bishops of the Churches planted by Paul, Barnabas and others about the
World are said to be there, nor any at all but the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
save Paul and Barnabas who were sent as Messengers, and were not the Men sent
to. And you now say, that none but Bishops have decisive Votes.

2. And there are more ways of deciding Controversies than one. We doubt not
but every Pastor may decide them by Evidence of Scripture and Reason. And many
assembled may contribute their Reasons and be helpful to each other, and may
see more than one, if they be meet Men. And Pastors thus by Teaching Evidence
do that as Authorized Officers (as Tutors and Schoolmasters) which Private Men
do but as Private Men, and not as Officers: so that even their Teaching
Decision is an act of Authority as well as of Skill. And so far as Humane
authority must go, the concurrent Judgment of a multitude of Divines, as of
Physicians, Lawyers, etc. Cateris paribus deserves more reverence than a
singular opinion. But for all that, 1. An Assembly of Lay Men have no Authority
but from their Evidence and Parts. 2. An Assembly of Bishops have no deciding
Authority but by an office by which they are entrusted as fallible Men to teach
others what they know themselves, by the same Evidence which convinced them;
and to guide their particular Congregations in mutable Circumstances. 3. But an
Assembly of Apostles had Power to say, It seems good to the H^ly Ghost.

Obj. 1. There were the Brethren also. 2. Single Apostles had the Holy Ghost,
yet they did it in an Assembly.

Answ. 1. The Inspiration or extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost were then
common to most Christians at least, as you may see by comparing Gal. 3.2, 3. 1
Cor. 12. Act. 8. Romans 8 9, etc. 2. There were but two Messengers more than
those that dwelt together, and met ordinarily. And, 1. The Apostles themselves
had not such present command of the Spirit, as excluded the need of
consultation. 2. And no doubt but the doubtful Christians abroad did more
reverence the consent of all, than one alone. What therefore they did as
consenting inspired infallible persons, will not prove a sovereignty in all the
Bishops of the World in a Council, to decide Controversies by Sentence and
Command. No doubt but the Assembly at Nimeguen, Munster, Francfort, etc. may
decide Controversies between Princes, but not by sovereignty over each other,
but by consent. To their Subjects it is reverenced as a consent of Princes, but
to each others it is the consent of Equals. I have said that Archbishop Usher
said to me, That Councils were but for Concord, and not for Government; the
Major Vote of Bishops being no rulers of the Minor, nor of the absent.

Obj. But all Pastors are related to the Universal Church.

Answ. As a Licensed Physician is related to all the Kingdom, that is, he may
be Physician to any that desire him: How strictly do the Canons forbid
Usurpation in other Men's Dioceses? The English Ordainers say, Take thou
Authority to Preach the Word of God and Administer the holy Sacraments where
thou shall thereto be lawfully called. A general Ordination makes none a
Governor of other Men's Flocks.

. 4. Dr. S. -- [The Apostles to give Example how Controversies should be ended
in future Ages, did not decide it by their infallible Spirit only, but proceed
in an ordinary Method, plainly countenancing the Authority of Councils, and
intimating to us, that all Christian People ought to submit to their Decrees.

Answ. 1. They did decide it by their Infallible Spirit; else they had not
fathered all on the Holy Ghost: But not [ only] by that Spirit: for it was also
by their Understandings and their Tongues. Even so they did not write the
Gospel only by the Spirit, but also by their Reason and their Pens. But they
decided it not without that Spiritual infallible Inspiration, which your
Councils have not.

You may as well say when Act. 6.2. the twelve called the Multitude, etc. that
there was a General Council, that spoke not only by the Spirit: And Act. 11.2.
Peter pleads his Cause before the Apostles and Brethren, who were satisfied
by his Reasons: This was such another General Council. But who doubts but the
Apostles had Reason as well as the Spirit, and used the gift of the Spirit in
the use of Reason, and not only in Ecstasies: And therefore Consultation and the
Spirits infallible Inspiration may go together.

2. We deny not the use of Consultation and the Consent of many as a help to
incline men's Minds to Satisfaction: But only infallible Men can by infallible
Authority decide Controversy sententially. And if Pope or Councils have such
Infallibility, they have done ill that they would use it no better than the
Multitude of their Contradictions manifests. And if they were Infallible, the
Peoples actual Faith is never the more infallible unless they themselves were
infallible also. Are all the believers of Popes and Councils themselves
infallible, or not? If yea, then are all herein equal to the Pope and Councils.
If not, then the Laity know not but they may be deceived in thinking the Pope
and Councils infallible.

3. I have truly recited the doleful decision of Controversies which they have
made: They have raised abundance of Controversies which have torn the Church
into pieces, as I have fully proved, whether Mr. Maurice will or not.

4. It would have been a Service to the World indeed if Pope or Councils would
to this day, after 1500 years Controversy, vouchsafe to end them, and not tell
us that they are appointed to end them, and yet will not? Why are there still
Cart loads of Books of Controversies among Papists, and Protestants, and all;
and yet no Council does decide them? Even the Catalogues of Heresies given us
by Ephinanius, Philastrius, Augustine, etc. are few of them meddled with in your
six Councils. It is the Controversies about the sense of Scripture which is
most talked of, which Councils must decide: And of the many hundred or thousand
Controverted Texts, how few have Councils ever Expounded to us? How great is
their guilt if they are bound to do it, and will not?

5. But you do but speak darkness, and no satisfaction to us, to tell us that [
all Christian people ought to submit to their Decrees,] till you tell us,
Whether it be to All their Decrees, or but to some, and to which, and how known.

The Case may be, I About points absolutely necessary to Salvation, or points
not so necessary. II. About points plainly expressed in Scripture, or points
there darkly expressed.

I. As for points absolutely necessary sober Papists themselves confess that
they are all plainly expressed in Scripture: Else it were no perfect Doctrine or
Law of God: if a Council contradict any Article of the Creed, must we receive
its Decrees? Sure Councils have no power to judge that there is no God, no
Christ, no Scripture, no Heaven! Nor must we believe them if they should so do:
And if they have power only to tell us that, There is a God, a Christ, a
Heaven, Scripture has told us this already; and we need not that a Council
tell it us. If we believe it as of God it is a Divine Faith; if as of Man, it
is but a Humane Faith.

2. But if it be only points not Necessary, a Council cannot make that
necessary which God made not so? And it is a great wrong to the World, to
increase the difficulty of Faith and Salvation, by making more necessary to it
than God has done.

II. And whether they are necessary or not, if they are plainly expressed in
Scripture what need we a Council to say the same again? Is not Gods plain words
intelligible, as well as theirs? And must we not believe Gods plain words till
a Council repeat them? How many things then must we refuse to believe, which
are plainly expressed in Scripture?

But if they be things not plainly expressed in Scripture, it is like they are not
Necessary to Salvation. If they be, they are such deductions from plain
Scripture as are obvious to a sound understanding, or not: If yea, then every
sound understanding may know them. Or if Men be ignorant, either Councils or
single Pastors may teach them: But that is by opening the evidence of truth and
not by commanding Men to believe it? Teaching and not Magisterial determining
begeteth rational belief.

But if they are not such obvious deductions, we cannot be sure that Councils
rightly collect them: But we are sure they have no power to command us believe
without giving us convincing proof of the truth.

For instance, The first General (National) Council, determines that Christ is
[ God of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God,] I believe they meant the
truth: But these words are so far from making me a new Article of Faith, or
making the point plainer than Scripture made it, that they are to me much
darker than many Scripture words. That Christ is God, even One God with the
Father, and that he is the Eternal Word, and Son, the only begotten of the
Father, the Scripture plainly tells us. And that the Person of the Son is of
the Father: For the Persons being three it is meet to say that one is of the
other. But God of God, and Very God of Very God, is of harder understanding,
and has tempted mistakers to say it is [Godhead of Godhead] as if the Essence
as well as Persons were many. Creeds must be supposed to speak properly. And
denominations formal are most proper: The Tritheites take advantage of this,
and say, [ It is not said that the Person of the Son is of God the Father; but
the Godhead as such: God of God being twice said, say they, signifies two
Gods: They misinterpret it: But the Scripture speaks plainlier. The same I
say of [ Light of Light] a Metaphor in a Creed. And they that put [ substare
accidentibus] into the definition of [ substance] and when they have done, say
that God has no accidents, do not by the Word [ substance] add any plainness
to the Scripture phrase.

And how little the Council at Constantinople and Chalcedon did to end the
Controversies of Prelates, and unite the Church, by setting Constantinople and
Rome in mutual Jealousies and Competition, the World knows.

And what the Councils at Ephesus and Chacedon did to end the Controversies
about the Nestorian and Eutychian points, or that at C. P. against the
Monothelites, or that under Justinian de tribus capitulis, Mr. Morice and you
cannot keep the World from knowing; nor yet what all the Councils about Images,
some for them, and some against them, have done.

Are they the only means of ending Controversies, 1. Who do end none? 2. Who
have most increased them? 3. Who are the greatest Controversy themselves? The
World will never be agreed which are to be taken for General Councils
Authoritative and which not; nor can you give us any thing that has the shadow
of reason to satisfy any impartial Man: And no wonder when indeed there never
was an Universal Council in the World.

All true Christians are agreed in all that constituteth Christianity: And it
is not the Authority of Councils that made them Christians, and so agreed them.
And to dream of ending all Controversies about lesser matters, as long as men
are so ignorant and imperfect, as all are in this World, is the part of no Man
in his Wits.

5. Page 345. Dr. S. [Accordingly the Christian Church has challenged such an
Authority, and has held such Assemblies as occasion did require; and six such
have been approved and received generally i^ the Church, and no more.]

Ans. In all this matter of fact I think there is not one true word.

1. The Christian Church did never challenge such an Authority, (unless you
mean the Papal Church) as in Council to have a Legislative and Judicial
Sovereignty over the whole Christian World.

2. Never such an Assembly was called or held, as I have fully proved.

3. The six you mean we honor, and are of the same Faith as they were, but how
far all the Christian World has been from receiving them all, I have elsewhere
shown (and so has Luther de Conciliis and many Protestants.)

4. That there were no more approved and received as these were, is unproved.

6. Dr. S. [As for Mr. B 's exception, why we do not own the second of Ephesians. and
second of Nice for General Councils also? I answer, because they were at the
time they were first held and many years after accounted no General Councils,
and not received for such by the Church -- And page 346. [Mr. B. demands how
shall any Man's Conscience be satisfied that just these six had a supreme, etc.
Ans. By the public Acts of the Church as we are satisfied of our Acts of
Parliament: For there are no more generally received, and these are.

Ans. 1. I will not stand here on many previous questions: How we shall know
that a Council not General binds us not as much as a General, if they have as
wise Men and as strong Evidence: And whether any Council be General which
carries it but by a Major Vote, where a few turn the Scales, and the rest
dissent. But,

2. If there be in this decision of this great point one word that should
satisfy any Man's Conscience which will not be satisfied with mere noise, or
the VVriters Authority, I confess I cannot find it.

1. Either the Decrees of the said Councils are obligatory by their Sovereignty
before the diffused Church receives them, or not. If yea* then that obligation
must be first known; yea and it is known and the Council known by those that
are nearest, before all the Church on Earth can know it.

If not, then it is not the Council but the Receiving-Church which has the
obliging Sovereign power: And this is indeed to make Sovereign and Subjects to
be the same. This is like Mr. Hooker's Principles (and many Politicians) that
the Legislative Power is really in the people by Natural right, and it is no Law
which has not common consent. And if so, no Man can tell how to date your
Church Laws: They did not begin to be Laws when the Council made them; but when
all the Church on Earth consented* But we have need of the Decree of a General
Council, (for no Dr. is sufficient) to tell us when all the Christian World
consents, for if every Christian must travel all over the World to know, it
will be a vagrant Church: And if he must send, he cannot be sure that his
Messenger says true: And a thousand Messengers may all differ: And who can
bear their Charges? And if a Council tell us when the World consents to
former Decrees, we must know also the worlds consent to that Decree before we
can be sure it is true.

And 2. Whether the Church diffusive give authority to the Decrees, or only be
the Promulgators, whose reception must be our notice, it is a contradiction to
say, [I know it first because all the World of Christians receive it.] For
that is all one as to say, [ Every single Christian knows it because all
Christians know it first.] That is, All know it before they know it: The parts
are in the whole.

3. Has God laid the Salvation of all the Millions of Men and Women, Learned
and Unlearned upon such acquaintance with Cosmography and History as to know
what Councils (past 1000 years) all the Christian World receives? Or whether
the greater part be for them or against them? Is there one of a hundred
thousand that knows it?

It Is like you will say, They must take their Teachers, or Bishops words. Ans.
If so, those in Italy, Spain, Portugal, Poland, Germany, and all the Papists
are bound to believe that you and all of your mind are Liars, for saying, There
are but six such approved Councils; for their Bishops tell them of very many
more. And then the Eastern Christians are bound to take you for Liars, whose
Bishops tell them there were not so many. And the Protestants are bound to
dissent, who generally hold that there never was one such General Council as
had a Universal Jurisdiction over the Christian World. How then shall the
people know what Councils as such are so received?

4. Yea it is a thing that neither you nor the most Learned Man can know. Were
you ever in Ethiopia, Syria, Armenia, Georgia, Circassia, Mengrelia, and in all
the Greek Churches? If it be Travelers that you trust to, they give you no
credible notice of any such thing: And you lay our Salvation on the avoiding of
Schism, and this upon our obedience to the Universal Jurisdiction, and so you
lay all our Salvation on the Testimony of Travelers, who of all Men are most.
susspected of a liberty to Lie.

5. But the plain truth is, that notice which we have by Travelers and
Historians of the mind of most of the Christian World, assures us that a very
great part of it receives neither your six Councils, nor your first four, and
the rest receive many more; If you have read Brocardus and Jacobus de Vitriaco,
who dwelt both at Jerusalem, and Haitho and others in the Novus Orbis that
describe Tartary and Armenia, and Leo Afer, and Paulus Venetus, and Boterus,
and Godignus, and Ludolphus of Abassia, etc. you may perceive how great a
number of Christians there be who own not so much as your four first Councils,
some abhorring that at Ephesus, and some that at Chalcedon. And you know that
both Greeks and Papists receive more than six.

6. And I crave your answer to the Question which I put to your Bishop and you,
How could Christians know which were the true Sovereign Councils, when the far
greatest part of the Bishops disowned them? I will not censure you to be so
ignorant of History as not to know that the far greatest part of the Church
renounced the Council of Chalcedon in the Reign of diverse Emperors? And the
Council of Nice in the Reign of Constantius and Valens. How then could they be
known by your Rule?

But you say, [ We may know it by the public Acts of the Church as we know the
Acts of our Parliaments.]

Ans. I desire no better proof; how we know them I have often mentioned. But here
you leave us utterly in the dark: What mean you here by [ the Church] and what
by [ its public Acts?]

1. If by the Church you mean, 1. All Christians of this Age, we are sure they
agree not of it.

2. If you mean the Greater number, we are incapable of gathering the Votes or
knowing it: But I have showed you that we have reason to conjecture that most
are against you: Vast numbers rejecting some, and the rest receiving more, and
the Protestants (nor any but the Papists that I know of) receive not any as
Universal Sovereign: And the Papists also are divided about it, as Pighius and
many more will show you.

3. If you mean it of the most in former Ages, I still say, one Age has had
most for the Council of Nice, Chalcedon, Constantinople second and third, and
another Age most against them.

4. If you go the only way that is left you, and with the Papists call only
those the Church who are of your mind, unchurching the most of the Church on
Earth, then I confess you may say that the Church receives them and only them.
But few wise Men will reverence a Church so described.

II. And what the Acts of the Church are which give us such assurance as you
mention, I cannot imagine: As to our Statutes I have proved a Physical Evidence
of the certainty of their being what they pretend; even such a consent of Men
of cross Interests and Dispositions in the compass of a Land where the fact may
be known, as cannot be counterfeited or false. But about Councils the case is
quite otherwise. I. The most of the Church do not so much as think that there
are any such Councils, or at least never did hold it till the Papal Usurpation,
that they had a Sovereignty over all the Earth.

II. They are utterly disageerd how many and which are to be received.

III. They are disagreed which be their Canons? Even of the first at Nice, how
long did three Popes contend about it with the African Bishops? And since
Pisanus and Turrian bring us forth 80 Canons instead of 20, which the unlearned
Africans receive.

IV. They are not agreed which of their Canons still bind, and which not: nor
which are de fide, and which not: Many (as the 20th at Nice) are laid by
without any Councils repeal.

IV. And the World is so much bigger than Britain, that it is not so easy to
be sure of the sense of all Christians about the Matter. And how should it when
it was never agreed on from the first?

If by the Church Acts you should mean the Decrees of later Councils, that is
to prove ignotum per ignotius. How know we which Councils to believe when so
many condemned one another? And if the Sixth was the last, there came none
after to notify the reception of it.

And whereas you say that those of Ephesians. 2. and Nice 2d, were when they were
held, and many Years after accounted no General Councils, nor received as such
by the Church.

Answ. The Mystery lies in some Sectarian Notion of the Church that you have:
you mean some Party; but it is hard knowing what. For, 1. Bellarmine himself
says, that the second Ephesians. Council wanted nothing to make it as true a
General Council as the rest, but the Approbation of the Pope's Legates. It was
called by the Emperor, the Number greater than many others: the Consent so
great, that he says that they decreeing Heresy, sola navicula Petri evasit.
2. It had not only the Consent of the present Bishops as much as other
Councils, but was as commonly received by the prevailing majority, while the
Emperor seemed to be for that way.

2. And the second Council at Nice was taken for as consenting a General
Council during the Reign of Irene, and after under the Emperors that were for
Images; yea, and by the Pope himself, and all his Party in the West: But it is
true that when the Emperors were against Images it was abhorred: And so one
Council was for Images, and another against them; (as one for Photius and
another against him) by turns, for too long a time, as the Emperors were
affected: But for the time, they were all called General, as that at Nice is by
the Romans yet.

2. But if this had been true (as it is not) which you say, How shall all
Christians know it to be true? When such as I with all our searching cannot
know it? yea are past doubt that it is false? It Is like you will say, It is our
obstinacy: And so all shall be Schismatics and condemned with you, whom you
are pleased to call obstinate, for escaping that Ignorance which would better
serve your Ends.

. 7. Dr. S. [ But Mr. B. objecteth, That the Nestorians, Jacobites, Abassines,
etc. renounce some of the six Councils (yes, three of the six) They had a
personal Veneration for the Persons of Nestorius and Dioscorus, and did believe
them when they said that the Councils were mistaken in Matter of Fact, and
Condemned them for Opinions, which they did not own, and thereupon did reject
those Councils: But they did not then, nor do not at this day reject the
Catholic Faith, and the Rules of Christian Unity, which are contained in the
six General Councils. So that in effect they own them; For the principal thing
required is to profess the true Faith, and hold the Unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace and Righteousness, which those Churches do, in that they own the
Nicene, and C. P. Councils, and deny not the Doctrine of the other four.

Answ. Do you think that none of your Readers will see how much you here
overthrow or give up your Cause? 1. If holding the Unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace and Righteousness will serve, while they renounce the Councils as
erroneous and tyrannical, and holding the same Faith and Doctrine will serve,
what have you been Pleading for? we are for all this as well as you? 2. And if
the Council may err in Matter of Fact, which may be known by common sense and
reason, how much more may they err in matter of right and supernatural
Revelation, as the Articles of the Church of England say they have done.

3. You confess here that Men may reject three or four of your six Councils,
and yet be no Schismatics, but hold Faith, Unity and Peace. And are the other
two more necessary than all the rest? You say, They hold the two first. Answ.
They hold not the Infallibility of Councils, nor that they may not be rejected
when they err, nor that we may not be discerning Judges when they err: For
all this is renounced in their renouncing all save two or three.

4. You say, They reject not the Rules of Christian Unity. Answ. Therefore they
judged not the Decrees of Councils to be that necessary Rule: Else the Decrees
of those renounced by them would be as necessary as the rest.

5. It Is apparent by this that they held the same with those Councils, not
because of the Authority of those Councils, but on other Grounds: For it is not
possible that they who renounced the Councils, should believe the Christian
Faith, on their Authority. They believed it as a Divine Revelation fide Divina,
and so do we.

6. And dare you say that a Man that believes the same things because they are
revealed by God in his Word, shall be damned unless he believe them fide
humana, because a General Council decreed them.

7. Did your other Councils add any Decrees to the first? If not, what need of
believing any thing as theirs? If yea, then receiving the Decrees of the two
first is not a receiving the Decrees of the later.

8. And on whose Authority did Christians believe the first 300 years before
there was any General Council?

. 8. Dr. S. P. 346. [ Obj. Did the Catholic Church die or cease after the
sixth General Council? Answ. The Essence of the Catholic Church does not
consist in the being of a Council. -- Their meeting is but an external means
for better declaring the Catholic Faith, and holding mutual Correspondence
between the several Churches.

Ans. 1. Still you are constrained to destroy your own Cause. You confess then
that Councils are no constitutive Governing part of the Church as a Governed
Society. And if so, it has some other Humane constitutive Regent part, or
none. If none, we are so far agreed: This is it that we contend for. If any
other, you must come to your Lords College of the diffused Pastors; who never
made Law, never heard a Cause, or judged out of Council, to this day, nor
possibly can do.

2. What is this that you call an external means of Correspondence? Is it a
necessary Supreme Legislative and Judicial Power? or not? If it be, it must be
a constitutive Essential part of the Church as Political. For every Politic
Society is informed by such. And you argued before that Nations must be under
such as well as Dioceses under Diocesans. If not, habetur quaesitum.

3. And because your former words assert an Universal Sovereignty, I wonder how
any of common reason can think this necessary to the whole Christian World,
during the few Years that those two or six first Councils sat, and never
before nor after? Are dead Men our Governors? Will a Power of Governing never
exercised serve for a Thousand Years last, and 300 before, and not for the
other 300? Or has the Church had one Form of Government for 200 or 300 Years,
and another for all the other 1300? And when you tell us that Kingdoms must be
judged as well as single Persons, did those first Councils judge all the
sinning Kingdoms since. If you own no Councils since the first Six, all
Kingdoms that have sinned these 1000 Years had no such Judges. And what
Councils or other Church Power save the Popes, judged the many Southern and
Eastern Countries that revolted? Or the Western Nations in their various
Changes and Crimes? Must we have such an Uuniversal Judge now, who never judged
any these 1000 Years.

4. Your Lord says at last that they are Mutable Laws which Councils make. If
so, why must we needs obey the six Councils that were 1000 Years ago, under
another Prince? May not 1000 Years time, and another King's Government make a
Change in the Matter and Reason of the Law? If you say, it stands till another
General Council change it; I answer, 1. What Council abrogated the 20th Nicene
Canon against Kneeling on the Lord's Day in adoration? and many such other. 2.
Then if ever there was a General Council it is Decrees are immutable (and so you
contradict your selves) For it is certain there never will be a General Council
to abrogate what is done, till all the World be under one Christian Monarch.

5. The Laws of England bind us not now as the Laws of the Kings and
Parliaments that are dead; that is, not by Virtue of their Authority (though
made by them) But as the Laws of the present Legislative Powers who own them
and rule by them, and can abrogate them when they will. And when the
Canon-makers are dead 1000 Years ago, where now is the Ruling Power whose Laws
those are? There is no General Council to own them, nor ever will be! A
thousand Years sure is time enough to prove the death of a Power never since
exercised: were there a Seminal Virtue of Universal Regiment in the diffused
Church, a Thousand Years Sleep in reason must pass for a Death.

6. Yea, the diffusive Church has since disowned the Universal Obligation of
those same Councils, and does disown them to this day. For it is not near half
the Christian World that own them; yea, none but Papists that I could ever be
certified of do receive any such Councils at all, as Legislators and Judges to
all the Christian World; but only as Reverenced Rules of Concord made by
Contract. And if Constantine, Theodosius, Martian, etc. called their Subjects
to Councils 1000 Years ago, why is our King and Kingdom now any more subject to
the Subjects of those Emperors than to them?

But if you were content to endure us to unite in Christ, and take his Laws for
our Rule and bond of Peace, and stay till the next General Council, be against
us, we desire no more.

. 9. P. 347. Mr. B. says, [It is a doleful thing to think on what account all
these Men expect that all Christians Consciences can be satisfied, etc.] D. S.
answers, [It is a doleful thing indeed to think how they should be satisfied
that set up a Pope in every Congregation, and follow him in opposition to the
Catholic Church and General Councils. -- Mr. B. knows he does this, and
deludes the poor People, etc.

Answ. 1. If I know it, methinks I should know that I know it. Which if I do,
it is I that am the Impudent Liar: If not -- Somebody is mistaken. Qu. Whether a
Council of such Bishops be infallible, or can make us a better Rule than the
Scripture.

2. Readers, here you see that it is no wonder that these Reverend Fathers
renounce Popery. You see what a Pope is in their account: It is a Minister of a
single Church, who takes not their Lordships or Councils to be Lawgivers and
Judges over all the Earth. We poor Protestants took him for a Pope that claimed
such an Universal Rule alone, or as the President of Councils: But these Men
take him for a Pope that denies Popery, and pretends to no Government beyond
his Parish. Yea, not only so, but in our Parishes we oblige none to take up any
of their Religion (Faith or Duty to God) on our commanding Authority, but to
learn by the Evidence which caused our own Faith, to believe by a Faith Divine.

3. I have often said that the Catholic Church is such by Faith and Subjection
to Christ, which I own and daily Preach: But that there never was a General
Council of the Christian World, nor is there any such thing as a Catholic
Church in the Popish sense, that is, having one Political humane Sovereignty.
And how did the Man make himself believe that I knowingly opposed that which my
whole Writing labors to prove never had a being. Reader, Lament the Case of
the Church on Earth, when the most studious Leaders are so dark and rash and
bad, as either I, or these Reverend Fathers are, setting the World into
ruinating Divisions by words of such a Dialect as is harsh to name.

. 10. P. 348. Dr. S. pretends to some Scripture Proofs, viz: 1 Cor. 14.32,
33. The Spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. For God is not the
Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints.]

Answ. Reader, Do you think this proves that the whole Church on Earth is
under one humane Sovereignty that has a Legislative and Judging Power. 1. This
Text speaks only of the avoiding Disorder in particular Assemblies by the
means which they had present there among them. To keep them from speaking two
at once, and such like Disorders: As the Archi-Synagogoi were used to do in the
Jews Synagogue. And must a Council from all the Earth be gathered to that
Assembly to rebuke such Disorder? If it must be but to make a General Law to
forbid it, that is done already in Scripture and in Nature: And must the World
meet to do it again?

2. Their Dr. Hamond says, that this Text speaks of the Spirit in each
Prophet being subject to himself, that is, to his own reason, and that the
Spirit moves them not to speak irregularly and confusedly: And what is this to
the Power of Councils?

3. If it were spoken of the other present Prophets, what is this to Men that
are no Prophets, and that are dead 1000 Years ago? Are not present Pastors
fitter Moderators of their Assembly, than a General Council of dead Men?

. 11. Next he that so condemns me as an Opposite, cites my words as granting
his Cause; yet this reconcileth him not: I am not so idle as to write him a
Commentary of my own words; for, I can devise no plainer. Only I may tell him
that he too quickly forgot that God is not the Author of Confusion: and
therefore it is not lovely: A Law should not be confounded with a Contract or
amicable Agreement; nor a Sovereign Government with a Peacemaking Assembly of
Equals; nor a possible Council of those within reach with an impossible Council
out of all the World. Neither the King of France or of England were Subjects to
the Assembly at Nimeguen.

. 12. P. 351. He says, he could give numberless Quotations of Protestants,
Melanchthon, Bucer, Calvin, Bishop Andrews, K. James, Spalatensis, Casaubon,
Bishop White, Bishop Mountague, Archbishop Dr. Hamond, Dailee, etc.

Answ. I cannot answer what you can do, but what you do. But the Reader may
know how far to believe you, that will but search these few. 1. Read what I
have cited out of Melanchthon to Bishop Guning, or rather his own Epistle of
the Conference at Ratisbone, and that to King Henry the 8th.

2. Read Bucer de Regno Dei, and the rest of his Opera Angl. and judge as you
see cause.

3. I am ashamed to cite any words of Calvin, to confute our Drs. intimation.

4. Whether Spalatensis was a Protestant I dispute not, but read his own words
cited by me in my Treatise of Episcopacy, and then read him of Councils, and
judge.

5. Bishop Usher, as I have often said, told me himself, That [ Councils are not
for Government of the absent or the particular Bishops, but for Concord.]

What Mind Dr. Hamond was of I determine not: But of the rest you may judge by
these.

The Matter is, All Protestants hold that we must Serve God in as much Concord
as we can: And that the Meeting of Pastors is a means of Concord: And that it
was the true Christian Faith which the Councils which he names owned; and we
are of the same Faith: and therefore they reverence these Councils: And they
hold that still Concord being much of the Strength and Beauty of the Churches,
when there is any special reason for it, (as several Princes assemble by
themselves or Messengers at Munster, Ratisbone, Francfort, Nimeguen) so Pastors
even of several Kingdoms, not too distant, may for mutual help and Concord meet
in Councils: And none should needlessly break their just Agreements, because of
the general Command of Concord: But 1. They hold that these Councils be no
representers of all the Christian World; 2. Nor have any Universal
Jurisdiction. 3. Nor any true Governing Power at all over the absent or
dissenters, but an Agreeing Power. 4. And if they pretend any such Power, they
turn Usurpers. 5. And if on pretense of Concord they make Snares, or Decree
things that are against the Churches Edification, Peace or Order, or against
the Word of God, none are bound to stand to such Agreements.

These being the Judgment of Protestants, what do these Men but abuse their
words of Reverence to Councils, and Submission to their Contracts, as if they
were for their Universal Sovereign Jurisdiction?

. 13. And next he says, [Whereas Mr. B. does usher in his Discourse with an
intimation that this was only a Doctrine of the Gallican Church, he cannot but
know that this was the sense of the Church of England in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign.]

Answ. 1. I honor the Gallican Papists above the Italian; but I am satisfied
that both do err.

2. There is a double untruth in Matter of Fact in your words: 1. That I cannot
but know that which I cannot know or believe. 2. That yours was the sense of
the Church of England: which I have disproved. But what is your proof?

D. S. [For the 20th Article says, [The Church has Power to Decree Rites and
Ceremonies and Authority in Controversies of Faith, and the next Article does
suppose this Authority in General Councils.

Answ. The Church of England supposes that Kingdoms should be Christian, and
the Magistrates and Pastors Power so twisted as that their Conjunction may best
make Religion national, (as it was with the Jews) But it never owned a foreign
Jurisdiction, or the Governing Power of the Subjects of one Kingdom over the
Princes and People of another. It follows not that because the Church in
England may Decree some Rites here, that therefore foreign Churches may command
us to use their Rites. Our own Church Teachers no doubt have Authority in
Controversies of Faith; that is, to teach us what is the truth, and to keep
Peace among Disputers, but not to bind us to believe any thing against God's
Word, and therefore not merely because it is their Decree: Therefore the Article
cautelously calls the Church only [ a Witness and Keeper of holy Writ] which we
deny not. And that [ besides Scripture they ought not to enforce any thing to
be believed for Necessity to Salvation.] But you would have us believe the
Sovereign Universal Jurisdiction of Councils, yea and the lawfulness of all
your Oaths and Impositions, as necessary to escape damning Schism; and is not
that as necessary to Salvation?

2. And one would think there needed no more than the next Articles to confute
you, which you cite as for you. They knew that there had been Imperial General
Councils, which being gathered and authorized by the Emperors, had the same
Power in the Empire that National Councils have with us, or in other Nations.
But there is not a syllable of any Jurisdiction that they have out of the
Empire: Yea, contrary it is said, 1. That they may not be gathered together
without the Commandment and Will of Princes: And therefore cannot Govern them
without their Will, nor have any Conciliar Power, being no Council: And one
King cannot command the Subjects of another. Indeed if Princes will make
themselves Subjects to a Council or Pope, who can hinder them? 2. They are here
declared to be Men not all governed by the Spirit and Word of God, and such as
may err and have erred in things pertaining to God. Therefore their mere
Contracts and Advice are no further to be obeyed than they are governed by the
Spirit and Word of God; which we are discerning Judges of. And it is concluded
that [ things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither Strength
nor Authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of the Holy
Scripture.] So that even their Expositions of the Articles of Faith, which you
make their chief Work, has no further Authority than it is declared to be taken
out of the Scripture it self, nor yet their decision of the sense of
controverted Texts. And such proof must be received from a single Man.

. 14. Such another proof he fetches from the Statute 1 Eliz. c. 1. Forbidding
to judge any thing Heresy but what has been so judged by Authority of
Canonical Scripture, or the first four General Councils, or any of them, or any
other General Councils.]

Answ. As if forbidding private Heretication were the same with the Universal
Sovereignty of Councils; we are of the same Religion with all true Christians
in the World, and we are for as much Concord with all as we can attain: But is
Concord and Subjection all one, or Contract and Government.

. 15. The like Inference he raises from a Canon 1571. forbidding any new
Doctrine not agreeable to the Scripture, and such as the Ancient Fathers and
Bishops thence gathered.

Answ. And what is this to an Universal Church Sovereignty?

. 16. The Church of England's Sense is better expounded, Reform. Leg. Eccles.
c. 15. Orthodoxorum Patrum etiam authoritatem minime censemus esse
contemnendam: sunt enim permulta ab illis praeclare and utiliter dicta: Ut
tamen ex eorum sententia de sacris literis judicetur, non admittimus. Debent
enim sacrae literae nobis omnis Christianae doctrinae, and Regulae esse, and
Judices. Quin and ipsi Patres tantum sibi deferri recusarunt, saepius
admonentes Lectorem, ut tantisper suas admittat sententias and
interpretationes, quoad cum sacris literis consentire eas animadverterit.

. 17. D. S. P. 358. [Mr. B. says, The doubt is whom you will take for good
Christians into your Communion* But this can be no doubt, -- when I except only
the Jesuited part of the Roman and other Churches.

Answ. So you take in the Church of Rome, which you cannot do without taking in
the pretended Sovereignty Essential to it. Was not that Church Papal before
there were any Jesuits? But hold, Dr. It Is France that you are first Uniting
with: and they say, that the Jesuits are there the Predominant part. And are
you against them there?

. 18. P. 360. He takes it ill that I suppose him to separate from the Church of
England, I have fully given him here my proof. The Church of England took not
it self for a part of an Universal humane Political Church. But his Church
does, and is thereby of another Political Species, as a City differs from a
Kingdom.

I will not tire the Reader with following him any further. Vain Contenders
necessitate us to be over tedious.

. 19. I am loath here to answer the rest of his Book against our Nonconformity;
1. Because I would not follow them that decoy, and divert Men from the state of
our chief Controversy, to hide their Design. 2. Because it seems to me to be
of no use: He that will not read impartially what we say as well as they, will
never be cured of his Errors by any thing that we can write. And he that will
impartially read but my first Plea for Peace, Apology, and Treatise of
Episcopacy, and take this Book to be a Satisfactory answer, shall never be
troubled by my Replies, no more than the distracted.

. 20. This much I shall presume to say, lest he expect some account of his
Success upon my self:

I. That when he tells the Reader at last of my Concessions, as if I scarce
differed from them, save by not giving over Preaching when forbidden, they do
but show how charitable and humble they are in their Domination, who yet can
hardly suffer such Men alive out of Jail, much less to preach, who come so near
them.

II. That when he tells us that the Presbyterian Cause is given up, and yet
their Party make the name of Presbyterian (odious to them but not to us) the
Engine of their reproachful malice, this seems not to me to come from the
Spirit of Christ.

III. That when this whole Book pretends to confute us, and scarce once that
I find in all the Book, truly stateth the case of our difference, but still
silenceth or falsely represents the points which we judge sin, yea heinous
sin; such a Deceiving Volume seems not to me to beseem a Bishop, or his
Amanuensis, or Chaplain.

IV. That when he tells us what pitiful proof he has for the justification of
their Silencing and Ruining ways, and yet how extreme confident he is, it
makes me wish Christians to pray yet harder that Christ would save his Church
from such Bishops.

I will now stay but to instance in that which they say the Bishop has some
peculiarity in, viz. Our Assent to the Rubric about the Salvation of dying
Baptized Infants. Reader, I have reason to believe that it is the Bishop as
well as Dr. Saywell that speaks to me. And 1. He deals more ingenuously
than they that on pretense of [ Assenting to the use] say that we are not to
Assent to the Truth of this as a Doctrine of Religion: He professes the
contrary, and that Assent to this is required as well as to the Catechism.

2. He seeks not their Evasion that make not the phrase Universal, but
Indefinite: For he knew, 1. That in re necessaria (which he takes this to be)
an Indefinite is equal to an Universal: And 2. That a quatenus ad omne valet
consequentia: And the assertion is of Infants qua Baptized.

3. It is a certainty mentioned by Tautology that must be by every Minister
professed, [ It is certain by the Word of God that they are undoubtedly saved.]
Here we ask them two things, or three. 1. Whether none should be a Minister of
Christ who cannot truly profess this undoubted Certainty. 2. Whether almost
all the Learned Writers and Ministers of the Reformed Churches should be
Silenced that hold the contrary. 3. But specially what be the words of God here
meant which express this undoubted certainty? They confess that God says,
Deuteronomy. 12.32. Thou shall not add thereto, nor take ought therefrom; and
concludes the Bible with, [ If any Man add to these things, God shall add to
him the Plagues that are written in this Book:] We tell them we dare not
venture on such a dreadful Curse: This cannot be one of their things
indifferent: Therefore before we profess our Assent that this is undoubtedly
certain by the Word of God, they will show us so much compassion as to tell us,
where to find that Word of God? And after all our entreaty (even my own to the
Bishop) he gives us by his Chaplain but this one Text of Scripture, Gal. 3.27.
As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.] Reader,
is here one word of the certain undoubted Salvation of dying baptized Infants
without exception?

1. Here is no mention of baptizing Infants; and it is usual with this sort of
Men to say, That we cannot prove Infant Baptism by Scripture, but only by
Tradition or the authority of the Church.

2. This Text most certainly speaks of the Adult: And will not these Drs.
believe St. Peter himself who told Simon when he was Baptized, Thou have no
part nor lot in this matter: For thy heart is not right in the sight of God;
Thou art yet in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity? If they say that
Simon had been saved if he had died as soon as he was Baptized, and that he
fell to that false Heart, and gall of bitterness after, who will take such Drs
words in despite of the evident truth? His Friend Grotius more modestly
expounds Gal. 3.27. Sicut a baptismo vesies sumuntur, ita vos Promisistis vos
induturos Christum, id est victuros secundum Christi regulam. Do these Men
believe that all Infidels and Hypocrites shall be saved if they die as soon as
they are Baptized? Or do they think that none such may be and are, Baptized?
The very words before the Text are, Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus: And Christ says, He that believes and is Baptized shall be
saved, and he that believes not shall be damned. And yet they bring us no Text
for their new Article of Faith, but one which will as much prove the Salvation
of all dying baptized Hypocrites and Unbelievers, as of all dying Infants. As
if none came in without the Wedding Garment, or such were in a state of Life.

I must profess that I cannot see should I subscribe this, how I could escape
the guilt of Heresy, being liable to the foresaid Curse and Plagues of adding
to the Word of God, by saying that Gods Word speaks this certain and
undoubted Salvation of dying Baptized Infants as such without Exception. Yet if
we would all conform to all their Oaths, Covenants and Impositions besides, we
must all be cast out and forbid to preach the Gospel, if we durst not Assent to
this one Article. Such is the mercy of these Men! And all is justified as for
sound Doctrine, which we are ignorant of, and these Masters are the Judges whom
we must believe.

Yet note that though when he got the Church of England to pass this Article,
he put not in the least Exception, and the Canon forbids the refusing Baptism
to any Child that is offered to it, yet now he limits it to all Children
seriously offered by any that have power to educate them in that profession.
And as it is not the Parent that must be the Promiser; nor is suffered to be so
much as one of the Godfathers or Sureties for his Child, so by this little
limitation, what a dreadful brand of perfidious Covenanting with God, does he
six on our common English Baptism? For sure it is not the confident talk of
such Writers that makes any English Man ignorant, 1. That our Godfathers
commonly are not once desired by the Parents to Educate their Children in that
Profession. 2. Nor ever give them the least reason to expect it. 3. Nor ever
perform it. 4. Nor have any power so to Educate them, because the Parents never
purposed so far to commit their Children to them, nor they themselves never
dream of any such power or undertaking; except only such as adopt a Child, or
take an Orphan or Grandchild as their own. I have lived almost sixty seven
years, (now near seventy four) and never knew one Godfather Educate the Child,
(save the Parent that is forbidden to be Godfather) or that it was ever
expected from him by the Parents. It seems the Poor never came to Bishop Guning
as they have done to me, to beg Money to pay the Curate and Clerk, and to hire
some poor Man to be Godfather, or else their Children cannot be Baptized: So
that he that can get but Twelve pence a day by hard labor, may get on the
Sunday Twelve pence for standing an hour at the Font as Godfather, and perhaps
half a Crown; and so it is become a Trade, of such as never mean to see the
Child again. Though none but the poor thus hire Promisers, yet the Nation
commonly never give them power to Educate their Children. And thus while the
Bishop first must force us to profess the certain undoubted Salvation of dying
Baptized Infants without exception he comes himself with an exception which
shuts out all that ever I knew conformably Baptized in all my Life; and makes
the common Baptism of the Land to be perfidiousness: The Anabaptists will not
be converted by such Doctors.

And it is known how much these Men are for tying us to deliver no Doctrine from
any Text but what the Fathers have thence gathered: And Augustine de Baptis.
Cont. Donat. li. 1. c. 11, 12. at large expounds this single Text of the Dr.
by Simon's case, and supposing the Donatists to say that Simon was pardoned in
Baptism and lost it by his next sin, he says, c. 12. [ Quid si ad ipsum
baptismum fictus accessit? Dimissa sunt ei peccata, an non sunt dimissa?
Eligant quod volunt -- si dimissa dixerint, quomodo ergo spiritus sanctus
disciplinae effugerit fictum? Si in isto ficto remissionem operatus est
peccatorum? -- fateantur vero baptismo Christi baptizari posse hominem, and
tamen cor ejus in malitia vel Sacrilegio perseverans peccatorum abolitionem non
sinere fieri. Atque ita intelligant in communionibus ab Ecclesia separatis
posse homines baptizari, ubi Christi baptismus eadem Sacramenti celebratione
datur and sumitur, qui tamen tunc prosit ad remissionem peccatorum cum quis
reconciliatus unitati, sacrilegio dissensionis exuitur quo ejus peccata
tenebantur, and dimitti non sinebantur. Sicut enim in illo qui fi^lus
accesserit, sit ut non denuo baptizetur, sed ipsa pia correctione and veraci
confessione purgetur, quod non posset sine baptismo, ut quod ante datum est,
tunc valere incipiat ad salutem, cum illa fictio veraci confessione recesserit
--

Thus Gods Word must by ten thousand Ministers be said to affirm that certainly
and undoubtedly, which he brings but one Text for grossly abused, contrary to
the Doctrine even of Augustine who laid too much on Baptism, and contrary to
the very Law of Christ, which says, He that believes not shall be damned, not
excepting the Baptized, Mark 16.16.

Obj. But yet all Baptized Infants may be saved? Ans. The question now is,
Whether that Text Gal. 3.27. prove it, or any Word of God.

He must be supposed to know that there are many Opinions among the most
Learned Divines about the Case of Baptized Infants Salvation, (ten I have
elsewhere named.) And must every Minister in England determine which of all
these is right, because it is Dr. Guning's Opinion?

Many Nonconformists hold that the Covenant of Grace, does certainly put all
true Christians Infants into a state of Pardon and Salvation, (calling them
Holy) which is to be openly done by Baptismal Investiture. But that the
Children of all the Atheists, Infidels, Idolaters, or wicked men on Earth are
in such a state, and certainly saved so dying, if any Christian will but stand
as in England as Godfather, and if a Band of Soldiers can but take up thousands
of them, and so Baptize them, and that the Salvation of them is undoubtedly
certain by Gods Word, to every one that must be tolerated to be a Minister;
this is our present way of Church Concord, but not Christ's way.

And if all the Infants on Earth have right to Salvation if they can but be
Baptized, why should they not have it Unbaptized, when it is none of their
fault it being not in their power? It is his own argument when we question the
undoubted certainty affirmed, p. 162. [ To say the unworthiness or the sin of
the Godfather or Father can deprive the Baptized Child of the benefit of Gods
Ordinance, is a monstrous Opinion.] And whose sin is it but the Fathers that
depriveth all Infidels Children of Baptism, and so of the benefit of it? Will
all England believe that God lays the Saving or Damning of Millions upon the
bare act of outward Baptism, while the Children have equal antecedent right?

The Bishop and his Chaplain Dr. refer me to Mr. Dodwell for part of my answer:
And Mr. Dodwell is so much of the Bishops mind, that I may suppose the Bishop
to be much of Mr. D's mind. I will urge him therefore ad hominem with one
argument from Mr. D. against Conformity; let him answer it without condemning
Mr. D. if he can.

In Sacramental Investitures no Man receives more right than what the Invester
intends to give him, or at least not that which he declares that he does not
give him. But multitudes of Baptizing Ministers in England and all the Reformed
Churches declare that they intend not to give by Baptismal Investiture a
present right to Salvation to all Baptized Infants, (if they so die.) Ergo all
Baptized Infants receive not by Baptism a present right to Salvation.

The Major is Mr. D's about Ordination. The Minor is notorious in the known
Writings and Doctrines of such Ministers; some holding that only the Children
of true Christians are by Baptism stated in a certain right to Salvation; some
holding it only of the Elect; some holding it only of professed Christians
Children; and almost all denying it of the Children of Atheists and Infidels.
When Dr. Cornelius Burges did but write that all the Elect, though they lived
wickedly after till Conversion, received a Seed of Regeneration in their Infant
Baptism, what abundance of Dissenters, yea how few Consenters did he find in
England? When yet he affirmed this of none but such as are after saved.

And if for want of the Baptizers Intention, thousands in England have no right
to Salvation presently on their Baptism, then it is not lawful to say that the
contrary is undoubtedly certain by the Word of God.

But I confess Mr. D's Proposition is false, as I have formerly proved to him.
And perhaps necessity will force himself to deny it as to Baptism, though it
overthrow his assertion about Ordination. Specially if he be for Laymen and
Women's Baptizing as the Papists are in case of danger.

But the Name of the Church will warrant such Lords to prove all such
Declarations, Subscriptions, Oaths, not only sinless, but necessary to Order,
Peace, Obedience, Ministry, and I think to Salvation: For they make Schism
Damning, and such Obedience necessary to escape Schism.

But he has one cleanly shift, Though the Corporation Declaration, be, that [
there is no Obligation from the Covenant on me or any other person,] and a Man
think that some are obliged by it against Schism, Popery and Profaneness, and
to repent of Sin.] He says no Man is forced to take these Declarations, Vestry
Oaths, etc. For he may choose, and none constrains him to be in Corporation
trust, or a Vestry-man, and so a Minister, so the Act was to appropriate this
sweet Morsel of so Swearing declaring, etc. to themselves: And to themselves
let it be appropriated for me. And yet when all the Corporations, Vestries and
Ministry are constituted as they are, -- this is the necessary Unity --

But Obedience to the Church solveth all. I once asked a Convocation man, what
were the Words of God by which this Article was proved and past in the
Convocation, and he could not name me any Text that persuaded the Convocation
to pass it; but told me Dr. P. Guning urged it so hard, that they yielded to
him without much contradiction: I was not willing to believe that the Church of
England would pass an Article of Faith against their Judgments to avoid
striving with one man, when in imposing it they must strive against and silence
thousands, and condemn most of the Reformed Churches; but rather that really
they contradicted him not, because they thought as he: And yet I was loath to
think them so uncharitable as to put all Ministers to declare such a thing to
be in the Word of God, and never tell them where to find it. Between both what
to think I know not: But if really Dr. G. was the Church, the reverence of his
Name [ Church] shall never make me add to the Word of God, or corrupt his
Ordinance; nor subscribe to his Book, or to a Foreign Jurisdiction, if he
Father it on the Church.

The main strength of all his condemnations of us, and justifications of
himself is, that, They are the Church, and our lawful Rulers, and we must obey,
and be Sworn never to endeavor any alteration of Church Government, (not
excepting Church depopulation by large Dioceses, nor the use of the Keys by Lay
Chancellors. And if you ask for the proof of all this, and that they are not
Usurpers nor Church-destroyers, nor Subverters of Episcopacy it self, nor grand
Schismatics, you must be content with, 1. Ipse dixit, and 2. Episcopacy is
ancient. 3. And the people have neither an Electing or necessary Consenting
Vote; and yet when not only Mr. Clerkson and I, but also Dr. Burnet have fully
proved that for twelve hundred or thirteen hundred years the peoples Consent
was requisite, these great dependents on Antiquity and the Church, can wash all
off with a torrent of words.

If the Letters in the Caballa and other History be credible, how great a hand
had G. Duke of Buckingham in making the Church of England in his days? Read but
what Heylin says of Bishop Laud's preferment; and the Letters of some Bishops
to Buckingham in the Caballa, and judge what made the Church of England: How
basely do they sneak and beg of him for Preferment^ e. g. Theophilus Bishop of
Landaffe, is a most miserable Man if his Grace help him not to a better
Bishopric: Mountagues place at Norwich was of little worth since Henry the
Eighth stole the Sheep, and scarce for God's sake gave the trotters, as he
says in his Letter to Laud. And this was the way. So the Church of England is
Jure Divino made by the Civil Powers: But yet a few words can prove (just as he
proves all the rest) that the Dean and Chapter choose the Bishops and not the
King. As Heathens made Images of the Gods and thought the Gods did actuate
them, so men make the Images of Bishops and Councils, and some Spirits actuate
them, whatever they be, whether those Noble Lords, Knights and Gentlemen that
at their death lamented that they lived Atheists and Infidels, repented that as
Patrons they chose Parish Church men I know not. But while these Drs know that
many Great Councils have decreed the nullity of those Bishops that got in by
Secular help and favor, and Damned the Seekers and Accepters of it; and yet
would persuade the Church that all Gods Word is insufficient for Universal Laws
without the addition of Sovereign Councils, I will regard them as they deserve,
and not as they expect. Why answer they not my late Book of English
Nonconformity?

The True Sum.
Popery is, I. The turning a National Univerglity or Catholicism of Councils,
Church, Power, into a Terrestrial Universality. II. Turning Confederacy and
Communion into Political Regency. III. Deponing Kings and States from their
Sacred office of Supreme Government (and sole forcible Government) of the
Church or Persons and things Ecclesiastical, (the Clergy having only the Power
of the Keys, Word and Sacraments to work on Conscience without corporal face.)

Chap. XV. The first Letter to Bishop Peter Guning, upon his sending me Dr.
Saywell's Book.
My Lord,
I Thankfully received from you by Dr. Crowther Dr. Saywell's Book, and a
motion for Conference with him, which I yet more thankfully accept; I read over
the Book presently, and think it meet to give you this account of the Success:

I. 1. I perceive that it does not concern me, nor many, if any, that I
converse with; For it is Presbyterians, Separatists, Quakers and Fanatics that
he accuses, and I am conversant with few such.

2. And yet the strein of his Book is such, as will make Readers undoubtedly
think, that by Presbyterians and Nonconformists, or Conventiclers, he means
the same Persons, and speaks of the common Case of the present ejected
silenced Ministers: Of whom I must again and again say, 1. That I have had
opportunity by Acquaintance and Report of knowing a great part of the silenced
Ministers of England, and I know but of few of them that are Presbyterians; and
Judge most of them to be Episcopal; Lawyers and Gentlemen indeed incline to
place all the Government in the King and Magistrates. 2. That in 1661. when we
were Commissioned to endeavor Concord with you, not only those named in the
Commission, but all the Ministers of London were invited by Mr. Calamy* and Dr.
Reinolds, and Mr. (...) and Dr. Wallis, etc. to come to us in Consultation, and
let us know their Sense: and many came. And I remember not one Man that
dissented from what we offered you first, which was Archbishop Usher's
Primitive Form, which took not down Archbishops, Bishops, or a farthing of
their Estates, or any of their Lordships or Parliamentary Power or Honor,
(unless the Advice of their Presbyters, and the taking the Church Keys out of
the hands of Lay Chancellors cast you down.) 3. That when the King's
Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs 1660. granted yet much less Power to
Presbyters, and left it almost alone in the Bishops, we did not only acquiesce
in this, but all the London Ministers were invited to meet to give the King our
joyful Thanks for it: And of all that met, I remember but two (now both dead)
who refused to subscribe the Common Thanksgiving (which with many Hands is yet
to be seen in Print). And those two expressed their Thankfulness; but only said
[That because some things agreed not to their Judgments, they durs^ not so
subscribe, lest it signified Approbation; but they should thankfully accept
that Frame, and peaceably submit to it.]

All this being so, I appeal (with some sense of the Case of England) to your
self and common reason, whether it be just and beseeming a Pastor or Christian,
or a Man to make the Nation believe, 1. That we are Presbyterians, 2. And
against Bishops) 3. And therefore that we are Schismatics. 4. And therefore
that we must be Imprisoned or Banished, as those that would destroy the Church
and Land. Would a Turk own such dealing with his Neighbor? Is this the way of
Peace? Will this bring us to Conformity? Was it Anti-Episcopal Presbytery which
the King's Declaration 1660 determined of? Nothing will Serve God, and the
Churches Peace, but Truth and Honesty, or at least that which has some
appearance of it.

II. I find that almost all the Strength of his Book as against Presbyterians
(who are his Fanatics) is his bare word, saying that they are Schismatics,
and that they forsake the Judgment and Practice of the Universal Church by
forsaking Episcopacy. And will this convince me, who am certain, that I am for
that Episcopacy which Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian, etc. were for, and am past
doubt that the Episcopacy which I am against is contrary to the Practice of the
whole Church for 200 Years, and of all save two Cities (Alexandria and Rome)
for a much longer time; If I prove this true (which I undertake) must I then
take his turn, and desire the Banishment of the Contrary-minded Bishops, as
dangerous Schismatics for forsaking the Practice of the Church?

III. I understand not in his Platform of the Rule which denominateth
Dissenters Schismatics, Page 353. what he means by the very highest Power,
most necessary to be understood in these words [ The Laws and Orders of the
Church Vniversal] to which every Provincial Church must submit.] What the Scots
mean by [a General Assembly] I know, and what the old Emperors and Councils
meant by [ an Universal Council] Viz. Universal as to that one Empire. But I
know no Universal Lawgivers to the whole Church on Earth, but Jesus Christ;
neither Pope nor Council. If I am mistaken in this, I should be glad to be
convinced: for it is of great moment: And is the hinge of our Controversy with
Rome.

IV. He does (to me) after all give up the whole Cause, and absolve me and all
that I plead from the guilt of Schism, and lay it on your Lordship, and such as
you, if I can understand him when he says, Page 363. [It is clear that in the
Church of England, there is no sinful Condition of Communion required, nor
nothing imposed but what is according to the Order and Practice of the
Catholic Church, there can be no pretense for any Toleration, etc.]

And Page 360. [There is no Question to be made but where there is an
interruption in the Churches Communion, there is caused a Schism: and it must
be charged on them that make the breach which will lie at their Doors, who by
making their Communion unlawful, do unjustly drive away good Christians from
it; neither does such a Person that is driven away at present from the external
Communion, cease to be a Member of that Church, but is a much truer Member
thereof than that Pastor that does unjustly drive him from his Communion. This
fully satisfies me; and if you will read my late small Book, called, The
Nonconformists Plea for Peace, you will see what it is that I think unlawful in
the Impositions; And if you will read a new small Book of your old troubled
Neighbor Mr. Jo. Corbet, called, The Kingdom of God among Men, I have so great
an Opinion, that by it you will better understand us, and become more moderate
and charitable toward us, that I will take your reading it for a very obliging
Kindness to

Your Servant Ri. Baxter.
December 11. 1679.

Add. V. His terms of Communion are not right, as I have proved.

VI. He speaks against Toleration so generally without distinction, as if no
one that dissented but in a word were tolerable, which is intolerable Doctrine
in a pretended Peacemaker.

VII. He infers Toleration while he denies it, in that he is against
putting us to Death: How then will he hinder Toleration? Mulcts will not do it,
as you see by the Law that imposes 40 l. a Sermon: For when Men devoted to the
Sacred Ministry have no Money, they will Preach and Beg: Imprisonment must be
perpetual or uneffectual: for when they come out they will Preach again. And it
contradicts himself; for it will kill many Students being mostly weak) as it
killed (by bringing mortal Sickness on them) those Learned, Holy Peaceable and
Excellent Men, Mr. Jos. Allen of Taunton, Mr. Hughes of Plymouth, and some have
died in Prison: And he that kills them by Imprisonment, kills them, as well
as he that burns them or hangs them. And the Prisons will be so full, as
will render the Causers of it odious to many, and make such as St. Martin was
separate from the Bishops; the same I say of Banishment.

Dr. Saywell's Principles infer as follows;

I. Schismatics are not to be Tolerated. They that are for the sort of
Diocesane Prelacy, which we disown are Schismatics: Ergo -- not to be
Tolerated.

The Major is Dr. S's. The Minor is proved thus.

They that are against that Episcopacy which the Primitive Universal Church was
for and used, are Schismatics: The foresaid Diocesane Party are against that
Episcopacy which the Primitive Universal Church was for and used -- Ergo they
are Schismatics.

The Major is Dr. S's. The Minor is thus proved, I. They that are for the
deposing of the Bishops that were over every single Church that had one Altar,
and those that were over every City Church, and instead of them setting up only
one Bishop over a Diocese which has a Thousand, or many Hundred Altars, and
many Cities, are against the Episcopacy which the Primitive Universal Church
was for: But such are the Diocesane Party now mentioned -- Ergo -- The Major is
proved, not only from Ignatius who makes one Altar and one Bishop with his
Presbyters and Deacons, the no^e of Individuation to every Church, but a
multitude of other proofs which I undertake to give: And from the Councils that
determined that every City of Christians have a Church (till afterward they
began to except small Cities) The Minor is notorious Matter of Fact, every
Parish with us has an Altar, and many hundred have but one Bishop: Ergo they
are no Churches according to the Saying, Vbi Episcopus, ibi Ecclesia, and
Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo adunata. And (...) then signified every great Town,
like our Corporations and Market Towns: And Titus was to set Elders in every
such City.

II. They that render Bishops Odious, endeavor to Extirpate Episcopacy. But so
do (I need not name them) -- Ergo -- The Major is granted. The Minor is proved.
1. They that use Episcopacy to the Silencing of faithful Ministers of Christ,
(near Two thousand at once, than whom no Nation under Heaven out of Britain
has so many better) and to render them and all that adhere to them odious and
ruined, do that which will render Bishops odious -- But -- Ergo --

2. From Experience, when we treated with you 1661. the People would have
gladly received Episcopacy as we offered it to you, and as the King granted it
in his Declaration: But when they saw near Two thousand Silenced, and that
Bishops thought all such as I, and the many better Ministers of the Country
where I lived, to be intolerable, it has done an hundred times more to
alienate the People, from Episcopacy, than all the Books and Sermons of the
Opposers of Episcopacy ever did: e. g. The People that I was over would
reverently have received Pious Bishops: But though I never saw them, nor wrote
to them one Letter against Episcopacy these 19 years, but have largely written,
to draw them to Communion in the Parish Church, and much prevailed, yet they
will now rather forsake me as a complier with Persecuters (as Martin did the
Bishops) than they would own our Diocesane Prelacy, since they saw me, and so
many better Men of their Country Silenced, and cast out, and many of
themselves laid in Jails with Rogues, and ruined for repeating a Sermon
together, as they were always wont to do. He that will teach Men to love
Prelacy by Prisons, Undoing them, and Silencing and ruining the Teachers whom
they have found to be most edifying and faithful to them, will do more to
extirpate Prelacy by making it odious, than all its Enemies could do; The
reason of the thing seconded by full experience are undeniable proofs: No Men
that I know of have done more against Episcopacy than Bishops: and (Pardon my
free inviting you to Repentance) none that I know alive, either Sectaries or
Bishops, more than you two, who I unfeignedly wish may have the honor before
you die, of righting the Church and repairing the honor of true Episcopacy. It
is a dreadful thing to us Nonconformists to think of appearing before God,
under the Guilt of Silencing Two Thousand of our selves, if it prove our doing;
If not, let them think of it that believe they shall be judged, Prove. 26.27.
Whosoever diggeth a Pit shall fall therein, and he that rolleth a Stone it shall
return upon him.

Chap. XVI. The Second Letter to Bishop Guning, after our first Conference.
My Lord,
I Much desire some further help for my Satisfaction in the Three things, which
we last Discoursed of. 1. Whether I mis-recited or misapplied the Case of St.
Martin's Separation? 2. Whether by (...), in Ignatius be not meant One material
Altar or Place of ordinary Communion of one Church? 3. What are the true terms
of Universal Christian Concord? But the last is to me of so much greater
Importance than the rest, that I will now forbear them, lest by diversion from
this, my expectation should be frustrate. And seeing I profess in this to write
to you with an unfeigned desire to learn, and also to take the Matter to be
such as my very Religion and Church relation lies on; I beseech you either by
your self, or some other whom you direct to speak your sense, to endeavor my
better information.

The only terms or way of Universal Christian Concord you say is, Obedience to
the Universal Church: and the Pastors are the Church: And he is not a true
Member of the Church that does not obey it: And this Church to be obeyed is not
only a General Council, but also a Collegium Pastorum who rule per literas
formatas, being Successors to the Apostles, who had this Power from Christ.

This is the Substance of what I understood from you. Here I shall first tell
you what I hitherto held, and next tell you wherein I desire Satisfaction.

I. I have hitherto thought, 1. That only Christ was a Constitutive Head of the
Church Universal, and had appointed no Vicarious Head or Sovereign, either
Personal or Collective, Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical. 2.
Therefore none but Christ had now an Universal Legislative Power? nor yet an
Universal Judicial and Executive. 3. And that this is the first and fundamental
difference between us and the Church of Rome. 4. But I doubt not but that all
the Pastors in the World may be intellectually thought on in an Universal
Notion, and we may say with Cyprian, Episcopatus est unus, etc. as all the
Judges and Justices and other Officers are Universally All the Governing Power
of the Kingdom under the King; and as all the Individuals are the whole People
as Subjects. 5. And I doubt not but each Pastor is in his place to be obeyed in
all things which he is authorized to Command. 6. And these Pastors must
endeavor to maintain Concord as extensive as is possible; to which end
Councils and Communicatory Letters are to be used: And that the individual
Pastors and People are obliged by the General Law of endeavoring to maintain
Love and Concord, to observe the Agreements of of such Concordant Councils in
all things Lawful belonging to their Determination. 7. And I doubt not but
while there were but twelve Apostles, those twelve had under Christ, the
Guidance of the whole Christian Church on Earth (which for a while might all
hear them in one place;) and were to do their work in Concord: and had the
Unity of the Spirit thereto, by which they infallibly agreed in that which was
proper to them, (and they had no Successors in) even, though they were never so
distant, as well as when they were together, Act. 15. though in other things
Peter and Paul, and Paul and Barnabas disagreed. And as in the recording of
Christ's Works and Doctrine, in infallible Scriptures, so also they agreed in
their Preaching it, and in the Practice of all that was necessary either to
Salvation, or to the forming or Communion of the Churches. 8. But I supposed
that none but those who were called to it immediately by Christ, or endued with
the gift of Infallibility therein, were to be as his Mouth and Hand, in so
delivering the Gospel, and writing the Holy Scriptures, as should be his Word,
or Law to all the Christian World, and to all future Generations. 9. But as
Prophets of old were the bringers of all new Revelations, and the Priests were
but the Preservers, Expounders and Appliers of the Word which the Prophets had
brought; So the Spirit in the Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets infallibly
delivered that Word and Law, which all succeeding Pastors must Preach,
Practice, and Rule by; as the only Universal Law.

This being hitherto my Judgment, if you are not mistaken, I am no Member of
the Universal Church, and so no Christian, and therefore am incapable of
Communion, and have not Christ's Spirit, nor title to Salvation, and therefore
it concerns me speedily to try, and receive Instructions: However we are of
two Religions and Churches if you are in the right.

II* That which I have hitherto denied herein, is, 1. That there is any
Vicarious, Constitutive or Governing Head of the Church Universal, or Sovereign
Power, Personal or Collective, having Supreme, Universal, Legislative, Judicial
and Executive Power under Christ, which all Christians are bound to be Subjects
of, and to obey.

2. That Obedience to such an Universal Church-Soveraign or Power is not the
necessary means or terms of Universal Concord or Communion:

1. Because there is no such Power.

2. If there be, it cannot be Universally known by Christians, 1. That it is,
2. What it is, 3. And in whom it is.

3. Nor can the Measure of Obedience to such Power necessary to Concord and
Communion of all, be Universally known. 4. And de facto, there is no such
Concord or Communion Universal in the World, nor ever was, at least since the
Apostles days. Of these in order.

I. If there be any Vicarious Universal Supreme Power that all must obey that
will be Members of the Church, the Institution of it is to be found in
Scripture, or in some other Divine Record: But no such thing is found in
either, we have no other Divine Record that notifyeth this: and Scripture does
not. It is the Apostles Power that is the thing hence alleged. But, 1. While
they were near the whole Church in its Infancy or small Number, Men could have
sent to them for their Judgment: But so they could not, had they lived to see
the Church in its present extent: If the twelve Apostles were now at Jerusalem,
and we doubted of the Nestorian, Eutychian, Monothelite Controversies, and the
rest in Epiphanius and Philastrius Catalogue. Could all the Christians in
America, Africa, Asia and Europe know that the major Vote of the Apostles met
at Jerusalem had thus or thus decided? How few would live long enough for that
Satisfaction. 2. The Apostles singly by an infallible Uniting Spirit were the
Mouth of Christ to deliver obligatorily his Laws and Doctrine, without meeting
to Consult and Vote it. Paul professes Gal. 1. that he received not his Gospel
from the Apostles, but from Christ: And his Epistles need not a proof of their
Authority from the Votes or Consent of the rest; but were otherwise received:
And so of other parts of Scripture. 3. The Apostles were to be dispersed about
the World, and not to stay long together to Govern the World as a College: And
while they stayed at Jerusalem, we read not of their doing any thing in a
College and Conciliar way, save that Act. 15. and 11. which was, 1. No General
Council from all the Churches: 2. Nor done by Apostles only* but the Elders and
Brethren also of the Church at Jerusalem. 3. And was not laid on the Authority
of a major Vote, but on the Apostolical Spirit of Infallibility and their
special knowledge of Christ's mind, in which they all concurred.

2. Therefore their Authority of Teaching the World all Christ's Commands
M-28-20. being proper to them by these two advantages (being chosen
Ear-witnesses, and having the Spirit to guide them into all truth) in this they
have no Successors though they have in the continued parts of their Work. They
were Christ's Instruments in Universal Legislation, and the Scripture written by
them is his Word and Law, and they were accordingly enabled to Seal it by
Miracles, and giving the Holy Ghost by Imposition of their Hands: This Law of
Christ all Christians own: But if in this they have Successors, 1. The Church
has a larger Law than we have thought on, and Gods Word is a greater Volume.
2. And Miracles are as necessary to Seal the new Word as to Seal the old.

II. The Scripture denies a Vicarious summam potestatem, or Sovereignty over
the Universal Church having a Legislative Power. 1. In that it says that There
is One Lawgiver, Jam. 4.12. that is, But One. 2. In calling Christ only the
Head, Lord and King, and calling Apostles but Members, 1 Cor. 12.27. and
Stewards and Ministers by whom we believe. 3. Baptizing us only into the Name
of Christ, and not of the Apostles; and Baptism is Christening, and shows all
that is necessary to make us Members of the Church and Body which Christ is the
Savior of. 4. Paul decryeth it as Carnality and Schism to think of Men above
what is written, as if they had been Baptized into the Names of Men. 5. The
Apostles did not Convert Men by preaching up themselves as Sovereign, but
Christ, only professing themselves Witnesses and Messengers of his Words and
Deeds: The Eunuch Acts 8. was Baptized by Philip upon his bare believing in
Christ, without hearing the ^ote of a College of Apostles. Nor did the
Preachers that Converted Men do it by the Argument of the Authority of such a
College. As Dr. Hammond says on 1 Timothy 3. [And such are all particular
Churches of the whole World considered together, under the Supreme Head Christ
Jesus, dispensing them all by himself, and administering them severally not by
any one Oeconomus, but by the several Bishops as Inferior Heads of Unity to the
several Bodies, so constituted by the several Apostles in their Plantations,
each of them having an (...), a several distinct Commission from Christ
Immediately and Subordinate to none but the Supreme Donor or Plenipotentiary.]

(Neither to a Personal nor Collective Sovereign Power.)

The Judges of England have a Power which limitedly in their several Courts and
Circuits respects all the Kingdom. But, 1. They have no Legislative Power. 2.
Nor are they Constitutive Essential parts of the Kingdom: It would be the same
Kingdom were their Power changed. 3. Therefore the Constitutive Oaths or Bond
is only between King and Subjects, and we are not to Swear Allegiance to any
other than the King. 4. Nor are they Judges out of their several Courts and
Circuits. 5. Much less in other Kingdoms. 6. Nor is any a Judge to all the
World, so is it in the Case in question, yet were they Apostles to the
Universal Church, that which none are since their time.

III. If there be such a Vicarious Governing Sovereignty over the Universal
Church, it is either the Pope, or a General Council, or some College of
Pastors: But it is none of these.

1. As to the Pope you say that he is so far from being Head of the Church that
he is not a Member: So that I need not say more of this to you.

2. That General Councils are no such Sovereign Power which all must obey that
will be Christians or in a Church, seems to me past doubt for these Reasons.

1. Because there is no such thing in the Creed, though the Catholic Church
and Communion of Saints be there. But it would be there were it. of such
necessity to Christianity.

2. Because there is no such thing said in all the Scripture, which would not
omit so necessary a point. What is said from Acts 15. is answered before; it
was no General Council: A General Council was not then the necessary means of
Concord or Communion.

3. There never was one General Council representing the Universal Church in
the World. I have fully proved in my second Book against Johnson, that the
Councils called General were so only as to the Roman Empire, (and few if any so
General,) and that the Emperor called all the Chief Councils who had no Power
without his Empire, nor called any that were without.

4. I have often proved the unlawfulness of calling General Councils now, as the
Church is dispersed at such distances over the Earth, and under Princes of so
contrary Interests and Minds.

5. I have often proved the Impossibility of such a Councils meeting to attain
the ends of Government in question; being to pass by Sea and Land from all
quarters of the World, by the Consent of Enemies that rule them, and through
Enemies Countries, and Men of Age, that must have so long time going, and
sitting and returning, and of diverse Languages incapable of understanding one
another, and a number incapable of present Converse, with other such
insuperable difficulties.

6. If such Councils be necessary to the Being of Christianity, Church or
Concord, at least the Church has seldom had a Being, or Concord; it seldom
having had such a Council in your own esteem: And you cannot say that it ever
will have any.

7. If General Councils have Supreme Government (visible) it is, 1.
Legislative. 2. Judicial. 3. Executive.

But I. If Legislative, then 1. Their Laws are either Gods Infallible Word, or
not: If not, all Men must disobey them when they err: If yea, Gods Word is not
the same one Age as another, and is Crescent still; and we know not when it
will be perfect.

2. Their Laws will be so many that no Christians can know them, obey them, and
have Concord on such terms.

3. If they could agree who should call them, and whither; yet the Prince whose
Country they meet in would be Master of the whole Christian World, and so of
other Christian Countries by Mastering them.

4. Princes would be Subjects, 1. To Foreign Powers. 2. Yea to the Subjects of
other Princes. 3. Yea of their Enemies. 4. And to such Pre^ates as they are
incapable to know whether they are truly called to their Office. 5. Or whether
they are erroneous or sound in Faith.

5. And then the Ecclesiastical Laws of all National Churches and Kings might
be destroyed by such Councils as Superior Powers.

6. And no Princes or Synods could make valid Laws about Religion, till they
knew that no Law of any such Council were against them.

7. The Laws of Christ recorded in Scripture would by all this be argued of
great insufficiency: ^f more were Universally necessary, he that made the rest
would have made them, whose Authority is to the Church unquestionable.

8. The Christian World is divided so much in Opinion, that except in what
Christ's own word contains plainly, they are in no probability of agreeing. So
much of Legislation.

II. As to Judgment. 1. To judge the sense of a Law (Scripture or Canon) for
the common Obligation of the Church, is part of the Legislative Power, and
belongs to the Lawmakers. 2. To judge the Case of Persons, e. g. whether John,
Peter, Nestorius, Luther, Calvin, etc. be a Heretic, an Adulterer, a Simonist,
etc. requires that the Accuser and Accused, and Witnesses of both be present
and heard speak: But he that would have all Heretics, Criminals, Accusers,
Witnesses, travel for a Trial to Jerusalem, Nice, Constantinople, Rome, even
from America, Ethiopia, etc. will not need any Confutation.

III. The same I say of Executive Silencing, Ejecting, Excommunicating, etc.

II. A Sovereign Power that cannot be known, is not necessary to Christianity,
or the Constitution, Communion or Concord of the Church. But General Councils
so empowered cannot be known.

I. I have showed that it cannot be known by ordinary Christians that there are
any such Authorized by Christ. I know it not, nor any that ever I was familiar
with: The main Body of the Reformed Churches know it not; for they ordinarily
deny it as the prime point of Popery. They cannot prove it, who affirm it:
Therefore they know it not, as others may judge. Millions are Baptized
Christians that never knew it.

II. It is not to this day known which were true General Councils that are
past: Some say those were Latrocinia and Conventicles that others say were
Lawful Councils. Some are for but four; some for six; some for eight; some for
all so called; there is no agreement which are true and obligatory. Grotius is
for Trent and all; which others abhor.

2. It is not known who has Power to call them, and whose call is valid.

3. Nor what Individuals or Particular Churches are capable of sending and
choosing, and obliged to it. Almost all the Christian World is judged incapable
by the most of Christians. The Papists are so judged by the Greeks,
Protestants, etc. The Eastern and Ethiopian Christians, are excluded by the
Papists, Greeks, etc. as Jacobites, Nestorians, Schismatics, etc. The Greeks
are excluded by the Papists and others as Schismatics and Erroneous. The
Protestants are judged Heretics and Schismatics by the Papists and many
Greeks, etc. How Lutherans and Calvinists, Diocesans and Presbyterians, etc.
judge of one another, I need not tell. And can all or any of them know which of
these must make up a Legislative Council of the whole Church on Earth?

4. It is not known how many must Constitute such a Council, nor in what
proportions. If there be innumerable Bishops under Philippicus for the
Monothelites out of the East (as Binnius says) and few out of the West, was
that a true General Council? If at Nice, Ephesus, Constantinople, Chalcedon,
there be not one out of the West to twenty or forty, or a hundred others, is it
a true representative of the whole Church? If there be two hundred at Trent, or
a thousand at Basil out of the West, or some few parts of it, and few from the
East, and none from Ethiopia, Armenia, America, and many other Churches; are
these a true Universal Council? And can we all be here resolved?

The Country where the Council meets, and the Prince who is for them, will
have more Bishops there, than any, if not all the rest; when remote parts, and
the Churches under Enemies, or dissenting Princes will have few.

5. The same Councils that had most for them under one Prince, have had most
Bishops against them under the next, and so off and on for many Successions: We
know that the Council of Nice was mostly for the truth, because we try it by
the Word of God: Else how should it be known after; when under Constantius and
Valens most of the Bishops by far, in Councils and out, were Arrians? The World
groaned to find it self grown Arrian. The Council of Constantinople, in the
beginning set up Greg. Nazianzen, and in the end was against him? Which part
was the Universal Governor? The first Council at Ephesus was against Nestorius
till Joh. Antiochenus came; and then it divided into two, which condemned each
other; and after by the Emperors threatening was united: The Chalcedon Council
carried most while Martian Reigned; and after most condemned and cursed it; and
then again most were for it, and under other Emperors most cursed it again; and
under Zeno the most were for Neutrality or Silencing the difference. The
Eutychians had far most at Ephesians. 2. and a while after under Theodos. 2. and
Anastasius, etc. And under others (and most Princes) most were against them,
and called Ephesians. 2. Latrocinium. And yet most of the East have been for
Dioscorus ever since, saving the Greeks. The Monothelites had far most
(innumerable Bishops out of the East, says Binnius ut supra) under Philippicus
in a Council, yea, says Binnius, the Council at Trullu in Constant. were
Monothelites, and yet the same Men that were at the foregoing approved fifth
General Council at Constable. And over and over most Bishops were for one side, and
most for the other, as Princes changed afterward. Under Justinian most seemed
for the Phantasiastae against the Corrupticolae: Which yet are since (with
Justinian) accounted persecuting Heretics. The approved Council at Constable. de
tribus Capitulis had some time most Bishops for it, and sometime most-against
it: Insomuch that it occasioned much of Italy it self to renounce the
Popes-headship and set up the Patriarch of Aquileia as their Chief. The Council
at Nice 2. and others for Images, and so others against them, have been so often
and notoriously under one Emperor owned by most, and under another condemned by
most, yea by the same Bishops owned and after disowned, that no Man can tell
which of them to take for the Universal Legislators or Rulers of the Church by
the number of the Bishops, but only we must know which of them were sound by
the Word of God. And since them what Council ever was there that could be so
known by numbers to be of Authority? Constance and Basil that had the greatest
numbers are condemned by Florence, and by the most of the Roman Church. No Man
can tell us of all that are past, what Councils are of obliging Authority and
must be obeyed by any outward Note, but only by trying them by the Word of God.

6. And what wonder, when there is no other certain Note by which an obliging
Council can be known from others? (And he that knows what God says without
the Council needs it not.) The Papists have no Note of difference but the Popes
Approbation. And Protestants know that this is no proof of their Authority. At
Ephesians. 2. Bellarmine and Binnius tell us that the consent was so general, that
only St. Peter's Ship escaped drowning. At Constable. 1. they confess that the Pope
had not so much as a Legate: By what Note shall we know the true and Authorized
Councils from the rejected, when part of the Christian World is for one and
against another, and the other part contrary?

III. And there is no Agreement in what the Power of such Councils materially
does consist, and what it is that they may command us, and what not.

IV. Nor is there any Agreement which and how many are their true Obligatory
Laws, when we have such huge Volumes of Decrees and Canons; woe to us if all
these must necessarily be obeyed to our Concord or Salvation. And if not all,
how shall we know which?

V. Nor do we know how we must be sure that all these Canons indeed were
Current and had the Major Vote; or many be Counterfeit; when the Africans had
then such a stir with the Pope about the Nicene or Sardican Canon; and when to
this day the Canons of the Laterane Council sub Innoc. 3. are justified by most
and denied by many.

VI. If this could be known to a few Learned Men, it is certain that to most
Christians, yea Ministers it cannot: To me it is not. And it is certain that all
Christians, nor all Ministers are not obliged to so great a task as to search
all the Councils, till they know which they be, and which the Laws which they
must obey.

III. And as the Power and Laws cannot be known, so it is certain that
Obedience to these is not the necessary means of Christianity, Concord or
Communion, because the necessary measure of such Obedience cannot be known to
such a use; Christ in his Institution of Baptism and other ways, has told what
he has made necessary to be a Member of the Universal Church, and how all such
must live in Love and Peace, in obeying the rest of his Word so far as they can
know it. But you that make Obedience to a visible Power over the Church
Universal, necessary to our Membership, can never tell us which is the
necessary Degree! If it be all the Canons and Mandates that must be so obeyed,
no Man can be saved: much less can the Churches all have Concord on such terms!
yea, every Christian: If it be not all, who can tell us which be the necessary
Canons, and Acts of Obedience, and distinguish Essentials from Integrals,
unless you will return to the Word of God, and say that The Covenant of Grace
is Essential, which we may know without these Councils Laws. The Ministry of
Councils teaching us how to know God's Word and Laws is one thing, and their
own pretended universally obliging Legislation is another.

Of all this I have said much in the second Part of my Key for Catholics, and
in my foresaid Rejoinder to W. Johnson.

II. But you tell me of another Church Power which all must obey that will have
Communion and Concord, which you call Collegium Pastorum.

If none be Church Members or Christians that understand not what this is (much
less do obey it) I doubt the Church is still a little Flock indeed: For I
understand it not, nor know one Man that I think does.

1. Is this College of Pastors to Rule while General Councils sit, or but in
the intervals? If sedente Concilio, which of them is Supreme? If only between
Councils; have they a Legislative Power, or only the Judicial and Executive? If
the former, where are their Laws to be found? that all the Church may know
them? And I ask all the Questions before asked of the Laws of Councils: How
shall we know which be Current? and necessary? and which are not?

If not, then they are no Supreme Rulers that have no Legislative Power?

2. Who be these Men that make this College? we cannot obey them till we know
them; Are they all the Bishops in the World, or but part? If but part, which
part, and who, and where shall we find them? I know you will not say they are
the upstart College of Cardinals, nor the Roman Clergy only: And I never heard
of any others besides Councils that pretended to it: viz. To be Universal
Governors.

If it be All the Bishops of the World; 1. Do they meet to Consent, or do they
not? If they do and must, when, where, how? was there ever such a meeting which
was no Council? No, you say, It is per literas formatas.

2. Are these Literae formatae, Legislative, Judicial or Executive? If none of
these, they are no Acts of Government. And I asked, where shall we find them if
they are our Laws? If they be Judicial and Executive, whither is it that the
Accusers, Accused and Witnesses must come to be heard speak before the Sentence
was passed per literas formatas: e. g. Theodoret, and the rest de tribus
Capitulis, when it must be judged, 1. Whether they wrote such words? 2. What
the sense was? 3. Whether they were Heretical? 4. Whether they repented, and
must we go to all the Bishops in the World one by one for trial? or be judged
without being ever heard?

3. I cannot imagine what can be here said, unless it be that some Bishops
first do the thing, and then others do per Literas consent. But, 1. Do some
Bishops first make Laws for all the World, and then the rest consent, or only
for their own Churches? By what Authority do they the first?

2. Or do some Bishops try and judge a Man, e. g. in this or that Country and
Parish, and then all the rest in the World consent, that never hear them, or
hear of them? Every Man (nor any) is not Excommunicated per Literas formatas,
by all the Bishops in the World, or most. 3. But it is not the Executive or
Judicial Acts that our Question is concerned in, but the Rule of Obedience,
which is a Law. As it was never known that Men must not be taken in by Baptism,
or cast out by Excommunication, till all the Bishops on Earth agree to it; so
no Universal Laws are extant that were made by such Letters.

4. And how can this be the Rule, and Test of Christianity, or
Church Membership or Concord, when no Christians, much less all, can possibly
know that all or most Bishops have per Literas, consented to such obliging
Laws? 1. How can we prove that ever any went over all the World to them? (
Drake or Candish did it not.) 2. And that they opened the Case aright to them?
3. And that these Laws had the Major Vote? 4. And that they are not forged or
corrupted since? 5. And that these were true Bishops themselves that did it in
America, Ethiopia, Armenia, Greece, etc. out of our reach?

6. Yea, What possibility is there of any such known Agreement, when it is known
that almost all the Christian World is divided into Parties, which disagree and
censure one another? The English Diocesans and Church differs from the Roman,
and the most, or many of the Reformed. The Lutherans from the Calvinists; The
Papists from us all, and from the Greek, and the Greek from them and us; and
all from the Abassines, Copties, Syrians, called Jacobites, Nestorians, etc.
and from the Armenians, Georgians, Circassians, Mengrelians, Russians, etc. How
shall I, and all the Ministers on Earth, yea, and all Christians, know that all
these have per Literas formatas, made Laws which all must necessarily obey?

But if it be only the Sound Part that has this Universal Government, how can
I, and all Men know which, and who that is? Hearsay of Adversaries report will
not tell us; and almost all on Earth are condemned or accused by the rest, or
most, or many. And we must hear them (that dwell at the Antipodes or Jerusalem,
etc.) before we judge them, so far as to exclude them from the Sacred Power.

If it be said, That it is not the making of New Laws, that is done by this
Collegium Pastorum all over the world, but their Consent to those that Councils
made: I answer, 1. Are they not Valid upon the Councils making them? Then
Councils have not Legislative Power. 2. If it be left impossible to most to
know which were true Councils, and which are their Valid Laws, when the present
Assemblies have best opportunity to signify Consent, how impossible will it be
to know which Councils and which Laws (and in what sense) are approved by all
the Bishops in the World, or by most? And that the Votes were faithfully
gathered? And by whom? And that the Major part are the Rulers of the Minors.

Will. Johnson says, That it is a General Judicial Sentence, De Speciebus, and
not De Individuis, that Councils use; E. g. [We Anathematize all that hold or
do this or that.] But, 1. It Is known that they Anathematized many Individuals.
2. No Man can be bound by it, till it fall upon Individuals. Condemning
Arrians, proves no Man to be an Arrian: Forbidding us to hear Heretics,
obliges none not to hear him that is not proved a Heretic: Judgment must be
of Individuals before it can be executed.

He that must obey the Universal Church, must be commanded by the Universal
Church, and must know that they command him, and what they command him; which
is to me, and to most impossible.

4. William Johnsons and his Parties last Answer is, That the People must
Believe their own individual Pastors, telling them what the Universal Church
commands: And indeed there is no other way practicable; But then, 1. This is
but a trick to make every Pastor the Lord of our Faith and Souls; on pretense
of obeying the Universal Church. And if this be your sense it will amount to
this [ No man is a Christian that believes not his Pastor telling him what the
Universal Church commands.]

2. But I find most Teachers are as ignorant as I am, who know not such
Universal Authority or Laws.

3. Archbishop Usher, and many other Bishops, thought that General Councils
were not for Regiment, but Concord: And he that believes no such Governing
Power, cannot declare it to his Flock, nor obey it.

4. By this way, most Christians shall be bound on pain of Damnation to believe
Untruths, and things contrary to what others must believe, e. g. In Abassia,
Egypt, Syria, etc. they will be bound to believe one thing* and at
Constantinople another, etc. Those called now Nestorians, are by Travelers
said to own none of that Heresy, but to Condemn the Council of Chalcedon and
Ephesians. 1. for wronging Nestorius, as Innocent did them that condemned
Chrysostom: Those called Jacobites and Eutychians are said to have no more of
the Heresy, but to condemn the said Chalcedon Council for wronging Dioscorus,
and to own the second Ephesine Council: some will be bound to be for Images in
Churches, and some against them; some for Constantinople, and some for Rome's
Supremacy, (and all in their Countries to be Papists) for their Pastors tell
them that the Catholic Church is on their side: yea, in the same Country (as
in England) some must be for Arminianism (as it is called) and some against it;
some for the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and some against it; some
for free Prayer in the Pulpit, and some against it, etc. For on both sides
their differing Pastors plead the Authority of the Church: Few Christians can
thus agree in any thing but Christ's plain Laws, which I showed are the terms
of Concord.

If we must appeal from particular Pastors, to whom is it? If to Councils, to
whom must we appeal from disagreeing Councils? If to the whole Church on Earth,
how shall we hear from them and know their mind? I never saw, nor knew any Man
that saw any literas formatas subscribed by all Bishops scattered through the
Earth.

5. You that are Zealous against Popery, I presume would not have me be a
Papist: But I cannot avoid it if I receive your Doctrine (that there is a
Church Power in a Council or College of Pastors, to Govern the Universal
Church: and that none are in the Church, nor have the Spirit that obey not this
Universal Church of Pastors, and that to obey them is the only means, or terms
of Concord.]

For, 1. I then yield them the fundamental difference. That there is one
Universal summa Potestas, or Visible Head (Collective) under Christ. 2. And if
so, I cannot deny it to be the Pope as the Principium Vnitatis, and the Chief
Executor of the Laws, and the first Bishop in Councils. For Councils are rare,
and the Church is a Church when there are no Councils: And the Pope is a known
Person, and Rome a known Place, and accessible, and no other pretends to this
Power that I know of: And the Executive Power must be Constant: And any other
Supreme accessible College is unknown to me and all that I can speak with, and
I can no more obey them, than a College of Angels unknown to me. If the Church
have a visible Vicarious Supreme, the Pope is likest to be he, as to the
constant Executive Power, and the President of Councils. I suppose you take the
Councils of Constance and Basil, and the French for Papists; though they set a
Council above the Pope.

6. The World has no Universal Civil Government under God; neither a Monarch,
nor a College or Council of Kings. All the World is Governed by Men per parts
in their several Dominions, as all England is under the King, by all the
Mayors, Bailiffs and Justices: But there is no Council of Justices that are One
Universal Governor Collective: Nor is the Diet of Princes, or any Council of
Kings one Supreme Government of the Earth. A Logical universality there is, as
all Rulers considered notionally rule all the World by Parts, but no Political
Head or Universal Governor over the whole, whom all the Parts must obey.

I. If now I am in the right, and you mistaken, then you wrongfully deny the
Spirit, Church Membership, and consequently Salvation as well as Concord, to
all Protestants that ever I knew or read, who deny a visible Universal Church
Head, Personal or Collective; And I think to most in the World. And what Schism
that is, I need not say.

II. If I am in the wrong, I am no Christian, nor Church Member, nor can be
saved (For you say, [This Body so governed only has the Spirit]: And I cannot
help it; not knowing possibly how to know, 1. Who this College is? 2. What
Councils. 3. Or which be the Laws which I must obey, 4. Nor with what degree of
Obedience. 5. Nor that they have such Power. How great need have I then
earnestly to beg your speedy help for my Information: Which will oblige

Your Servant Ri. Baxter.
December. 27. 1679.
Chap. XVII. The Third Letter to Bishop Guning.
To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Ely.
My Lord,
THough in Conference I told you the Sense which I had of your words, yet
judging it my duty to think of them over and over again, I also judge it my
duty in Writing to leave with you the sum of such a Judgment as I am able to
pass on them, on my best Consideration, leaving it now to your self whether you
will by word or writing return any further Answer, my hopes of Satisfaction
thereby being very low.

The sum of your Speech which I am concerned in, is as follows:

I. That certainly a Supreme Vicarious Governing Power there is in the Bishops
by Christ's Institution, 1. Because it is Prophesied, Isai. 60.12. That the
Nation and Kingdom that will not serve the Church shall perish; And the word
Church is never put for Christ. 2. And the Apostles only were admitted by
Christ to his last Supper, and so the Power of Administering that Sacrament till
Christ come, is given only to them, and such as they shall give that Power to.
3. And it was not Paul and Barnabas that had the infallible judgment of that
Case decided, Act. 15. but the College of the Apostles.

II. That this Supreme Vicarious Governing Power over the whole Church on Earth
is, 1. In all the Christian Bishops of the World, 2. And the Major part goes
for the whole, 3. And General Councils are their Representatives, and so have
this Power. 4. And that to such Councils it is enough that all be called,
though all be not there. 5. And it is their reception by the Church Universal,
which must prove their Universal Power, and the Obligation of their Laws. 6.
And though the Universality of Bishops be not always in such a Council, they
have always that Power which in Councils is to be used: as the Judges out of
Term time. 7. And that if I, or any will publish a Heresy, we shall know where
that Church is by their Censure. 8. But as Promulgation is necessary to the
Obligation of Laws, so many that never can or do hear of the foresaid Universal
Church-Governing Power or what their Laws are, or what is the sense of them,
may be saved without them, by the reading of the Word; as many that have not
the Scriptures may be saved without them.

And this you say answers three parts of my last Papers. 9 Of these General
Councils it is only six that you own as such, Nice 1. Constable. 1. Ephesians. 1.
Chalced. Constable. 2. (de tribus Capitulis) and Constable. 3. against the
Monothelites.

III. "You say that These six things are the Governing Acts of this Chief Power.

1. To judge which are the true Books of Scripture, "and the true Copies and
Readings.

2. To judge what is the sense of the Fundamentals, Baptism, Creed, whose words
misunderstood will not save any.

3. To judge and declare what is the true Church Government instituted by
Christ and his Apostles, or delivered by them.

4. To judge and declare what are the instituted Ordinances e. g. Confirmation
as it is a giving of the Holy Ghost by Imposition of Hands, and not only an
owning of our Baptismal Covenant, which we do in every Sacrament: and so of
other Ordinances.

5. A Judicial Power, not of all individual Cases, but that those e. g. that
hold or do this or that be Excommunicate.

6. A Legislative Power, to make alterable Canons or Orders of the Church
Universal. This is the sum of all your Explicatory Discourses: To which I
answer.

. I. To your proofs that such a Universal Governing Church there is instituted.
1. To Isai. 60.12. I say, 1. It is not safe stretching dark Prophetical Texts,
farther than we can prove they are intended. The New Testament plainlier tells
us the Church State and Power than the Old.

2. The Universal Church has not expounded the Text, whether it speak of the
state of the Jews after the Captivity, or of the State of the Catholic Church
now, or of the more Blessed State of it at the last, when it is more perfected,
Therefore how are you sure that you have the true sense of it without the
Churches Exposition?

3. The words indeed are nothing for a Vicarious Sovereign Power. Every
Political Body is essentiated by the Pars imperans, and the Pars subdita:
Christ is the only essentiating Pars imperans in Supreme Power: Christ then is
the Prime part of the Church: The word [Church] then is not put for [Christ]
alone, but for the Society consisting of King and Subjects, and sometimes for
the Subjects alone. It Is often said that many Nations served the Israelites: we
say, many Countries were subject to the Romans, the Medes, Persians, Greeks,
Turks: and we do not mean that either the Turkish, Roman, Persian, etc. Common
Subjects did govern all these Nations, nor that their Bashaws, Judges,
Magistrates, etc. as one Persona Politica in summa potestate ruled them by a
Major Vote: If the King will say that all the Corporations in Middlesex shall
be under London, or obey or serve it: Who would feign such a sense of it, as to
say that there must be therefore some Power to rule them by a Vicarious
Supremacy beside the ordinary Government, or that all the City must Govern by a
Major Vote. The sense is plain. As we all 1. Obey the King as the Universal
Constitutive Head, 2. And the Judges, Justices, Mayors, as ruling under him per
parts, in their several Places. 3. And we serve all the Kingdom, as we serve
its common good, which is the finis regiminis; So other Countries served the
Romans, Greeks, Turks, etc. And so all Kingdoms should serve the Church or
Kingdom of Christ; that is, 1. Christ as the only Head and Universal Governor:
2. All his Officers as particular Governors in their several Limits and Places
(but none as Rulers of the whole) 3. And the bonum Commune, or all the Church
as the End of Government. And how can we feign another sense?

. 2. To your second Proof I answer, 1. The 70 Disciples were Christ's constant
Attendants as his Family, with whom he was to Eat the Passover.

2. We all grant that none have Power to Celebrate the Eucharist, or Govern the
Church but the Apostles, and those to whom the Spirit of Christ in them did
Communicate it. But we say that they Communicated it to the Order of
Presbyters, as I thought all had Confessed (as some Councils do.) 3. The
Apostles were not appointed as one Supreme ruling College to give the Sacrament
by their Votes to all the World, but each one had Power to do it in his place:
Nor did they Ordain only as a College by such Vote (as Vna persona Politica)
but each one had Power to do it alone: Nor did they write the Scriptures as one
Collective Person by Vote, but each one had the Spirit and Power to do it, (as
Paul did, etc.) nor did they sit on one Throne, or had the promise so to do, to
Judge the Tribes of Israel, as one College by Vote, but to sit on twelve
Thrones Judging the twelve Tribes, as under Christ the only Universal Head and
Governor.

. 3. To your third I answer, 1. I answered to that Act. 15. in my last to you.
2. Paul and Barnabas had the same Infallible Spirit, and had before said the
same against the keeping of Moses Law: But 1. Recipitur ad modum recipientis:
No wonder if among those that quarrelled with Paul* the Consent of those that
had received Christ's Mind from his own Mouth and Spirit, did better satisfy
the doubtful, than one Man's word alone. 2. And Christ's Work was to be done in
Unity.

. 4. II. As to the Seat of this Power I answer, 1. All the true Bishops of the
World Govern the particular Churches as Kings Govern all the Kingdoms of the
World, under God, one Universal Monarch: But there is neither one, Universal
Monarchical, Aristocratical or Democratical Sovereign, Civil or Ecclesiastical
under Christ: But each has his own part.

. 5. 2. I have showed the impossibility of our judging of the Major Votes at
our distances in most controverted Cases.

. 6. 3. And I have, where I told you, proved that there never were, must or
will be true Universal Councils, much less are such the standing Governors of
the Church. But in Cases of need, such as can well do it, should come to help
each other by Council and Concord, without pretending to Universal Governing
Power.

. 7. 4. 1. Who called them to Nice, Ephesus, Chalcedon, Constantinople, etc.
out of the Extra-Imperial Countries?

2. Who shall call them now out of the Empire of the Turk, Abassia, the Mogul,
Tartary, and the rest?

3. If calling Men make the Council Universal though they come not, is it a
Council if none come? or how many must it be to ascertain us that it is
Universal? Has the Pope the Calling Power? or who is it, and how proved, that
they that obey it not may be unexcuseable?

. 8. 5. I have told you how unable I am to know what the Major part of all
Christians or Bishops in the World receive, save only by uncertain fame, saving
that while I know otherwise what is necessary truth, I know that they are not
the Church that receive it not, whoever they be. I am a Stranger to Abassia,
Armenia, Georgia, India, Russia, Mexico, etc. And what if I never knew that
there are such Countries in the World?

2. I can easily prove what I told you, how often the Major Part has changed,
yea, the same Bishops upon the change of Princes, and cried, Omnes Peccavimus.
And who knows by Majority of Votes, which Years they were in the right?

3. Either the Canons of Councils were obligatory upon the Promulgation before
the absent Bishops in all Countries received them, or not; If yea, then it is
not Universal Reception that made them so: If not, then the absent are not
bound to receive them.

4. How many Years will it be after a Council before we can know whether all or
most of the Christian World receive it? By all that I can read in History, I
cannot tell, e. g. whether more Bishops were for the Council of Chalcedon, or
against it, for the time of seven or eight Emperors Reign; Nor whether more now
be for or against the second Nicene Council (which the Lutherans so much
favor) and so of many more. And every one cannot know it, nor fetch his Faith,
or Religion from a Catalogue of all the Christian Bishops in the World, or a
Calculation of their numbered Votes.

. 9. 6. Frustra est Potentia quae non reducitur, nec reducenda est in actum. 1.
Indeed as the Pope is naturally incapable of Governing all the Christian World,
All Bishops on Earth are much more incapable as one Collective Voting Power,
but only per parts in their several Limits. 2. How can I obey a Power that
acts not?

. 10. 7. Alas what abundance of Heresies have been Published since the Six
Councils which you own? yea, by Ranters, Quakers, Familists, etc. in our times,
besides Beckman's Catalogue of German Fanatics. And yet what Universal
Council, or Literae formatae of all the World, have given us sufficient notice
of their Evil? How foolishly have the Papists done about Jansenianisms, the
Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, etc. to seek the Pope's
Determination, if the sense of all the Bishops of the World can be known to
decide the Case? How many Heresies have been Condemned in Councils since the
Sixth Council, of which the whole Church has no otherwise notified their sense
(as in the Case of Philoponus of Images, of Elipandus, and Faelix, of Abbot
Joachims Abeilard, of Gilbert Porretane, of Wecilo; of Berengarius, Wickliffe,
Husse) whether it was Heresy or not? You say, If I broach a Heresy, the
Universal Church will soon tell me where they are by Condemning it: When
Multitudes have been broached these last Thousand Years, of which those in
Abassia, Syria, Egypt, Armenia, and most of the Christian World, have never
told us that ever they were Judged, or so much as heard? Shall no Bishops or
Provincial Council condemn new Heresies, but leave e. g. Swenkfeldius, David
George, Serv^tus, Pomponatius, Vaninus, and a hundred such to pass for good
Christians, till they hear from all the Bishops of the World? And what need
General Councils be gathered to Condemn such, if we can know the sense of all
without them?

. 11. 8. If one that cannot know the sense of all the Bishops on Earth, may
ordinarily be a good Christian, and saved by the Scripture only, then why
should they be sent to enquire of all the Bishops on Earth, when a sure and
nearer way is at hand.

2. And then such may be of the Church and have Christ's Spirit, that obey not
such a Vicarious Church Head.

3. And if want of Promulgation nullify the Obligation, that is no Governing
Vicarious Sovereign to all the Christian World, which cannot Promulgate his
Laws to all. Neither I, nor any that ever I knew, can tell how to know the
Minds of all the Bishops on Earth, or gather their Votes, so as to rule our
Obedience; If the Scripture could not be commonly made known, it could be no
common Rule; as it is not to them that have it only in unknown Tongues.

. 12. 9. What shall satisfy any Man that the Six Councils owned by you are the
Acts of a Supreme Vicarious Universal Church Power, and no other? but those, 1.
If the Pars imperans in Supremacy be (as Politics say) a Constitutive
Essential part of the Society, then since the sixth Council, the Church has
been no Church for want of an Essential part, if Councils were that part: But
if it be all the dispersed Bishops, the Head has been in nuda Potentia,
unactive these Thousand Years, as the Socinians say the separated Soul is till
the Resurrection, or as one in an Apoplexy.

2. This favors the Seekers, who say that the Church this Thousand Years
has been lost in the Wilderness, or asleep.

3. The same Councils have done and undone. That at Constable. 1. in the beginning
set up Greg. Naz. and in the end forced him to resign going about to depose
him; which part was obligatory? That at Ephesians. first, was first one, and after
two, and Nestorius, Cyril and Memnon, were all Condemned, and after two of them
restored, and Joh. Antioch: and Cyril by Theodosius threats were brought to
confess that they had differed but in Words, and did not know it: Which part
was Obligatory? That at Chalcedon consisted of many, yea most that had gone
contrary in Ephesians. 2. and cried, Omnes peccavimus, and so did many others, and
most Bishops were often and long against it after. That at Constable. de Tribus
Capitulis, is noted commonly as a mere Cheat and abuse put on Justinian by an
Eutychian, and condemned three dead Men's Words before at Chalcedon absolved,
set the World (even Italy) into a greater Schism. If you are sure all these are
Universally Obligatory, prove it, and prove that no other are as much so.
Diverse others were as numerous, and called by as good Authority. If you say, as
of Ephesians. 2. they were Latrocinia and forced; I answer, No more than many
others. At Constable. ^. Nazianzen tells you they raged like Mad Men: At Ephesians. 1.
they fought it out even before the Emperors Commissioners. Theodosius 2d. used
his overruling Power at both Ephesians. 1. and 2. What force was used in that under
Philippicus, and many others that erred and were more numerous than such as you
receive. Sola navicula Petri, says Binius, escaped Drowning at Ephesians. 2. so
Concordant were they all; What have you against even Constance and Basil on
your Grounds? If you say they erred, I grant it: and how shall we know that
none of the Six did so? It was not their Number nor Consent that proved them in
the right. Tell us how to know the Councils that we must obey from all the
rest? Is it by other Councils Testimony? that is, to run in a Vain Circle: How
know we that the later is right other way than of the former? Is it by
Scripture or by Reason. Tell us how, without subverting your own Foundation,
the Sovereignty of Councils.

4. Do you hold all the Six Councils still obligatory as the Rule of our
Obedience and Communion E. g. 1. That at Nice 1. and the Quini Sextum at Trull
forbid Adoring by genuflexion on any Lords Day, etc. And no General Council
has revoked it, but above a Thousand Years after it wore out by degrees in
most Churches: And yet Thousands of Christians are here to be denied
Sacramental Communion, if they keep these Canons even in the reception of the
Eucharist: and Hundreds, yea Thousands of Christ's Ministers shall be silenced,
ejected, and ruined if they will not Assent and Consent so to use them. How
many Canons in the Six Councils can I name which do not now bind us?

. 13. As to the work of Councils and Bishops named by you; I. As to our
receiving the true Scripture from an Universal Church-Governing Authority. 1.
Paul's Epistles were received otherwise. Yea, there is no mention of any part
of the New Testament that was not received till such Universal Government
required it.

2. If I must first know the said Church Authority before I receive the
Scripture, how shall I know it? Not by the Scriptures; for that is supposed yet
not received: If by the Assertors Authority, that is to know they have it,
because they have it, which is the Question. If by some fore-known Character of
Infallibility, what is it? unless with Knot you come to the Miracles of the
present Church, I know not what can be said.

3. But is not the common Protestant way (which you call Chillingworth's) much
surer? 1. We first receive the Matter of Fact Historically, (that such Persons
were, and wrote such Books, and did such Deeds) from the Concurrent Testimony
of all Credible VVitnesses* some Enemies, some Heretics, the generality of
Lay-Christians, Presbyters that in all Churches received and used them, and
Bishops also as credible entrusted Keepers of these Records: As we know the
Laws of the Land, by Judges, Lawyers, People, and all that make up a full
Historical Certainty, and not from some fore-known Universal Governing Bishops
Judicial Sentence. 2. And the Matter of Fact being known by certain Historical
Evidence, I have so largely showed how the rest is known in my Reasons of
Christian Religion, and Life of Faith, etc. that I will not repeat it: Do you
think that most (or any) Christians before they received the Scriptures, did
first otherwise know that all the Bishops on Earth are by God authorized to be
a Supreme Collective Sovereign to the Church, and to judge infallibly which are
the true Scriptures for all the People, and that they are now most of them true
Bishops? etc. Which way are all these things to be known?

We deny not that Ministers are by Office entrusted to keep, expound and preach
the S. Scriptures: But we use against the Papists herein, to distinguish the
Authority of a Teacher or Ambassador, from the Authority of a Judge; and the
Authority of an Official limited Judge, in proprio foro, from that of an
Universal Judge to all the World. Indeed it is commonly granted, that it is
proper to the Lawmakers to judge of the sense of their own Law, so as
Universally to oblige the Subjects: For it is part of Legislation it self, the
sense of the Law being the very Law: Else Judges might make us what Law they
please, by expounding the Words as they please. But the Power of Judicatures is
limitedly to expound and apply the Law only to the decision of particular Cases
that come before them.

If the Question be, Whether our Statutes were really made by those Kings and
Parliaments whose Names they bear? And are not altered or corrupted since? How
shall we be sure? By a Natural Certainty from such Concurrent Testimonies as
cannot be false; viz. 1. The Judges have still judged by them; and, 2. The
Counselors plead them; 3. Justices and all Officers execute them; 4. All the
People hold their Estates and Lives by them, and stand to the Determination
made according to them; 5. The Records attest them. And it is not possible were
they forged or corrupt, but that the Interests of Multitudes would have led
them to plead that, and appeal from the Corruption: And yet none of these named
are Supreme Governors of all the Kingdom, who thus Historically assure us.

4. It may be questioned, What is the Law of Nature? And it is known much by
the Agreement of all Mankind, and that is known Historically: But neither of
them is known by any Humane Soveraign-Authority appointed to Govern all the
World. And so it is in the present Case.

The Agreement of all Christians, Ministers and People, Friends and
Adversaries, of contrary Opinions and Interests, contending against each other
about the Rule of their Expositions, is a full Historical Evidence of Fact,
when no considerable Contradiction, even of Jews or Heathens, is made against
it.

5. It is notorious, 1. That regularly our first Reception both of Creed and
Scripture, is by Gods appointment to be by Children from their Parents, before
ever they hear a Preacher, Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. Thou shall teach them thy Children,
lying down and rising up, etc. And God will bless his appointed Means. Timothy
learned the Scripture when he was a Child. If you say, Parents received it
first from the Church: I answer, Our Parents regularly were to receive it as we
did, even from their Parents, and they from theirs, and so on to those that had
it from the Apostles, or first Preachers. And all Parents are not a College of
Sovereign Rulers of all the World.

2. And private Christians by Conference convert many. 3. And those that have
not their Faith either of these ways, usually have it by the teaching of
particular Presbyters where they dwell. And yet none of these are the
Collective-Soveraign to all the Christian World; any more than Tutors in Law,
Physic, or Theology are. Three and twenty Years ago I read most that you say
in a Paris Doctor H. Holden's Analys. S. fid. who yet (though mixed with
injurious passages against the S. Scripture) acknowledges, that it is by such
an Universal Consent of all Christians, Lay and Clergy, that we receive the
Scriptures, that it is a Natural Historical Evidence that the Matter of Fact is
resolved into, and not of Supernatural Infallibility by Authority. 4. And when
Vinc-Lirinensis turns us to quod ab omnibus ubique and semper receptum est,
and the Papists that go with Holden lay most on the Consent of all Christians,
they never thought that the Laity through all the Christian World are one
Universal Collective Sovereign. Nor do you think so of all the Consenting
Priests, while you appropriate this Collective-Soveraignty to the Bishops.

6. I would know, whether it be only the Scripture, or also our Christianity
and Creed, which must be received as from a Sovereign Church Power? If you say
it is only Scripture, why may we not receive the Scripture otherwise, if we may
otherwise receive our Christianity, Creed and Baptism? But I doubt not but you
will say, It is both. If so, then a Child (or Man) must know and believe that
Christ has authorized a Vicarious Sovereign Prelacy, before he can believe
that there is a Christ that had any Authority himself. 2. And he must be so
good a Casuist as to know what makes a true Bishop. 3. And so well acquainted
with all the World, as to know what parts of the Earth have true Bishops, and
what they hold. And is this the way of making Christians?

Perhaps you will say, That Parents, Tutors and Priests tell them what all the
Bishops of the World hold as a Sovereign Judicature. I answer, 1. If they did,
Holden confesses that the Certainty of Faith can be no greater than our
Certainty of the Medium. And the Child, or Hearer, that knows not that his
Parent and Teacher, therein says true, can no more know that the Creed or
Scripture is true, on that account.

2. The generality of Protestants believe not an Universal-Governing Sovereign
under Christ, but deny it; Therefore they never Preach any such Medium of
Faith: And can you prove that those that are brought to Christianity by
Protestant Parents, Tutors or Preachers, are all yet Unchristened, or have no
true Faith? 7. Why should we make Impossibilities necessary, while surer and
easier Means are obvious? It is impossible to Children, to the Vulgar, to
almost all the Priests themselves, to know certainly what the Major Vote of
Bishops in the whole World, now think of this or that Text or Article, (save
only consequently when we first believe the Articles of Faith, we next know
that he is no true Bishop that denies them. And it is impossible to know that
Christ has authorized a Sovereign College, before we believe Christ's own
Authority and Word. But the Protestant Method is obvious: viz. To hear Parents,
Tutors and Preachers, as humble Learners: To believe them Fide humana first,
while they teach us to know the Divine Evidence of Certain Credibility in the
Creed and Scriptures; and when they have taught us that, to believe Fide
Divina, by the Light of that Divine Evidence which they have taught us: What
that is, I have opened as aforecited, and also in a small Treatise against the
Papists, called, [ The Certainty of Christianity without Popery;] in which also
I have confuted your way: Besides what I have said in the Second Part of The
Saints Rest,] and my [ More Reasons for the Christian Religion.]

8. I cannot by all your Words understand how you can have any Faith, on your
Grounds. 1. You that renounce Popery, I suppose take not the Popish Prelates
for any part of the Sovereign College. 2. I perceive that you take not the
Southern and Eastern Christians for a part, who are called Nestorians,
Eutychians or Jacobites. 3. I find that you take not the Protestant Churches
that have no Bishops for any part, (for the Sovereignty is only in Bishops.) 4.
I find that you take not the Lutheran Churches, or any other, for a part, whose
Bishops Succession from the Apostles has not a Continuance uninterrupted,
(which Rome has not.) 5. And me thinks you should not think better of the
Greeks than of such Protestants, on many accounts, which I pass by. Where then
is that Universal College on whose Judging-Authority you are a Christian? Sure
you take not our little Island for the Universal Church. I would I knew which
you take for the Universal Church, and how you prove the Inclusion and
Exclusion.

9. I find not that the Universal Church has so agreed as you suppose of the
Canon of Scripture, and the Readings, Translations, etc. Four or five Books
were long questioned by many; General Councils have not agreed of the Canon:
Bishop Cousins has given us the best account of the Reception of the true
Canon: Provincial Councils have said most of this. Even the fullest at Laodicea
has left out the Rev^lations: The Romanists take in the Apocrypha: Many
Churches have less or more than others: What Grotius himself thought of Job and
the Canticles, I need not tell you: Nor how Augustine and most others strove
for the Septuagint against Jerome: And if the Universal Judicature have decided
the many Hundred Doubts about the Various Lections, I would you would tell us
where to find it; for I know not.

. II. Your second Use of the Sovereign Power, is to judge of the Sense of
Fundamental Articles of Faith; because the Words may be taken in a false Sense.]

1. This is very cautelously spoken: Is it only Fundamentals that they are to
expound by Sovereign Judgment? How then shall we know the Sense of all the rest
of the S. Scriptures? And how will this end a Thousand Controversies? 2. And
why may not the same Means satisfy us about Fundamentals, which satisfies us
about the Integrals of Religion? Yea, we have here far better help. The first
Christians Catechized and taught the Sense of Baptism before they were
Baptized: They and their Tutors and Preachers taught the same to their
Children, and so on: Baptism and the Fundamentals have been constantly repeated
in all the Churches of the World. There are as many Witnesses or Teachers of
these, as there are Understanding Christians. And yet must all needs hear from
the Antipodes, or know the Sense of a Humane Sovereign of the World, before
they receive them?

3. Can this Supreme College speak the Fundamentals plainlier than God has
done, and than the Parish Priest can do? Are they necessary to tell us that
Christ died, rose, ascended because Scripture speaks it not plain enough? We
know that no Words of Creed or Scripture, falsely understood, make a true
Believer. But is not that as true of a Councils Words, as of the Creed? And are
there any Words that Men cannot misunderstand? Why has [ Filioque] continued
such a Distraction in the Churches, and Councils yet end it not? To say nothing
of (...), and other such: Have we a necessity of a Sovereign Judicature, to be
to all Men in stead of a Schoolmaster, to tell them what is the meaning of
Greek and Hebrew Words? And could not one Origin or Jerome tell that better than
a General Council of Men that understand not those Tongues? I must confess that
what understanding of the Words of Creed or Scripture, I have received, was
more from Parents, Tutors, Teachers and Books, than from Sovereign Councils, or
College of Bishops, (though Dr. Holden say he is no true Believer and
Catholic that believes an Article of Faith, because his Reason finds it in
Scripture, and not rather because all the Christian World believes it.) There
is more skill in Cosmography, Arithmetic, and History necessary to such a
Faith, than I have attained, or can attain. I can tell E. g. by Lexicons and
other Books what (...)* signifies in the Creed, better than how all the
Bishops in the World interpret it by an Authoritative Sentence.

. III. Your third Work of this Sovereign Power is, [ Authoritatively to declare
what Government of the Church was delivered by the Apostles.] 1. As I said of
Scripture, we know such Matter of Fact better by Universal Consent of all
Christians, and true History, than by such a Judicature of all the Bishops of
the World. 2. But Protestants do so strongly prove that the S. Scripture is
the entire Regulating Word of God, without defect or supplement by Unwritten
Tradition, as that nothing is left out of it which is of Divine Obligation to
all the Christian World in all Ages: And therefore that all that the Spirit
instituted as Universally Necessary in Church Government, is there.

3. If it were not so, this Gap of Unwritten Necessary Supplemental Tradition,
will let in, no Man knows what, besides Church Power, on the like Pretenses.
4. Tradition has been often pretended by General Councils against each other,
(as I undertake to prove.) 5. All that is not in Scripture of Church-Offices
and Government have been so far new, or changed up and down, as proves that
the Church never took them as Universal Necessary Institutions of Christ
delivered by the Apostles. I need not instance in Patriarcks, and such like,
nor such difference of Seats as Nazianzen and Isidore Pelusiota wish levelled;
when if General Councils themselves had been this Necessary Church Government,
the Church had not been Three Hundred Years without them, (yea, and to this Day
indeed.)

6. As the King by his Laws, and by his Officers, Judges and Justices, Lawyers,
etc. without another Vicarious Sovereign or Vice-King, does tell the Subjects
what is the Constituted Government of the Kingdom, and all Official Powers,
which they must obey, so does Christ by his Written Law, and by his Ministers
teaching us in their several places, tell us what is his Church Government,
without an Universal Vicarious Sovereign.

7. When Leo the First called himself Caput Ecclesiae Vniversalis, and Boniface
was called Universal Bishop, (much more long after for many Hundred Years) so
great a part of the Empire judged the Roman Bishop to be the prime in the
Empire, and in Councils, and Principium Vnitatis, as Archbishop Bromhal
speaks, as that it seems then to have been the Major part of the Bishops of
the whole World, the Empire being then the far greatest part of the Universal
Church: And even Salmasius (liberally) grants that the Pope was not a mere
Patriarch, but the Heads of the Patriarchs and Church Universal (in the Empire)
de Eccles. Suburbicar. prope fin. And I understand not how he is Principium
Vnitatis in a Governed Society as such, who is not Principium Regens. But it
follows not that it was so from the Apostles, nor that it must continue so
when the Empire is overthrown, or the Emperor will change it. If most of the
Church be in one Empire, and the Prince think he should form the Government to
that of the State, (as the Chalcedon Council that magnified Leo yet witnesses)
does this make one of his Subjects Ruler of all other Christian Kings, or
subject the World to Foreigners? Yea, and that when the Empire and its Laws are
overthrown, and most of the Church is without the Empire, enlarged more over
other Lands. Must we turn Papists, if they can but prove that once a General
Council, or the Major part of Bishops was for them by Corruption, or Secular
Advantage? What Changes have the Majority often made?

. IV. Your fourth Work of Universal Supremacy, is [ To declare what Ordinances
were received from the Apostles, as Imposition of Hands to give the Holy Ghost,
and such others.

1. I acknowledge that Baptism and the Eucharist were known by practice before
the New Testament was written, and the continued practice has been as sure a
Tradition of the substance of them, as the Scripture it self has had: But it
is all Christians, Lay and Clergy, that assure us of this, yea Heretics and
Enemies with them, by Universal Historical Concord, and not the Authority of a
Supreme Universal Judicature: And yet it was all recorded in the Scripture,
that without those sure sufficient Records, the Tradition might not, as Oral or
practical only, be continued. So that all that is Universally Necessary is now
in Gods written Law. And, if it had not been so, the Papists changes of the
Eucharist, (which yet Holden with others pleads Current Tradition for) tell
us how little security we should have had of them. If there be more Sacraments
than two in the Scripture, we will receive them: Or if more could be proved
instituted by Christ, and delivered from the Apostles, than the Scripture
mentions, we should not refuse them: But we are persuaded there is no such
proof. The Papists plead Scripture for all their seven Sacraments; and we
quarrel not at the Name, but expect better proof of all that is Obligatory to
the whole Church on Earth, than an unproved Universal Judicature.

What Confirmation is, I now pass by.

. V. Your fifth Work for the Sovereign Power is, Judicial Sentencing (not
Individuals ordinarily, but) by Description such as are to be cast out by
Excommunication.] 1. This is not part of Judicial Government, but Legislative:
To say, [ He that is impenitent in Drunkenness or Heresy, shall be cast out,]
is the Penal part of the Law. And Gods Law has already told us who shall be
cast out: There are Sins enough enumerated to this use.

2. If all the Necessary Doctrine and Practice be expressed in Scripture, then
so is the Necessary Cause of Excommunication: For that Cause is [bringing other
Doctrine, or Impenitence in breaking Gods Law. But the Antecedent is true: Ergo.

3. How happy had it been for the Church, if there had been no Hereticating or
Anathematizing but for violating Scripture, Doctrine and Law impenitently?
Alas, what Work have Hereticators and Anathematizers made in the Church?

4. How know we what Curses are valid, when General Councils have cursed per
Vices almost all the Christian World? And the same Bishops in one Council
cursed one party, and in the next the contrary; and cursed their own Councils.

5. As there needs no Vicarious Monarch of the whole World, (no nor of one
Kingdom under the King) to tell who shall be Fined or Hanged, but the Kings Law
as the Rule, and the Judges and Justices in their several Limits to pass
Sentence in particular Cases; so there needs no Church-Vicarious-Judicature of
all the Earth, to judge who shall be cursed and cast out: Christ's Laws, and the
Pastors respectively in the several Churches, are enough: And in doubtful
Cases, and for Concord, Neighbor-Bishops in Synods must Consult.

. VI. Your sixth Use of an Universal Supremacy, is to make mutable Church-Laws.

1. God is the only Lawgiver to all the World: Christ to all the Church. We
deny any such Church on Earth as has an Universal Sovereign under Christ, and
can make Laws for all the Christian World.

2. How is Gods Law sufficient in s^o Genere, if it leave out that which is to
be commanded to all the World of Christians? How is Man's Universal Legislative
Power proved, (any more than an Universal Civil Sovereignty?) Or how differs
it from Gods?

3. Mutable Things are not of Universal Need or Use: These Bylaws (like those
of Corporations) are only the Work of particular Churches or Countries. E. g.
One Translation of Scripture, one Meter or Tune of Psalms, etc. will not fit
all the World that have several Languages, etc.

Upon the whole, I am more confirmed by longer Considerations, 1. That to
assert a Sovereign Vicarious Church Power over all the Christian World, is to
make a Church which Christ never made.

2. And Treasonably to set up an Usurpation of his Prerogative.

3. And to plead for that which de facto never was in being.

4. And to lay the Ground of heinous Schism and Persecution, by prosecuting
impossible Terms of Concord and Communion.

5. And to make this the necessary Medium of our believing in Christ, or
knowing his Word and Will, is to subvert the Christian Faith and Scripture.

6. And as one Pope cannot possibly, through Natural Incapacity, Govern all the
Earth in Religion, one Collective and Aristocratical Sovereign of all the
Bishops on Earth, is so incomparably more incapable, that I wonder that any
Considerate Man can believe it. Pighius well tells us of the Novelty and Vanity
of Heading all the Churches by General Councils.

7. And if the French, and the Councils of Constance, and Basil, and Cassander,
and Grotius, and such Papists as set Councils over the Pope, had not taken in
the Pope as the ordinary Governing, Executive Head, to Rule by the Councils
Laws, they had been far more gross and incredible than the Italian Papists, who
prefer the Pope.

8. And that Civil Government may so much easier be exercised by Officials than
the Spiritual, that a Civil Monarch of all the Earth is far more congruous and
possible, than a Humane Visible Church-Head under Christ, Personal or
Collective.

9. That if this was the Principle from which you disputed at the Savoy, and in
the Convocation, and from which our late Changes, and the silencing of Two
Thousand Ministers have been made, it is no wonder that the Effects were such:
But if ever we be healed, it must be by other Terms and Hands.

R. B.
Jan. 12. 1679.

This Feb. 13. Being with the Bishop again, he disclaimeth the Names of
Supreme, Summa Potestas Vicaria, as Invidious, and chooses the Name of [ a
Ruling Collegium Pastorum Ministerialium, who are the Church, which is the
Mother which all must receive their Faith from and obey, and so must know their
Consent.

Chap. XVIII. The Fourth Letter to Bishop Guning.
To the Lord Bishop of Ely. (Dr. Guning.)
My Lord,
THough I intended to trouble you no more by Writing, yet observing how apt you
are to mistake me, and because time streightened our Discourse; Lest I be
mistaken, and consequently mis-reported, I thus send you the sum of what I said
to your last, as far as it concerned me.

I. Whereas you are offended at my Applicatory Conclusion, I must still say it,
that [ If these were the Principles upon which our Changes were made by your
Endeavor 1661 and 1662. it is no wonder that Two thousand Ministers were
Silenced and Cast out.] And is it more offense to you to hear what you did
toward it, than to them and their Flocks to suffer it? Is this impartiality?

II. My naming Holden as saying what you say, was not invidiously to intimate
that you differ not from him in any thing else; but to tell you that these
thoughts are not new to me, and that even a Papist pleading rather Historical-
Natural-Evidence in Universal Tradition, than judicial Authority, in this is
further from the common Papists than you.

III. You are offended at my comparing Bishops to Kings only in this respect,
that they both govern only their proper Provinces, and neither are Rulers of
all the World: And your reason is, because it intimates that Bishops rule like
Kings.

Who can Dispute on these terms? Did I not in the stating of our Question
agree, that it is not the Power of the Sword, but only Ecclesiastical Power of
the Word and Keys, that we Dispute of? Did I not still profess to you to speak
only of this? And does comparing Princes Coactive Government with it, only in
the extent, neither of them being over all the World, contradict this, or wrong
you by unjust intimations?

IV. You take the words [ Aristocratical-Supream Vicarious, under Christ,
Legislative] to be invidious, and you disown them; 1. Because they intimate a
forcing Power like Princes, 2. Because Christ only is Supreme.

But 1. It is not de nomine that we dispute, but de re; and I understand all
this while that we had no other question to debate.

2. I desired still nothing more than that you would state your assertion in
your own words, that I might use no other: You tell me your own words are [
Collegium Pastorum] I tell you again, that names only the subject Matter of
the Power, where our question is de forma, what is their Power which we must
obey.

You next tell me [ It is a College of Pastors having a Ministerial, Ruling,
Judicial Power over the Universal Church] I take up with your own words: Only
remember that before you asserted a Legislative Power (of mutable Laws) and now
it is but judicial! If so, then we owe no Obedience to their Laws, but to their
Sentence according to Christ's Law: How then is obeying them the only way of
Concord?

But say you, It is but mutable Laws that they make? Answ. And are mutable Laws
no Laws. And is he no Legislator that makes but mutable Laws? Neither King nor
Parliament will believe this.

But you say, Canons are not Laws. I thank you for that Concession. So says
Grotius de Imp. sum. Potest. If so, then they are but either Counsels or
Agreements, (Contracts.) It is not de nomine that we contend. A Law, says
Grotius, is Regula actionum Moralium: More fully, A Law is the signification of
a Ruler's Will making the Subjects Duty.] If a Canon be none, then Literae
formatae are none: And where there is no Law, there is no Transgression. Then
no Obedience is due to the Laws of the College of Bishops. And then obeying
them is not the only way of Concord. Authoritas imperantis est objectum formale
Obedientiae: you disown also the word (Pars imperans) I take your own [ Pars
Regens] which to me is of the same Signification as to Ecclesiastical Power.
Jus regendi is that which I mean by Authority, and Debitum Obediendi, by
Subjection. But I think that indeed authorized Pastors may make proper Laws, e.
g. At what Places and Hours to meet: what Translations, Version, Meter, and
such Orders to use; but only to their proper Subjects, and not to all the
Christian World.

V. You Copiously blame us for denying that Obedience to the Universal Church,
which we give to every single Pastor; and thought that I owned no Power but
Parochial.]

I tell you still, 1. I maintain that there were in the first Age (and perhaps
except two Churches, for the second Age and more) no Bishops distinct from
Archbishops but Parochial, and I described them at large.

2. But though Cyprian and the Carthage Council said, Nemo nostrum se dicit
Episcopum Episcoporum; yet I deny not such as may be called Archbishops. Would
you but restore Parish Churches, or at least make true Discipline a practicable
thing, I should never quarrel against your Government.

3. I still tell you that I am for Councils, and that as large when requisite
as they can well be made. And Pastors there agreeing, oblige us to obey their
true Authority far before a single Pastor's: For it is Authoritas Doctoris? and
it is Discipuli Obedientia that is due: And a Teacher's Authority is founded in
his Credibility, and that on his Skill; Oportet discentem credere: And a
thousand Historians, Philosophers, Physicians agreeing, oblige me to greater
belief than a single one. And a Dissenters singularity obliges me to suspicion
and suspension of my belief. Besides, that God binds us to do his work in as
much Love and Concord as we can: And the Canons or Agreements of Councils when
Just do determine the Matter of that Concord.

4. But that which I still repeat to you, is, that I deny the being of any such
Church as you tell me I must necessarily obey; That is, one Ruling Ministerial
College of Pastors over the whole Christian World. I remember no Protestants
that own such a thing but you, and some such of late. Mr. Thorndike and Mr.
Dodwell do imply it, but they speak not fully out. What an unedifying way of
Discourse is it for you so Copiously to call out for our Obedience, when we
only desire you to prove that there is any such Governing College to obey? I
deny the subject of your Question, and you largely prove the Predicate. If you
would spend many hours to tell me, I must obey Gabriel the Angel as the Ruler
of this Kingdom, I only beg of you to prove that he is such a Ruler, and then
to tell me how I shall know his Mind; will your Exhortation to Obedience profit
me?

VI. Your Copious instances of difficult Texts of Scripture that need a sure
Exposition, are no Proof to me, that Ergo There is a College of all the Bishops
on Earth that must be the Expositor. I told you the Eunuch, Act. 8. was not so
resolved of the sense of Isai. 53. It was not the Ancient way. A single Teacher
may resolve a Doubter by Expository Evidence. An agreeing Provincial or
National Council may do more without knowing the Mind of all the World; And
many Texts will be difficult when all the World have done their best.

VII. But you urge that no Scripture is of private Interpretation.

A. 1. All is not Private Interpretation, which is made by Persons, Pastors or
Councils, which are not a College authorized to Rule all the Christian World
(or Church.) If it be, 1. I confess I never received one Article of my Faith,
or Exposition of one Text of Scripture aright: For I never believed one of them
upon [the Authoritative-Ruling-Judicial-Vniversal Power of all Bishops on Earth
as an authorized College.] 2. And I know not one Man living then that
expounds not Scripture by Private Interpretation; 3. And I know not that any
one these Fifteen hundred Years have not done the same.

2. And it is certain that there is no Commentary on the Scripture yet written
by the Universal College of Bishops; And it is harder to deliver it down by
Memory than by Writing.

Therefore all Scripture is in this sense of Private Interpretation; yea, such
Councils as are called General, have expounded little more than the Articles of
the Creed (with sad dissension as to their Votes.)

But I confidently think that you follow a wrong Exposition of the Text, and
that it speaks not of [ an Efficient Interpretation] but [ an Objective, a
Passive, and not an Active] Q. d. you must not interpret Scripture Prophecies
narrowly and privately, as if they spoke but of such or such a private Person,
that was but a present typical object of them: For holy Men spoke as moved by
the Spirit, which looked farther, and meant Christ to come] e. g. you know how
many Prophecies are meant of David and Solomon proximately, and of Christ
ultimately. And you know what Grotius thinks of the proximate sense of [ A
Virgin shall bring forth a Son.] And of Isa. 53, etc. which yet ultimately by
the Holy Ghost is meant of Christ; and whether the Prophet himself knew it
always, many doubt: Josias or Jeremy may be meant as types, and yet Christ
Principal as typified: when David says, My God, why have thou forsaken me?
They pierced my hands and my feet: They divided my garments among them, and
cast lots for my vesture, etc.) and so many Texts cited by St. Matthew, these
are to have no Private Interpretation as of the private Persons, only the first
Objects; for the Holy Ghost intended them to be Prophecies of Christs] when you
bring me any Literae formatae from all the Bishops on Earth for another sense,
the reverence of their Concord will do much to make me forsake this.

Just so the Papists, and too many others distort that 1 Timothy 3.15. (which I
wonder that I heard not from you) when the Text plainly calls the Church, The
House of the living God, and tells Timothy how to behave himself in it, as a
Pillar and Basis of the Truth; it is but putting [ The Pillar] for [ a Pillar]
and then saying, that it is not the title of Timothy, but of the Church, and so
it becomes useful to some men's Opinions.

Therefore still that which I am more confirmed in by your failing to prove
your Affirmative, is [That there never was instituted, and never was existent,
and is not now existent in the World any one Ecclesiastical Ruling Persona
Collectiva Civilis or Governor authorized by Christ to Rule under him all the
Christian World, (that is, all the Church) by Legislation and Judgment, or
either of them, and to Constitute the Universal Church visible, as one by
relation to that One Governor; Especially that all the Bishops on Earth
Governing per literas formatas never were, nor are such a Power, nor yet as
Congregate in an Universal Council.] If such a College of all Bishops on Earth,
ruling all the Christians on Earth by Consent, be the Church which you mean
that all must obey that will have Concord, I say, There is no such Church on
Earth, nor ever will be before the Day of Judgment.

After all this sure you cannot mistake the Question, 1. It is only of an
Ecclesiastical Power by the Word and Keys. 2. It is not whether all Bishops
ruling by Parts in their several Provinces, and keeping Concord in convenient
Meetings or Councils may be said to Govern all the Church (as all the
Magistrates in England Govern all England in Subordination to the King.) But it
is of One Persona Ecclesiastica in whom the Church is relatively called One, as
Venice is one Commonwealth with relation to one Supreme Senate, which rules
the whole.

1. Show me any Literas formatas of all Bishops in the World before the Council
of Nice, yea, or ever since to this day?

2. What need the Council meet, if all Bishops could know each others Mind and
Consent without it, e. g. Did they all agree about Easter Day before? Or about
the extent of Patriarchs Jurisdictions. 3. There was never a General Council in
the World; It was called General only as to one Empire: The Emperors that
called them, had no Power elsewhere: The Subscriptions show you that none other
came; yea, and but a part of the Empire. Few out of the West were at any great
Councils.

4. Heticks have had as great Councils as ever had the Orthodox, and as much
Consenting. And the disallowed have been as great as the approved; Sola
navicula Petri, as I said out of Binnius escaped Drowning at Ephesians. 2.

5. There never must nor will be an Universal Council of all the Church
hereafter, as I have elsewhere proved, And is the Universal Regent Ministerial
Church extinct these Thousand Years? How can we obey a Power that is not?

6. But you say, I confess that the Roman Empire was seven Parts of the Church:
Answ. Your haste overlooked my exception of the Empire of Abassia, which
Brierwood says, is now as great as Italy, Germany, France and Spain: and was
incomparably greater heretofore; And you may gather from Damianus a Goes,
Alvarez, and especially Godignuus de rebus Abassinorum, that, they had
Christianity from the Eunuch mentioned Act. 8. And it is certain that their case
was much unknown to Rome it self, till the Portugals and Oviedo's late access.
And though now they give some Preeminence to the Patriarch of Alexandria, that
is but since the Banishment of Nestorius and Dioscorus, who thereupon carried
the Interest of their Parties without the Empire into other Lands. Of Abassia
see more in Ludolphus since come out.

7. Either this Vnum Collegium Omnium Episcoporum must rule the Church
Universal by a Major Vote, or by Consent of all Bishops in the World. If the
former, where shall they meet to Vote? who shall gather them? how many Years or
Ages will it be doing? How shall all Christians know that they are truly
gathered? Shall we, till we know the Major Vote of all Bishops on Earth,
suspend our Obedience? and have no Faith, no Concord till then? If all must
Consent, or almost all, the case will be still harder, how to procure, and how
to know it: May the Heretic keep his Heresy till all the Bishops on Earth
condemn him per literas formatas, or otherwise? When e. g. the Nestorians or
Eutychians or Monothelites have the greater number of Bishops one Year or Age,
and the lesser the next; Is Bishops Consent the determining ruling Power?

8. Either this One ruling Church is necessary in all Ages, or only in some, or
at least the exercise of their Power: If in all, the Church is extinct or
ungoverned, either these 1500 Years, except during your Six Councils, or all
the time that we have had no Universal Government by them: If but in some Ages,
why not in the rest as well? And is not the Church still the same thing in
specie, and for the same use and ends.

VIII. You say all Heresies are Condemned already. Answ. 1. Yes, Virtually by
God's Word, Rectum est index sui and Obliqui. 2. But if you say Actually in
their form, How great is your Mistake! The Devil could invent a Thousand more
yet. My long Catalogue of Errors to be forbidden in my Book of the Churches
Concord will tell you of enough that are too possible.

2. If the use of your Ruling Church ended so long ago, why does not the Church
end? or how are we to be Governed by it, when it does not Govern? I never heard
from it since I was born by any Literae formatae. To say, I must obey the old
Canons, is to say I must obey a Government that was, and not one that now is
and Governs. The Pope I could possibly send to: Old Councils I can read: But
how to hear* from a College of all the Bishops on Earth, that never see or hear
of one another or me, and that are broken into so many Sects, I know not. I
have my self, with some Wise and Able Divines, Pleaded the Cause that you Plead
for, to try what they could say to me: And they answer me with Laughter, as if
I were Distracted for talking of all being Governed by all the Bishops on
Earth, as one ruling College by Consent or Vote.

IX. You lay much stress on the Church, being (our Mother). And Solomon saying,
[ Obey the Law of thy Mother] Answ. 1. You may possibly believe that Solomon by
[ Mother] meant an universally Governing College of Bishops] but when will you
prove it? 2. You cannot name one Text that I know of that calls the Church
[our Mother] except Gal. 4.26. And there 1. You suppose that by [ Jerusalem
which is above] is meant the Church which is on Earth: which I know many others
think: But it is uncertain. 2. And when will you prove that by Jerusalem, is
meant your Ruling College. 3. Or that it speaks of any one Universal
Government. The word [ Mother] is a Metaphor: And Similitudes prove nothing but
the Point of Assimilation. The Text expressly says that It is called our
Mother, because she has many Children. But these Children are not begotten by
All the Bishops in One Voting College, as Universal Rulers, but by particular
Pastors. And so that one Church of Christ has many begotten and ruled per
parts.

X. You still lay much on [ The Nation that will not serve thee, shall Perish.]
And you bring three or four Fathers to prove that spoken of the Christian
Church. And you say still the Church is no where taken for Christ.

I answer, 1. As the Kingdom includes the King and Magistrates as the only
Governors, so does the Church include Christ and his Ministers: 2. I believe
that it is meant of the Universal Church: But three Fathers Interpretation or
threescore is a Private one compared to your College. 3. All Power is given to
Christ: Princes are his Ministers. Infidels that are Converted to serve the
Church, must serve Christian Magistrates as well as Bishops. And it is as likely
to be specially meant of Magistrates: For Bishops destroy not the Disobedient,
nor so much as Excommunicate the Infidel World: What have we to do to Judge
them that are without? But Princes conquer and destroy resisting Enemies. So
that this Text will no more prove One ruling College of Bishops over all, than
one Monarch or College of Kings to rule all the World; nor so probably.

4. The Nations serve the Church, 1. When they Obey the King of all the Church,
2. and his Universal Laws. 3. And his Officers ruling per parts in their
several Provinces by Word and Sword. 4. And serve the good of the whole* as the
end of Government: Stretch the words on any Rack that is not against reason,
and besides these four, you can never prove one Universal ruling College.

XI. You say, God is not the visible Head of the World, and Men have access to
Kings, but not to Christ.

Answ. God is the King or Supreme Governor of all the World; and you have no
more visible access to the Father than to the Son: And particular Pastors are
as accessible as Kings: And Church Government, which like a Physician, or
Tutor, depends on personal Skill, may much less be performed by absent Men at
the Antipodes, than Civil Government.

XII. But it is said, [ It is the whole Churches reception of Canons, though
Councils be not properly Universal, tha^ makes the Obligation Universal.

Answ. If they bind not by the Imposers Power, they were not received as
binding Universally: If Reception be the Obligatory Act, Subjection is
Government, and Lay Men and Women govern by receiving. And I have proved how
mutable and how uncertain Reception is: They say all the Church was against
Adoration by genuflexion on the Lord's Day, and for Milk and Honey, and the
white Garment in Baptism: And yet particular Churches laid them down before any
Universal Judicature allowed it.

XIII. Qu. If you know that all the Bishops of the World receive any Doctrine
or Practice as needful or good, will not you do so too? and do you not so
receive the Creed and Bible?

Answ. 1. I receive the Laws of the Land only as authorized by the Lawgivers:
But I know them to be the same Laws that the King and Parliament made, by the
concurrent Testimony and Use of all Judges, Lawyers and People of the Land,
(and Proclamation by the Proclaimers) But I know them not by my obeying all
these Judges, Justices and People as one authorized College, that is under the
King to Govern the whole Land: So here, I know the Writings of Homer, Virgil,
Cicero, to be theirs the more confidently by Universal Tradition: But not
because I believe that all the Witnesses in the World that have so received
them, are Commissioned to be Rulers or a Judicature to the World; I receive
Divine Truths as Delivered in the Creed and Scriptures, as from Christ and his
Apostles, especially Commissioned and qualified to teach all Men whatever he
commanded them, and this by the hand of my Parents and Pastors; and since I
understood History common consent puts me the more out of doubt of the Matter
of Fact, that these are their true Writings and Doctrines: But not from the
Bishops, as one College Commissioned to rule all the World or Church on Earth.
And alas, how few are so well verst in History as to know much of this.

To know what is received now ab omnibus ubique is too hard: But to know the
semper is much harder especially when the Filioque and the (...), and many such
like, have had more for them in one Prince's Reign, and more against them in
another, and so off and on; and to know which had most was impossible, to most
Christians: How few know at this day whether the [ Filioque] have more for it,
or against it? Not I, nor any Traveller that I have spoke with.

XIV. But you would not for a World be guilty of saying what I have written of
Councils; 1. As if they were to be abhorred for their Faults. 2. You say, How
great Matters the Articles of two Natures and Wills and of one Person are, and
no small nor wordy difference.

Answ. 1. I can mention Men's Faults without abhorring them, I honor them for
their good, and am for the use of needful modest Councils of good Men.

2. I doubt not but the Matters determined were weighty: But how far Persons
wronged and misunderstood one another, and strove about words when they meant
the same thing, I have not nakedly said, but proved to you. When Theodosius
forced by threatening Cyril and Johannes Antioch. and Theodoret to agree, did
they not confess that they had wrongfully anathematized each other, and were of
one Mind, and did not know it? Have I not proved to you that Nestorius denied
two Persons? and that Cyril often asserteth but one Nature after the Union? Do
you indeed think that [One] and [Two] are words that have but one
signification? Have I not proved the Ambiguity, and the Misunderstanding of
each other in too many? But O how hard it is to be Impartial and to Repent,
when Contentious Bishops in Councils have notoriously torn the Churches, drawn
streams of Blood, Cursed and Reproached one another, and Cursed that Cursing it
self and their Party the next change, and have overthrown the Empire, and set
up the Pope by striving about Jurisdiction and hard words, who shall be
greatest and wisest, must not this which cannot be hid be lamented? If Cyril
were but half as bad as Joh. Antioch. Theodoret, Isidore, Pelusiota, Socrates
and Sozomen, etc. make him, how partial were his Admirers? But I see it is as
hard for Bishops to repent as other Men, when their Self-esteem and Dignity
seems to themselves to entitle them to the reputation of Sanctity and
Innocence: And if they divide the Christian World as woefully as the West and
East, and the Abassines, Copties, Jacobites, Nestorians, Armenians,
Protestants, etc. are divided at this day, or should they Silence Thousands of
Faithful Ministers of Christ for not Sinning, or for Nothing, and bring thereby
Confusion and Schisms, among serious Christians to the hardening of the
Profane and Heretics, it will seem to some a more heinous Sin to name their
Sin, and call them to Repentance, than in them to commit it. And yet one may
name the Sins of a Thief or Drunkard, and call him to Repentance without blame.
But have I said half so ill by them, as they said by one another? They
anathematized each other, but so do not I by them; What say I worse of the
first and best of your Six Councils than Eusebius and Constantine said of them,
when he burnt their accusing Libels against each other?

2. What say I worse of the first Council at Constantinople than Greg.
Nazianzen says? I do but recite his words and the History? Did they not set
him up in the beginning, and pull him down at the end? (and for what)?

3. What say I of the first Ephesians. Council but what the recorded Acts do tell
us? How they divided into two Parts, and each Excommunicated the Leaders of the
other, and the Orthodox Part fought with the other notwithstanding the
Endeavors of the Emperor's Lieutenant to have kept the Peace; and yet when
they had done, found that they had been of one Mind, and knew it not, (except
Nestorius.) And how much hand a Woman had in it against him, the History tells
us.

4. Have I said so much against that at Chalcedon as the many Councils that
anathematized them did? or more than they said of themselves when they cried
Omnes Peccavimus for Voting with Dioscorus and the Eutychians at Council Ephesians.
2. I would fain know, when as the greater Part of the Empire and Church was
against this Council, in the days of Zeno, Basiliscus, and Anastasius, by what
means every Christian should then have known the sense of the Universal Church.
At Jerusalem the Orthodox rebelliously resisted the Emperor's Lieutenants, and
put them to ^light in defense of this Council (following a Monk that compared
the four Councils to the four Evangelists) and sent the Emperor word that they
would spend their Blood for it: And yet even there, before, the prevailing Part
had condemned it. At Antioch the Bishop and Monks fought it out to so much
Blood, that the Monks Carcasses could have no Grave but the River Orontes: At
Constantinople and Alexandria the Matter often was little better. Are these
things indifferent or jesting Matters of small Infirmity?

5. And the 5th General Council Constable. 2. was thought long by a great Part of
the Church to have contradicted the* 4th de tribus Capitulis, and was so much
disowned, that even Venice, Liguria, Istria, etc. renounced the Pope and Roman
Primacy for Owning it, and chose a Patriarch at Aquileia to be the Primate
instead of Rome; which long continued, till Sergius reconciled them.

6. And that Council. Trullanum called Quino-Sextum which you own as the same
with the Fifth, is disowned by the Roman Party to this day, and accused by them
to have been Monothelites. (Vid. Binnium) And yet said to be the same Men who
were the Second Constable. Council: And so they make that Second also to have been
Monothelites.

6. And the next, Constable. Third were condemned by the Seventh General at Nice,
as heinous Sinners for condemning Church Images, and even Helvicus, with other
Lutherans, call it Synodum Iconoma^hicam quam O^cumenicam dici voluerunt. And I
think that the Church of Rome disowneth the Doctrine both of it and the Second
of Nice, which has agreed that Christ's Body is not flesh in Heaven.

Now I would know while these Councils thus anathematized each other, or
lamented their own former Errors, as Voting by Fear or Mistake, and while most
of the Bishops declared against any of them as they often did, and when
Heraclius, Philippicus or other Emperors were Monothelites, and the Major part
of the Bishops followed them, how common Christians should know whom to Obey.

XV. I remember that you also pleaded Christ's words, Hear the Church] But he
says also, [ Tell the Church] even the same Church which we must Hear. And
verily here I am utterly at a loss. Christ I know and Paul I know should be
heard, but who are this one Universally ruling College for me to to hear? yea,
the Pope may be told and heard; but how to tell or hear a College that dwell
all over the Earth, I know not, I cannot hope to live long enough to send to,
or hear from Abassia, Armenia, Syria, Mengrelia, Georgia, Circassia, and all
the Greek Churches, and to Mexico, and perhaps the Antipodes; nor do I think
our Salvation lies so much on our Skill in Geography, that we must know that
there are any such Countries in the World, nor a Rome or a Constantinople, etc.
And I cannot think that most of the World, will ever hear that there is such a
Man as I in being; nor that one of a thousand of the Bishops ever hear the
Names, or know the Opinions of all the rest, or of the one half of them: And if
I were rich enough to hire a Messenger to go all over the Earth, and were so
foolish as to hope to live till he returned, I must take their Votes on the
Credit of the Messengers Word, which is a sandy Ground for Church Communion and
Salvation. Nay, I cannot hope to live to see a General Council, much less to
see the end of it, and to be certain of their Votes and Sentence: And if I knew
that I had all the Bishops on Earth for one Opinion, I am not certain whether
most of the Presbyters (being an hundred to one) be not against them; and in
England the Presbyters are part of the Convocation, which is the Representative
Church. Had I lived on Earth when the Council of Nice was contradicted at
Sirmium, Ariminum, Tire, Milan, and the World groaned to find it self turned
Arrian: Or when they were Anathematizing each other, and fighting at the first
Ephesians. Council: Or when the 2d Nicene were condemning the second Constable. Or when
Vigilius was dragged by a Rope at Constable. by Justinian's Command, and the
Patriarch of Aquileia set up against Rome; or when the Trull. Canons were made
by Men now called Monothelites; or when innumerable Monothelite Bishops met
under Philippicus, etc. I could not possibly have told how to know the
Governing Judgment of the College of Bishops that live all over the Earth. Nay,
when you own no Council since the Sixth, why will no Importunity entreat you to
tell me, whether for these Thousand Years last the Universal Church was
Governed by one College, and what Governing Act this College has so long
exercised over all the Christian World? And how it was known? And whether their
Literae formatae are to be found written? And where? Or are only transmitted to
all the World by Memory? and by whose Memory? and of whom we may all enquire of
them with certain Satisfaction? Or whether the Church has been this Thousand
Years no Church, or Ungoverned.

You say the Council at Frankford condemned that at Nice: How shall I know
which the College owned at the time of the sitting of each Council? How few
Councils were ever so great as that at Basil? Can you tell me how to be sure
whether the College be more for it or against it at this day?

Bear with me for telling you, that if I had not found that you are a Man of
strong Passions, and full of your self, and of undoubting Confidence in your
Apprehensions, I should wonder how so Studious, Learned and Sober a Man could
possibly take either Union, Communion, or Salvation, to lie upon Men's Belief
of, and Obedience to such a College as all the Bishops on Earth: And if you
take the Creed to mean this as the Holy Catholic Church, I shall not wonder if
you take me, [and almost all the Protestants that ever I knew or read,] for
Heretics; and having twice admonished me, and not convinced me, if you avoid
me, and should not only Seventeen Years silence me, but banish or burn me, if
you are for such execution upon Heretics; or at least take me, and all such as
I, to be intolerable, and use us accordingly.

XVI. I will sum up the Difference between you and me in a Similitude. All
Power in Heaven and Earth, and all Judgment is given to Christ. The Creator's
Government by Civil Rulers he changes not, but is now their Sovereign King.
His Church he Governs as a Savior and a Teacher, and their Heavenly High
Priest: It is his School, and we are his Disciples; I suppose that God the
Father and Christ is the only Rightful, Universal, Civil and Church-Monarch,
and none else can give Laws, or exercise Judgment over the whole Earth; but
that Magistrates and Pastors are Commissioned by God to their several
Provinces, Governing the whole only per parts between them; and God, as the
Monarch, makes them such Universal Laws as they must Rule and be Ruled by. And
that there is no more proof of one Ecclesiastic Humane Judicature to Rule all
the World, than of one Civil one, and less probability: But that Princes and
Pastors must do all by the best Advantages of Unity, Love and Concord, and keep
such Synods and Correspondencies as are necessary to that end; I suppose that
every Kingdom has its own King and Inferior Magistrates Ruling by their
several Courts and Circuits, and by the Kings Laws; but not Ruling all the
Kingdom as one College of a Voting Synod of Judges, Justices and Majors. If
Senates have any where a Supremacy, it is from the peculiar Constitution of
that Commonwealth; and there is no Institution of a College of Kings (or one
Monarch) to Rule all the Earth: But their Unity is centred in God that is one.

I suppose that the King has ordained that all Free-Schools in England,
Scotland and Ireland, shall have each their proper Schoolmasters, one to a
small School, and to a great one a Chief Master, with under Schoolmasters; and
he has made an Order that they shall teach E. g. Lilly's Grammar, and
faithfully perform their Trust, or be put out by them that have the Power: And
if any School-Difficulty occur, they may do well to consult for their Mutual
Help.

But you seem to add, g. d. as if, 1. All the World is one Humane School,
though under several Kings. 2. None is a Member of this School that is not
under the College of Schoolmasters that dwell all over the World, and never
know one another, and that does not live in Obedience to that College. 3. All
these Schoolmasters of the whole World must meet by themselves or Delegates in
General Councils. 4. All Schools must receive Canons from these Councils, and
be judged by them, and bring their Accusation (at least Appeals) to them, from
all Nations of the Earth. 5. All the Schoolmasters of the several Kingdoms must
hold National Assemblies in those Kingdoms [or Provinces] as a College of
Governors to the whole Land. 6. A Thousand, or many Hundred or Scores Local
particular Schools must be Schools but equivocally so called, and have all but
one proper Schoolmaster, who alone must have the Keys of them, and judge of
each Scholar that is, 1. admitted, 2. corrected, 3. or put out. 7. All these
Schools under this Diocesan Schoolmaster shall have his Ushers, (and no proper
Schoolmasters) who shall have Power to teach those that will learn, and to tell
the proper Schoolmaster, (perhaps One Hundred, Eighty or Twenty Miles off) of
every Boy that deserves to be corrected or put out. But none of these Ushers
shall have Power, 1. To judge whom to take or refuse, or what Boys to correct,
nor to correct them till commanded by the Diocesan Master: 3. Nor to put out
any till he bids him: 4. Nor to forbear correcting or casting out any when
commanded, though he know them to be the best.

I think this, 1. Deposes all the Inferior Schools, and robs them of proper
Schoolmasters, which are their due. 2. And deposes the Ushers, that should be
mostly Schoolmasters. 3. And makes School-Government an impossible thing,
while one only in a Diocese is to use that which he cannot do. 4. And thereby
overthrows Learning, and introduces Barbarousness. 5. And brings in a new
sort of Diocesan Schoolmasters, who will undo the Scholars and themselves by
undertaking Impossibilities.

But I disallow not, 1. A Chief Schoolmaster in each School. 2. Nor needful
Overseers or Visitors to see that all Schoolmasters do their Duty. 3. Nor that
the King and Justices keep them all to their Duty, and make Laws that they
truly teach the Sacred Scriptures, and correct those Schoolmasters who by their
Insufficiency, or Unfaithfulness deserve it.

Again, I tell you, 1. Make us no Universal Governor but Christ. 2. And restore
the Power of necessary Discipline to the Parish-Churches, or at least make
Christ's Church Discipline a possible practicable thing, and you will reconcile
many Nonconformists to you. But to say only one Schoolmaster, with mere
Teaching-Ushers, shall Govern many Hundred Schools, or one Bishop many Hundred
Churches, or rather Oratories and Chapels that are made but parts of one true
Church infimae specici; this is in English to say, that there shall be no
considerable Government of such Schools or Churches at all, and to put it down
on pretense of having the Power to do it. And yet by the Charity and Justice of
many that now Write and Preach against us, we are all unruly, intolerable,
rebellious Schismatics, and against Bishops, for desiring more Bishops, at
least one to every (...)* or Corporation, that Discipline might be a possible
thing, I have in many Years (of Liberty) tried without Rigor so much as all
Church-Canons agree to be necessary, in a Congregation that had not Three
Thousand Souls, and was unable for it with the assistance of Three Presbyters,
when one Parish about London has Thirty Thousand, and Forty Thousand, if not
Sixty Thousand Souls, and most, or many, far less Governable.

XVII. The Essentials of the Sacred Office are, 1. Power or Right; 2.
Obligation to; 3. The Work. 1. The Work, you say, is to Rule the Church
Universal on all the Earth, not only separately per parts, but as Vnum
Collegium, which is Vna Persona Politica. 2. The Power is Jus Regendi. 3. The
Obligation makes it their Duty.

The Apostles were sent first to Preach the Gospel to every Creature, or all
Mankind, and make them Christians; and after to Teach them all Christ's Doctrine
and Law, and to Rule them by Pastoral Guidance thereby.

2. If the College of Bishops be their Successors, are they bound to that Work
in uno Collegio, which the Apostles did each one apart? That is, deliver
Christ's Commands, and guide the Churches. If, yea, are they not bound in uno
Collegio, to Preach to all the Heathen World? And then, are they not guilty of
the Damnation of most of the World for not so Preaching to them?

3. If you say that it is only a Regiment that they must do in uno Collegio, or
per Literas formatas, do you not make the whole Pastoral Church guilty of
perfidious Negligence, (as a Pastor would be, that never guided his Flock) for
not at all performing any such Government? What one Act of Government has the
College performed in our Age? or in the Age foregoing? or in any Age according
to your self since Constant. Pogonatus his sixth (or seventh) Council? And was
it only the Church of those Ages that was bound to Govern? Then it was they
only that were Authorized, or had the Office and Power: For Obligation to the
Work (though not ad hic and nunc) is Essential to the Office as well as
Authority: Or will the Performance of the Bishops of the Fourth and Fifth
Centuries excuse all that succeed them to the end of the World from any
Performance? Why then not from all Pastoral Guidance? And are they not then
degraded?

XVIII. We are against Singularity in Matters of Faith: We believe that all
Christ's Church shall never err from any one Essential of Christianity or
Communion; else it would thereby cease to be a Church: But we believe General
Councils (such as the Empire had) have erred so far as to condemn each other of
Heresy. We persuade all Men to believe as the Church believes; that is, to
receive that from the Apostles, quod ab omnibus ubique and semper receptum
fuit, which the Church received and delivered as from them with known common
Consent, and to suspect odd Opinions, Novelties and Singularities.

But Protestants against Papists commonly use these Distinctions: 1. Authority
of a Governor by Legislation, and Judgment, or either, is one thing. 2.
Doctoral Authority (like a Philosopher in a School of Consenters) is another.
3. The Authority of Witnesses (which is their Obliging Credibility) is another.
4. The Authority of a Steward, or Keeper of Records, is another. 5. The
Authority of a Herald, or Crier, or Messenger, (to publish Laws) is another. 6.
And the Authority of Contractors in Mutual Self-Obligation, is another.

Accordingly they hold, 1. That there is no one Universal Head, Governor, or
Summa Potestas Ecclesiastica, to Rule the whole by Legislation or Judgment,
Personal or Collective, but Christ.

2. That there is no one Person, Natural or Political, that is bound or
authorized to be the Teacher of the whole World or Church; but that all Pastors
must Teach and Guide in their several Provinces.

3. That the larger and more uncontrouled the Testimony is, the greater is the
Credibility and Authority of the Witnesses: And therefore if all the Churches
in the World, as far as we can learn, agree, de facto, that these are the
Books, Doctrines, and practiced Ordinances which they received; and especially
when Heretics or Infidels, and Enemies that would gainsay it, cannot with any
probability, we thus receive the said Books and Practices, (as Baptism, etc.)
ex Authoritate Testium, and not ex Authoritate Judicis Regentis; or else
Laymen, (such as Origin, when he was a more credible Witness of the Text than
an Hundred unlearned Bishops, and such as Hierom, that was no Bishop, of whom I
say the same) yea, and Women, yea Heretics and Infidels, (such as Pliny, etc.)
would be Church-Rulers.

4. All Pastors being by Office to Preach Christ's Word, and Ministerially
Officiate accordingly, are thereby especially entrusted with the keeping of
these Sacred Records, as Lawyers while they daily use them, are with the Laws,
and the Universal Testimony of such Officers is the most credible part of the
Witnesses Work; or if not Universal, the more the better. 5. Every Pastor is as
a Crier to proclaim Christ's Laws. 6. And in Circumstances left to Mutable
Humane Determination, the more common Consent (Caeteris paribus) the better.
And this is the use of Councils; this is enough: But the Protestants that I
have known and read, do make it our first Controversy with the Papists,
Whether Christ ever Instituted any one Head or Ruling Power over all the
Church, under himself? And, 2. Whether Pope or Council be such? Both which they
deny.

XIX. If you have not read it, I entreat you read in the Cabal-Supplement King
Henry the VIII's Letter to the Archbishop and Clergy of the Province of York,
where you will find, 1. Your cited seeming Contradictions of Scripture,
answered by use of Speech and Reason, without any Universal Judicature. 2. That
Dic Ecclesiae cannot be meant of the Church Universal. 3. That the Universal
Church has no Head or Governor but Christ, but the Clergy subserve him, as
Ministers by whom he gives Spiritual Grace, and quae Spiritu aguntur libera
sunt, and nulla Lege astringuntur; and if the Teachers do their Office with
scandal, Magistrates must punish them, and that it is the Ecclesia quae non
Constat ex bonis and malis, which the King is not the Head of: But that in
Spirituals, as the word signifies Spiritual Persons and their Goods and Works,
and the enforcing the Observances of Gods Laws, the King is Head: And the
reason of the word [ Head] notably vindicated, with much more.

XX. I crave your Pardon both for the Prolixity and Boldness, while I add this
Question* (not as accusing you of Popery, Perjury or Disloyalty;) How can I be
cleared from the guilt of Perjury, and Disloyalty, if having taken the Oath of
Supremacy, and subscribed according to the Canons, etc. I shall plead for the
subjecting of the King and all Subjects to a Foreign Power in Spirituals? when
the Oath disclaimeth it, and the Can. 1. says, That [ all Usurped and Foreign
Power has no Establishment or Ground by the Law of God, and is for most just
Causes taken away and abolished, and therefore no manner of Obedience or
Subjection within His Majesty's Realms and Dominions is due to ANY SVCH Foreign
Power.

And all Ministers subscribe Can. 36. against all Foreign Power, as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or Causes, as Temporal.

And Articl. 21. General Councils may not be gathered together without the
Commandment and Will of Princes: (And when will all Princes, Orthodox,
Heretical, Mohammedan, Heathen, Enemies in War, etc. agree to gather them out
of all the World?) And when they be gathered together, (for as much as they be
an Assembly of Men whereof all be not Governed with the Spirit and Word of God)
they may err, and sometime have erred even in things pertaining to God;
wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have no Strength
nor Authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of the Holy
Scriptures. (And does Church-Unity, Concord, and Salvation, lie on things not
necessary to Salvation?) If you say, that none of this speaks against Foreign
Ecclesiastical Power, such as the Apostles had; I answer, 1. Not against a
Foreigners Preaching and Baptizing, and Celebrating the Lord's Supper, if he be
where we are, (and there he is no Foreigner:) But against all Foreigners proper
Government of Men as their Subjects. The Apostles Commission in that was
extraordinary, and yet they Ruled Doctorally none but Voluntary Consenters. 2.
The Law, Oath, Canon and Articles disclaim such Power as the Pope claims
here: But the Pope claims proper Ecclesiastical Government, and most English
and French Papists (and half the rest I think) claim for him only the power of
the Word and Keys, and not any forcing Power by the Sword.

XXI. As hence, I wonder not that Mr. Thorndike threateneth England, unless we
right the Papists by altering the Oath of Supremacy; so I conclude with another
Request, That seeing Dr. Heylin, and many others of you, honor Melanchthon,
you will read his Epistle to King Henry the VIII. Epistolarum Vol. 1. per
Pencer. Edit. Anno 1570. page 59.60. etc. But especially Ep. de Ratisb. act. p.
188. etc. and de Wormat. Colloq. p. 201. etc. where he speaks against Eccius
and other Papists overvaluing Councils, and making them Legislators and Judges
to us, and tying the Church to the ordinary succession of Bishops, and
Obedience to their Laws, and imagining the Church to be like Civil Polities,
Page 191. [1. Humano more Constituit in Ecclesia Potestatem interpretationis,
propemodum ut de praetoria potestate interpretandarum Legum Jurisconsulti
Loquuntur. 2. Addit amplius non licere privatis, non paucioribus reprehendere
judicia Majoris partis seu dissentire a suffragiis plurimorum. 3. Majorum
Synodorum sententiis and decretis parendum esse, etc. -- In Ecclesia long alia
res est. -- In hoc coetu non potest as alligata est certis personis aut certae
multitudini, sed donum est aliquorum piorum: Id est, lumen divinum, quo
intelligunt sapientiam in Evangelio traditam, quae est supra rationis humanae
judicium Posita. Page 195. addit Vinculum dilectionis a Paulo Vocari
Obedientiam Praestandam Episcopis Ordinaria successione regnantibus and eorum
legibus, -- Yet Synods and Discipline he was for, by present faithful Pastors.

And Luther, Lib. de Conciliis, speaks (as was his way) more sharply of
Councils, telling us what their Work is, and is not; and that one Augustine
has taught the Church more than all the Councils that ever were, yea one
Catechism: And that before the Council of Nice, Arianism was but a Jest in
Comparison of what it grew to afterward, (though doubtless the Council did well
in condemning it) and he justifies Nazianzen's Words of Councils: And except
the undeniable Evidence of David Derodon, he says more than I have seen in any
to vindicate Nestorius, as certainly holding one Person and sound Doctrine in
sense, but for want of Learning, taking it for an improper Speech to say that
God was begotten of Mary, killed, risen, etc. And that the Controversy of the
Ephesians. Council and him was but about Words. And I think he that reads but
Derodon's Citations of the Words of Cyril, will think me rather charitable than
injurious, for saying that though his Words were Eutychian, he meant also
better than he spoke.

Ri. Baxter.


REader, The Bishop's repetition in Conference (before and with Dr. Beveridge
and Dr. Saywell) occasioned my over-tedious Repetitions: But you may perceive
they have not been wholly in vain, while at the last the Bishop was forced, I.
To deny Canons to be Laws: And then what is their Churches Legislative Power?
and how can we obey a Law that is no Law? And why are we called to Swear
Canonical Obedience? or why are we called Schismatics for not obeying them?
And if they might be called Laws to their proper Subjects, can Usurping
Foreigners therefore make us Laws?

II. He is put to disown the Names of Universal Sovereignty, and Summa
Potestas, but only as Invidious, that is, as opening that which they would hide
by other Names fitted to deceive: And yet maintains the thing, and calls them
Rectors and Universal Governors: As if Jus regendi in Supreme Rectors were not
the same thing, and that which he knew we were to dispute.

III. When he has often pleaded for Obedience to the Universal Church and its
Laws, and made Law-making its work, he is fain at last to reduce it almost to
Sentence and Execution. And in his many instances of such Judging Powers to
name not one that requires an Universal Human Judge.

IV. He was angry at the Argument fetched from the incapacity of an Universal
King or Civil Senate; But why? Only, as invidious? that is, As detecting their
Error; And says, that it intimates that they claim a Kingly forcing Power,
whereas he knew that I professed the contrary of them, and only brought a
comparing Argument. But if they had claimed no forcing Power, or made Princes
believe that they were bound to be their Hangmen or Executioners, the World had
suffered less, and they know that their Curses would have been despised as
bruta fulmina, and Protestants would have said Procul a Jove Procul a fulmine.

V. He could never be got to give up the least show of a Satisfactory account,
where his Collegium Pastorum out of Councils was to be found, or whom it
consisted of? They dare not go to Patriarchs whatever they think, as knowing
how far, and where they long have been, and most against them.

VI. Nor could he be got to answer my instances of the incapacity of Councils;
nor my proof that they were not of terrestrial, but only of National (Imperial)
Universality.

VII. Nor would he answer my proof of the utter incapacity, either of one Man,
or one College; for Universal Government of all the World.

VIII. Nor to answer my proof that his Universal Sovereignty is the most
essential Point of that which Protestants call Popery.

IX. Nor my Reasons that a Pope's Headship is not so impossible as this same,
though both are impossible.

X. Nor the plain Evidence, that this way must needs bring us under the
Government of the Pope himself, and every King and Kingdom under the Government
of foreign Subjects, and of those Princes whose Subject-Bishops make the
greatest Number in Councils.

XI. And we cannot be informed how their Form of Government differs from the
French, and that the French are no Papists. And that they that since Laud's
time have studied a Coalition, would not receive them to our cost.

XII. Nor yet how the Nation and Clergy shall be saved from Perjury that are
all Sworn against all Foreign Jurisdiction.

For it is a vain Argument that says, The Oath of Supremacy renounceth no
Jurisdiction but what the King owneth: But the King disowneth Ecclesiastical
Spiritual Jurisdiction.

For, 1. Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Jurisdiction are expressly named. 2. The
Oath renounceth it as Foreign, because it is against the King to be under the
Power of Foreigners. The King chooses his own Pastors, and Rules them by the
Sword, (as he does his Physicians) though he profess not to be a Pastor
himself, nor to Administer the Word, Sacraments or Keys.

And the new Oath, called the Test, expressly abjureth the Foreign Jurisdiction
of any Prince, Prelate, etc. Spiritual and Ecclesiastical.

It Is ludicrous jesting with Oaths for any to say, by [ Prelate] is not
excluded [ Many Prelates in a College or Council, but some one]: If One, much
more many; as Prince and Potentate excludes many. And all our present Clergy
that are in the Parliament and Convocation, have taken this Oath or Test: and
they call themselves the Church-representative: And if after this they should
be for a Foreign Jurisdiction (and specially Universal) in a College, or a
Council, or a Pope, or a Council and College under the Pope as President, their
Subscription to our Articles, and their usage of Oaths, would be no invitation
to Dissenters to imitate them, or Conform.

Chap. XIX. Mr. Henry Dodwell's Leviathan further Anatomized.
. 1. I Have already elsewhere (in two Books) detected the Schismatical and
Tyrannical Doctrine of Mr. Dodwell in his tedious voluminous Accusation of the
Reformed Churches as damnable Schismatics, that Sin against the Holy Ghost,
and have No right to Salvation by Christ. I recite now a few Passages that show
the Constitution of the Church he Pleads for.

Page 73. The Essential work of the Ministry according to my Principles, is to
transact between God and Man; to Seal Covenants on behalf of God, and to accept
of those which are made by Men, and to oblige them to perform their part of the
Covenant by otherwise authoritatively excluding them from God's part. Paul
says, I was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel of Christ, Mat. 28.
And Paul to Timothy tell us of other parts as Essential: They can include or
exclude none but those that include and exclude themselves, which shall be
effectual whatever the Priest say or do; He is but a Minister, Invester and
Declarer of it.
Hence results the whole Power of Ecclesiastical Government. And for this, No
great Gifts and Abilities are Essential. All the Skill that is requisite
essentially, is only in general to know the Benefits to be performed on God's
part, and the Duties to be performed on Man's, and the Nature and Obligation of
Covenants in general, and the particular Solemnities of Ecclesiastical
Covenants; And of this how any Man can be incapable, who is but capable of
understanding the common Dealings of the World -- Then a Moscovian Priest may
serve, or such as Optandus Bishop of Geneva was, illiterate: and one may be
taken from any Shop or Cart that understands the Dealings of the World. But how
much more requires Paul to Timothy, and Chrysostom, etc. 2. And yet I, and all
of my Degree, yea, all the Ministers or the Reformed Churches that disown his
Leviathan, are incapable of Ministry or Christian Communion by our ignorance.
3. But is the Nature of the Covenant-Benefits, Duties, etc. so easily known as
he talks? And yet must we Perish for not knowing them.


Page 72. He shows that Immoralities of Life are not sufficient to deprive
them of this High Power.

And of the Power it self he says, Page 80, 81. It is not stated in Scripture,
but to be measured by the Intention of the Ordainers, and that the Hypothesis
(of God's settling in Scripture) is irreconcilable with Government in this
Life, by permitting Men to appeal to Writings against all the visible Authority
of this Life. Note here, that though his Priesthood have the Power of saving or
damning Men; yet he confesses the very office in Specie is not of God's
making. For if it be not stated in Scripture, it is not in the mere Law of
Nature; And our Church-Changers are no Prophets: And if God made not the
office, then the arrogated Power is not his Gift.
On the contrary (says he) Our Hypothesis obliging inferior Governors to
prove their Title to their office, and the extent of it from the intention of
their Superior Governors, does oblige all to a strict dependence on the
Supreme visible Power, so as to leave no place for Appeals concerning the
Practice of such Government (which as it lasts only for this life, so it ought
not to admit of Disputes more lasting than its Practice) from them, and that
upon rational and conscientious* Principles: for how fallible soever they may
be conceived to be in expounding Scripture, yet none can deny them to be the
most certain as well as the most competent Judges of their own Intentions: As
certainly therefore as God made his Church Note that he speaks of God's
Church in the singular Number, and not of national Churches which are many.
a visible Society, and constituted a visible Government in it, He has
constituted a Species of visible Governors over the several Parts, but no one
(Personal or Collective) over the whole.
so certain their Hypothesis is false.

P. 83. How can Subjects preserve (their due Subordination to their Superiors)
if they practice differently? They may possibly do it notwithstanding Practices
of Humane Infirmity, and disavowed by themselves; But how can they do it while
they defend their Practices, and pretend Divine Authority for it? Yea, and
pretend to Authority and Offices unaccountable to them; which must justify a
whole course of different Practices.

P. 84. If their Authority be immediately received from God, and the Rule of
their Practices be taken from the Scriptures, as understood by themselves what
reason can there be of subjection to any humane Superiors. Is it no Obedience
unless it be absolute? Is none due to God above Man? Must not his Law be
undorstood?


I Must entreat the Reader that he will not call any of these men Papists till
they are willing to be so called: You are not their Godfathers: Do not then
make Names for them. But I must confess that once I thought the stablished
French Religion had been Popery, and I see no reason to recant it: But if
Brierwood's Epistles mis-describe them not, Mr. Dodwell is not so much of their
Mind, for the Supremacy of a General Council, as I thought he had been: Will
you know my Evidence? It shall be only in his own words.

I. Separation of Churches, etc. Page 102. [The Church with whom this Covenant
is made, is a Body Politic as formerly, though not a Civil one] and God has
designed all Persons to enter into this Society.

Page 98. Faith and Repentance themselves, on which they so much insist, are
not available to Salvation, at least not pleadable in a Legal way, without our
being of the Church: And the Church of which we are obliged to be, is an
external Body Politic: (So that it is clear it is the Universal Church, and a
visible Humane Polity which he means.)

Page 107. [The design of God in erecting the Church a Body Politic, thus to
oblige men to enter into it, and to submit to its Rules of Discipline however
the secular State should stand affected -- It is more easy for the vulgar
Capacity whatsoever, to prove their interest in a visible Church, than in in an
invisible one, consisting only of elect Persons.

In these, and many places of both his Books, he tells us, that the Catholic
Church is One Body Politic, and has on Earth a Supreme humane Government,
which I have noted in his words in my Answer to him.

II. Page 488. Only the Supreme Power is that which can never be presumed to
have been confined. (Of which more in his words which I have confuted.)

III. That the Intention of the Ordainers is the true measure of the Power of
the Ordained, he copiously urges (and proves as much as the Ringing a Bell
will prove it, by loudness and length) Page 542. [Therefore the Power actually
received by them, must not be measured by the true sense of the Scripture, but
that wherein the Ordainers understood them.] Now the Ordainers of the first
Protestants never intended them Power to abrogate the Mass, or Latin Service,
or Image Worship, or to renounce the Pope, or gave them any Power but what was
in Subordination to the Pope, but bound them to him and his Canons, and to the
Mass, and the other parts of Popery. To prove this, he says, [Pag. 489. It is
very notorious that at least a little before the Reformation, Aerius and the
Waldenses and Marsilius of Padua and Wickliff were Condemned for Heretics, for
asserting the Parity of Bishops and Presbyters: And it is as notorious that
every Bishop was then obliged to Condemn all Heresies, that is, all those
Doctrines which were then censured for Heretical by that Church, by which they
were Ordained to be Bishops -- Our Protestants themselves do not pretend to any
Succession in these Western Parts, where themselves received their Orders, but
what was conveyed to them even by such Bishops as these were.

And Page 484, 485, 486. he shows at large, [ That All the Authority which
can be pretended in any Communion at the present, must be derived from the
Episcopal; especially of that Age wherein the several Parties began. -- Within
less than Two Hundred Years since, there was no Church in the World wherein a
Visible Succession was maintained from the Apostles, which was not Episcopally
Governed. And the first Inventers of the several Sects were at first Members of
these Episcopal Churches Or Papal, say others.
, and received both their Baptism in them, and all the Orders they received. --
There was then no other Communion that could give this Authority. -- Our
Adversaries will not deny, -- but that their Orders were received by them, were
actually received by their Forefathers in the Episcopal Communion And the Papal.
. -- They have actually received no more Power from God, than they have
received from their Ordainers; -- For their Ordainers, are they, and they
alone, who have represented Gods Person in dealing with them Representing his
Person is a high word. But he never enabled them to change his Laws, or
Church-Offices; but only as Servants, to deliver that same Power by way of
Investiture, which he had instituted and described in his Law, and was in their
Commission: As the Londoners may not change the Lord Mayor's Office, but put
him in that which the Charter makes.
. -- 2. They have actually received from their Superiors nothing but what their
Superiors did actually intend to give them. One would think this should be very
clear Yes: If the Bishops had been Makers of the Office, and Donors with
absolute Power, and not only Servants entrusted to deliver their Masters Gifts
and Offices.
.

To the Objection, that [ They ought to have given more Power,] he answers,
That only proves that we have no more, if they wronged us.] Where now is all
the Reformers Power? Did the Pope or his Bishops intend them any against
himself?

IV. But yet he perceived that some might say, Particular Ordainers might have
singular Intentions. (And I cannot tell him that as Richardus Armachanus, and
abundance more thought Bishops and Presbyters to be ejusdem Ordinis, so did
Jacobus Armachanus of late, and Bishop Downame and many other Bishops, and
declared that Presbyters had Power of Ordination, but for Order sake it should
not be without the Bishop, save in cases of necessity.) To this he says, [That
the Ordainers must be presumed to do according to the common sense of the
Church and Canons.] But what if they declare the contrary? As Bishop Edw.
Reinolds openly declared that he Ordained Presbyters into the same Order with
Bishops, who were but the prime Presbyters; and that he was of Dr.
Stillingfleet's Judgment, that no Form of Government was Jure Divino necessario.

Says he, [ Page 487. The Law is always charitable to presume that every Man
intends as becomes him to intend: (Very good.) But it is prudent to presume his
actual Intention not from what others do think will become him, no nor from
what will really become him in the Judgment of God. -- Therefore they must not
judge of the Intention of the Bishop by the real Will of God I am wholly of
your Mind, specially as to the Pope and his Bishops: But I Will judge of their
Power by the Will of God.
.

Supposing us to be [ Proud of the Suffrages of the Schoolmen, page 492.493. He
suspecteth, It was rather Picque than Conscience that brought them to it.
(Alas! Were not the Schoolmen Prelatical enough? Many of them were Bishops, and
one was a Pope at least.)

And the Council at Basil that allowed Presbyters deciding Votes, and St.
Jerome, and the Reformers, all fall under his Censure for the like; viz. That
Necessity put them on it as a Shift, or else the Pope by the Vote of Bishops
would have carried it; and he justifies not the Necessities choice, but
concludes, Page 496, 497. If it be suspicious whether the Men who then
followed these Principles did embrace them out of a sincere sense of their
Truth, then they cannot be presumed to have been Principles of Conscience.
Which if they were not, this is sufficient to show that they are not fit
Measures of the Power that was actually given by the Bishops of that Age.] I
confess, I had thought that the Papist Bishops Intention had not been the
Measure of the Power of Bishops or Presbyters: And that Mr. Dodwell had not
been so much against the Council of Basil as unjust Conspirators by ill means
to overtop the Pope.

He says truly, Page 505. [Most certainly they who were of this Opinion, (the
Papists) could not intend to follow the Doctrine of the Wicklefists and
Waldenses, who had been lately censured for maintaining the Equality of Bishops
and Presbyters.] No nor the Doctrine of Luther, Cranmer, or such as the Church
of England has held.

V. Yet being forced to confute himself, he says, p. 52. [It is sufficient for
my purpose that Ecclesiastical ^ower be no otherwise from God, than that is of
every Supreme Civil Mugistrate. It is not usual for Kings to be invested in
their Offices by other Kings, but by their Subjects. Yet when they are
invested, that does not in the least prejudice the Absoluteness of their
Monarchy, where the fundamental Constitutions of the respective places allow to
them.] (And has not God's fundamental Law as much Power?) much less does it
give any Power over them to the persons by whom they are invested.

If the Power of Episcopacy be Divine, and all that men can do in the case be
only to determine the Person, not to confine his Power, etc. (what kept the man
from seeing how great a part of his Book he here confuteth?) Does he not
confess now that God's Law may give the Power, which men may not alter, but
only determine of the Person to receive it? In the case of the Presbyters
Office he will have it otherwise, because the Bishops are, forsooth, not only
the Investers, but the Donors, who give just what they please; and he proves
it fully, by saying it confidently and copiously: Because God gives it not
immediately: Yes, he immediately by his Spirit in the Apostles, instituted the
species, though he do not immediately choose the Receiver. But who gives the
Bishops their Power? The Council is above them: Do they give them their Power?
Who gives them theirs? And who gives the Pope his Power? If his may be given
by Divine Charter without a Humane Donor, but a mere Invester, why may not a
Presbyters?

VI. But it is the Vicedeity that is his great foundation. Page 543. says he,
[Nor is there any reason for them to oppose God and the Church as they do on
this and other occasions The Church is the Bishops and Council, the Pope being
President.
If the Churches Authority be received from God, then what is done by Her, is
to be presumed to come from him, the same way as what is done by any man's
Proxy is presumed to be his own act: And as what is done by an Inferior
Magistrate by virtue of his Office, is presumed to come from the Supreme.]

This is in Answer to an Objection, That [ the Powers united by God are
inseparable by any Humane Authority: But the Power of Ordination is by God
united to the other Rights of Scripture Presbyters, etc.] He answers [ If our
Adversaries mean, that those Presbyters who had both those Powers united in
them by God, could not be deprived of the one without the other, nor of any by
any Humane Authority; this, if it should prove true is a case wherein our
present Ordinations are not concerned, which were not received in those times,
wherein our Adversaries pretend to prove that these two Powers were inseparably
united That is, in Scripture times. Dr. Hammond confesses the same: And yet we
are all no Ministers, and have no Sacraments, nor right to Salvation, if we
have not uninterrupted successive Episcopal Ordination from those times.
. They may be separated de facto, though they who separate them be to blame for
so doing. -- If they were then united by God, because they were united by the
men who represented God, why are they not disunited by God now when men alike
empowered by him have disunited them? Why should they not oblige God in one
case as well as the other?

Readers, you see here the Core of the Churches disease, and chief of our
differences: 1. By the Church they mean not the People, but the Prelates and
Councils headed by their great President. 2. They suppose these to be God's
Proxies, and that God does what they do, and they so oblige God to stand to it,
and men to take it as God's act. 3. They suppose these Prelates and their
President alike empowered by God, as the Apostles were; and therefore God by
his Proxies now may undo what he did by his Proxies then. Do you now wonder if
Pope and Council by Canons have power from God to make new Canonical
Scriptures, and new Universal Laws for the Church; yea and for the World? And
if these may undo the Scripture Laws and Institutions, and make other
Sacraments and Worship in their stead?

But Protestants have long ago proved, 1. That there is no Vice-God, and that
God has no Proxies or proper Representatives with whom he has entrusted his
Power so, as that their word must lead, and he will follow: But only
Ambassadors, whose Message is prescribed them by God, and they are to speak and
do only what he bids them, and he will own it, and not that which they add of
their own, or which they do against his Word.

2. That the present Pastors have not the same power as the Apostles had; who
were commissioned to deliver Christ's Commands to the World, and enabled for it
by the Spirit of Infallibility and Miracles: Even as the Jewish Priests had not
the Power of Moses, nor could change a tittle of the Law, but only keep it,
teach it, and apply it.

VII. That he and his followers are for a Supreme Governing Visible Humane
Power over the Universal Church, is a thing that I need not cite their words
further to prove. Mr. Thorndike, Bishop Bromhall, Bishop Gunning, Bishop
Sparrow, Dr. Saywell, and the rest of that mind, are not ashamed of it. And it
is a General Council that by some of them is supposed to be this Supreme Power:
And when I have proved against Johnson that there never was a General Council
of the Christian World, but of the Empire, I can get none of them to answer me
(save that when the Empire was broken, some of the pieces came together for a
Job at Florence, etc.) But it is the Pope's right, says Bishop Bromhall, to be
President and Patriarch of the West; (which Thorndike and others largelier
insist on as the necessary Principium Vnitatis, which turned poor Grotius to
them for Unity. But I confess I thought Mr. Dodwell had been more for a
Councils Power than I find he is.

The Protestants believe no Supreme Governor of the whole Church but Christ.
Dr. Iz. Barrow of the Unity of the Church, has fully overthrown the fiction of
a human Supreme Aristocracy as well as of a Monarchy: But an Union of all the
parts in one Head Christ, we all believe, and consequently a Communion among
themselves.

VIII. But what Mr. Dodwell's Judgment is of the Power of the Council, and
whether the Supremacy be in it, or in the President, I will tell you only in
his own words; supposing the Reader to know that the Papists so far differ
among themselves, that 1. Some are for the Pope's Supremacy alone, the Council
being but his Counselors, as some are for the Kings, the Parliament being but
his Counselors. 2. Some are for the Councils Superiority over the Pope, as
some say Parliaments are greater than the King, and urge his old Oath to pass
such Laws quas Vulgus elegerit; so say they, the Pope must own those that the
Council passes; yea, that they may depose him if he deserve it. 3. Some say
that Universal Legislation belongs only to the Pope and Council agreeing, the
Pope being to Call and Approve them: And this is the prevailing Opinion among
them; so that the Controversy is much like that which men have raised about
Kings and Parliaments. Now, says Mr. Dodwell,

[Ch. 24. Page 509, etc. Even by the Principles of Aristocratical Government,
no Power can be given validly, but to persons who are are at least in
conjunction with those from whom they receive their Power -- Subordinate
Authority must be derived from the Supreme. No act can be presumed to be the
act of the whole Body, but what has passed them in their Public Assemblies,
(in which Body is the Right of Government) -- so it have the prevailing Vote:
Nay, though that prevailing Vote be not the greater part of the Society, so it
be the greater part present at such Assemblies What an happy advantage has the
Pope, that can get forty Italians together at Trent, seven years before he can
send to, and they come from Mexico, Abassia, Armenia, and all the World. There
is an Art in all things, and men live by their wits.
, God himself cannot be supposed to have made a Government, even of his own
Institution, practicable, till he have settled these Rules of Administering it
Sir, God will not learn of you: But God has made no such Government at all,
Monarchy or Aristocracy.
. As nothing but the Society it self can in justice make a valid Conveyance of
its Right, so it is not conceivable how the Society it self can do it by any
thing but its own act.

If this be so, 1. Mark that this man disclaimeth any other Divine Institution
than by the Society. 2. The People that have no Power, being the greater part
of the Society or Church, give the Bishop and Pope, and Council their Power. 3.
If the Clergy were all the Church, the Presbyters give that Power to the
Bishops and Pope, which they had not themselves. 4. All runs on the false
Antimonarchical and Anarchical Principle, which I have confuted in Hooker, that
the Body makes Power by giving up their own Right. 5. Then the General Councils
and Pope have no Power: For the Body of the Universal Church never gave it
them, but the Emperors, (save as to Teaching and Arbitrations.) 6. Then in
those Countries where the Body of Clergy and People put down Bishops, there
Bishops are put down by such as had Power to do it. For 1. If man may set up
Diocesans, Popes and Councils, man may take them down.

Yet the Proteus changes his face, and presently supposes [that the whole
Right of these Assemblies could not have proceeded from the bare consent of the
Society, but from the actual Establishment of God. -- No Assemblies can dispose
of the Rights of such Societies, but such as are lawful ones according to the
Constitutions of that Society. -- As out of Assemblies they have no power to
act who might act in them, how many soever of the Suffrages, and how freely
soever they had been gotten; so all those Meetings, how numerous soever, for
acts of Government, if they be not Legal, they add nothing of advantage to the
power of particulars singly considered. They are not in the Eye of the Law,
Assemblies, but Routs, and their concurrence, not Consent, but Confederacy: And
as it were Rebellion in particular persons to attempt any thing of that nature
concerning the Government without the consent of their present Established
Governors; -- so is there nothing in such a Meeting that can give them any
Power as united more than they had as singly considered, that may excuse them
from Rebellion A General Council meeting without the Call of the Pope their
Established Governor, are Rebels.
. Nay rather, by the Principles of all Societies, that which had not been
Rebellion, if done singly, is counted so, if it be done in unlawful Assemblies.
And sure none can think it reasonable to ratify the acts of Rebels. -- And if
the Society be not represented by unlawful Assemblies, how can it in justice be
obliged by them? How can any of its Rights be disposed of by them who are not
its Legal Representatives 1. Has the King no power but as a Representative? If
yea, why not others? 2. Who made Pope or Prelates the Representatives of those
that never consented to them?
. -- P. 513. The most natural way is by abrogating the acts of such Assemblies.
Therefore the Jurisdiction of the Assembly by the President, is a right
consequent of the Office of a President, as a President, and a circumstance
requisite to make the Assembly it self lawful -- specially where no certain
places or periods of times are agreed on for the keeping of any Now we know
what Councils have Authority: Only those appointed by the President.
. There must be some who have the power of Assembling them, when they judge it
convenient for the public, and who may be allowed for competent Judges of that
convenience. -- Every one is not permitted to judge of the occasion. -- But
there is none concerning whom this Power can so probably be presumed -- None to
whom all undisposed Power, does by the common Rules of all Societies, so
naturally Escheat, as the President of the Assemblies. Even in the Assemblies a
Veneration is due to him, for his Office above all other Members, but much more
so out of the Assemblies, where none is in a likely way to be able to oppose
him. He who calls an Assembly must have some advantage over all the Members
called by him, that he may oblige them to convene, and it is necessary to the
Public that they be obliged to meet when they are so called, that is, when the
IVDGE of Circumstances thinks it necessary, etc. But there is none who can
pretend to this advantage, I do not say, of Jurisdiction, but even of Authority
and Reverence, above his fellow Members, besides the President.

Besides, the Power of such Assemblies expires with the Assemblies themselves:
so that in the intervals of Assemblies there remains no more of that Power,
etc. But the Convening of Assemblies is an act of Authority, in that very
interval, and therefore cannot agree to any but the President, whose Authority
alone can be antecedent to the meeting of the Assemblies; so that if it be the
right of any it must be his, because none besides him is capable of it.

Answ. 1. Did Hosius of Corduba, or Eustathius Antiochenus, or Cyril Alexandr.
Anatolius Constable. etc. call the Councils of Nice, Ephesus, etc. or had an
Antecedent right to it? 2. Has no King or Parliament a right to call a
Convocation in England? 3. Have not K. James, Jewel, Crakenthorpe, Buckeridge,
Bilson, Carlton, Abbot, Field, Andrews, and other English Bishops and Divines,
and Chamier, Sadeel, Chemnisius, and the rest abroad, fully proved that the
Emperors called the General Councils, as did the Spanish and French Kings, and
the Emperor Provincial ones. 4. Does not every Conformist Subscribe to the
Articles of Religion, which say, that General Councils may not be called but by
the Will of Princes? Though Mr. Dodwell have the plain Honesty not to be
Ordained or Subscribe these English Articles, Mr. Thorndike, Bishop Bromhall,
Bishop Guning, Dr. Saywell, Dr. Parker, etc. I suppose did; But let us hear him
further.

And this is more certainly true of him who has a right to preside in
Assemblies when they are convened by Virtue of his General Right to preside
over the whole Society, as well when Assemblies are not Convened as when they
are, than of him who is chosen by the particular Assemblies for their
particular Occasions. And he who has his Precedence not by virtue of any
particular Election, but for term of Life, must have such a Presidency as I am
speaking of. Not only the Assemblies convened by him are in this regard lawful;
but also no Assemblies are lawful but what are called by him, because there is
no other way of making them lawful, but the lawfulness of their Call; nor any
Power to Call them distinct from that of such a President.

Do you wonder that this Man Conformeth not? Or do you not wonder that those
Subscribe and are called Protestants that are of his Mind? If they can answer
the Articles, the King and Parliament, that say the King has Power to call
Synods, what do they make of their Readers that obtrude such Baronian fictions
on us, without once attempting to answer Protestants, who with all credible
Historians, prove it past all modest Contradiction that Emperors were the
ordinary Callers of the General Councils, and not the Presidents or Pope.

Page 516, 517. He goes on asserting Assemblies called without the President
to be unlawful, nullities, and by the highest common interest to be punished
(so far must we think the Councils of Nice, Ephesus, etc. to be from binding
us) and says, [Indeed the Bishops could not renounce this Power without
dissolving the Society by making the Exercise of Government unpracticable, or
without changing the whole frame of Government; For -- who must have it? If
none had had it, how could the Society be secured, that Assemblies should meet
if none had Power to oblige particular Members to be present at them when
called? If at any time no meeting were ascertained, the Government would be
dissolved?

Ans. 1. Did this reading Man never hear of the Claim of Princes to call
Councils in their Dominions? Did he not know where he lived? Did he never read
the late Act of Parliament in Scotland, that asserts all Church Power in
Exteriors to be in the King? Nor any of the Protestants Confessions or Divines?
Should I think he had quite forgotten all this? or that he had the craft to
take no notice of it, as that which was too hot to handle?

2. And was it not a piece of Wit to take it for granted that such Assemblies
(as he calls the Councils) are so Essential to the Church, that the
Government and Society is dissolved without them, or without a Ruling
Presidents Power to call them? And the Pope must have a Power to oblige all
particulars to come when he calls them? And no wonder when (unless Men be
Cheaters) the whole Power Escheateth into the Presidents hands when the Council
is dissolved; which is when ever his Holiness please: And long enough may you
Petition him for these Church Parliaments, when to call them, is to surrender
part of his Power.

Answ. 3. But what if all these Church Councils as such have no Governing Power
at all over any of the particular Bishops, any more than a Synod of
Schoolmasters have over each others Persons and Schools, but meet only by
Christ's general Obligation to do all their work with greatest Prudence for
Mutual Help and Concord? He has been told on both Ears often enough that this is
not only his Adversaries Judgment, but such great Bishops as I have often named:
yea, and of Grotius his Friend, when he wrote de Imp. sum. Potest. And where do
you find this Disputant once attempt in all this begging presuming Volume to
prove any Regent Power in such Councils (but what the Magistrate gives them.)

Monstra mihi, inquit Hieron. quisnam Imperatorum celebrari id Concilium
jusserit? says Grotius, (ib. P. 168.) Non ideo convocari Synodum quod in ea
pars sit Imperii, satis jam demonstratum arbitror: Finis ergo, ut Episcopus
Wintoniensis recte notat, hic est, ut ad veritatis and Pietatis amplificationem
Consilium Principi praebeant; hoc est, Praeeant ipsi judicio directivo -- and
ut per Synodum stabili^i testataque fieri possit Consensio Ecclesiae. -- Omnium
autem horum finium nullus est necessarius simpliciter. Neque Synodus
simpliciter ad illos fines necessaria. This he goes on to prove, and more than
so, that Synods are often hurtful (as well as unnecessary, Cum potius, says
August. rarissimae inveniantur haereses propter quas damnandas necessitas talis
exstiterit.) I will not repeat, says Grotius, the Complaint of almost all
Ages, that the chief Diseases were brought into the Church a Sacerdotibus:
citing Nazianzen, he adds, Neque agit de Arianis duntaxat Synodis, sed de
omnibus suorum temporum, praecipue quibus ipse interfuit (Mr. Morris might
easily know this) -- Nec pauca referri possunt si opus sit infoeliciorum
conciliorum exempla, quale fuit sub Constantino Antiochenum, Caesariense and
Tyrium, cujus conventus Episcopis scribens Constantinus, nihil ait ab illis
fieri, nisi quod ad odia and dissensiones serendas, ad perniciem denique humani
generis faciat. -- Zanchy's way cited by him, is often better than Councils, that
the Magistrate command Ministers in Controversies, 1. Vti non suis sed
Scripturae vocibus, 2. Et a publica damnatione abstinere.

And Page 209. says Grotius, The Church has no Legislative Power by Divine
Right -- What was written in Synods before Christian Emperors for Order and
Ornament, are not called Laws but Canons, and have either only the force of
advice, as in things which rather belong to singular persons than to all; or
they oblige by way of Agreement, etc. But some Legislative Power may be given
by humane Laws. --

But perhaps some will say that Mr. Dodwell speaks only of National, or
Provincial, or Diocesane Councils, and not of General ones, and therefore by
the fixed President, means not the Pope.

Answ. 1. I would he were willing and able to tell what he means. But he felt
what a fine advantage he had under the Name of Bishops Presidency to please a
Party, and say more than every one of them shall at first perceive. But he
expressly maintains that the Universal Church is one Political Society, and
has a visible Supreme humane Government that is Absolute, and from which there
is no appeal: And that this Society has Legislative Power, and is bound but by
the Laws made in its own Assemblies: And that these Assemblies are Rebels, and
punishable if not called by the President: And though Mr. D. had the Prudence
to use the word President rather than Pope, if ever he speak intelligibly it is
here. And Mr. Thorndike (whom he valueth as a sound Protestant) Archbishop
Bromhall, and the rest of the Tribe, do openly assert the due Presidence of the
Pope, as Principium Vnitatis and first Patriarch.

Says Mr. Dodwell further, Page 522, 523. [ Supposing those Presbyters that
chose the President had invested him in his Office by Prayer and Imposition of
hands, and no Bishops had any more to do in his Consecration, than Kings have
in the Inauguration of our ordinary Kings -- it will not follow that those
Presbyters who chose and consecrated him, must have any more Power over him --
Nor is it only true that this way may be so -- but indeed it must be so;
whenever the Person so invested is supposed to be invested in the Supreme
Power, and whenever the Society over which he is placed is also Independent on
other Societies [As the Universal Church is] Such a Person can never be placed
in his Power, if not by them who must after be his Subjects, unless by his
Predecessor, which no Society can safely depend on for a constant rule of
Succession. (And does any but the Pope pretend to this Sovereign place)? In his
own Society he can have none of his own Order that can perform the Ceremony to
him, because we suppose Him to be Supreme; and there cannot be two such in one
Society. (True: And you make it your fundamental that the Catholic Church is
one such Society; and so must have such a Supreme).

And it is worth the noting which he adds [And therefore I, for my part, am so
little solicitous for any consequence that may be hence inferred to the
prejudice of my Cause, as that I am apt to think that this must have been the
way at first in the making of Bishops, how Absolute soever I conceive them to
have been when they were once made. --

Ans. Are we not beholden to the Universal Presidentship for this concession? I
forced Johnson, alias Terret to the same: And yet both these men cry down a
Power resulting from God's Law or Charter to the person duly receptive, when
yet the Instance of the Papacy constrains them to make it their foundation.
Why then must Presbyterian Ordination be Nullity, if Inferiors only choose and
Consecrate the Pope, and Presbyters only at first chose and Consecrated Bishops?

Obj. The difference is, that such Inferiors are but Electors and Investing
Ministers, and not Donors of the Power, but Popes and Prelates are Donors.

Ans. 1. Then no Prelate could be such but by the Popes or Councils donation.
2. Does not Mr. D. often say, that the Body is the seat of Power, and so gives
it? 3. But why should he think that we must take his word for this difference
and the Prelatical Donation instead of Ministry? Do not the Papists themselves
more commonly hold that the Presbyters (or Priests) Office is of fixed Divine
Institution, and more unalterable, than that the Bishops is? The latter is
disputed; the former undisputable. (It may be Mr. D. will thus prove that he is
no Papist: But I had rather he be one than worse.)

Nay, what will you say if after all he be half an Independent?

P. 523. says he, [This seems best to agree with the Absoluteness of
Particular Churches, before they had by compact united themselves under
Metropolitanes and Exarchs into Provincial and Diocesan Churches. -- And this
seems to have been fitted for the frequent Persecutions of those earlier Ages,
when every Church was able to secure its own Suecession by its own power
withoue depending on the certain opportunities of the meeting of the Bishops of
the whole Province. And the alteration of this practice, the giving the Bishops
of the Province an interest in the Choice of every particular Colleague, seems
not to have been so much for want of power in the particular Churches to do it,
as for the security of Compacts, that they might be certain of such a Colleague
as would observe them. -- And he thinks [it probable that it was in imitation
of the Philosophers Successions, that these Ecclesiastical Successions were
framed. -- And when the Philosophers failed to nominate their own Successors,
then the Election was in the Schools.]

Ans. What could be said more gently by such a man? 1. Then the first Churches
were like Philosophers Schools; very good; not many score or hundred Schools as
the first and least Order. 2. The Government of Churches was much like that of
Philosophers in their Schools. 3. Bishops (and much more Presbyters) might be
made then without Bishops, by the Election and Consecration of Presbyters. 4.
This was the old way in time of Persecution. 5. This alteration was not for
want of Power in the Particular Churches, etc. 6. But it was made to secure
Observance in the Colleagues. 7. And Church Successions framed in imitation of
Philosophers.

We shall in due time enquire whether we are all bound to stand to these
changes, on pain of all the scorn and sufferings that the followers of them
will lay upon us.

Will you know more of this Self-confutation? In his Preface he says, [P. 4. I
suppose all Churches Originally equal, and that they have since submitted to
prudential Compacts.

But are not all we (poor nothings then) obliged on pain of damnation to stand
to all that our Forefathers did? And must we not take the Imperial Subjects of
Asia, Africa and Europe, (we know not who) for our Forefathers in Britain?
and be of that Heathens mind that drew back from Baptism, when he heard his
Forefathers were in Hell, and said, that he would be where they were? No, this
moderate man tells you, [Though they may oblige them as long as the reason of
these Compacts lasts, and as far as the equity of those Compacts may hold, as
to the true design of those that made them, and as far as those Compacts have
meddled with the alienable Rights of Particular Churches; yet where any of
these Conditions fail, there the Particular Churches are at liberty to resume
their Ancient Rights.

Obj. Yea, but who shall judge when any of of these Conditions fail?

He answers next [ And I suppose the power of judging when these Conditions
fail to be an unalienable Right of Particular Churches, and not only to judge
with the Judgment of private discretion, but such a Judgment as may be an
authentic measure of her own practice.

We thank you Sir, that you give us so fair quarter: But if you had not, had we
known where, we should have commenced a Suit for our Native and Christian
Birthright, and put you to prove quo jure John, Thomas, Peter, etc. meeting a
thousand years ago we know not why, nor when, nor by what Authority, did give
away the Birthright and the Souls of an hundred millions not then in being,
that never consented or heard of their names, nor were bound to know that there
was such a City as Rome, Nice, etc. or such men as Leo, Tharasius, etc. in the
World. And if you had answered us according to the Roman genius with Gaols, or
Fire and Faggot, we would have appealed to God whether you and all such will or
not; and when God judges, do your wor^t.

But would you think what a stress this Humane Catholic lays on innovating
Prelates Compacts? He adds after all this,

P. 6. Whoever they were that nominated the persons, whether the People, the
Clergy, or the Prince, or the Pope; yet still they were the Bishops that
performed the Office of Consecration; which was that which was then thought
immediately to confer the Power.

Ans. You were not then in being, and therefore did not then think it. -- And
you know men's thoughts so long before you were born no better than others;
Oportet fuisse memorem. Had you not memory enough to make your Preface meet
with your Book, where you say that Presbyters did Consecrate Bishops, and yet
did not give them the Power? and say that as to the Supreme President, (we know
his name) it must still be otherwise.

Yet this fundamental Humanist concludes, p. 11. [ They must be guilty of
disobedience to the Divine Government, -- Guilty of giving or abetting a Divine
Authority in Men to whom God has never given such Authority, nay in opposition
to all the Authority, he has really established among men. They must be guilty
of forging Covenants in Gods Name, and counterfeiting the great Seals of Heaven
in ratification of them. And what can be more Treasonable by all the Principles
of Government? What is more provoking and more difficultly pardonable -- They
must be guilty of sinning against the Holy Ghost, and unto Death, and of the
sins described in the passages of the Epistle to the Hebrews, with which none
do terrify the Consciences of ignorant unskilful persons more than they do.
They must be guilty of such sins which as they need pardon more than others; so
do they in the nature of the things themselves more effectually cut off the
offender from all hopes of pardon in an ordinary way. By being disunited from
the Church, he loses his Union with Christ, and all the Mystical benefits
consequent to that Union. He has therefore no Title to the Sufferings, or
Merits, or Intercession of Christ, or any of those other blessings which were
purchased by those Merits, or which may be expected from those Intercessions.
He has no Title to pardon of sin, to the gifts and assistants of the blessed
Spirit, or to any Promises of future Rewards, though he should perform ALL
OTHER PARTS OF HIS DVTY, besides this of uniting himself again to Christ's
Mystical Body in a VISIBLE COMMUNION: Till then, there are no promises of
acceptance of any Prayers which either he may offer for himself, or others may
offer for him. And how disconsolate must the condition of such a person be!

And page 20. Suppose I were mistaken -- why should they take it ill to be
warned of a danger? --

Ans. 10. What harm was it for those, Act. 15. to say, Except ye be circumcised
and keep the Law of Moses, ye cannot be saved? And yet did Paul rail when he
said, Beware of evil-workers, beware of Dogs, beware of the Concision? What
Sect cannot easily without a Doctors degree thus dispute? You are all damned
that be not of our mind or Sect. But the Devil hurts those most whom he least
affrighteth.

Ans. 2. What if we put this to wise men to tell us, 1. How he can prove that
all the Christian World agreed to the Compacts that bring us under these
hellish consequences. I provoke him again to answer my proof against Terret,
that they were the Compacts but of one Empire?

2. How proves he that we Britains are under such Compacts, when our
Ancestors (and the Scots) renounced Communion with the Romanists?

3. If our Ancestors after turned to Popery or Church-Tyranny, how proves he
that we are any more bound to sin as they did, than if they had turned to
Arianism or Turcism? when Ezekiel. 18. and 33. speak for the clean contrary.

4. What if we prove that Christ has himself given the Church in the
Scriptures, an account of his own Institution of Church-Form and Government, as
much as is necessary to its Essence, Unity and Salvation, and that all altering
Compacts contrary to this are diabolical: Will Christ damn us for not breaking
his Laws, and serving the Devil? Is it the sin against the Holy Ghost, and
unpardonable, not to despise Christ's Laws, and not to obey the Devil?

5. What if we prove to him that the very Species of his Prelacy, and specially
of a Supreme Catholic Jurisdiction is condemned by Christ, and Treason against
him? Are we Traitors for not being Traitors?

6. What if we prove to him, that according to his very Canons, the Pope and
Bishops that he damns us for not owning, are no Bishops, having no true Call
and Title to that which they pretend to?

Will you have yet another of his Self-contradictions? P. 7. [ I cannot but
look on it as an Argument that God never intended to oblige Particular Churches
to as great a dependence on other Churches as that is wherein he has obliged
Subjects to depend on their own Churches, because by his contrivance of things
it does not follow, that Separating Churches must be left as destitute of the
ordinary means of Salvation on their separation from other Churches, as
particular Subjects are on their separation from their own Churches -- Abating
what obligations they have brought on themselves by their own Compacts, God has
made them equal. -- There is no way of judging who is in the right, but by the
intrinsic merit of the Cause. I really believe that the true original design
of those Compacts whereby particular Churches have voluntarily submitted to
restrictions of their original Power, was ONLY that every particular Church
might have her Censures confirmed in all other Churches in reference to those
who were originally her own Subjects; not to gain a Power over any other
Subjects but her own; nor to submit to any other Power, etc. Alas! And have
Compacts by we know not who brought us all into the snare of the unpardonable
sin? Though Christ died for the World, he saves none but Consenters: And can
Men in Asia, in Towns whose Names we poor Countrymen never heard of, make Laws
to Damn all to the Worlds end, that obey them not; and this without our own
Consent?

To conclude, this Gentleman has yet an easy remedy against all this: He does
indeed frequently prove (if you will believe him) that though you have Faith
that works by Love, and do all other duty, (that is in Love to God and Man) you
cannot be saved without external Communion, that is, subjection to this humanly
compacted Catholic Church; so said Pope Nicholas long ago, yea and Aeneas
Sylvius when Pius 2d, that all other Graces and Duties will not save a Man that
is not subject to the Bishop of Rome: But says this Man, p. 13. They may
easily avoid the danger only by returning to the Catholic Unity. Mark
Catholic Unity. National Unity will not serve: We grant it. But what Catholic
Unity is, and whether Catholic Councils with a Catholic President that has
an Antecedent Power to call and oblige them, without which they are null,
rebellious and punishable, and to whom all Power escheateth in the Intervals of
Councils, whether I say, this be necessary to Catholic Unity, or to
Antichristian Church Tyranny is the doubt.

I will conclude this with Dr. Iz. Barrow's Theses, p. 255.

1. Patriarchs are an Humane Institution.

2. As they were erected by the Power and Prudence of Men* so they may be
dissolved by the same.

3. They were erected by the leave and confirmation of Princes, and by the same
they may be dejected, if great reason do appear.

4. The Patriarchate of the Pope beyond his own Province or Diocese does not
subsist upon any Canon of a general Synod.

5. He can therefore claim no such Power otherwise than upon his Invasion or
Assumption.

6. The Primates and Metropolitans of the Western Church cannot be supposed
otherwise than by force or one of fear to have submitted to such an Authority
as he does Vsurp.

7. It is not really a Patriarchal Power, (like that granted by the Canons and
Princes) but another sort of Power which the Pope does Exercise.

8. The most rightful Patriarch holding false Doctrine, or imposing unjust
Laws, or Tyrannically abusing his Power may and ought to be rejected from
Communion.

9. Such a Patriarch is to be judged by a free Synod if it may be had.

10. If such a Synod cannot be had by consent of Princes, each Church may free
it self from the mischiefs induced by his perverse Doctrine and Practice.

11. No Ecclesiastical Power can interpose in the management of any Affairs
within the Territory of any Prince without his Concession.

12. By the Laws of God, and according to ancient Practice, Princes may model
the Bounds of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, erect Bishoprics, enlarge, diminish
or transfer them as they please.

13. Wherefore each Prince having Supreme Power in his own Dominion and equal
to the Emperors in his, may exclude any Foreign Prelate from Jurisdiction in
his Territories.

14. It is expedient for the public peace and good that he should do thus.

15. Such Prelate according to the Rules of Christianity, ought to be content
with his doing so.

16. Any Prelate Exercising Power in the Dominion of any Prince, is eatenus his
Subject; as the Popes and all Bishops were to the Roman Emperor.

17. Those Joints of Ecclesiastical Discipline Established in the Roman Empire
by the Confirmation of Emperors, were (as to necessary continuance) dissolved
by the dissolution of the Roman Empire.

18. The Power of the Pope in the Territories of any Prince did subsist by his
Authority and Favor.

19. By the same Power as Princes have curbed the Exorbitancy of Papal Power in
some Cases, (of entertaining Legates, making Appeals, disposing of Benefices,
etc.) by the same they might exclude it.

20. The practice of Christianity does not depend on the subsistence of such a
form instituted by man.

As to Mr. Dodwell's fundamental Opinion (that the Minister can have no Power
which the Ordainer intended not to give him) He overthrows by it all the
Reformation and all the English reforming Ministry, as derived from the Roman
Ordination: For it is certain that the Roman Bishops intended not to give them
Power to reform, or to Worship God as they have done.

And the Protestants are against him: Says Dr. Challoner (in his Credo Eccles.
Cath. p. 95.) However the Priest at the Baptizing, or the Bishop at the
Ordination, had another meaning, yet the words wherewith they Baptized and
Ordained being the words of Christ, are to be taken in Christ's meaning; in as
much as he which receives from another, is to receive it according to the
intention of the Principal Giver, and not the Instrumental Giver. He which
confers Baptism and Orders as the Principal Donor is Christ; the Bishop or
Pastor confers them only as his Instruments.] So others.

As all Power is of God and must be obeyed, so Usurpation is of Satan, and the
higher the worse; and the word Antichrist is supposed by many to signify one
that is a Usurping Christ, that is, a Usurper of Universal Sovereignty which
none but Christ is capable of.

Mr. Jos. Glanviles Character of Devils or Evil Spirits in his Sadduc^ismus
Triumphatus is considerable, p. 33. and 42. Edit. 2. [The meanest and basest in
the Kingdom of darkness -- having none to Rule and Tyrannize over within the
Circle of their own Nature and Government, they affect a proud Empire over us,
the desire of Dominion and Authority being largely spread through the whole
circumference of degenerated Nature, especially among those whose Pride was
their Original Transgression: Every one of these desires to get him Vassals to
pay him Homage. --

The good Angels have no such ends to prosecute, as the gaining any Vassals to
serve them, they being Ministering Spirits for our good, and no self-designers
for a proud and insolent Dominion over us.

But I think no Devil but Beelzebub the Prince aspireth so high as to be Ruler
of all the World or Church: And when Cardinal Bertrand told Philip King of
France that God had not been Wise if he had not set up one as his Vicegerent
visibly to Rule all the World, I do not find that he set up that Vice-god so
far above God himself as to forbid obeying him before his Viceroy, or to deny
Gods Universal Laws to be above Man's, and to deny all Appeals to God and his
Word, or to say that the President of Counsels must be obeyed without excepting,

If Gods Laws and his be inconsistent.

Since the Writing of all foregoing, Mr. Dodwell has Published the Second Part
of his Leviathan, called, A Discourse of one Altar and one Priesthood, as
against us whom he calls Schismatics, and me in particular. It is much of
the Complexion of the First Part, (His Schismatical Book) being a Chain of many
linked Propositions, of which many are false, and many falsely shaped and
applied: But put off with a confident Affirmation that he has proved them
true; And his former Method is defended by as confident an Affirmation, that
all that is said against them invalidates not his proof. The shortest way, I
confess, of defending himself, and answering others, and saves the labor of
much Writing and Reading: And I think if the tedious Discourses of his two
Volumes had been just so abbreviated, it had been a Kindness to his Readers.

2. Whether he reserve his Answer to my last Book against him to another
Treatise, or mean to overpass it by saying it is contemptible, I know not, nor
much desire to know. I find him here in his Preface doing that which may serve
his turn much better than an answer, viz. 1. Many angry Charges that I slander
him; 2. An attempt to prove it agreeable to his Method. 3. Confident
Affirmation that I write not accurately, nor answer his Proofs. And to those
that read his Books and not mine, this is enough.

3. His Proof of my Slander is mostly by way of question; Where did I say this
or that? Where, 1. Those things that I spoke of others, he feigneth me to say
of him: Joining diverse late Writers together, I mention what is said among
them, some one part, and some another, and he takes all to himself. 2. When I
mention the clear Consequences of his Doctrine. 3. And when in my Letters I
recite his Verbal Discourse with me, he asks, Where have I said it.

Did I not find him a designed Hider, I would not suspect designed Fraud, but
should be very glad that he so much as intimates in his Questions a denial of
so many Errors; But who can choose but suspect his Sincerity in such seeming
Denials, who finds some of them unsincere. E. g. He asks (Pref.) Where did
I once call Thomas Aquinas a Saint? This startleth me: Many times have my Ears
heard him call him [Saint Thomas] and never once heard him call him otherwise.
And does he now seem to deny it? I never said that he so wrote, but so called
him. Had I not reason to believe that when he often calls ( the Church of Christ
in the singular Number; One Political Body under One humane Government which
all must obey, and not question, whether it is Laws be agreeable to the Law of
God] that he meant the Church Catholic, and not a Diocese? There are Thousands
of Diocesses; but the Church that he spoke of is but One. Had I any reason to
believe that when he talked of the sole right of the President to call Councils
or Assemblies to make Church Canons, that he meant only Diocesans? When as a
Diocesane has no Bishops under him to Convocate? And whether it be not
Convocate Bishops to whom he appropriateth this Legislation, let the Reader
judge as he sees cause.

4. But I abhor making any Man thought to own what he disowneth. And I gladly
receive his intimated Denyals in these Questions; and tender them to the
Consideration of all that are for a foreign Jurisdiction.

1. Mr. Dodwell denies (by intimation) all humane Universal Church Supremacy,
and consequently all humane Power of Legislation or Judgment over the whole
Church. He denies the Government of the Catholic Church Collectively ought to
be either Monarchical or Aristocratical, in Pope or Council.

2. He denies the Pope to have any Primacy or Presidentship in General
Councils, or that it belongs to him to call them. It was but a Diocesans Power
to Convocate his Presbyters that he meant.

3. He takes the French Church for Papists, while they own the Popish
Communion (though many are not so in their Principles: But it is Men's
Principles that I spoke of, and not their Communion).

4. He denies Communion with any part of the Roman Church (Does Dr. Saywell do
so?)

5. He takes the Councils of Constance and Basil for Papists, (and has no
Communion with those that own them as being Papists.)

6. He proves the French Church guilty of the Hildebrandine Doctrine of
deposing Princes (and Aquinas too.)

7. He disowneth the terms of Cassander and Grotius as not sufficient to a
lasting Peace.

8. He (odly) dreamed that when I deny a Governing College of Bishops, I
thought the Lord Bishop of Ely had meant such as our University Colleges,
cohabiting, (this is no Slander in him) yet he declares that by such a
College, he means but Bishops ejusdem Speciei, governing the Church by parts,
and not any One Numerical Sovereign Company: But that they should hold all due
Communion (which he may see I still grant.) And he falsely fancies that I am
against Cyprian's naming of Colleagues or his sense.

5. But if Mr. Dodwell be sincere, he makes himself one of the greatest
Separatists in the World: Consider how narrow his Communion is, and the Church
which he owneth:

1. He has no Communion with the rigid Italian Papists.

2. Nor with the moderate Papists that are for the Councils of Constance and
Basil For he takes them for Papists with whom he has no Communion.

3. Nor with the Church of France, because they have Communion with Papists:
Though many of them are no Papists in their Principles.

4. He has no Communion with any Protestant Churches that have not Bishops.

5. Nor with any Protestants that have Bishops not Ordained by Canonical
uninterrupted Succession from the Apostles (at lest presumptively).

6. With none of the Greek Church that have Communion with the Church of Rome,
or with any Schismatics, or that want such Succession, or refuse the Laws of
the Church (which is all.)

7. With none of the remote Nations, called Jacobites, Nestorians, etc. Because
they are judged Heretics or Schismatics, or Communicate with such, or have a
notorious interruption of Succession.

8. Not with the Maronites, or any Sect that Communicate with Papists.

9. Not with the Nonconformists of the Church of England, whom he endeavors
to prove Damnable Schismatics.

10. Not with the true and old Church of England, who professed to hold
Communion with those Foreign Protestants whom he calls Schismatics: Nor with
any of the present Bishops and Conformists, who profess the same Communion: For
his Rule is, that they are Schismatics who Communicate with Schismatics.

Who then has he Communion with? It seems none but those few new Men in
England of his own Mind, who perhaps may call themselves the Church of England.

11. Nay, not with those among them who profess Communion with the Church of
Rome, except with the Jesuited part.

12. And with those of them who are for one Supreme Universal Aristocracy, or
Legislative College, Council and Judicature over the Universal Church.

And now can you tell which is the Church that he is of: Or is there a more
notorious Separatist or Schismatic than he?

6. And now can any Man tell which is that Church which he speaks such
wonderful things of? as the One Body Politic of Christ) with one visible human
Government? Which be the Bishops and Church that have all that Leviathan-like
Power of Heaven and Hell, which he describes and asserteth? Is it only the
uncertain relicts of all these?

7. Mr. D. hops (justly) that none, or few of his friendly Readers will read
what I write against him; and therefore when I detect his Fraud and putid
Errors, he puts it off with saying, [I do but put many new Questions, and
answer nothing accurately.] But, for the sake of them that will read, I will
ask him, 1. Whether his little invisible Church be a Body meet for the Glorious
Elogies which he gives the Church of Christ; I profess I know not one Bishop
that is of his professed Principles. Archbishop Laud was not, that took a
General Council to be a Court of Pretorian Power to be externally obeyed by all
the Church. Bishop Guning is not, as the foresaid Evidence shows.

2. And I would ask him whether his Church have all the Power of Heaven and
Hell which he describes, over those that are without the Church, or only over
those within? Paul says, What have we to do to judge them that are without?
And if so, how narrow is the Power of his magnified little Church? Let their
own Subjects escape their Damning Power how they can; it seems none of all the
people on Earth whom he counts Schismatics or Heretics are within their
reach: For these with him are all without. If it be said, They were within when
they were Baptized, I answer, 1. What they were, and what they are, is not all
one. 2. But he says that the Sacraments are but Sacrilegious Acts and
Nullities that are done by such. And if so, they were never Baptized, and so
never in the Church.

8. But let us come to his new Book and Method. And first I will tell him once
more what our different Church Principles are, that he may not accuse he knows
not what.

1. Christ is the only Head, Prophet, Priest and King to the whole Church on
Earth; both of Influence and Government, Constitutive, Specifying and Unifying;
and has no Deputy or Vicar under him, Aristocratical or Monarchical that has
any such Capacity, Power or Obligation.

2. Therefore the Church though Compaginated in all its parts, is only one
Politic Body of Christ, and not of Man, and has no other Sovereign.

3. Therefore neither Pope, Council or College of Bishops have any Legislative
or Judicial Power over the whole Church Collective; but only the several
Pastors are such to their several Churches.

4. Yet are they obliged to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace
and Love, and to do all in Concordant Observation of Christ's Laws. And all
Churches and Christians to help others to their Power.

5. And when they afford such Counsel, or help for Concord to other Churches,
they do it not as Laymen, but as Pastors, in the Universal Church, though not
as Pastors to other Men's Flocks. As Physicians of several Hospitals, and Judges
of several Courts, or Mayors of several Corporations, or Kings of several
Kingdoms may advise for Concord, without Usurping each others Government.

6. As God only by Moses made the Jewish Law, and the Priests were not to make
more, but only to Rule by it, it being a Prophetical and Mediatorial Work: So
Christ only by himself and his Spirit (of Infallibility and Miracles) in the
Apostles, made the Christian Universal Law, and no Men are to make more such,
but to Rule by that so made.

7. As Gerson truly told the Pope, Christ's own Law is sufficient for the
Government of the Church (Universal) else Christ had not been a perfect
Lawgiver: And they that pretend by Supplements or Emendations to add or do
better, are not his Ministers but Accusers.

8. Therefore those Popes and Councils that have presumed to make Laws for the
whole Church have Usurped Christ's Prerogative, and are false Prophets or
Traitors against Christ.

9. Therefore none should own them as such, nor is it Schism, but Duty so far
to disown them.

10. Nor should any own these Bishops as such, who own this their Usurpation.
As no Soldiers of the Kings Army should follow those Captains who subject
themselves to and take Commissions from an Enemy, Usurper or Foreign Princes.

11. The Power of Bishops under Christ as to Laws is only to keep and teach
Christ's Laws, and Rule by them, and determine themselves of undetermined
circumstances or accidents, which vary as time and emergent occasions vary, and
are unfit for Universal Obligation; and this Power they have only over their
single Flocks, though by contract they may join in such things with others for
Concords sake.

12. When the case of many Churches is alike, and their common good requires
Concord in any such accidents, all are bound to observe such Concordant
Agreements, by virtue of Christ's command for Concord.

13. But if on this pretense Pastors will turn Agreements for Concord into
Laws, and make that seem needful to Unity which is against it, and hurtful to
the Churches, no Christians should encourage their Usurpation by Obedience, it
being contrary to Christ's general Laws.

14. Whatever makes true Christians makes Men Members of Christ and his
Church? And only the Essentials of Christians go to make true Christians, and
the Integrals to make complete Christians.

15. The Canons of Bishops are not Essential to Christianity, nor the
understanding the many Controversies about Diocesans, Patriarchs, Councils,
Ordinations, Successions, nor to know which is the true Bishop.

16. Baptism is our Christening, and he that is truly Baptized is a Christian,
and a Member of Christ, and has the pardon of Sin and right to Heaven before
he be a Member of a particular Church, or Pastor; as the Eunuch Acts 8. and
many converted without Bishops: As the Indians by Edesius and Frumentius, and
the Iberians by a Maid, etc.

17. Whosoever truly repents and believes and loves God as God, and is of
a Heavenly Mind and Life, is pardoned before God, before Baptism, and Baptism
does but Invest him in it, and make him a Christian more fully by Covenant and
before the Church, and the want of it without contempt will not keep him from
Salvation.

18. No one shall be saved by being joined to a right Bishop, or receiving the
Eucharist, who has not true Repentance, Faith, Love, and the Spirit of
Holiness: No Sacrament saves the unqualified.

19. Thousands live in ignorance and wickedness, in Atheism, Sadduceism,
Carnality, Adultery, Drunkenness, etc. that conform to Bishops and receive the
Eucharist. And to tell such they are in a state of Salvation is opposition to
Christ, and Damnable deceit of Souls.

20. The Levites and Inferior Priests received not their Office from the
High Priest, but by Gods Law had it by Inheritance to which God chose the Tribe
of Levi: Nor had the High Priests power to add to, or alter the Laws and Office
of the Inferior Priests or their own.

21. Nor was there a necessity of an uninterrupted regular Succession; much was
of man's making: Christ owned them that were in possession, though Usurpers,
not of Aarons Line, but such as bought the place of the Romans.

22. Seeing the High Priest was a Type of Christ, and the Scripture says so
much of the change of the Law and Priesthood, and Christ has made sufficient
Laws for Church Offices, it is presumption to Judaize, and pretend to any other
imitation of the High Priests than Christ has ordained.

23. No one of the Apostles was an High Priest over the rest, but had equal
Apostolical Power.

24. Christ rebuked them for seeking who should be greatest, and expressly
forbad that which they sought.

25. Every Pastor or Church-Presbyter has an Office subordinate to the
Teaching, Priestly and Ruling Office of Christ.

26. Every ones Pastoral Office is instituted and described by Christ (by his
Spirit in the Apostles) and this specification is Divine, which none may alter,
nor make any other such.

27. Therefore (as Papists confess of the Pope) all that men have to do is (not
to be makers or donors of the Office, but) to determine of the persons that
shall receive it from Christ's donative Instrument, his Law, and ministerially
to invest them (as men Christen, Marry, Crown Kings, etc.)

28. No Minister or Priest represents Christ simpliciter, but secundum quid,
as Ambassadors or Justices do the King.

29. Christ's Laws are above man's, and no man's to be obeyed against them. To
obey man against God is Idolatry.

30. The Priests or Bishops are under Christ's Laws as well as others, and by
them all their true Power is given and limited: And therefore if they go
against Christ's Laws, they represent him not therein, nor are to be obeyed, as
usurping an unjust Power.

31. Therefore every Christian has a Judgment of discerning whether Bishops
Laws agree with Christ's, and must be governed as reasonable creatures, and not
as Infants, Idiots or Brutes.

32. They that deny this, and require absolute obedience in all things, set man
above God, and make it the duty of Subjects to be Atheists, Infidels,
Idolaters, Mahometans, Murderers, Adulterers, Heretics, where Kings, or Popes,
or Prelates will command it.

33. Multitudes of Church-Canons have been contrary to Christ's Laws, as I have
(with grief) proved in my History of Councils.

34. Bishops that deposed Emperors and Kings were not to be obeyed therein.

35. Almost all the Christian World since the use of General Councils are
disagreed who are the true Bishops, one Party setting up one, whom others
reject and condemn; so that if it were necessary to Salvation to know who is
the true Bishop of the several Churches, few Christians could be saved.

36. Many Canons nullify the Office and Power of these Bishops who come in by
the Magistrate, without the choice or consent of the Clergy and People: And I
think Mr. Dodwell professes Communion with few but such, and so is by Canons
condemned.

37. There is no Law of Christ, or unchangeable Law of man for appropriating a
certain space of ground to one Bishops Jurisdiction. Grotius and Dr. Hammond
thought that at first most great Cities had two Bishops and Churches, one of
Jews, and one of Gentiles. And the Apostles never so appropriated any places to
themselves, but often diverse in one City were their Teachers.

38. Occupation of a space of ground for Priestly Power is no just Title, and
may be altered: And if it were, the Primitive Occupation was contrary to Mr.
Dodwells Model.

39. If each City was to have a Bishop, each of our Corporations should have
one, being all Cities in that ancient sense.

40. It is not necessary to all to be of any fixed particular Church, as I have
proved elsewhere (of Travelers, some Ambassadors, Merchants, Vagrants, etc.)
while they are of the Universal Church, and own Christ, and obey his Law.

41. The Electors do more to the making of Bishops than the Ordainers:
Oft-times Bishops have ordained contrary Competitors, some one, and some
another; and are often forced to ordain whom Princes and Patrons choose.

42. Cyprian and his Carthage Council, prove in the Case of Martial and
Basilides, that it is the Peoples Duty to forsake those Bishops who are not
qualified according to Christ's Law, though Canonically ordained and approved.
And Martin separated from such; and Gildas says he is not eximius Christianus,
that owned the British Bishops.

43. Christ has left sufficient Directions, for the continuation or
restoration of the Priestly Office, without Canonical successive Ordination
uninterrupted; As well as God has done for Kings.

44. Seeing Mr. D. says, A Presumptive title may serve, he thereby confesses
that it is not real Canonical Succession, but the Opinion of it that he makes
necessary.

45. The Question is, Who must be the Presenters? When they so greatly differ?
Grotius presumed that the Chief Minister of a City or a Church was really a
Bishop, though not so called.

46. The Reformed can prove a more probable Succession than the Roman, whose
frequent interruptions has been often proved.

47. If we must imitate the Jewish High Priesthood, not every City must have
one, but every Nation (and so England has none) or else all the World.

48. Judea being a small Country, all the People at their great Anniversaries
might go up to Jerusalem; which in great Kingdoms and Empires is impossible.

49. It is false that we are united to Christ only by the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist. Baptism which is no Sacrifice, first uniteth us to him publicly, as
Faith and the Spirit do before secretly.

50. It is a frivolous thing of Mr. D. to write a Book for one chief Altar and
Bishop, when the Question is of what Church that one must be: I have proved
that Ignatius appropriated them to Churches no bigger than our Parishes, and
Mr. Clerkson has proved more; and the Man confuteth none of this proof.

51. Seeing he disowneth one Universal High Priest, and would have one in every
City, or Nation at most, who knows not that the City Bishops of the World are
now (and have been 1200 Years) in so great dissension disowning each others
Communion, that it is hard to know Catholicism by his way of Communion.

52. And who shall Govern these several Bishops, if each one be a Supreme? Have
they not as much need of Government as Presbyters?

53. The Eucharist is no otherwise a Sacrifice, than as it is an instituted
Symbolical Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice.

54. The validity of the Sacrament depends not on the uninterrupted Succession
of the Priest, nor his Subjection to the Bishop.

55. There are many Cases in which it is a Duty to be ordained, and officiate
without the Bishops consent: As in all the Popish Countries where they will
admit none without consent to Sin.

56. To make Bishops and all their Curates the absolute disposers of Heaven and
Hell, is to set up the highest Papal Tyranny over Kings and Kingdoms, by vile
Presumption.

57. His words that the People can better judge of their visible Union with the
High Priest and Christ, than of any invisible one, is a pernicious intimation,
that this visible Church Union will save them that have not the invisible Grace
of sound Faith, Repentance, and the Spirit of Love and Holiness.

I intended to have proceeded to a distinct Answer to Mr. Dodwell's whole Book,
because I take him to be the most injurious and gross Adversary to the true
Unity of the Church, on pretense of Pleading for Unity, of any that calls
himself a Protestant; and find him not only extremely self-conceited,
loquacious and magisterial (in a lowly Garb) but grossly unsincere, intimating
his denial of that in Print, which he often owned to me in Private Conference,
viz. for the Nullity of the Protestant Churches, that have not his false
Character, for the verity of the French Church, and for the uninterrupted
Succession of the Papal Seat; when I undertook to prove it, he told me, It was
not for the interest of Christianity to say so; And yet it is for the interest
of Christianity for him to Unchurch more Churches, I think than the Papists
ordinarily do.

But when I had gone thus far, I was stopped by the Persecutions of his
Church-Rulers, and then by Sickness, and after by near two Years Imprisonment
for my Paraphrase on the New Testament by a Judicature, as admirably agreeing
to his Principles, as if he had been his Disciple (Chancellor Jeffreys lately
Dead.) and such others.

Therefore not to tire the Reader with more words to so wordy a Man, I again
and again (though I suppose in vain) provoke him and his dividing Brethren, to
answer my Treatise of Episcopacy, my first Plea for Peace, my Sacrilegious
desertion of the Ministry rebuked, my Apology for the Nonconformists Preaching,
my English Nonconformity, and Mr. David Clerkson's Posthumous Book for the
Primitive Episcopacy, against his Fiction of the present Diocesane Episcopacy,
as having no Bishops under them. But fraudulent Disputers will dissemble, and
silently pass by that which they cannot answer: But will that be Peace to
Conscience in the End?

Having said as much as I think needful to satisfy intelligent impartial
Readers, against his Schismatical Writings, in my Book of Church-Concord; and
here before, I take my self discharged from any Obligation, further to detect
or confute his Fallacies. The rather because he can say and unsay, as he finds
his Interest lead him: And his Leviathan Church- Vicegod, which he feigns to be
God's Proxy to us, from whom there is no appeal to Scripture or to God, will to
Men that believe in Christ, I think by his own Description, appear as frightful
as Hob's his Leviathan.

(Some of this I wrote long after the most of the Book.)

Chap. XX. Dr. Thomas Pierce now Dean of Salisbury's Judgment (and Dr. Hamonds.)
. 1. I Think Dean Pierce is the only Man surviving, who was Commissioned by
King Chapter 2. to Treat with us for Concord, as being of the Bishops part, in
1661: And who has lived to see by near 30 years Experience whether his Zeal
against the terms of Concord which we as humble Supplicants offered, has done
more Good, and prevented more Evil, than a Concord on those offered terms would
have done. What it has done on him I know not, but with others Experience has
had as little Success as Reason and Petitioning had.

. 2. He has written against me more Book's than one, which no Man has
excelled in insulting and in command of words: His work is to prove Grotius to
have been no Papist. Few Men living think highlier of Grotius than I as to what
he wrote before his change: Especially his Book De Satisfactione Christi, and
that De Imperio Sum. Pot. and de Jure Belli, and his Annot. on the Evangelists.
Valesius and Petavius took him to be of their Religion and Church, as did
Vincentius, and Saravius. But 1. It is not the Name [Papist] that I regard, but
the Thing. 2. Therefore the doubt between Dr. Pierce and me is, What is Popery?
He thinks that it is not a proof that he is a Papist to be for an Universal
Church Jurisdiction, the Church of Rome being taken for the Mistress of all
Churches, and the Pope as Primate, and Patriarch of the West, governing
according to the Canons of Councils, and not Arbitrarily; And taking the
Articles of Pope Pius, his Creed and Oath added at Trent, which contain the
Body of that which Protestants call Popery, to be such as may be Sworn and bear
a fair sense. (Though Dr. P. himself cannot subscribe them.) This with all the
rest cited by me out of Grotius he takes to be no proof of a Papist. Let him
call it how he please, The French Church Government, or the Protestant or the
Catholic, it is the Thing (a Foreign Jurisdiction, and specially an Universal
that I deny.)

. 3. And this he himself owneth, for the proof of which I refer the Reader to
his Books; particularly his New Discoverer, Append. P. 206, 207, 208: where he
is for one Government of the whole Church: Not in specie only, (for so we are
as well as he, each Governing per parts in his own Province, as Kings in their
several Kingdoms) but numerically, by one Aristocracy, the Pope being
Principium Vnitatis; And Aristocracy is a Government formed and unified in una
Persona Politica consisting ex pluribus Personis naturalibus; Else it would not
make one Sovereignty, nor one Political Church or Society. Therefore his saying
P. 206. that the Pope's Primacy as (Universal) and his Western Patriarchate, is
no Monarchy, but exactly reconcilable with an Aristocratick Government of the
Church] reconcileth not me at all to his Model, who am past doubt that, 1. One
Aristocratical College is far more incapable of Universal Government of the
Christian World, than a Pope. [If inter impossibilia daretur Magis and Minus]
2. And that a College of the Subjects of Foreign Kings (e. g. France, Spain,
Portugal, Armenians, Abassines, Turks, Moscovites, etc.) are unfitter for
Foreign Jurisdiction, and particularly to Govern Britain than a Pope is.

The Confutation of Dr. Pierce is sufficiently done before and after: I now
only recite his Opinion: And am sorry that ( he is sure that Dr. Hammond was of
the same Religion with Grotius, and for such a Jurisdiction. But if any be for
the French Church form of Government, call them Papists or Protestants, as they
shall themselves desire; It is the Thing, and not the Name that I oppose. The
French know by feeling what that is; God grant we feel it not.

Chap. XXI. That this New sort of Prelatists who were for a Coalition with the
French or Roman Church, have been the great Agents of all the Dividing,
Silencing, Persecuting Laws, which have brought and kept us these Twenty seven
Years in our dangerous lacerated State.
1. THat the Church of England before the days of Buckingham and Laud were
quite of another Mind, I have before fully proved: And no reasonable Man can
doubt of it, who has read the Apology of the Church of England, and Jewel's
Defense of it, and the Writings of Whitaker, Fulk, Humphrey, Field, Willet,
Airy, Bernard, Crakenthorpe, Sutliffe, G. Abbot, Rob. Abbot, I. Reignolds,
Morton, Usher, Downame, John White, Birkbeck, Cook, Perkins, Bilson, Andrews,
Hall, Davenant, and many such Bishops, Dignitaries, and other Conformists;
besides, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooker, Farrar, Bradford, Philpot, and the
rest of the Martyrs. Besides the Nonconformists.

2. And that the true Church of England even in Laud's time and since, have
never consented to this Coalition, is evident. 1. In that Heylin confesses
that Laud prevailed but with four or five more Bishops to be so much as
Arminians, viz. Neale, Howson, Corbet, Buckeridge, and Mountague: And he that
reads Buckeridge his Book for Kings, and Mountague's Works, will think that
even they were against this Coalition.

2. And he confesses that Laud durst not put his Cause to a Convocation,
because so small a Number there were for him.

3. And to this day the Church or Parliament have not revoked the Homilies,
Articles, Liturgy, Apology, or any of the Writings of the Bishops and Doctors
aforesaid, who have written against Popery.

4. And excellent Writings have all along to this day been Published by the
Church Doctors against all such Confederacies with Papists; such as Dr.
Stillingfleet, (who though to please his Superiors he defended Laud, yet
defended not all that he said or did) Dr. More, Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Tennison,
Bishop Th. Barlow, Mr. Wake, yea, even Henry Fowlis, and many more; But above
all, Dr. Isaac Barrow of the Supremacy, unanswerably, though S. Parker had
Confidence enough to pretend a Confutation.

3. The Endeavors for a Coalition that were publicly attempted in Scotland,
Ireland and England, by Laud and his Agents, have been so voluminously written
of, Accused and Condemned in Parliaments, and his own Death, and the long Wars
and all the Fractures that have followed, were so much of the Consequents, that
to say more of this is Vain. Dr. Pet. Heylin's Life of Laud does acknowledge
and justify all. And Prin's History of Laud's Trial largely opens it.

4. When the Parliaments and Scots Opposition, and the ensuing Civil War had
broken this Design, and the Bloody Massacre in Ireland had rendered Popery more
odious and dreadful than all Arguments could do (before our War here) the
Parliament that had before the War, begun to Purge the Church Ministry, of
Drunkards, Scandalous, and ignorant incompetent Men, proceeded too far on Civil
Accounts, and ejected some for adhering to the King, and being against them in
the War (though some of us dissuaded them from all such severity.) Cromwell
first rebelled against the Parliament, and usurped the Government, and shortly
died, and his distracted incoherent Army striving against the Democratical
Relicts of the Parliament, dissolved their usurped Government, which
Dissolution brought in King Charles II. (by Monk and the Presbyterians, as the
Dissolution of the Parliament had brought in Cromwell. And with the King return
many of the ejected exasperated Clergy, full of the Desires of Revenge, and of
preventing all Danger to their Dignities and Promotions for the time to come;
But at first they were diffident of their present Strength, and thought they
must execute their Revenge and Mutation by degrees: The Lords, Knights and
Gentlemen that had suffered for Fighting against the Parliament for the King,
Published many Protestations to draw in the Presbyterians to restore the King,
that they would be for Love and Concord, and seek no revenge: Dr. Morley was
sent before the King to Cajole the Ministers to believe that the King was a
Protestant, and inclined to Moderation; And thereupon a moderate Party of
Episcopal Men, met with some called Presbyterians, and declared their desires
of Concord on sober terms, ( viz. Dr. Bernard, Dr. Gulston, Dr. Allen, and
others such). But Dr. Morley used them to his Ends, and shifted off all
discovery of his Designs, still quieting them by general pretenses of
Moderation, and Treaties. He had the Chief Power over Chancellor Hyde, who
ruled the Land; And Sheldon was next him, and Hinchman the third: But under
them truckled many of the same Mind.

The King published a Declaration of Liberty for tender Consciences (at Breda),
(expounded since by 27 Years barbarous Persecution, laying all on the
Protestant Prelatists that would not make a Law for it.)

I was past doubt in 1660. that the King was as he Died, or had engaged himself
to promote it here, first by giving them Liberty of their Religion, and
afterward the Power of the Land, in Magistracy, Militia, and the Church.
Knowing Men said that Morley, Sheldon, Guning, and the other Chief Agitators,
knew this, and thought they had no other way to oblige him to keep up the
English Prelacy, but to engage, that they would be firmer to his Absolute
Power, and sole Legislation, and for Passive Obedience, and for the Extirpation
of Puritans and Parliament Power, than the Jesuits were; and therefore that he
should be more for them than for the Jesuits. And withal that they would begin
where Laud was interrupted, and would attempt a Coalition; or if that failed,
would yield to Liberty for the Popish Religion, (which joined with their power
would soon prevail.)

5. At that time Mr. Calamy and I motioned a Treaty with the Prelatists for
Union and Concord, with which the Earl of Manchester and the Lord Orery
acquainted the King: which he presently accepted as an Opportunity to quiet Men
till his Absoluteness was settled. He promised us that the Church Bishops
should meet us in the midway, if we would come as far as we could without Sin.

The Drs. that were for the nearer approach to Rome, and the defenders of
Grotius his design, were the chief Agents Commissioned by the King to Treat
with us, viz. Dr. Sheldon, Dr. Guning, Dr. Peter Cousins, Dr. Sparrow, Dr.
Heylin, Mr. Thorndike, Dr. Tho. Pierce, Dr. Hinchman, Dr. Lany, Dr. Stern, and
such other; but by their Power with the Lord Chancellor Hyde, Dr. Morley, Dr.
Sheldon, and Dr. Guning overruled all the Work. When we told them how great a
number of the most Godly and Loyal people of the Land would be undone for
nothing by the Impositions which they seemed to resolve for, and how
unavoidable a Division it would cause throughout the Nation, and what
Encouragement Profaneness and Popery would thence take, and what mischievous
Effects among the Clergy and People would unavoidably follow, and how easily
all this might be by them prevented, and the Love and Honor of their Persons
and Order hereby won, Dr. Guning and others told us plainly that they had a
greater party than we are to consider, that must not be alienated to please us:
And when Dr. Bates said that abundance more of the Popish Ceremonies might be
introduced by the same Reasons as were pleaded for those imposed, Dr. Guning
answered, They must have more and not fewer. And Dr. Morley told me, That he
had good reason to believe that most of the Roman Church on this side the Alps
(that is, France) would have joined with us, were it not for the stumbling
Blocks that Calvin had laid in the way. They charged us with Sedition for
telling them how many would dissent and suffer, and what a weakening such a
Division, and the Penalties that must enforce it, would be to the Protestant
Interest and to the Land: And they all agreed (save Dr. Gauden) that they would
not abate one Ceremony to prevent all this: Yea lest they should not cast out
enough of the Ministers, they put in more and harder Impositions, and made the
Terms of Concord and Ministry such as they knew would turn out more; Sheldon
and others of them saying, They were afraid too many would Conform, and if this
much would not turn them out, there should be more; for Enemies in the Church
were more dangerous than without.

6. It is likely that the Drs. and Bishops that had been with him beyond Sea,
knew the King's Religion and Designs, and to keep up their worldly Greatness,
Dominion and Wealth, resolved to please him that he might please them: What
Religion King Charles the Second was of at his Death, his Brother has told us:
And what he was before his Return, I marvel not that Huddleston tells us so
obscurely. But I had rather believe his own words and deeds, than the reports
or conjectures of others.

It was the Opinion of the wisest Papists that Liberty for all Religions, with
the Power of Disposing of all Offices of Government and Preferments, would be
enough to bring in Popery, and that there was no other way: And that till the
King could safely declare himself for Popery, his way was to do all as a
Protestant that might advantage them: Especially to divide and break the
Protestants, and root out those of them, who were most unreconcileable to Rome,
and to engage the other to persecute and destroy them, that it might not be
doneas by the Papists, but they might seem their Fellow-Dissenters, and might
come whenever the Necessity of others should open the Door.

The King had the Choice of the Bishops, and Deans and other Church
Preferments, and of the Masters of Colleges, and of the Judges, and other Civil
Powers and Honors: Accordingly he made those Bishops, Deans, Masters of
Colleges, etc. who were known to be the most obedient to his Will, and the
greatest Enemies to those called Puritans, and those that Philanax the Papist
called Protestants of Sincerity. And by the help of the Lord Chancellor,
Morley, Sheldon, and the rest, got the mastery of all the Dependent Clergy,
when it was seen that all their preferments came much by their Wills. And that
those called Puritans, and Presbyterians might end with that Generation they
labored to place all the Students in the Universities, under such as would
possess them with the greatest contempt and hatred of those men, and to
persuade them that all that Conformed not to all their Oaths, Covenants and
Impositions, were but a pack of Fanatics, Schismatics and Rebels. And by
their great Industry the Universities, Dignities and Clergy in most Power, were
much thus constituted. And the Nonconformists being men who were noted for more
seriousness in Religion than the common sort of men, and accordingly for a more
serious way of Praying, Preaching, Discoursing and Living than the Multitude of
Hypocrites, that are Religious but as far as pleases their Bellies, their
Purses, and their Masters, it unhappily fell out that the doors of Preferment
being open to those that had no Scruple of Conscience against any of the
imposed Covenants or Practices, the main Body of those that had truly no
Religion, became an engaged Party against the Nonconformists, and took the
powerful Bishops for their Captains, and so Prelacy and Hypocrisy, and
Profaneness united their Interests, and became the strength of one another:
And this is become the fatal Odium of Prelacy among the most Religious of the
Land, and I fear will either finally root it out, or a Worldly Prelacy
confederating first with the Profane, and after with the Papists, will root
out from the Public Churches true serious Religion.

7. From first to last King Charles showed his own Judgment, I. In his
Declaration for Toleration at Breda: II. When he granted us his Declaration
about Ecclesiastical Affairs; which was to try whether we would consent to a
commoner Toleration: In the Conclusion of the Day, the distaste fell on me. The
Lord Chancellor drew out another Paper, desiring a Liberty of Religion for all
others that lived peaceably: And said, He knew not what to think of it himself,
but desired the Company to speak their Minds: Neither Lords or Bishops, or any
of their Drs. said a word to it: After twice or thrice asking, no one answered:
Dr. Wallis standing next me, said, [ I pray thee say nothing, It is an odious
Business] I forbore, till I perceived that they would take our Silence for
Consent, and then I said [ May it Please Your Majesty, This reverend Dr.
(Guning) just now accused us, as if we would let in Socinians and Papists: We
suppose that this is not intended, as our deed.] The King answered, [ There be
many Laws against the Papists] I replied, [ We understand this to be for a
dispensation with those Laws.] There was no more said, and that was the
Conclusion of the day.

III. In 1662. came out a Declaration for Liberty of Religion, naming the
Papists to have their part in it, but not a Toleration. I was desired to get
the City Ministers to Subscribe a Thanksgiving for it: I told them, that it was
the King's Work, and not to be done by us; But I knew it was the Bishops design
to cast the Odium of a Toleration of Popery on the Nonconformists, while they
would gratify the King, by forcing us to Consent; But they should never do it:
They should do it themselves, or it should not be done. And it presently died.

IV. The Lord Bridgman called Dr. Wilkins, and his Chaplain Dr. Hez. Burton,
and Dr. Manton and me, and Dr. Bates (after) as by the King's Order, to attempt
an Agreement, for a Comprehension to the Presbyterians, and a Toleration for
the Independents. We agreed of the Comprehension in terminis, and Judge Hale
drew it up into the form of an Act: But when we came to the other part, the
form proposed was for a Toleration of all, not excepting the Papists. I told
the Lord Keeper, that we could not meddle in measuring out all other men's
Liberty, but only to declare what we desired our selves: Others must be
consulted about their own concerns, we were not for severity against any: But
it was the King's Work, and we unmeet to be his Counselors in it. And so all
was cast off by the Parliament by that means, and the Act forbidden to be
offered.

8. At last the King himself broke the Ice, and Published a Declaration for
Licensing a Toleration: The Cruelty of the Prosecution of the Nonconformists,
being still the seeming Necessity for all: But the Parliament broke it, and it
did the Papists much more harm than good; for the Nonconformists continued to
Preach though Persecuted.

9. The Clergy now would lay all the Severities on the Parliament, and wash
their own hands as guiltless of all. But 1. It was they, even their chief
Bishops and Drs. that when the King Commissioned them [ to Agree on such
Alterations as were necessary to tender Consciences] after all importunity,
concluded that no Alteration was so necessary.]

2. And it was the Bishops and Convocation that altered the Book for the worse,
and put in new matter harder than before.

3. And the Bishops in Parliament were the Chief Agents in all the Laws by
which we are undone.

4. And it is known that it was the Interest of the Bishops and their Church
way that engaged the Long Parliament in all their terrible Acts against us;
Viz. The Act of Uniformity, the Acts for Banishment, the Five mile Act, the
Corporation Act, the Militia Act, the Vestry Act, and others.

5. And who knows not that it is they and their Disciples that make the great
stir, against our Healing in jealousy of their Interests, which nothing but
their own over-doing is like to overthrow.

6. And when did they ever once Petition any Parliament to reverse the dividing
wicked Laws? or to restore the Silenced Ministers? or to free them from dying
with Rogues in Jails, or to prefer the Ministers of Jesus, before Barabbas? or
to request that the Eminent Ministers of Christ might have no greater
Punishment for Preaching Christ, than debaucht Whoremongers, Drunkards,
Swearers and Blasphemers usually have in England.

7. Yea, if a Godly Conformist do but write against their Cruelty to the
Nonconformists (such as are Mr. Pierce, Mr. Jones, Mr. Bold,) they have for it
Persecuted him as if he were a Nonconformist himself. And that you may know
that it is not the old Churchmen, nor yet a few single Persons, when Dr.
Whitby Prebend of Salisbury who had wrote against Popery, did write an
excellent Treatise for Peace and Reconciliation, the Oxford University Decreed
the Public burning of it (together with my Holy Commonwealth: The Lord
Convert and Pardon them, that they prove not the burned fuel, when
Reconciliation and a Holy Commonwealth are prosperous.] etc. God shall judge
at last.

10. All this time (from Laud till now), it is a hard Controversy which of the
two Parties is to be called, The Church of England? Both Parties pretend to it,
and some call both of them, the same Church. But the Infamous Roger L'Estrange
set the Name of Trimmers on the old and reconciling Party, pretending that the
other were, the Genuine Members of the Church; And was employed by his Genius,
and the Court, and the Papists, and the New Clergymen, to do a work so truly
Diabolical, as I never read of the like in History; even for many Years
together to Write and Publish twice a Week a Dialogue called Observations,
mainly levelled against Love, Peace and Piety, to persuade all men to hate
their Brethren, and to provoke men to destroy them whom he Nicknamed Whigs,
and to render odious all save the Wolves (whom he called Tories, as if he owned
the Irish Robbers); so that a Trimmer with him was the same as a Peacemaker,
Blessed by Christ, and Cursed by L'Estrange.

11. But whether the New Clergy or the Old be the Church of England, and
whether both be of one Church, remains still doubtful: But whoever has the
Name, that one Name is equivocal when applied to Parties contrary and
inconsistent. 1. That Church which owneth a Foreign Government and
Jurisdiction, cannot be one and the same with that Church which renounceth and
abhors it, and owneth only Christ's Universal Government, and a Foreign
Concord and Communion. But this is the difference between the Old Reformed
Church of England, and the New that call themselves the Church. Two Kings make
two Kingdoms: For the Form denominateth: And the Relative Union of the pars
Imperans, and Subdita, is the Form.

That Church which has a Human Head above National, must have a Form and Name
above National: that is, Above a Church of England: which makes them all talk
so much of [ The Universal Church] in this false humane Form. An Universal
Church has an Universal Sovereign Power; which is only Christ. If the Pope be
Antichrist, it is his claim of this that makes him so, because it is Christ's
Prerogative, which no mortal Man or Council or College is capable of. And if
so, is it not a Papal or Antichristian Church that these Foreign Subjects own
and are of? whether it be of the French or Italian Form, if one be
Antichristian, both are so, when the Claim of Universal Jurisdiction is the
Cause.

I have voluminously detected the mistake of these deceived Men, who are
deluded by the Name Ecumenical, Catholic and Universal, which they find in
the Councils and Fathers; and fully proved to them, that it signified no
Councils above the Imperial or National; But distinguished those that were
Universal in that one Empire, from the Provincial.

2. The Reformed Church of England takes the Parish Communicants to be true
Churches, and the Pastors to have as much of the Oversight as is necessary to
the Constitution of a true Political Church. (Though their Canons sinfully
fetter them in the Exercise.) But the Foreigners hold the Diocesses to be the
least or lowest Churches, and the Parishes to be no true Churches for want of
Bishops in them, but only Parts of a Church, that has a Bishop over them all.

3. The Old Church of England owned the Foreign Protestant Churches as true
Churches, and their Ministers as true Pastors, and own Communion with them. But
the Innovators say, that they have no true Bishops, because they have not
Diocesans, and are no true Pastors if they have not an uninterrupted Succession
of Diocesane Ordination from the Apostles; whereas for some Hundred Years after
the Apostles, there was no such Bishops known in the World, as were not either
Congregational (Parochial) Bishops, or Apostolic Overseers of such: and no
Diocesans over many Hundred or Score Parish Churches, that had no Bishops under
them.

12. When you consider what Power the New Foreigners had at Court, and with the
Parliament that made the Act of Uniformity, and required Reordination, and
that made all the other persecuting Acts; and with the Justices that executed
them: And when we see how they promoted the Roman Interest; and when we see how
potently and obstinately they frustrated all attempts of the Protestant Union
here, and read how they reviled the old Reforming Bishops (from Parker to
Abbots) and the Parliaments as going too far from Rome; And when we consider
that we have not one Bishop but who was chosen by K. Charles II. and K. James,
and what Men they may be supposed to choose; we Contradict not these Men when
they call themselves [the Church of England] But when we consider that the old
Homilies, Apology, Articles, Liturgy, Canons, etc. were never yet repealed, and
that they are all Sworn to Endeavor no Alteration of Government of Church or
State, we have cause to think that the old Party have more right to be called
The Church, the altering Endeavors having not changed its Essentials.

By this much the Reader may Expound whom I speak of in my Treatise of
Episcopacy.

13. The Church is nothing, but the Men that constitute the Church: If 1. It be
denominated by their Numbers, no man can tell which Party has the greater
Number till they are further put upon the trial. 2. If they are denominated by
Laws, the better part are rather to be called the Church, because the Old Laws
against Popery are not yet Repealed; Though yet some late Laws are to the Old,
as poison to a living Man: So if they be Denominated by Power, the Innovators
have been the Church at least these 31 Years. For that Party Ruled, and had the
Countenance of the Kings, who chose them. And indeed in the Days of the
differing Emperors ( Constantine, Constantinus, Valens, Theodosius, Arcadius,
Marcian, Leo, Zeno, and the rest) that usually went for the Church or Orthodox
party, which the Emperor owned: The uppermost will have the Name.

14. Though the French and English (aforesaid) designed a Coalition, the long
possession of their different ways, unavoidably hindered them from an immediate
Union; But they were forced to approach by leisurely Degrees: England would not
suddenly turn the Liturgy to a Mass Book, nor France suddenly turn the
Mass Book Corrected into French: But what fair Approaches were made, and what
further intended, Grotius his Counsel Magnified by both Churches, and the
present practices of the French declare.

The Council of Grotius was to bring down the Pope to Moderation, that he might
Rule but by the Canons, and not be above Councils, nor deprive Kings nor
Bishops of their Rights, and that the Lives of the Clergy be Reformed, and
School Niceties left indifferent, and the Lutheranes as Reconcilable Courted
to a Concord, and the unreconcileable Calvinists brought down by force: But the
Lutheranes are not so Reconcilable as they imagined; Princes that are once
free, are loath to become Subjects to a Foreign Priesthood.

15. And how much the French meant to bring down the Pope, their late
Transactions show a little, but their Doctrines much more: Mr. Jurieu himself
in his Posteral Letters ( Engl. p. 216.217.) thus Describes them.

1. That the Church of Rome is no more than a Particular Church, as other
Churches are. 2. That St. Peter had nothing but a Primacy of Order, and
Presidence above the Apostles. 3. That St. Peter could give (to his Successor)
over other Bishops, no more but that Primacy which he had over the Apostles. 4.
That the Bishop of Rome Originally, and by Divine Right, had no Power over the
Universal Church. 5. That he did not receive Appeals in the first Age of the
Church. 6. That he had no Right to Assemble General Councils. 7. That he could
take Cognizance of the Affairs of no other Provinces but his own; no not by
Appeals. 8. That he had no Right to take Knowledge of Matters of Faith, to make
Decisions therein; which should oblige the whole Church. 9. That before the
Council of Nice, and after, he had no inspection over other Churches, but those
which were in the Neighborhood of Rome. 10. That he could not Excommunicate
other Bishops, otherwise than the other Bishops could Excommunicate him. 11.
That a Man might separate himself from the Bishop of Rome, without being a
Schismatic, and out of the Church. 12. That the Pope had no Right over other
Bishops. 13. That the Council of Sardica is the Fountain of that Right of
receiving Appeals which the Pope claims. 14. That the Rights which the Pope
has at this Day, excepting his Primacy, are by Human Laws, and because he has
assumed them to himself, and because they have bin conceded to him. 15. To
which they add, he is not Infallible, nor Superior to Councils, nor Master to
the Temporalities of Kings.] This is the French Religion, and who would think
that this is Popery: No wonder if the Pope be more hearty for other Friends,
than for France.

15. Lay all this together, and it is Notorious that (though Whetgift and some
other Calvinists were too much guilty of the Persecutions, to keep up the
Dominion and Preferments which they were jealous of) yet it was the French
Reconcilers that have set, and to this Day kept on foot our present increased
Divisions and Dangers: Since Le Strange new-named them, the old Church
Protestants are called Trimmers, and are Men that love not Division or
Persecution, and would fain see a Coalition of Protestants; though they have
not zeal enough (save too few) to put it on openly, lest they provoke the
opposites. But the Laudians called Tories, are still as much against the
Removal of the Dividing, Persecuting, Snares, and against the Coalition of
English Protestants, on any possible healing Terms, as ever, and as fiercely
seek the Continuance of our Slavery and Silence.

Chap. XXII. How they have been stopped, and in that Danger we are yet of those
that are for a Foreign Jurisdiction.
1. THe continual Endeavors of Parliaments to Suppress all the Relicts and
Advantages of Popery in Queen Elizabeth's and King James Days, long kept this
Papal inclination from appearing: And when Laud raised it up, and King James
and Buckingham Countenanced it, to promote first the Spanish, and after the
French Marriage, the Articles of Liberty for Popery, Consented to by King
James, and after Ratified by King Charles, greatly Distasted the Nobility and
Gentry, and the People much more; so that the Kings and Parliaments were never
after easy to each other, till King Charles II. got a Parliament fitted to his
turn.

2. The new raised Impositions of King Charles I. and Laud first Exasperated
the old conformable Clergy, by ^uspending and vexing them, for not reading the
Book for Sports on the Lords Days, and for Preaching twice a Day, and by Altars
and Bowing, and other Innovations: And the Severities against Burton, Prin and
Bastwick made a murmuring noise; And the driving many hundred Families of Godly
Men out of the Land, much more. And the newly Altered and Imposed Liturgy,
Exasperated the Scots, who were Encouraged by the English Discontents: Yet all
this had done the less, had not the same Church-Innovaters been against
Parliaments, and kept them out, because Parliaments were against them: And had
they not Preached for, and promoted the Kings power to Raise Taxes without a
Parliament. But this leavened the Nation with an Averseness to the Frenchified
Reconcilers. And the Scots knowing all this, began Resistance, which proceeded
to a Mutual diffidence of King and People, which brought forth after a
Civil-War.

3. While the King and Parliament were Laboring under the Mortal Disease of
mutual distrust, the Irish by an Insurrection, Murdered most Barbarously two
hundred thousand Protestants, (just the day Twelmonth before Edghil Fight,
Dublin escaped:) And this Horrid Cruelty hastened the War in England, and made
Popery more odious than ever it was before; and rendered the French
Conciliators more distasted.

4. The Conciliators having the chief Ecclesiastical Power under King Charles
I. and having too much Modelled the Churches and Universities to their Minds,
the Parliament began a Reformation before the War, and carried it on after, and
cast out many Hundred for Insufficiency through gross ignorance, and for
Drunkenness, and Vicious Lives: And some for being against the Parliament; and
prospering till Cromwell cast them out, and Cromwell going much further against
Prelatical Tyranny, and an ignorant Vicious Ministry than they, thirteen or
fourteen or fifteen years time, not only stopped the French design of Coalition,
but also wore out the chief designers and promoters of it: To which the Death
of Laud, with all the Accusations against him, struck deep: (of which see Prins
Introductions, and his Canterburies Trial.) And many old Conformists (which was
all the Westminster Assembly of Divines saving eight) were the Men that chose
rather to put down the English Prelacy, than to run the hazard of the change of
Civil Government and Introduction of Popery. So that both Popery, and the
favorers of it, seemed quite cast out in England. But Cromwell and his Armies
Usurpation and Treasons so Exasperated the two Kingdoms, both Episcopal and
Presbyterians, that after his Death (his Army having cast themselves and the
Land into Confusion) they brought in King Charles II. who by his Declaration
from Breda, and his Treaty in 61 with the Nonconformists, and his Declaration
1662. (called Bristols) and by his Treaty with us by the Lord Keeper Bridgman,
and by his Declaration for Toleration, still labored so Strenuously to give
Popery a Toleration, that discerning Men were satisfied that he was then of the
Religion that he dyed in, (if he had any) or at least had engaged himself to
introduce it: To which ends. 1. The dividing of the Protestants, 2. The
Ejecting, Silencing, Ruining, Imprisoning or Banishing those of them that were
most unreconcileable to Popery; 3. The keeping such out by new Impositions of
Oaths, Subscriptions, Professions and Practices, were found to be the fittest
means: 4. To which was added, the Exasperating the long Parliament (of Men
before Exasperated) against them. 5. And the Declaring and Swearing the People
against the Lawfulness of any Military Defense of Parliament or Kingdom against
any Commissioned by the King. 6. And to bring all those that scrupled such
Oaths, under the odious Name of Nonconforming Rebels, (Though they were all
against Defensive War by any private Men or Faction; or for any Cause less than
the saving of the Kingdom from apparent Ruin, Subversion or Alienation). 7. To
which was added, the taking away of all Legislative Power from Parliaments, and
appropriating it only to the King (the strenuous Endeavor of Bishop Morley's
last Book against me, and of many others. 8. Which were all thought an
unresistible force while the King, (of whatever Religion) had the choice of all
the Bishops, Deans and Dignitaries, and consequently of that called The Church
of England; 9. And also the choice of Judges, and the making of Lords. 10. And
the changing of Corporation Charters.

5. To these uses (that we may not accuse the Innocent) it was comparatively
but a few men that were the visible prime Instruments, besides the
non-appearing Jesuits or other Papists): That is, Chancellor Hide, Dr. Sheldon,
Dr. Morley, Dr. Guning, whom not only Dr. Hinchman, Dr. Cousins, Dr. Lany, Dr.
Stern, and several others followed ex animo; but also most of the worldly
sequacious part of the Clergy and Laity, for Interest and Preferment sake, when
they saw that the Interest of Sheldon and Morley with the Chancellor, was a
great and necessary means of obtaining their desires.

6. But the bringing us to French Popery by the Grotian way, proved so slow by
many stops, that it has by God's Mercy been hitherto much frustrate and
prevented. For the King must not make professed Papists to be Bishops, Deans
and Convocation Men, lest the notoriety of the Design should raise
unconquerable Offense and Opposition: The Name of Popery was to be renounced,
even by those that were for a Foreign Jurisdiction: And a Government like that
of the French Church must be said to be no Popery, but only that which made the
Pope Arbitrary, or Supereminent above Councils: And the very retaining of the
Name of Popery in their Renunciation, spoiled their Game: And specially being
necessitated to avoid Suspicion, to make diverse firm Protestants, Bishops,
Deans and Judges. Yet the slow way of K. Chapter II. was like to have been the
surest, could their Patience have held out.

7. But God used K. James II. as the great Instrument of frustrating all the
Plot (till now); by his and his Instigaters Impatience of this delay, and
confidence of a more speedy way of Success: So that he resolved to put it to a
speedy upshot, and would have all or none: which brought the Changes which we
have since seen.

8. But is the Church of England yet delivered from all the Inclination to a
Foreign Jurisdiction, and the French Government? The Oath of Supremacy made it
seem hard to perjure the whole Land, that had renounced all foreign
Jurisdiction. But many devised an Expository Evasion (that only a Civil
Jurisdiction was meant; though the Ecclesiastic also was named). Should there
be but a new attempt by such as the former Rulers probably made, is it not like
that Men of the French or Grotian Principles will promote it; yea, and be glad
of French assistance?

I doubt they that would Perjure the Kingdom by a foreign Jurisdiction, will
debate this odd Question.

Qu. Whether all that Profess or Swear that it is Unlawful on any Pretense
whatever to resist the King, or any Commissioned by him in the Execution of
that Commission, may resist a French Army if they Invade the Land by K. J 's
Commission? (Or will they turn Nonconformists?)

Chap. XXIII. Postscript to the Reverend Dr. Beveridge.
SIR,
1. THough you were Bishop Guning's Witness (with Dr. Saywell his Chaplain)
when he conferred with me, I was not willing to believe that you were of his
mind for a Foreign Jurisdiction, either Aristocratical or Democratical, or
Monarchical, but to my grief am now convinced of it, by your published
Convocation Sermon: Having too copiously here and elsewhere confuted it
(specially in my two Books against William Johnson alias Terret the Papist) I
shall go on the supposition that you will there take notice of it: Especially
of these two Reasons against it.

1. That the Kingdom and Church is sworn against it.

2. That a pretended Universal Humane Sovereignty or Legislative and Judicial
Power over the whole Church on Earth, is the Grand Usurpation of Christ's
Prerogative; which no Mortal Men are capable of: And if this be not Popery,
there is no such thing as Popery: And if the Pope be justly called Antichrist,
or at least a Traiterous Usurper against the Right of Christ and Kings, it is
by this: And if such a Power be really given to any, the Pope cannot be
excluded, at least from the Universal Primacy.

2. I doubt not but the Love of Unity and the sense of the woeful case of the
Church by Sects, and sad Dissentions, engaged Bishop Guning and you in the
Opinions you took up: And no doubt but the Conscientious part of the Learned
and Religious Papists are fixed by the same Motives in their way: I may say
[fixed and very confident, or else they durst not carry it on as they have done
in France and all other Popish Countries. And I can say that I have not fixed
on the denial of a Humane Universal Jurisdiction, without thinking seriously
Forty years of what I could find said for it as well as against it; nor out of
an inclination to any contrary extreme: Could I have found but any Humane
capacity in One or Many for such a Sovereignty, Legislative and Judicial, and
but a possibility of such a thing, and any probability that it was of Christ's
Institution, the Love of Unity, and Hatred of Unruliness and Divisions, and
their Effects had long ago made me a hot defender of it. But the contrary
Truth, had contrary Effects.

3. That you may not think that I differ from you more than I do, I here
premise, I. That I doubt not but that the Universal Church visible is One Body
or Society of professed Christians: As the Universal Church as Regenerate and
Spiritual is One Body of sincere Christians.

II. That the Unity and Concord of it as Professors, and as sincere, must be
maintained to the utmost of our power by all due lawful means.

III. That a wise Correspondency between all those Churches, which by nearness
are capable of Acquaintance and Communication is a due means to preserve their
Love and Concord.

IV. That seasonable and duly chosen Synods of many conjunct that live within
the reach of such Acquaintance and Communication may in case of true need be a
fit means of such Concord.

V. That where such Synods cannot be had with due equality, Letters and
Messengers from the several Nations or Provinces, or Churches may be used to
that end.

VI. That the General Law of Christ commanding Love, Concord and Edification,
makes it a sin for any to affect causless singularity, and to choose any way
which tends to Division: And that where there is an Equality, and no Regent
power; yet just Contracts for Concord ought to be observed.

VII. That if in National Churches (that is, Christian Kingdoms or
Commonwealths) the Sovereign Power give one Seat or Bishop a Primacy or
peculiar Privilege, in the Circa Sacra, the Circumstantials of Sacred Offices,
which are within the Magistrates Power, it ought to be obeyed.

VIII. If I had lived in the Christian Empire, when it sometime gave the Bishop
of Rome, and sometime the Bishop of Constantinople this pre-eminence of degree,
and the other Patriarchs (of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem) their several
Privileges and Powers, not contrary to the Word of God, I would have obeyed
that which the Emperor by his Law preferred.

IX. The Roman Empire was so great a part of the known Civilized World, and so
Potent, that I quarrel not with the Titles of [ Orbis Romanus] and [ Ecclesia
Vniversalis] given to that Dominion and Church which was merely National or
Imperial; so be it, we understand the true meaning.

X. Had the Empire continued one Polity, and had made the Bishop of Rome the
Primate as to his Seat in Councils, and the said Bishop had been a capable
Person, and had not Challenged the Government or Primacy in order of Regiment
over the whole Christian World but in the Empire only, as the Archbishop of
Canterbury does in England, I would have been none of his opposers: All this I
grant you.

4. But (premising for the Explication of Terms, that we take the words [
Regiment, Laws, Authority, etc. in the proper political sense, and not
equivocally for mere advice or consent) I add as follows.

1. That as the Universal Church on Earth, has but one Sovereign Jesus Christ,
so it is one Body Politic, in relation to no one Vnifying Head but Christ, and
has no one Substitute Vicarious Christ, or Substitute Sovereign Government,
Monarchical, Aristocratical, Democratical or Mixed.

II. The Sovereignty of one Christian King, Emperor or Senate, (in Aristocracy)
over an United or Confederate Christian Clergy and Laity as Subjects (each
keeping to their own Place and Work) is the Unifying Headship of a National
Church, which is nothing but such a Christian Kingdom or Republic: And that
Christ has owned such National Church Power, and has instituted and owned no
Power of Humane Government over it on Earth: And therefore as pretending to
Universal Jurisdiction is Treason against Christ, so the claim of Foreign
Jurisdiction is Hostility against Kings and States.

III. That Foreign Councils of Bishops and Dyets of Sovereign Princes are
Authorized for Communion for mutual Counsel and Concord by Contract and
Agreement, and have no just Jurisdiction or Political Regiment over particular
Sovereigns or their subject Congregations: Though in Councils they retain their
proper Power at home.

IV. The Foreign Councils agreeing on things profitable to the common benefit
of all, Gods own Law of Love, Unity, Concord, Edification and public Regard
and Peace, forbids the particular Bishops and Churches causlesly to dissent
and affect singularity: But if they agree on things hurtful and dangerous to
any of the particulars, they are not to be obeyed, nor yet if they claim
Jurisdiction instead of Communion and Contract: But every Prince and Pastor
must Rule their own. As Kings will not own a Foreign King or Council of Kings,
who shall Usurp a Sovereignty over them, much more if over all.

V. That all Forcing Power that the Clergy can claim by Canons or Mandates in
Christian Kingdoms, is only from the Prince (or State) as they are authorized
by him as his Officers, who only has the power of the Sword; and not at all
any part of their Pastoral Office. And therefore (as Grotius in that excellent
Book de Imperio sum. Potest. circa Sacra has showed) Clergy-Canons are no
Laws, but directing Agreements.

VI. The Canons of the Greatest Councils called General, were Laws to none
without the Empire, unless Foreign Princes or Pastors made them so: Nor to any
within the Empire, but by the Sovereigns Act as they are forcing, and the
particular Pastors as Directing.

VII. Before the Division and Ruin of the Empire, the Name of a General
Council signified but an Imperial or National Council. They being called by the
Emperors who had no further power, and only out of the Imperial Provinces,
unless any odd Person came voluntarily in for help and advantage; which was
rare. This I have at large proved in my two Books against W. Johnson alias
Terret.) And, Ecclesia Vniversalis usually signified no more than Universal,
National or Imperial. Leo meant no more when he called himself Caput Ecclesiae
Universalis, nor Phocas when he gave Boniface the Title of Universal Bishop:
And when the Empire was divided it was the Treasonable Erection of Popery to
feign that Orbis Romanus was Orbis Universalis, and that Concilia Generalia,
and Ecclesia Vniversalis, meant extra Imperial and Universal Over-foreigners,
and all the World: And this is still as the Foundation of Popery, so the common
Cheat that pleads for Foreign Jurisdiction.

VIII. Though Rome was a meet Seat for Imperial Church Primacy while Emperors
would have it so; as it has no just pretense to the Government of Foreigners,
so it is of all others most unfit for a Primacy or Presidentship in the
Councils of Foreign Confederate Princes and Churches, because it claims so
much more, even Foreign and Universal Regiment: Nor are Councils of such
Bishops or Princes to be trusted with General Contracts, who claim such
Jurisdiction.

A Primacy in Lawful Councils of Confederates would strengthen their claim of
an Universal Jurisdiction till they openly renounce it.

And so would the use of a Senate or Council that pretends to the like power.

IX. Patriarchs and Metropolitans, and Provincials or Diocesans in one Empire
or Kingdom, can for Number, Seat or Precedence, justly claim no power of
Governing Foreigners; nor subject Bishops of that Nation, but from the
Sovereign.

X. Legislation is the first Essential power of Regiment: Therefore none can be
an Universal Legislator that is not an Universal Rector.

XI. As an Universal Monarch (Ecclesiastical or Civil) is the absurd claim of
an Impossible thing, and open Hostility to all Christian Kings and Churches, so
an Universal Aristocracy in Councils or Patriarchs, and Bishops, is yet more
absurd, as claiming a more notorious Impossibility than the Pope does.

XII. An Universal power of Expounding or Judging of Christ's Laws by Regent
Authority, or of being such Keepers of unwritten Laws, seems the most Eminent
part of Legislation; it being more to be Judge what is Law, and to make or
determine of the sense, than to make the bare words: And so the Bishops should
have a higher Regency than Christ: Official Judges Expound the Laws only in
their limited Provinces, and for the deciding of particular Cases; but not to
be the Universal Determiners of the sense to all others: None but the
Lawmakers can make an Universally obliging Exposition.

XIII. The instance of the Apostles power will not prove an Institution of a
stated Universal Legislative Aristocracy, or Monarchy. For, 1. It is evident
that Christ first chose and instituted them, as his National Ministers, by the
number of Twelve related to the Twelve Tribes; and by the keeping up just that
number after the coming down of the Holy Ghost: And by his special Mission of
Paul, Barnabas and others to the Gentiles, distinguishing their Apostleship
from Peter's and the rest to the Jews.

2. When Persecution and the fall of the Jewish state, made the Apostles Office
more Extensive, it was rather Indefinite than Universal: They were to go as far
as they were sent, and were able.

3. The Church was then in so narrow Bounds as made that Extent easy, when now
an Universal Humane Regiment is of Natural Impossibility, and so past rational
Controversy.

4. Their power was not any further Legislative, than as they were Promulgators
of Christ's Laws, and Determiners of mutable undetermined Circumstances or
Accidents.

5. They have no Successors in those extraordinary parts of their Office, which
looks like any part of Legislative power. Which parts are, 1. Being Eye and
Ear-witnesses of what Christ did and said committed to their Testifying and
Predicating Trust. 2. Having a special Commission to teach all Nations his
Laws, or what he commanded as the prime Promulgators. 3. As having the promise
of the Spirit to Teach them all things, and bring all to their remembrance. 4.
And having the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost to attest their Witness: As
Moses had Successors in Executive Regency, but not as a Mediatorial Deliverer
of Gods Law, which Aaron, Samuel, David and Solomon must obey and rule by, but
had no power to alter words or sense, nor add any thing but undetermined
Circumstances.

Yet as the Laws of Christ promulgate by the Apostles bind all Nations to whom
they are revealed; so we grant that the same Laws of Christ declared by
Councils, or Preached by any single Minister, bind all to whom they come: And
that every Minister (and Christian) being a Member of the Church Universal, his
Doctrine tends to Universal Benefit which yet gives him no Universal Regent
Jurisdiction.

As I remember I have said all this before in my Letters to Bishop Guning when
you were his Second or Witness of our Conference: But the Invitation of your
Discourse, which I shall now give you my thoughts of, makes me think that this
repetition is not unnecessary. If you will read Mr. Th. Beverley's whole Duty
of Nations, you may see more of my Judgment.

Supposing your Book to be in the hands of the Reader, I shall forbear
transcribing, and only tell you what I dissent from, and the pages where it is
contained.

I. I dissent from your Opinion of a Humane Sovereignty as over the Universal
Church on Earth, (whether you feign it to be Monarchical, Aristocratical,
Democratical or Mixed, I matter not.)

II. Consequently I deny your Doctrine of such an Universal Legislative power
in Man, and of any Humane Universal Laws.

III. And I deny all Foreign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that is, That the
Clergy of any one or many Foreign Kingdoms have a Legislative Regent power over
any other King and Nation which give them not that power by a voluntary
Subjection.

All these denied Doctrines you own, page 28. l. 7, 8, etc. p. 24, 25, 26, 21,
23, 19, 13, 14, 15.

My Reasons against the first are so many before repeated, that I must not
again do that which is so often done. Prove you a Universal Humane Polity (by
Kings or Clergy) and I will easily prove that Aristocratical is worse than
Monarchical, and less practicable: And if you think Popery an unfit Name for
it, I will prove it Antichristian, as the Treasonable claim of Christ's
Prerogative may be so called.

The Second Error falls with the first: For Legislation is the most Essential
part of Sovereign power.

Your Third denied Opinion I hope all Protestant Kings and Kingdoms will
continue to renounce. And seeing you know that this whole Kingdom is Sworn
against it, (even all Foreign Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions as
well as Civil,) in the Oath of Supremacy, (besides the many Oaths against
alteration of Church and State Government) I hope you would not have the Nation
stigmatized with the brand of PERJURY. If the Law for taking the Oath of
Supremacy be repealed, the Law of God against Perjury is not repealed.

And whether it be Treason in it self against King and Kingdom, to set up the
claim of a Foreign power over them, without their consent, the Judges know
better than I. But I know that there be some wise men that cannot yet prove K.
James his Self-deposing, if this will not prove it, that he openly endeavored
to settle the Kingdom under a Foreign Jurisdiction against the Laws and against
their Wills, and so to alienate the prime part of Sovereignty.

And should a Foreign Jurisdiction be asserted, we should all be confounded by
the Impossibility of knowing where to find it, or how to use it, if it be
Aristocratical: Where the Pope is may be known: But where to find a General
Council of all the Christian World, or an Ecclesiastical Parliament or College,
or the Major Vote of all the Churches we know not.

And seeing Bishops are all (save one) the Subjects of other Princes, blame not
Kings to be unwilling to be their Subjects, when thereby they will be subjected
to those Princes that Rule them, or can sway them by Preferments.

IV. And I believe not your Doctrine that the Major part must go for this
Governing Church.

For, 1. It will never be agreed who be the Nations or Persons that are to be
accounted Parts; all will claim a Right that are called Christians. And can all
Christians or Ministers judge of their pretensions?

2. It is certain that the Greater part have often erred in Counsels, and out
of them: The Case of the Arrians proves it: And the Greater part of the
Bishops have been sometime on one side, and sometimes of another, and have
turned and returned in the same Age; as is notorious in the Cases of the
Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites, the Council of Chalcedon, owned and
disowned, the Tria Capitula, the Case of Images, and others.

3. It is known that most of the Christian World at this day have no small
number of Errors; the Greeks, Moscovites, Armenians, Abassins, Coptis, Syrians,
Jacobites, Nestorians, Maronites, Georgians, etc.

4. It is to be expected that the Countries nearest the Councils, and that have
most numerous Bishoprics will have the Major Vote, when those far off, and
that have large and few Bishoprics will have few Votes.

5. It is known that three of the five old Patriarchates have many Errors, yea,
four of them differ from all the Western Churches, Papists and Protestants.

5. And it is certain that as we cannot be sure of the Major Vote all over-the
World, so God never gave the Major part the Sovereignty.

V. And your Foundation for all this in Politics is intolerably false, viz.
[pag. 13. In omnibus hujusmodi Societatibus pars omnis toti suo congrua, and
pars minor majori consentanea esse debet. Hoc ratio suadet: Hoc jus natural
edicit: Hoc Communis hominum Consensus necessarium esse statuit. Adeo ut si
quid a majori, multo magis quod a maxim^ cujusvis Societatis part constituitur
eodem pars reliqua constringatur, illudque observare necesse habeat, si membrum
manner and privilegiis illius Societatis gaudere velit. Quod cum in omnibus
cujuscunque generis Societatibus valet, multo magis in Ecclesia valere debet,
quam omnium ornatissimam esse decet.]

I am loath to English it, 1. I confess I find the like in Archbishop Laud, and
R. Hooker: So Nonconformable to each other is the Conforming Clergy. But it is
downright Popularity or Democracy of the worst sort; And can such men cry down
Republicans? yea, and raise a suspicion of Nonconformists as Republicans? O
what a vafricious sort of men do sometime appropriate the Name of the Church?

2. It is true of no sort of Political Society in the World, but only of
ungoverned Communities or Confederacies, except those by Contract turned a mere
Community into the worst sort of Popular Polity: And in Aristocracies it is
not the Major Vote of the whole Society that Rules, but of those few who make
up One Political Person or Power. And yet could you appeal to Reason, Nature,
and common Consent?

3. It is against the Essence of the Government of this Kingdom? Shall Kings,
Parliament and Magistrates be bound to obey the Major part of the Kingdom? No,
nor King and Lords to obey the Major part of the House of Commons? Nor Mayors
and Bailiffs be bound to obey the Major part of the Cities and Corporations?

4. It is contrary to God's Law of Nature and Scripture. God has anticipated
humane popular pretenses of being either naturally Rulers, or the Fountain of
Governing Power: For God has instituted in Nature, the Genus of this Power,
and so much of the Species as is to execute God's Laws: He has made the Fifth
Commandment: and as he allows not the Major part of the Children to govern
Father and Mother, or of Scholars to rule their Masters, so neither of Subjects
to rule the Sovereign or the Minor part.

5. It is contrary to Oaths that are taken by the Subjects of this Land.

6. It is contrary to the subscribed 39 Articles, that tell us of the Errors
and Fallibility of Councils.

7. It is contrary to the Canons, especially those of 1640. that determined
Kingly Power to be of God's Institution.

8. It is contrary to all the Writers and Fighters that were against
Parliaments resisting the King. Michael Hudson has most strongly wrote against
it. Dr. Hammond against John Goodwin has proved that the People have neither
ruling Authority to Use nor to Give. How far then were Bishop Morley and such
others from your Mind, who write that the Parliament themselves have no
Essential part in Legislation, but only to prepare Matter which the King only
makes to be a Law? All the Clergy have subscribed to the King's unresistible
Power, and a Law made to that purpose by the Parliament that settled your
Conformity and Church.

9. Do you take the Major part of your Congregation to be your Governors? Or
the Major part of the Diocese to Rule the Diocesane? Or are these no Societies?

10. Is it not contrary to the Oath of Canonical Obedience?

11. Are our Universities of this Mind; when Oxford burnt my Political
Aphorisms, and Dr. Whitbye's Book, and Mr. I. Humfrey's, as derogating from the
Regal Power, when yet I abhord such a derogation as your Majority of the
Society?

12. In a word, it is destructive of all Government: For the truth is, that
Democracy in a large Kingdom is an Impossibility: The People cannot all meet to
try who has the Major Vote: They can but choose their Governors, though
called Representatives: And that is an Aristocracy: For to choose Governors is
not to Govern. Even Rome was not a true Democracy: For the People had but a
Negative part in Legislation, S. P. Q. R. conjunct having the Supremacy: And
what were the People of one City to the whole Empire, which was the Politic
Body?

But how shall we know who constitute this Voting Society which you call the
Church? I know that the Papists appropriate that title to the Clergy? But when
it comes to Practice (in Councils or out) how small a part have any but the
Bishops? Our Canons condemn those who deny the Convocation to be the
Representative Church? Who are the real Church which they represent? Do they
represent the Laity? Or are they none of the Church? How can they represent
those that never choose them? Patrons choose the Incumbents; and the People
choose neither Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons or Proctors. Is it the King and
Parliament that they represent? I confess the King that chooses Bishops may
most plausibly be pretended to be represented by them. But are they indeed his
Rulers and Lawgivers, and he their Subject? Was Moses so to Aaron, or Solomon
to Abiathar? The King chooses Justices, and Constables (mediately) but not to
be his Governors but his Ministers. Or is the King and Parliament no Part of
the Church of England? Say so then, that we may understand you.

But if indeed you confess the Laity (...) be of this Voting Church (whose
Major part by Nature, Reason, and the Consent of all the World must Govern us)
I beseech you help us at last (after all our lost importunity) to know which of
the Laity it is. Is it all that are in the Parishes? I doubt then that the
Atheists, Papists, Sadduces, Deists, Hobbists, Ignorant, Irreligious Debauchees
and Lads, will be our Rulers.

Is it only Communicants? Then the Parish Priest of one place will have a
Church of one sort, and another of another sort? And how knows he in great
Parishes who are his Communicants, when he knows not who or what they are? or
whence they come, nor whether ever they came before? The Law is the likest
test, which obliges all to Communicate that will have a License to sell Ale or
Wine, or, that will not lie in Jail; a place that few Love, and many would
avoid at so cheap a rate as eating a bit of Bread, and drinking a little Wine.
And shall the Majority of these be Rulers of Kings, Bishops and Pastors?

But what if you mean but the Major Vote of Bishops? (which it seems our Lower
House of Convocation mean not). Verily, Sir, you must not too sharply blame the
King of England, Sweden, Denmark, etc. if they be loath to be Subjects in so
great a Matter as their Religion to the Clergy of Italy, France, Spain, Poland,
Germany, Moscovy, Constantinople, and Asia, Africa, etc. while we know what
Power their own Princes have over them?

And do not we know that there is no one common Language which they can use to
understand one another as a College? Even of our great Learned Schoolmen few
understood Greek: And few of the Greeks understand Latin (or true Greek either)
And few Abassines, Armenians, Syrians, Moscovites, etc. understand either. If
Christ has been so defective a Legislator as to leave us to a necessity of
Universal Humane Legislation, O let us not have them made by such Babel
Builders. Let us have those that can meet together in less than an Age (whether
their Princes will or no) and can learn in an Age to speak to one another.

Or if you first prove that Mortal Men are capable of such an Universal
Government, try it first on Kings, and settle one King, or Senate of Kings to
Rule all the World by Legislation and Judgment: For verily more of
Sword-Government may be done per alios -- than of Priestly Government (else you
may appoint Presbyters to Ordain, and Laymen to celebrate the Sacraments.) And
if we must have a Vice-Christ, let him be a Monarch that we may know where to
find him, and not a Chimera called a Collective Person, or College of Bishops:
Or at least if it must be Patriarchs, let us know who shall make them, and
where they are, and what we shall now do, when of five so called Four are
called Schismatics and are under the Turk: Christ has instituted National
Church Polity: Prove more if you can.

VI. And I should rejoice if you could prove what you affirm, that the Major
part of the Church, even in Rites and Discipline, is guided by the Spirit of
God. 1. It was not so in necessary Doctrine in the Arians reign. 2. If it be so
at this day, England is Schismatical. 3. If it be not always so in General
Councils (as the Articles of our Church say) how much less in the diffusive
Body of People or Clergy? 4. It is not so in any one Kingdom or National Church
yet known in the World, no not the World; And what is the whole but the Parts
Conjunct? Dr. Dillingham in a late Book against Popery concludes, that there
was never yet any Kingdom known where the tenth part were truly Godly: And I
think you take the Church of England to be the best in the World: And how many
Thousands would rejoice if you could prove that the Major part even of their
Teachers were guided by the Spirit of God? And is it better with the Papists,
or Greeks, or Moscovites, that cannot Preach at all! O how happy a Church do
you Dream of?

VII. And it is yet more incredible that this popular Majority should be so
right in such small Matters as Rites and Ceremonies and Discipline, as that
their Practice should be a Law to all the rest of the Christian World: And that
the Unity or Concord of the Universal Church must be built on such Sand as
cannot so much as be gathered into one Heap? And all must be Schismatics, and
so far separate from the Church that obey them not: I remember when Dr. Hammond
proceeded Dr. I heard Dr. Prideaux in the Chair argue against the Churches
Infallibility, that John, and Thomas, and so every Individual was fallible:
Ergo a company of fallibles were not infallible. Especially in such Matters as
a Ceremony. Those that Paul wrote to Romans 14. and 15. were not taken for
infallible or Legislators by him.

VIII. And you no where prove that Paul means by [the Churches have no such
Customs] that none in the World had any other, nor must have any other; but
only that what Garb and Habit the Custom of all those Countries had placed
Decency in, the general Rule of Decency would oblige all to in the solemn
Assemblies, as it obliges us to be uncovered. You must needs know that by your
Exposition and Inference you Condemn your own Church that has the contrary
Custom. Especially your noble Patrons that wear Periwigs.

IX. And how impossible a work do you set us all as a Law, to know what these
Ceremonies are without which we separate as Schismatics. 1. Must all good
Christians be so great Historians as to know what Ceremonies have been used in
all Ages by the Major part? 2. Must they be so Skilled in Cosmography, as to
know what Countries make the Major part? 3. Must they have so good intelligence
of former Affairs, as to know who have now the greater Vote in Councils and out
of them? 4. But you say, It must be of such Rites as ab omnibus, ubique and
semper have been used: we like Vincentius Liri's rule well as to things
necessary, that may aliunde be so proved. But how shall any man know that ab
omnibus and ubique without more Knowledge of the World than Drake or Candish
had, or any Traveller? Except Negatively, that we must not affect causeless
Singularity from the most of the Godly, as far as we can know them. And how
shall we understand the semper? Must it respect all time to come? Then, none
can know his Duty till the End of the World? If it be only as to time past,
then how knew they that lived in the first Age, how long their Customs would
continue? And then all the after Changes (which were many) were Schismatical.

X. Do you not too hardly censure the Church of England as Schismatical? You
know Epiphanius has a peculiar Treatise to tell us, what then were the Customs
and Ceremonies of the Universal Church? And how many of these are forsaken by
us, yea, and by almost all the Churches? Do you now clothe the Baptized anew in
White? Do you dip them over head in Water? Do you anoint them as they did, and
cross them with the Ointment? Do you give them to taste Milk and Honey? Do you
exorcise them? Do your Bishops only make that Chrysme? Do all here and in other
Churches worship only versus Orientem? Do you all forbear, and forbid Adoration
Kneeling, on any Lord's Day, or any Week Day between Easter and Whitsunday?
What! when you cast out of the Church those that will not Kneel at the
Sacrament? You know that the Council of Nice, and that at Trull, and the
Fathers commonly make this a Rite of the Universal Church: And Dr. Heylin
says, that Rome it self kept it for a Thousand Years, and it was never
reversed by any other General Council. Do you keep the Memorial of Martyrs at
their Graves as then they did? Do you use their Bones and relicts as they did?
Twenty more you may see in Epiphanius and others.

O condemn not the Church of England, as separated from the Universal Church.
(And our Reformers too.)

XI. What a case would you bring this Church and Kingdom to, by your Law of the
Custom of the Major part? Must we have all the Opinions, Rites or Ceremonies
which the Greeks, Moscovites, Armenians and Papists have many Hundred Years in
their Ignorance and Superstition agreed in as to the Major part? Must we be
able to confute their pretensions of Antiquity and Custom as to all these? He
that reads the Description of their Customs, methinks, should be loath that we
should be such.

XII. And your Doctrine of Traditions as certainly received from the Apostles,
when the Majority use them, is so much against the Church of England's
Judgment, and so copiously confuted by the whole stream of Protestant Bishops
and Drs. and foreign Divines, that I will not stay now to repeat that work:
were all the Traditions forementioned since laid by, received from the
Apostles? (About Genuflexions, Milk and Honey, Chrysme, the white Garment?)

You instance in Synods meeting and making Laws. To meet for worship or
necessary consultation and Concord, is no unwritten ceremonial Tradition, but
the obeying of Christ's written Law, which requires such mutual help, and that
we do all to Edification, Concord and Peace. But Communion of many Nations is
one thing, and a Government over all is another thing. It was the Emperor's
Commission and Power that made Canons to be Laws.

And do you not here write against the King's Commission by which you sit,
which declares from that Act of H. 8. that your Canons are no Laws, till King
and Parliament make them so? Ask the Lawyers. Were not the Canons of 1640. cast
out even by your own long Parliament?

XIII. But the worst is, that while you set us a new Universal Church
Legislative and Judicial Sovereignty, you deny the sufficiency of Scripture, if
not the Sovereignty of Christ himself, while you feign unwritten Universal
Laws, as part of Christ's Law, and a supplement to the Scripture, and give
Christ's Prerogative to a Usurping Sovereignty, utterly incapable of that
Office? Scripture we know where to find; but where to find your Universal
Additional Laws, and your Church Senate or College, they must know more than I
that know. But so much is written against the Papists (as aforesaid) for
Scripture sufficiency, that I refer you thither, and to the Articles, Homilies
and Ordination Books which this Church subscribeth to. Alas Sir, is not the
whole Bible big enough to make us a Religion?

XIV. As to your definition of the Church, P. 12. It is tolerable if you make
no Head but Christ; and set up no Vicarious Head Monarchical or Aristocratical,
and instead of Provincial parts, put National and Congregational; or confess
that you describe but the Imperial-National Church, which was made up of Roman
Provinces. And gratify not the Fanatics by making the Holy Ghost to be the
authoriser of the Majority for Government: For they will think that they have
more of the Holy Ghost than you, and therefore must Govern you. I would all
Rulers had the Holy Ghost; but it is somewhat else that must give them Authority.

XV. Your instance of the Easter Controversy is against you. The difference
undecided for 300 Years, and Apostolical Tradition urged on both sides, tells
us that it was no Apostolic Law; And Socrates and Sozomen tell us, that in
that and many such like things (...) Churches had freely differed in Peace*
(...) you seem to intimate contrary to them and to Iren^^us, that the Asians
were Schismatics till they Conformed.

And why name you Asia alone? Were our British Churches, and the Scottish no
Churches? Or do you also Condemn them as Schismatics for about 300 Years after
the Nicene Council? What could the Papists say more against them?

XVI. How impossible a thing do you make Church Union to be? while the
Essentials or great Integrals of Religion are made insufficient to it, and so
many Ceremonies and Church Laws are feigned necessary, which no man ever comes
to the true knowledge of, that he has the right ones and all?

XVII. If the Patriarchs must be the Sovereign College, I beseech you give us
some proof (in a Case so weighty) 1. How many there must be? 2. Where seated?
3. Who must choose and make them? 4. And quo jure? 5. And whether we have now
such a College; or is there no Church?

XVIII. What Place will you give the Pope in the College? I suppose with your
Brethren you will call him 1. Principium Vnitatis? But that is a Name of
Comparative Order? what is his work as such a Principium? How is he the
Principium, if he have no more Power than the rest? Must not he call the
Councils? (Though our Articles say General Councils may not be gathered without
the Will of Princes). Shall he not choose the Place and Time? Tell us then who
shall? Must he not be President? Must he not be Patriarch of the West? And so
Govern England as our Patriarch, and Principium unitatis Vniversalis also?

XIX. I pray tell us whether the French be Papists? And how their
Church Government (as Described from themselves by Mr. Jurieu) differs from
that which you are for? Tell me not of their Mass, and other Corruptions? It is
Government that is the Form of Popery. And they will abate you many other
things: And must we be Frenchified? If the French restore those that we called
Papists, will disowning the Name, and calling them the Church of England
(chosen by Papist Princes) make us sound and safe? And when we find Archbishop
Laud, Archbishop Bromhall, Bishop Guning, Bishop Sparrow, Dr. Saywell, Dr.
Heylin, Mr. Thorndike, Bishop S. Parker, and many more were for a Foreign
Jurisdiction, can we think if the French bring in the late Governors, that
such Churchmen would not embrace the French Church Government, and call it the
Church of England, when since Lauds days* they have endeavored a Coalition? If
they be Defeated, we may thank King James, who could not bear delays, and would
have all or none, when Grotius way would have been a surer Game.

XX. You tell us of Penalties made by Church Laws? Deposing Ministers, and
Anathematizing the Laity? But while the Clergy has no power of the Sword, who
will feel such Penalties? When Rome Excommunicates the Greeks, the Greeks will
Excommunicate them again: What Penalty is it to Protestants to be
Excommunicated by the Pope or his Council? How commonly did they that were for,
and against the Chalcedon Council, Excommunicate each other: And those that
were for and against Images? And for Photius, and for Ignatius? Cheat not
Magistrates to be your Lictors, and Cursing will go round as Scolding at
Billingsgate? Who is hurt by a causeless curse, but the Curser? I confess that
Dr. Saywell says well; If single persons must be punished, shall not Nations
also? Yes: But by whom? By God the Universal King, and not by an Universal
Human Sovereign; whether a King or Pope, or a Senate of Foreign Subjects:

XXI. We are promised by a trifling Pamphleteer (that some of you are answering
Mr. Clerksons two Books about the Primitive Episcopacy and Liturgies: I pray
you procure them also to answer my Treatise of Episcopacy, (and my English
Nonconformity) and not with the Impudent Railing Liars, to say it is answered
already, while we can hear of no such thing. And see that they prove that all
these things following, are Traditions of the Universal Church, received from
the Apostles, and used, ab omnibus, ubique and semper.

1. That most particular Churches for two Hundred or three Hundred years and so
down, consisted of many Congregations that had no personal presential Communion.

2. That Churches infimi ordinis were Diocesan, having many Hundred or Score
Parishes under them.

3. That these Diocesans, undertook the sole Pastoral Care of all these
Parishes, as to Confirmation, Censure, Absolution, and the rest.

4. That all these Parishes were no true Churches, as having no Bishops, but
the Diocesans, and were but Chapels, or parts of a Church.

5. That the Incumbents were no true Pastors or Bishops, but one Bishops
Curates: And that there were not then besides Diocesan Archbishops in each
single Church, Episcopi Gregis and Episcopi praesides.

6. That Bishops Names were used by Laymen that had the Decretive Power of
Excommunication and Absolution.

7. That such Secular Judicatories, far from the Parishes, rather than the
particular Pastors Tried and Judged the unknown people.

8. That Parish Ministers Swear Obedience to the Diocesans, and they to
Metropolitans.

9. That all People that would have Licenses to keep Alehouses or Taverns, or
that would not lie in Jail, were Commanded to receive the Sacrament as a Sealed
Pardon of their Sins.

10. That from the beginning, all Churches were forced to use the same form of
Liturgy, and not every Church or Bishop to choose as he saw Cause.

11. That Kings chose Bishops and Deans without the Consent of the Clergy and
People.

12. That all Ministers were to be Ejected, and forbidden to Preach the Gospel,
that durst not Subscribe that there is nothing contrary to Gods Word in such as
our three imposed Books.

13. That all Lords, Magistrates, Priests and People that affirm the contrary,
be ipso facto Excommunicate.

14. That Lay-Patrons that are but Rich enough to buy an Advowson (how Vicious
soever) did choose all the Incumbent Ministers, to whom the People must commit
the Ministerial Care of their Souls.

15. That they that dare not trust such Pastors as are chosen by Kings (though
Papists) and such Patrons, and dare not Conform to every imposition like ours,
must live like Atheists, in forbearance of all public Worship and Church
Communion.

16. That all may Swear that an Oath or Vow of Lawful and Necessary things,
binds not our selves or any others, if it be but unlawfully imposed and
taken, and had any unlawful part of the Matter.

17. That the Church ever held it unlawful for a whole Kingdom to defend it
self against a Prince that would deliver up half the Government to a Foreiner,
and force them to a Religion which requires them to be Damned (or to Dye:)
When the Clergy and Church at Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, Rome, etc. did so
often by force and Blood, resist even Christian Emperors, such as Theodosius II.
Zeno, Anastasius and many others.

18. That all the Churches held it lawful to Swear and Covenant, never to
endeavor any Amendment or Alteration of any such as the forementioned Church
Government.

If all these things be contrary to the constant judgment or practice of the
Church, Quaere whether Dr. Beveridge and his Approvers, pronounce not the
Church of England Schismatical, as so far separated from the Church Universal?

But again I conclude, O! What, must the Christian World suffer even by
Learned, and I hope pious Doctors?

I. Because they will not distinguish National or Imperial Universality of
Church and Councils, from those of the whole World.

II. Nor Communion from Regiment, nor Contracts from Laws; nor a Regent
Excommunication from a Renunciation of Communion by Equals.

III. Nor Divine Obligations to Concord, and human demands of obeying Usurpers,
or the hurtful Agreements of an injurious Majority of equal Votes.

IV. And by their Deposing Christian Kings and Magistrates from their Sacred
Power over Bishops in Church Government, and for Men's Souls; as if they were
made only for the base things of the World and Flesh, and Priests only were
trusted with Religion and Souls: And Kings were not Heads of National Churches.

V. And their shameless calling them Adversaries to Episcopacy, that would have
one Hundred Bishops for one, and are for the old three sorts, Episcopi Gregis,
Episcopi praesides, and Archbishops, and calling those the Episcopal part,
that put down all the Bishops in a Diocese save one; As for your self, I
profess to be so far from Censuring any thing of you, save these Mistakes, that
as I have long, so I do still, Love and Honor you as a Man fearing God, and of
a good and blameless Conversation, as far as ever I Credibly heard: And I
thought the like of Bishop Guning, though (as it is with many Religious
Papists) his Opinions more prevailed against his Charity, for that Mischievous
hurtfulness, in which he served the Subtilty of Sheldon, and the fierceness of
Morley, and the Designs of Papal Courtiers: But I hear that your Piety and
Charity prevails against the evil tendency of your mistaken Doctrine: Though
Mr. Thorndike threaten England, unless they Reform the Oath of Supremacy, I
confess I wish it restored, and am Displeased with those Scots that have
causelessly quarrelled with it; and so helped to open a Door to a Foreign
Jurisdiction, which the Kingdom is Sworn against.

Since the writing of all beforegoing, I first read your two great Volumes of
Canons, and your Answer to Dallaeus. In the Prolegomena of the first, to my
Grief I find you more express for an Universal Legislative Power and Foreign
Jurisdiction than in your Sermon: And yet not at all telling us, where to have
access to this Universal Sovereignty for Judicature, out of the times of
General Councils, nor how to know but by believing your bare word, what
Councils are our Universal obliging Laws, when you confess the vast difference
of the Eastern and Western numbers, nor how to know what our Religion is, while
we know not what be our Laws: Nor how to know whether the Church be extinct,
when it has no human Head, by the Cessation of such Councils; nor who must
call them, nor whence, nor what is their Constitutive Matter; only you say,
they must be called out of all the Christian World: But need not all be there?
And will a Call make a General Council, if the Men come not? And can they come
from all the Dominions of the Abassines, Armenians, Turks, Persians,
Muscovites, etc. And who has right to call them? has the Pope? Or our
Emperors or Kings? what power has he over all other Princes Subjects? You
confess they were called out of the Imperial Provinces? And how few (if any)
other Names are Subscribed? But I am sorry that you still, so contrary to all
Evidence, take National or Imperial Universality for Terrestrial Universality
of Church and Councils: I beseech you, if we must be Papists, let us be of the
more reasonable sort, that know where to find a Papal Monarch, or Vice-Christ;
and not sent to seek a Church-Parliament Universal, or Universal Aristocratical
College, that is no where extant in the World, nor can be, especially now the
five Patriarchs are what and where they are. How much more Rational to be
Governed by the Pope as Patriarch of the West only, till we can find out the
Aristocratical Head.

But since the Empire was turned into many Kingdoms, who can prove that those
many must have all one Human Head.

But I am yet more sorry that you join with Hildebrand, in making Princes to be
but for the Body and Civil Peace, and Bishops and Priests to be the Church, and
for the Soul: Which (God willing,) as I have often done, I shall fullier Confute,
in a Treatise for true National Churches, proving that Christ has made no
Higher Visible Humane Church Power or Form: And that Christian Kings are as
Sacred Persons, and Ministers of Christ as Bishops; and Superior Heads of
National Churches, though the Power of the Keys belong only to the Clergy; And
that a true National Church, is but a Christian Kingdom, as such, the King
being the Head, and Confederate Pastors and Churches the Subject Body.

The Second Part. The Stating of the Controversy, and full Confutation of the
Pretenses for a Foreign Jurisdiction.
The CONTENTS.
CHap. I. The clear stating of the Controversy, and Confutation of the
Pretenders. In 60 Propositions; proving it a perjurious alteration of
Government, etc. Chapter II. Why Parliaments and the Church of England before
Bishop Laud were so much against such a Coalition with the Papal Church. Chapter
III. The said Coalition is not the way to Catholic Union. Chapter IV. The Deceits
that are pleaded for an Universal Humane Sovereignty. Chapter V. A Foreign
Jurisdiction by College or Counsels unmaskt. Chapter VI. The Grand Consequential
Case: Whether it be lawful for Presbyters to Swear or Profess Obedience to
those Bishops who profess Subjection to a Foreign Jurisdiction? or for the
people to own them. Chapter VII. Of the second part of the design to bring the
Papists to our Churches as in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days. Chapter
VIII. Why it will not serve for a Coalition for the Papists to abate their last
400 years corruptions as Archbishop Bromhall maintains. Chapter IX. Whether the
instance of the Apostles Church Government, prove an Universal Sovereignty in
man. Chapter X. Many Questions about Councils to be resolved before we can take
them for an Universal Aristocracy. Chapter XI. A Breviate of both the
Aristocratical and Monarchical Popery. Chapter XII. A humble Expostulation to the
Zealous Antipapists, Conformists and Nonconformists whether they have been
innocent as to promoting Popery? Chapter XIII. What is the Duty of all other
Christians toward the Papists, in order to the discharge of the Fundamental
Duties of Love, Concord and Peace, and the promoting the common Interest of
Christianity: Written to keep Protestants from sinful Extremes, and while we
cannot come so near them as Cassander, Erasmus, Grotius, and those that are for
a Foreign Jurisdiction, we may keep and use a Christian Zeal for the better way
of Concord of Christ's prescribing, avoiding all injury to Papists, and all
others.
NB. To prevent misunderstanding Citations, note, That both some Episcopal Drs
and some Presbyterians say, That the Government of the Church is
Aristocratical, meaning only, 1. Per parts, as England is Governed by
Justices, and, 2. Meeting in such Councils as they can for Concord: But not as
the summa potestas of the Universal Church which is una persona politica in
pluribus naturalibus unifying the Body and so Ruling it. They speak not
properly in the Language of Politics.

Chap. I. The true State and just Resolutions of the Controversies about a
Foreign Jurisdiction, in Sixty Evident or Proved Propositions.
1. HOW great advantage Satan makes of the deceivableness of ignorant men, and
of the deceitfulness of the Crafty, and of the aptitude of ambiguous, or false,
or artificially-contrived Names and Words to deceive, the sad Experience of the
deceived World, and corrupted and divided Churches openly declare; and yet,
alas, how few observe it and escape the snare?

2. If all Men were judicious and stablished Christians, when serious Faith and
Godliness is made a scorn, by the false names of Heretics, Schismatics,
Puritans, Fanatics, Sectaries, or any senseless jears, it would no more turn
them from the holy performance of their Baptismal Vow, and Obedience to Christ,
than the raving of a Drunkard or a Bedlam, or the crying of a Child. But
ignorant unresolved Persons, that never yet know what the bearing of the Cross
was, nor have learned self-denial, are stopped in their convictions, good
purposes, and hopeful dispositions, when they hear serious Piety made a common
scorn, and that by those that were themselves Baptized, and profess
Christianity. Some of them think, sure all this reproach is not laid on them
for nothing, and others that think it but the stinking breath of ulcerated
malignant minds, yet cannot bear it, but draw back and shrink: Therefore Christ
pronounces a dreadful Sentence against those that offend (that is, by such
stumbling blocks turn back and discourage) even the least of these childish
beginners; It were better for that man that a Millstone were hanged about his
Neck, and he were cast into the Sea.

3. But no scandal or snare is so dangerous as those which are made by Rulers
or Great Men, or by Pastors and Teachers on the pretenses of Religion, and
Divine Authority, abusing the holy Name of Christ.

4. And the same Artifice that Satan uses against Godliness in general he
uses against particular Truths, Duties and Persons. And one of the most
dangerous that I now perceive the Protestant Religion assaulted with, is
putting the Name of Nonconformists, and Puritans, and Schismatics, on
Protestants as Protestants, and the Name of Catholic, the Church, the Church
of England, the Clergy, yea of the Reformed Church, and of Protestants on the
Papal Roman Sect. The Church of England, King, Parliament, Archbishops,
Bishops, and the rest were sixty years ago and less against that as Popery,
which now is obtruded on us as the sense of the Church of England against
Popery: Such Wonders can bare Names do with the ignorant: And they go on
without any great resistance.

5. Whereas there are great differences among the Papists about the degree of
the personal Power of the Pope, the Cheat is this; To confine the Name of
Papists to the one party, and to own the Opinions of the other Party, and to
call them Presbyterians or Nonconformists that are against both, and will be no
Papists. 1. The Italians are for the Popes Sole Supremacy, and Councils being
but his Counselors. 2. The French Lawyers are for the Councils Supremacy above
the Pope, as to Legislation, and Judgment when they sit. 3. The middle greater
part are for the Supremacy in Pope and Council agreeing, and the Popes
Executive power in the intervals, not absolute, but according to the Church
Laws or Canons. But all for a visible Universal Supremacy, and for the Papal
Presidency in General Councils, and his prime Patriarchship in the West. If in
England some be for the Kings Sole Legislative Power and Absoluteness, and
Parliaments being but his Counselors; and others for the Conjunction of King
and Parliament in Legislation, and the limiting of the Kings Executive Power by
the Laws, does it follow that only the first sort are the Kings Subjects? The
Controversy is the same. Yet the same men that are for Absolute Civil
Monarchy, take on them to be for Ecclesiastical Aristocracy.

6. Men love not to be tired with tedious Volumes; nor can I find time to write
more such, therefore I shall here lay down what the Reader must necessarily
know in some Theses or Aphorisms, with so short but sound a proof as is
necessary to capable willing Readers, instead of putting them into distinct
Chapters with numerous proofs to urge the unwilling.

I. The World is the Kingdom of God; who is Eminently the King, and all
Reasonable Creatures his Subjects under Moral Government, as all natural Agents
are under Natural Potential Government.

No man will deny this but the Atheist, whom I leave to be disputed with by
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, Heaven and Earth, and common Reason.

II. God only is the Unifying as well as Specifying Governor of this Universal
Kingdom; and though all men be of one Nature, Species, Mould, Interest, etc. yet
it is only by their Relation to one God that they are one Kingdom.

III. God has made no Universal Supreme Monarch or Aristocracy under him in
the World: But only appointed to each Sovereign his particular Province or
Republic. For, 1. No Man or Senate is naturally capable of it: They do not so
much as know the Terra incognita, nor can send to the Antipodes and all the
Earth as Regiment requires: He would be thought as mad that should attempt it
as he that claimed a Kingdom in the Moon. 2. No Man or Senate had ever yet the
madness to claim it.

IV. He that should Claim an Universal Supremacy, must thereby make all Kings
and States, and all the World to be his Subjects.

V. He that does so proclaims himself to be publicus hostis, the public
Enemy of all Kings and States, while he will make them his Subjects against
their wills. And therefore all Kings and States are allowed to resist and use
him as their common Enemy.

VI. The whole World is now the rightful Dominion of Christ our Redeemer: For
this end he both died, rose and revived, that he might be the Lord of the dead
and of the living, Romans 14.9, 10. All power is given him in Heaven and Earth,
Mat. 28.19. All things are delivered to him of the Father, and given into his
hands, John 13.3. and 17.2. He is made Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians.
1.23. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son,
John 5.22.

VII. Princes are therefore now the Ministers of Christ by Duty, and are bound
to study his Interest and Laws, and to obey him.

VIII. Subjects by Obligation are not always Subjects by Consent, nor Subjects
by Professed Consent, always Subjects by Heart-Consent.

IX. All the World is the Kingdom as of God the Creator, so of Christ the
Redeemer as to Obligation: And the Wicked as Rebels.

X. All the truly Baptized are thereby made the Kingdom of Christ the Redeemer
by Professed Consent. And this is the Church visible.

XI. All the true Believers and Sanctified are the Kingdom of Christ by
Heart-Consent; and these are the Church Regenerate and Mystical.

XII. Therefore the Kingdom of Christ is larger than the Church of Christ: And
the Church is an Elect peculiar people, Visible as to Means, and Mystical as to
Salvation. Even as the Israelites had the Covenant of peculiarity, while the
Law of Grace in the first Edition made to Adam and Noah was still in force to
all the World: And Abraham thought that even Sodom had had Fifty Righteous
Persons in it.

XIII. The Church of Christ is an Eminent Politic Society, of which Christ is
the Specifying and Vnifying Head, and all Christians are Members. All the
Baptized Visible Members, and all the sincere consenters mystical Members.

XIV. Christ is the Maker of his own Body, Church or Kingdom: He made himself
the Head: He made the specifying Institution or Law; the Terms of Union and
Communion; He gives Men the Grace by which they Believe, Repent, Consent and
are made Members.

If Christ made not his own Church, as to the Formal Head, the Species, the
Unifying Terms and Graces, it would be as a Wooden Leg to a living Body, a
Human Creature imposed on him, Savouring of the Errors and Naughtiness of
those that made it, and Mutable at their Mutable Wills. Every active Form,
makes it is own material Domicilium. Who is he, or who are they that had power
to make Christ a Body or Church in specie, before he made it himself: Christ's
Body is not made by Man? If it were, who were they? Were they his Body or
Church first themselves, or not? If yea, who made them such, and who them, and
who them in infinitum: If not, how came Infidels and the Members of the Devil
to have power to make a Body or Church for Christ?

XV. Christ has de specie Instituted who shall be Members of this Church: And
by his Laws, Terms and Description taught us certainly to know the Members as
Visible.

Else we could never know whom to take for Christians, nor whom to love as
such; Nor to whom to give the Seals of his Grace, and Communion with his
Members.

XVI. Baptism is the Symbol or Badge of Christians, and Baptizing is our
Christening; and whoever believes and is Baptized, shall be Saved: Therefore
till they Revolt, all truly Baptized persons are Visible Christians, and make
up the Visible Church: Which is the Society of all Christians, Headed by their
Sovereign Christ.

XVII. All Christians entered in Infancy, are not capable of the Duty,
Blessings and Communion of the Adult. Adult Members and Communion must be
distinguished from Infant.

XVIII. Therefore all that will have Adult Communion, though they must not be
Baptized again, must as fully own their Baptismal Covenant, Devoting themselves
by their own Understanding Consent and Vow to God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, Renouncing the World, the Flesh and the Devil, as if they were now to be
Baptized.

The neglect of this, or turning it into a dead image and Ceremony, by dead
Images of Bishops, on pretense of Confirmation, confounds the Church, and
would make it a dead Image, and really but the World.

XIX. The Universal Church of Christ in his days on Earth, was but an Embrio;
and his few Apostles and Disciples, who were suited in number to the Jewish
Nation, where their Ministry was to begin, were but like the Organical parts of
the Body, the Heart, Head, Eyes, Liver, etc. when Nature has first made them,
that by them it may make the rest. But when Christ was Risen, and the Holy
Ghost sent down in Eminency, and the Gentiles called, and the Church began to
be Catholic, this Kingdom of the Holy Ghost is that which is called specially,
the Kingdom of God and Heaven, which the Gospel then proclaimed, and John
Baptist told Men was at hand.

XX. The Church of Christ on Earth is partly Visible and partly Invisible, and
yet but one Church.

As Man is visible as to his Body, and invisible as to his Soul, and yet but
one Man. It is visible, 1. In that the Subjects persons are Visible* 2. Their
profession is Visible: 3. Christ was Visible on Earth: 4. He is Visible now in
his Court of Heaven: 5. He will in visible Glory come and Judge them. 6. They
shall see his Glory for ever: 7. His Laws are Visible: 8. His Officers are
Visible. 9. Many of his Judgments and Executions are Visible here: 10. The rest
shall be so quickly, and for ever.

His Church is Invisible, 1. In that Christ as God was never seen: 2. His Soul
never seen: 3. His Office as to Truth, Right and Authority Invisible, and to be
believed. 4. The Souls of the Subjects Invisible; 5. Their Sincerity Invisible.
6. And Christ now not seen on Earth. 7. Nor Heaven and Hell seen, where is his
great Execution and Retribution.

XXI. Christ only is the Specifying and Unifying Form of the Church, as United
to the Matter: And all Christians, Pastors and People, are but the Matter.

They have a sort of Unity in themselves: They are of one Human kind, of one
Interest, of one Profession (and Faith and Love if sincere) and join in one
sort of Worship, and Acts of Obedience to Christ* But they are One Christian
Church, or Body of Christ, only by their Union with Christ, and Relation to him
their Head and Center. As the Kingdom of England has one sort of Men in our
Land, of one Language, etc. But only their Relation to one King, makes them one
Kingdom.

XXII. The Church or Body of Christ when fully made, has dissimilar parts;
some are Noble Organical parts, first made to be instruments in making and
preserving all the rest; and the Church cannot be a Formed Church without them;
some are such Integrals, as the Church may live without, but not be Whole
without.

Even as Aristotle defines the Soul to be Entelechia, or the Entitative Act
and Form of a Physical organized Body, capable of being Animated by it. And as
in Generation the Heart is first made, and then some Rudiments of the Vessels
for Distribution, and then the Head and Eyes, and then the Liver, etc. So
Christ's Humane Nature with his Spirit, is as Heart and Head to the Church: And
then Teaching by himself first, was as the Arteries for Distribution; And the
Apostles were first made the most Noble Organical parts, to Deliver and Record
his Universal Commands, and by his Spirit, make up the Inferior parts, and the
ordinary Pastors to be as the Stomach and Liver, etc. for the Nutrition of the
whole. None of these parts are the Soul or forma hominis; but the Noblest parts
are necessary in that Contexture, which is forma Corporis, to make it materiae
disposita, receptive of the Soul, which is the Form, as to its full Operation,
though the Semen to make an Embrio before received it. Much like is it in our
present Case.

XXIII. Our Controversy then is not, whether it be necessary to the being of
the Church in facto esse, that it have Apostles and Pastors and Teachers, to
make it the Organized Body of Christ, for this we all acknowledge. Nor yet
whether these should be all Christians of one Body, Spirit, Faith, Baptism,
Hope, united to one Head and God in him; Nor whether the Unity of the Spirit
(for that is the Unity) should be kept in the Bond of Peace, no more than
whether the dissimilar parts of the Body should all be of one Matter, and live
by one nutriment, united to the same Head and Heart, Contiguous, and made for
the Good of the whole, actuated by the same Spirits, and Animated by the same
Soul.

XXIV. But our Controversy with the Papists is, Whether the Church on Earth
have any One lawful Supreme Power under Christ, Monarchical, Aristocratical or
Democratical, authorized to Govern the whole by Legislation and Judgment: That
is, One Ministerial Sovereign, or Vice-Christ; a Constitutive, specifying and
Vnifying Supreme over all, being one Political person, whether in one, or many
natural Persons? This Protestants deny.

XXV. It is but our second Question with the Papists, Whether the Pope be this
Head or Supreme Rector: but our first and fundamental Controversy is, Whether
there be any such at all but Christ.

Did we believe there were any such at all, we should readily be Papists,
either of those that give most to the Pope as Absolute, or of those that make
him the President of Councils, and in their Intervals, the Prime Church
Governor according to the Laws. Of which more anon.

That the Protestants commonly deny all Universal Sovereignty but Christ's, I
should tire the Reader needlessly to prove by numerous Citations. He may soon
know that will read, 1. All the Churches Confessions in the Corpus
Confessionum. 2. Our Oaths for renouncing all foreign Jurisdictions. 3. Our
Disputants, Luther, (de Conciliis) Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Melanchthon,
Brentius, Calvin, Bullinger, Zanchy, Illiricus, Pezelius, Musculus, Aretius,
Chamier, Molinaeus, Blondel, Dallaeus, Rivet, Paraeus, Sohnius, Piscator, Beza,
Sadeel, Danaeus, Grynaeus, Spanhemius, Arminius, Episcopius, etc. Jewel,
Whitaker, Reignolds, Crakenthorpe, Abbot, Challoner, Willet, Usher, White,
Chillingworth, Davenant, Morton, Carlton, Bernard, Barrow, etc. Their Disputes
were not Who is this Summa Potestas Ministerial to Govern all the Christian
World, but whether there be any such?

XXVI. No Protestants ever* yet denied the Councils of Pisa, Constance and
Basil, and the French allowed Clergy to be Papists because they were not of the
Italian strain, nor for the absolute unlimited Power of the Pope. Nor did any
call them Protestants.

XXVII. That the Pope has no right to an Universal Supremacy, Headship or
Government, I have proved at large in the First and Second Part of my Key for
Catholics: And Dr. Barrow has better and more largely proved after many
other. Briefly,

1. No Man is naturally capable of Governing all the World. Only God and our
Redeemer is capable; Man cannot know, hear, send, execute over all the Earth
per se and per alios, it is a kind of madness to imagine it.

2. The Christian Churches are mostly under the Power of various Princes,
Abassines, Turks, Persians, the Mogol, Moscovites, Tartarians, Swedes, Danes,
English, etc. that will not receive the Pope: How then can he govern the
Subjects under them?

3. Had such a Head been of Christ's making, he would have plainly made us
understand it by his word: Of so great importance would it be to the Churches
Unity and our Salvation.

4. When Heresies and Sects and Controversies arose and troubled the Church,
the Apostles would sure have told them this necessary means of ending all, and
living in Unity and Concord.

5. Paul would never have chidden the Contenders for saying, I am of Cephas, if
centering in him had been the only uniting means.

6. Peter never exercised any Power over the rest of the Apostles, nor over the
Universal Church any more than the rest.

7. If he had, it had been no more to the Bishop of Rome, than to the Bishop of
Antioch, and others.

8. None can show any Commission of Christ for such a Headship: And none other
can authorize them.

9. The Council of Chalcedon says expressly, that it is being the Imperial Seat,
caused Rome to have the Primacy by the Father's Gift.

10. The whole Greek Church never believed that Christ made any Universal
Sovereign: For, 1. Else they would never have contended for the Primacy at
Constantinople (nor for the second place)* For they knew that was no
Apostolical Seat, nor did they claim it as by Christ's institution: and they
were not so impudent as to set up a Human Right before a Divine. 2. And even
they never claimed a Sovereignty over the Extra Imperial Christian World, but
only over the Churches of the Empire, and those that had been the Emperor's
Subjects.

11. The Fathers and Primitive Church, and Tradition are all against the Pope's
Universal Government without the Empire (as I have elsewhere proved).

12. The Catholic Church is now against such a Sovereign, even the far
greatest part of Christians: And it never acknowledged him or united in him in
any Age.

13. There is less reason for one Church Monarch over all the World than for
one Civil Monarch (as shall be further proved) which yet no Man has the face
to plead for.

14. This Papal Claim has no just pretense; There is no work or use for any
such Power (of which more anon). Let not Magistrates or Pastors be robbed of
their right, and there will no Governing Work be left for the Pope.

15. It is an unsufferable Usurpation of the Power of all Christian Princes,
who are entrusted with the Exteriors and Accidentals of the Church; and a wrong
to them, and their Kingdoms to subject them to Foreigners. The Pope of old was
a Subject to one Prince; And for one Princes Subject to Rule all other Princes
of the Earth, is in effect to make that Prince the Ruler of them all.

16. A humane Usurping Head makes an human adulterous Catholic Church; and
makes that the Body of the Pope, which should be but the Body of Christ.

17. It is a certain means of Schism, while thereby they separate that humane
Society of the Usurper from all the Church that will own no Head but Christ.

18. This Idol Head or Vice-Christ in plain Pride setting up himself as the
Governor of the World, and setting the World together by the Ears about his
Title, by Usurping the Government over them, must needs make it a hard question
at least to Christians, whether this Idol be not the Antichrist, that is, the
Pro-Christ, while he makes himself the Vice-Christ. And especially when it is
considered what men abundance of the Popes have been, and how much they have
done against the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and faithful Servants of Christ.

19. They have no way to give the World any satisfactory certainty who is Pope,
and who not: How then can the World be ruled by him? 1. They cannot tell
whether the Electors or Consecrators be they that necessarily give him his
Power, or make him Pope. 2. If it be the Electors, they cannot tell us who
those must be. If any will serve, the Turk may make a Pope! And then ten sort
of Electors may make ten Popes: If it be tied to any one sort of Men, the
Papacy has long been extinct; for in some Ages the People of Rome chose with
the City Clergy: In some Ages the Neighbor Bishops and People chose: In some
the Emperors: In some Cardinals; And sometimes General Councils: If God had
appointed one Vnifying Head to his Church, he would have determined who should
choose him, and told us how to know him.

If it be Consecration that makes him Pope, God would have authorized some to
Consecrate him. If any will serve, some may Consecrate one, and some another,
and some a third: Every one may have three Bishops. If it must be both a just
Election and Consecration the uncertainty will be the greater, when neither of
them is certain.

And none can give Power but they that have it to give. But Electors and
Consecraters being Inferiors have none to give.

If they say that God only gives the Power, and the Electors do but choose the
Receiver, and the Consecrators invest him: I answer, It is so indeed in the
true Col^ation of Church-offices, and Power (Whether Mr. Dodwell and such
others will or not). But that is here all one as to our uncertainty Who is the
Man.

2. And this is no feigned case: when in such a multitude of Schisms, there
have been two or three Popes at once (and once six alive at once that were or
had been Popes): And these made Bishops and Cardinals, and those Bishops made
Priests, and no man yet knows which of them (if either) had the right.

3. And is it the Name of a Roman Bishop, or the Thing that is necessary to the
being of an Universal Pastor? If the Name, a Hundred may be so called; And bare
Names give not so great Power: If the Thing, how were those Bishops of Rome,
that diverse Score Years did dwell in France, and never did any Bishop's Work at
Rome, nor had Rome's Consent? Might not one in Armenia have been as truly
called the Bishop of Rome?

But if it be Possession that gives validity to the claim, then the strongest
has the best title. And they that have by turns driven out each other were all
true Popes: And who was Possessor, when one was at Rome, and another (that
carried it at last) at Avignion or in Germany?

20. Tying an Unifying Head of all the Church on Earth to Rome, does leave it
in the Power of any Infidel, or Arian that can get Rome to set a Head of the
Christian Religion on the Church; that is, To un-church it, destroy it or
corrupt it. For all that know the World, know how ordinarily the Present Powers
can prevail with their Subjects to Elect whom they please; As Theodoricus and
other Arians at Rome have done. And if the Turk should conquer Rome, how easily
could he keep them from having any Bishop at all, and so the Church were dead
as headless.

21. Yea Rome has long been without any true Bishop: And the Church is no
Church without it is Constitutive Head. In diverse times of Wars, Desolations,
and Persecutions, yea, long by the Disagreement of the Electors, and many ages
by the nullity of incapable Popes, some set up by Whores, and Tyrants, and some
deposed by General Councils as Heretics, and yet continuing (as Eugen. 4.) And
long much of Italy it self deposed the Roman Bishop, and set up a Patriarch at
Aquileia, and took him for their Head.

22. Yea, it is certain by their Doctrine of necessary uninterrupted
Succession, that there is now no Pope nor ever can be. For when so many false
Elections, Incapacities by Simony, Heresy, Schism, Infidelity, Councils
Depositions, have interrupted the Succession, it can never (by their way) be
restored.

23. By all the Canons every City should choose their own Bishop: And so Rome
(often a Nest of Wickedness) would be made the Mistress or Head of all the World;
when as Cosmography is not so necessary to Christianity, that all the World
should be bound ever to know that there is such a place as Rome in the World:
And it were a strange thing that God should make it necessary to Salvation for
them at the Antipodes and all the Earth, to obey one City, and him that they
elect. Was it ignorance or craft in Pope Zachary to Excommunicate one for
saying there were Antipodes. If he knew of no Men on the other side of the
Earth, he was unlike to Govern them. If he persuaded Men that one half of the
Earth was uninhabited, that he might not be known to be no Governor of them, it
was vain Craft. But it is liker it was Ignorance.

He that would have more Proof, may find enough in Dr. Barrow.

XXVIII. The Pope by this Claim of Universal Government claims so much Power
unjustly from and over all Princes on Earth, as obliges them all to take him
for a Public Enemy, as one would do that should claim an Universal Monarchy,
and tell them on pain of Deposition they must be all his Subjects: as the Pope
does on pain of Excommunication, Deposition and Damnation.

None ever had the madness to dream of an Universal Schoolmaster, or Physicion.
Gregory long ago made the claim of Universal Bishop to be a mark of Antichrist.

XXIX. Christ binds all Christians to live in Communion as Saints, as making
up one Body Politic (of a transcendent Species) of which Christ is the Supreme
Governor or Head.

This therefore is none of the Controversy between us: All Christians are
agreed that as many Members of different shape, use and honor make up one
Natural Body, so do Christians that differ in Gifts, Office and Grace make up
one Body of Christ. And as every Member contributeth to the good of the whole
Body, so must every Christian to the good of the Universal Church: And so it is
not only Bishops that have every one a Charge in his Place to promote the
Universal welfare, but every Presbyter, and every Christian in his Place.
Therefore that Bishops are related to the whole Church, no more proves that
they have as a Senate a summa potestas or any Universal Government over it, as
one College, than it will prove it in all other Christians, who are all related
to the whole; Nor no more than the Members of the Body do make one natural
Governing Part by Consent.

XXX. This Communion of Christians in the Church as Catholic; is essentiated
by the Essentials of Christianity and Ministry; for Christians as Christians
with Christ the Head do constitute the Catholic Church, in its first being as
in fieri, And Christians as Christian Ministers of Christ, and private
Disciples, do constitute the organized Body which with Christ the Head make an
organized Catholic Church.

XXXI. The Integrals of Christianity and Communion are not necessary to the
Essence of the Church, but to the Integrity: Much less the Accidents.

XXXII. The Christian Churches through the World have Communion in all these
things following at this day. 1. They are all Baptized with the same Baptism in
Essence; and so are all Christians. Particularly they all profess to believe in
God the Father, one Jesus Christ our Redeemer, and one Holy Ghost, one in
Essence with the Father and the Son. They all profess the same Creed called the
Apostles, yea and the Nicene: and the Lord's Prayer as the Rule of our Desires,
and the Decalogue as a summary Rule of Practice: They all believe the same holy
Canonical Scripture, as to as many Books at least as are necessary to the being
of Christianity and Salvation. They all agree in the Essentials of the Sacred
Ministry, that such must teach the Infidels of the World, and make them
Disciples of Christ baptizing them; and then must teach them Christ's Commands:
That they are under Christ's Teaching, Priestly and Kingly office, to be to the
Churches the Peoples Teachers, their Guides in Public Worship, and the Rulers
of their Communion by the Power of the Keys. They agree in the Essentials of
the Lord's Supper, save that the Papists have corrupted it by
Transubstantiation, and other foul Abuses* The Protestants, Greeks, Armenians,
Abassines and all or near all the Parties of Christians in the World are agreed
in all this and much more, excepting the said Corruptions of Popery. 2. Their
Religion teaches them all to Love one another, as the Members of the same Body
of Christ; to do good to all, especially to the Household of Faith; and to Pray
for one another, and and relieve each other in want, and to do to all as they
would have others do to them. In a word to Love God as God, and Saints as
Saints, and Men as Men, and all to seek one Heavenly Kingdom, and all fight
against the same Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. And this is
Catholic Communion.

XXXIII. The greater Communion they have in all the Integral parts of Christian
Faith, Worship and Government, the more strong and amiable the several Churches
are, and so is the whole by such Communion: But it is not necessary to the
Essence.

It is not the Papists trick of challenging us to name Fundamentals that will
cheat men of understanding to confound Essentials and Integrals: That which
has no Essence is nothing: that whose Essentials are unknown is not knowable,
nor can be defined. Christianity was once known by Baptism: and it was once
knowable who were to be Baptized, and who to be received as Christians into
Communion. There are multitudes of Divine Truths revealed in Scripture, and
therefore to be believed, which are not essential to a Christian or a Church:
And so there are Integral Parts of Worship and Discipline. He that needs more
proof of this, is not one of those that I write for.

XXXIV. The Accidents of Christianity and Churches are of two sorts: some such
as it is desirable that all Churches should agree in, though it be necessary
neither to their Essence or Integrity. And some such in which an Universal
Agreement is neither possible nor desirable.

As it is desirable to comeliness that all men have Hair and Nails, etc. but
not that they all wear Clothes of the same Stuff, Shape, or Price; or all dwell
in Houses of the same materials, form or bigness, nor all use the same Trade of
Life, nor be of one Age or Rank, etc. It is desirable that all the World spoke
one Language, and were of one Judgment in all things of common concernment: But
it is hopeless, And he would play the hypocritical Devil, that on pretense of
seeking Unity, would destroy or ruin all that agree not in these things; so is
it as to Church Communion: It is desirable that all Christians understood and
spoke one Language; and that we had but one perfect sort of Copy of the Bible
without various readings; or where Translations are necessary that they were
all perfect and agreeable; but it is hopeless: As the case is, it is not
desirable, much less necessary, that we all Worship God in one Language when
all understand it not, or that we all use the same Translations, Liturgy, or
words of Prayer or Preaching, or all wear the same sort of Garments, and an
hundred such like: And to silence all that do not, or reject them from
Catholic Communion is the like hypocritical Diabolism; and in that way, the
Devil and the Pope are the greatest Vniters, that is, Dividers and Destroyers
in the World.

XXXV. The Universal Church contains many particular Churches throughout the
World.

This none denies. As a Kingdom has many Cities and Corporations.

XXXVI. These particular Churches Parts of the Universal, have a distinct
constitutive Form: That is, Christ only is Sovereign of the Universal, but his
Officers are the particular constitutive ruling part of the particular; though
under Christ.

King and Subjects only are Essential to a Kingdom: But a Mayor, Bailiff, or
other chief Officer, and the common Citizens are Essential to a City. And to
call a man Chief or Head of a Family or City, that is no King, is no Treason,
but to claim the Royalty is.

XXXVII. Therefore there is more necessary to Communion in a particular Church
as a Member of it, than to Catholic Communion. Viz.

He must consent to his Relation and Submission to the particular Pastors of
that Church; and to meet at the same time and place, and join in all the
necessary Parts of Public Worship with them: Else local Communion will be
impossible.

Therefore it is injurious ignorance which maintains of late, that he that
separateth from or is justly cast out of one Church, separateth from, or is
cast out of all. For he that will not own the Pastor of that Church, cannot
have Communion with it as a Member of that Church; who can come to School to a
Schoolmaster that he consents not to? And yet he may own most or all other
Pastors of the Catholic Church as such. He that thinks the Subscriptions,
Forms or Ceremonies of the Greek, Roman or English Church unlawful, does not
therefore think Christianity or Catholic Communion unlawful.

XXXVIII. All Christians are not bound to be fixed Members of particular
Churches subordinate to National; but those that can enjoy it ought.

The Negative I have so fully proved against Dr. Stillingfleet, that for Dr.
Sherlock to go on to harp on the same string, and give no answer to it, does
but tell us with what Men we have to do. I will not repeat the Proofs I gave,
that some Ambassadors, some Merchants, some wandering Beggars or Tradesmen,
some Travelers, and some where no Churches yet are gathered, some Soldiers,
and some in times of Confusion, are not obliged to be fixed Members of any
particular Church; but only to be Christians in Communion with the Church
Catholic, and to hold transient Communion with the Churches where they come.
He that yet will deny this, words will not make him see it.

XXXIX. Many of these Churches in one Kingdom, have so great advantage by the
Unity of Sovereignty, civil Interest and Laws, to be strengthening helpers to
one another, that they should accordingly associate, and live in as much
concord as their various conditions, Auditors and Imperfections will allow.

And accordingly as Neighbors owe some more Charity to each other than to
Strangers, so Christians under the same Prince united by Civil Government, Laws
and Interest, should be so far from persecuting and destroying each other, for
that which in various Kingdoms is allowable in Religion, that they should
exercise more love, compassion and forbearance of one another.

XL. Christian Princes are true Parts of the Kingdom of Christ, and eminent
Integral Parts of the Universal Church, as well as Pastors. And are bound by
Christ to do their best to make all their Kingdoms, the Kingdoms of Christ;
that is, to bring all their Subjects to consent to be Christians, and to live
in concordant Obedience to the Laws of Christ.

And so all Nations should be discipled as far as they can procure it: And such
National Churches, that is, Christian Kingdoms, we must all desire.

XLI. Supreme Christian Princes or States are authorized and obliged to drive
on, by just means, all Pastors and People to the Duties of their several
Places, and correct them for their Crimes.

XLII. Christian Princes and States being Members of the Universal Church, are
bound to contribute their best endeavors to its welfare: And therefore so far
to Unite and Agree as is necessary to their mutual strengthening for the
Universal good.

XLIII. Therefore so far as Civil Councils, or Dyets of many Princes or their
Delegates or Ambassadors are necessary to this Concord for the common good,
they are bound by God to keep such. And where Meetings cannot be kept, to use
all meet correspondency by Ambassadors and Letters for the same End.

So that this is no duty proper to Bishops, but common to Christian Princes:
And if their sinful omission make it strange, it is nevertheless their duty, as
God will make them know.

XLIV. Thy Synods of Pastors duly ordered are of great use for their mutual
advice, strength and concord, in order to the universal good.

So far are we from being against them* that we think the right use of them of
great importance. That they may keep a right understanding of the Faith which
they agree in, and bear down Heresies the better by their joint opposition; and
may keep up Christian Love, and work out the disaffections which strangers and
the calumnies of backbiters are apt to breed. And even in Integrals and meet
Accidents may do as much in Concord as they can.

XLV. The Obligation which lies on Particular Pastors to observe the
Agreements of such Synods, is from the general command of Love and Concord, and
the means thereto. And he that stands not to such Agreements as make for the
Strength and Concord of the Churches, violateth this Common Law. But such
Agreements of Synods as make not for this common end, but are against it, no
man is obliged to observe.

For it is no means that is not for the End, but against it. Therefore every
Canon which enjoyneth sin, or is not to the Churches good but hurt, must not be
kept.

XLVI. It is not true that the Diocesan is by Office the Representer of the
whole Church in Synods, and Presbyters have no place or decisive Votes.

Protestants have at large confuted this in their Confutations of Popery; and
so have many French Papists, and some others. The Convocation in England has a
lower House of Presbyters: Else in Abassia one Bishop were instead of all the
Clergy of the Empire: And two or three were a National Synod, in a Nation that
has no more Diocesses. They can show no Commission for such a Representative
Power; therefore they have none such.

XLVII. Much less have five Patriarchs, and a few Metropolitans, or such near
them as they will call Authority to pass for the Representatives of all the
Christian World, and to constitute a General Council.

XLVIII. No Pastors or Churches can give power to any to represent them
absolutely; but only limitedly to lawful things, for common good: And to oblige
them no further or longer to stand to what they do, than the common good
requires it.

What a man may not do himself, he may not authorize another to do for him: And
no man may himself oppose Truth or Duty, or cross the common good, or assert
any falsehood, or consent to any sin. And that which accidentally makes for the
common good in one Age or Country, may be against it in the next: And then we
are obliged against it, whatever our Delegates, Ancestors or selves did for it
before.

XLIX. There was never in the World a General Council of all the Bishops on
Earth, nor of the Representatives of all the Churches: Even the six or eight,
or more old Councils now most honored, were General but as to One Empire, (yea
far from that,) and not as to all the Christian World.

This I have fully proved in my second Book against Johnson; 1. From the
Subscriptions to the said Councils; 2. From the Authority of the Emperors that
called them; 3. From the rest of the History and Acts; 4. And from the
Testimony of the Historians of those Times. Yet A. Bishop Bromhall, with the
Papist Priest Johnson maintains the contrary, page 110. saying, [ This
Exception was made in the dark, etc. and says, it abounds with Errors, and
that the Abuna of Ethiopia submits to the Patriarch of Alexandria, and they
all acknowledge the Pope the first Patriarch, etc.

Ans. 1. If such a cant as this go with any man for a satisfactory answer to
the full proof aforesaid which I have given, and my Confutation of ten times
more of Johnsons, I have done with that man.

Ans. 2. Our Question is, Whether any, or all the Extra-Imperial Churches had
Bishops in those Councils, or were there represented, yea or ever called? Does
he prove a word of this? Not one word; but says, The Ethiopians now submit to
them.

Ans. 3. The Question is not, what they do now, but what they did then.
Christian Reader, admire the gracious Providence of God. The Custom then was
for the Major Vote of the Bishops in Council, when they anathematized any as
Heretics, to get them banished. Many of these banished men enlarged the
Church, and increased the numbers of Christians where they came; but they
propagated a Condemnation of the Councils that condemned them. Nestorius, but
specially Dioscorus and Jacobus Syrus, and many of the Eutychians turned
multitudes in the East and South, and some in Tartary to their minds herein.
Among others the Abyssines were taken with the Reverence and Authority of
Dioscorus, condemning the Council at Chalcedon, and the rest that were against
him. And all the Extra-Imperial Churches honored those of the Empire above
themselves, living under Infidels (except Abassia) and rejoiced in the Power of
the Christian Empire; but never joined in their Councils, nor received them as
their Laws, but rejoiced as Consenters to all that they thought good. He cannot
prove that before Dioscorus Banishment the Abassines obeyed Alexandria: And to
this day, their Abuna is chosen by the Monks at Jerusalem, say some, but say
others, chosen and confirmed by the titular Patriarch of Alexandria, and rules
Abassia himself; and they all condemn the foresaid Councils, and the Pope.
Godignus tells you and Ludolphus more fully, what respect they have for the
Pope and our Councils.

Ans. 4. The truth is, all that ever I heard yet that can be said for the
Subjection of the Abassines, or other Exterior Churches to the Council even of
Nice, or the Patriarchs before, is but a Word in the Canons lately Divulged by
Pisanus; which are novel, of no Authority, nor to be Credited by any that
Credit not the Roman Forgeries: And it is contrary to the true Nicene Canon,
that says Egypt only is Subject to Alexandria, when this Forgery adds
Ethiopia: And yet it is said of Trajan, that he went far into Ethiopia to
Enlarge the Roman Power: So if the Romans had any skirt there, as they had often
in Persia and Scythia, that is nothing to the Abassines, nor proves any
Exteriors, much less all represented in the General Councils of old.

Ans. 5. Many Countries and Parties did for Concord, and some Advantages, put
themselves under particular Patriarchs, and also profess their voluntary
consent to the Nicene, and some other Councils, Canons or Creed, who yet never
took a General Council for the Rightful Sovereign of the Christian Churches,
through the World. At this day one Sect obeys only the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and rejects all the rest; and another the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and three others, the three pretending Patriarchs of Antioch,
rejecting the rest: and they reject as aforesaid some of the four first
Councils, and all that followed: By which it appears, that they take not the
four or five Patriarchs Essential to Catholic Unity, nor General Councils to
have a supreme Regiment over all. Most Protestants receive the four first
General Councils (saving some mutable accidentals:) And yet they hold not their
Universal Sovereignty.

L. It is neither lawful nor possible to call a Universal Council to Exercise
Universal Sovereignty, nor ever like to be.

I have fully proved this in the Second part of my Key for Catholics:
Consider, 1. It must be Grave Experienced Men, who are fit to be trusted in so
great a Matter: And such are Aged and usually weak.

2. From Abassia, Mexico, Armenia, etc. they must be a year or near in
receiving the Summons, and as long in preparing and coming to Europe, if this
be the place.

3. They must it is like, be some years absent at the Council.

4. They cannot (if they are sufficient Representatives) come all into one Room
to hear Debates.

5. They cannot most of them understand one another Language.

6. They will hardly live to bring back the Decrees.

7. There is no Person or Senate in the World, that has an obliging Authority
to call them.

8. It is not like that they will ever agree Voluntarily to meet in one place,
without such Authority: The Abassines, Armenians, Syrians, etc. will think we
should come to them, and we shall think they should come to us.

9. If possibly they should agree, a Man's Age is little enough to go all over
the World to Solicit and bring them to such Agreement.

10. Who, and how many will undertake that task?

11. How few can bear the Charges of all this.

12. It were sinful Cruelty to Separate the Wisest Men so long from their
Charges, to the Peoples loss, as well as by the Voyages and Journeys to kill
them.

13. It is certain, that most of the Princes on Earth, under whose power the
Bishops live, would not give leave to go out of their Dominions to such Synods;
most being Infidels, many Heterodox, and many in Wars or Enmity with each
other, and almost all in Jealousies; and without their leave, they cannot come.

14. The great Numbers of the nearer Bishops, and the paucity of the most
remote, would make it no true Representative, as to Votes.

15. There is no one on Earth Antecedently Authorized to be their President
(what ever the Papists pretend:) And to choose a President, it is like so many
such would hardly agree.

16. It Is already known, that they account one another Heretics, or
Schismatics, or Usurping Tyrants before hand: Some are called Nestorian
Heretics, some Eutychian or Jacobite Heretics, some Melchites, some one
thing, and some another, and most take the Papists for Tyrants, and Heretics
both. And will all these ever meet in Council?

17. Men are naturally so much for their own ease, and so much against Works of
so vast difficulty, charge and hazard, that a competent number of fit Men would
never undertake it; it being almost equal to a Martyrdom, which even the best
Men will not undergo, till they are better Convinced of the Duty and Necessity
than any Man can truly be of such Universal Councils.

18. It Is known that all the Protestants, if not almost all other Christians,
save Papists, do believe no such Councils to be necessary, no, nor lawful, but
to be usurping Tyranny, as challenging the Universal Church Government as a
Senate.

So that as there never was, so there never will be, must be, or can be such a
Council; unless (which God forbid) all the Church should be again Reduced to a
narrow Room.

LI. They that would make such Councils, possible by pretending that a few
Patriarchs and such Bishops as they will bring with them, are the Sufficient
and Authorized Representers of all the rest, do but more grossly deceive and
abuse the Christian World.

For, 1. They never proved, nor can prove that ever Christ Authorized such
Patriarchs, much less to such a Power.

2. And whereas Archbishop Bromhal says, that God does it by the Law of
Nature, enabling Men to do it, and to deny this is to overthrow all Government:
I answer, 1. We know of no such Law of Nature; nor that he is a Credible
Expositor of it: We take the Law of Nature (on the Reasons before and after
mentioned) to be plainly against the very being of such Councils, and
especially against such trusting our Religion with them, and supposing them to
be the Governors of all the Christian Princes and People on Earth. 2. What Men
be they that have given these Patriarchs this Power? If Men dead 1300. years
ago, they have no Authority now: Dead Men have no ruling Power. The Laws of the
Land bind us not now by any power, that the Dead Kings and Parliaments have
over us: But (though made by them) they bind us now only as the Laws of our
present Governors. By the Constitution, the Successive Kings are still by
consent to make them Their Laws, till by consent of King and Parliament, they
are Dissolved: Unless some present power over us make them Their Laws, no old
Church Canons can bind us. 3. If they say that God binds us to stand to what
our Ancestors did, I want the proof of that: If we will have the benefit of our
Ancestors Contract, we must stand to them, else we may choose: A Father cannot
bind his Child to his hurt, but only to his Benefit. Let them prove the
Obligation.

4. But we deny that any made those Patriarchs, who would have had any power
over us, had we been then alive. The Subjects of one Prince made them in his
Empire, and he Confirmed them. But neither that Prince nor his Subjects were
our Rulers here, what if the King or Convocation make Canterbury and York
Metropolitans: Does it follow that they have Church Power over other Lands.

5. These Patriarchs had never the Government of any given them by the old
Councils, but within the Empire: And after of some Volunteers that for
Advantage chose it.

6. Who be these Patriarchs they talk of? Are they not all turned into Names
and Shadows, Condemning one another? and must these five fighting Shadows
Represent and Rule the Christian World?

7. To return to the twelve Apostles is Impertinent: The Apostles were prime
Ministers, and more Represented Christ than the Church. The Church chose them
not: Christ made them Foundations, Bases and Pillars in his Church, but not
Representatives of it. And if he had, they chose none to Succeed them as
Apostles; But as ordinary Ministers, all Ministers Succeed them, and as
Superior Ministers, some say Bishops. Bellarmine confesses and proves, that
the Apostles as such have no Successors, and that the Pope Succeeds not Peter
as an Apostle, but (as he Dreams) as an ordinary Supreme Pastor. Had the
Apostles settled twelve or thirteen Successors, or appointed any Churches to be
Rulers of the rest, we must have obeyed these Rulers: But who have called them
a General Council* None but Rome, Antioch and Alexandria claimed Succession
from the Apostles; and all these claimed it but from one Apostle Peter, Rome
and Antioch as his pretended Seats, and Alexandria that he set St. Mark over
them, sure the Apostles rose not from the dead to make Constantinople and
Jerusalem Patriarchates: And if they had, four of the five Patriarchs are all
now Subjects to the Turk: And experience telling us what Power Princes have in
the Choice and Ruling of the Clergy: All this does but say, that the Turk is
the Chief Governor of the Religion and Consciences of all the Christian World.

If they plead for new Power to make Patriarchs, let them prove who has that
Power over all the World, and how they came by it, and how they now use it.
Will all the Christian World who fear the guilt of obeying Usurpers, and
disobeying Christians, ever unite in the obedience of Patriarchs, who cannot be
known by the wisest, much less by all to have any Authority to command them?

LII. The Pope has done much of his mischiefs to the Church and World by the
Councils of Bishops.

They have been his Army, and he their General: Without them he could have done
little or nothing: By them the most of Church Corruptions have been made Laws:
By them Emperors have been deposed, Rebellions maintained, the Pope enabled to
give away their Kingdoms, absolve Subjects from their Oaths, to make it a
Heresy (called Henrician) to be Loyal, to dig dead Bishops out of their graves
as Heretics, that were for Loyalty: Yea the Councils of Bishops without, if
not against the Pope, deposed the good Ludovicus Pius, and have done much to
the corruption and confusion of the Churches; as I have elsewhere proved.

LIII. General Councils are not the authorized or lawful Supreme Government of
the Universal Church, nor have an Universal Legislative or Judiciary Power.

This many Protestants, and after all Dr. Barrow have unanswerably proved.

Arg. 1. If there never was, nor must be, nor can be a true Universal Council,
then such a Council is not the Churches Supreme Governor. But the antecedent I
have before proved.

Arg. 2. That Government which the Church was without for three hundred years,
is not the just Supreme Government of the Universal Church: (For the Church is
not the Church without its Supreme Government.) But the Church was without a
General Council at least for three hundred years.

Arg. 3. That Government which rarely existeth, and has not existed near an
hundred years, or, as some of our Adversaries say, a thousand, is not the
Supreme Government of the Church: (For then the Church would be dead, and no
Church in all that time of vacancy; for the Species depends on the Supreme
Government:) But the Church has so rarely had that which our present
Adversaries themselves take for a true General Council. If the Council of Trent
were any, they have had none since. Yea Bishop Guning owneth but the six first
Councils called General: And if there were none since, then the Church has had
no Supreme Council just a thousand years: And was it this thousand years no
Church? or of another Species? Or can the Church be a thousand years without
its Supreme Government?

Arg. 4. If General Councils be the Supreme Legislative Power, then the Church
has had no such Councils-Laws for all the foresaid vacancies (300 years first,
and since 601, a thousand years after.) But the Adversaries will not allow the
consequent; (that all the Canons of General Councils were no Laws so long:) But
the antecedent is proved from the definition of Laws, which are the
signification of the Sovereigns Will to be the Rule of the Subjects Right
(actions and dues.) There is no Law which is not the Rulers Law; and if the
Ruler be dead, the Law is dead: For a dead man has neither Authority nor Will.

Obj. Our Laws die not with the King, nor at the dissolution of Parliaments.

Ans. 1. The Law says, Rex non moritur. As soon as he is dead, the next Heir
is King, and the Law is his Law, he being by the Constitution (by Contract)
obliged to own it, and Govern by it. 2. And Parliaments have their part in the
Legislation as Representatives or Trustees of the People, and therefore the
Laws are called those quas vulgus elegerit. But the People die not at the
dissolving of a Parliament. 3. At least it is of apparent necessity that the
Supreme Executive Power survive, or else the Laws die: For whose Laws are they,
if we had no King or Sovereign? Whom do we obey or disobey in obeying or
disobeying such Laws? But our opposers say, that even the Supreme Executive as
well as Legislative Power is in General Councils. If so, their Laws are dead a
thousand years; and we cannot disobey or obey dead men: Therefore why do you
press us to obey their Laws?

Arg. 5. If God would have had such Councils to be the Universal Sovereigns, he
would have notified this plainly in his Word, or in Nature; it being supposed
the Constitutive Form of the Church, or at least necessarily to be known for
the common Duty and Concord of Christians: Our opposers say, [ There is no
Concord nor avoiding damnable Schism, but by obeying the Universal Governing
Church.] But God has notified no such thing in Nature or Scripture.

Arg. 6. If God would have his Church Universal to have had such a Sovereign,
he would have empowered some one or more to call such a Council, and told us
who has the power to call them, that we may know which have Authority and are
to be obeyed: For there have been many false and heretical General Councils (so
called;) and they have cursed and condemned one another. But God has given us
no notice of any empowered to call such a Council, nor any means how to know
which of them is true, and which false, which to obey, and which not; whatever
the Pope pretends.

Arg. 7. All the Inferior Officers derive their Power from the Supreme: But all
the particular Bishops and Presbyters do not derive their Power from General
Councils; ergo they are not Supreme.

The Major is undoubted with all Politic Writers: It is one of the Jura
Majestatis to be the Fountain of Inferior Power.

The Minor is notorious de facto in the common History of the Church: By the
National Orders of the Roman Empire, Councils had a chief Power in case of
difference to determine of the five Patriarchs; but not necessarily to choose
them, nor did they consecrate them; nor was this without the Empire; nor did
these Patriarchs make the other Bishops. The Papists dare not determine whether
Election or Consecration necessarily make a Bishop, or whether it must be both:
For which ever be necessary (distinguished from invalid acts) their Popes and
Bishops are nulled; much more if both. But neither of them was appropriate to
General Councils.

Arg. 8. The Sovereign Government of the Universal Church, is supposed
necessary to its Unity, and to avoiding of Schism, and deciding Controversies,
and therefore its Laws are necessary to be Preached to all the Flocks. But none
of this is true as to the Sovereignty of a Council: ^or the Church had Unity
mostly without it, and subsists without it at this day; and few Subjects know
its Laws, and few Preachers preach them, or People think they are bound to
learn them.

Arg. 9. Christ has appropriated the Sovereignty and Universal Legislation and
Judgment to himself alone: Therefore it is not committed to a Council.

The Antecedent is proved fully by 1 Cor. 11.3. 1 Cor. 12.27, etc. Col. 1.18.
and 2.10, 17, 19. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. to 16. 1 Cor. 6.16, 17.
Gal. 3.28. 1 Cor. 3.3, 4, 5. and 4.6. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Matthew. 22.25, 26. Luke
22.26.

Arg. 10. They that will claim so great a Power as to be the Sovereigns of the
Christian World, must show a clear Commission for it: But Universal Councils
can show no such Commission.

Arg. 11. If an Universal Council of Bishops be the Supreme Governors of the
Universal Church, they that call them not, or they that come not together, live
in most damnable sin: For all Office consists in Obligation to do the duty,
as well as Power to do it. And to neglect so many hundred years a work of such
unspeakable need, must be more damnable than to neglect a particular Flock; so
that this casts either all the Bishops of the World into damnation, as most
perfidious men, or the Pope for not calling them.

Arg. 12. The necessity of such an Universal Supreme Senate is feigned and
false; therefore none such is of God.

1. The great pretended necessity is of Universal Legislation: But that is not
necessary. For Christ has already given his Church as many Laws as are
universally necessary: No man can prove the necessity of one more.

2. Nor is their Universal Judging Office necessary: For,

Arg. 13. A General Council is not capable of Universal Supreme Government:
Therefore they were never by God appointed to it.

I. They are not capable of Universal Legislation.

1. Because Christ has made perfect Universal Laws, and forbidden all addition
to them; that is, at least all of the same kind. To say that Christ has left
out any of universal necessity, is to say, that he has done his work by the
halves, and men must mend it; especially if it be in necessary things. If it be
but undetermined Circumstances or Accidents, then 1. None can know which of
them agree with all Countries on Earth. 2. Those that agree this year may not
be agreeable the next. 3. Nor is an Agreement in more than Christ has
determined necessary at all. So that here is no work for them to do.

2. And what is the Judiciary Power that they can use? No man can tell what. 1.
They cannot judge of particular Persons to be Baptized whether they are fit.
All the Bishops of the World must not meet to try a Catechumen. 2. Nor yet of
Persons that are to be Confirmed and admitted to adult Communion: 3. Nor of
Persons accused of Heresy or Scandal: No one is so mad as to say that an
Universal Council must be gathered out of all the Earth to judge whether A. do
justly accuse B. of these Crimes, and to hear all men speak for themselves, and
to Examine the Witnesses, etc.

And whole Cities, and Kingdoms are not fit for Church Censures, because they
are mixed of righteous and unrighteous, and noxa Caput sequitur: Every man must
answer for his own Sin, and every one must have his own Repentance. And if
whole Countries are to be Judged, whole Countries of Witnesses must be heard.
And shall the Council come to them, or they all go to the Council? and whither?
and when?

If it be Causes and not Persons that they must judge, what are they if they be
no Persons Causes? If only Cases of Doctrine and Conscience in general, as the
Expounding hard Texts of Scripture, or Points of Divinity; This is not properly
a Judiciary Executive Power, which is ever subsequent to the Subjects actions;
but it is a part of the antecedent Power; If it be but Instructing it is the
act of a Teacher; If generally obliging it is the act of the Legislator's: For
it is his Prerogative to be the universally obliging Expositor of the Law, who
is the Maker of it: And it is more to Give the sense, than to endite the bare
words. So that here is no Universal Legislation or Jurisdiction left for a
Sovereign Council: Nor any that they are capable of.

LV. Much less can all the Bishops out of Council living all over the Earth, as
one College, Senate or Aristocracy, be the Supreme Governing Power of all the
Churches and Christians on Earth, having no possible Capacity thereof.

If our new Church Bishops and Drs. had not fixed on this as the Universal
Supremacy, I should have expected a sharp censure for judging any so -- as to
own it. The same Arguments forementioned confute it?

Arg. 1. The diffused College of Bishops out of Council never did make Laws for
the Church Universal: Therefore they are not its Lawmakers or Supreme
Legislative Rulers.

Arg. 2. They have never (much less always) exercised an Universal decisive
Judiciary Power: Therefore they were never appointed to exercise it. The Church
could not obey that Power that was never used by such as Judges.

Arg. 3. If God had given them this Power, he would somewhere have plainly told
us of it, and directed them and us how to use it: But this he has not done.

Arg. 4. The Assertors of this while they would extol the Clergy, cruelly
Judge them by Consequence to Damnation, for never performing so great a Duty as
Universal Legislation and Jurisdiction; if God did oblige them to it.

Arg. 5. For the diffusive Clergy or Bishops of all the Earth out of Council to
Govern all Christians on Earth as one College or Senate, which all must obey,
is a thing of such notorious natural Impossibility, that I once thought I
should never have heard a Man, much less a Christian, yea a Dr. and Bishop,
yea, many maintain.

1. For must they all agree that their acts may be valid in Legislation or
Decisive Judgment, or must it be a Major Vote? No doubt they will say the latter.
And who shall propose and draw up the Laws?

2. Who shall carry them all over the World to procure Votes?

3. Who shall gather the Votes, and Judge of the Majority?

4. Shall they Vote and Judge without ever consulting each other, and hearing
what be said on every side?

5. How many Messengers must there be to go into all the World? And who shall
bear their Charges?

6. How shall we be sure when they come home that they have truly taken the
Votes? Will not all our Faith be resolved into the Credit of these Messengers?

7. Must accused Persons and Witnesses travel all over the World to be Judged?
or must all the Bishops on Earth come to them?

8. How many Millions of Criminals will a Bishop have to hear at once, or Judge?

The Case is so gross that I am afraid you will say, I feign Reverend Men to be
Mad. That which they say is, That there is no Concord to be had, nor avoiding
of Schism but by obeying the Universal Governing Church, which is the College
of all the Pastors and Bishops on Earth, who have as such a Supreme Power under
Christ of Legislation and Judgment, which they exercise per literas formatas.

There is no way to excuse this -- but by feigning that this College of Bishops
is to do these great works not by themselves, but by a College of Delegates or
Representatives, viz. Either Cardinals or Patriarchs: or else by reducing the
whole Church on Earth to the narrow compass of some little Sect, and condemning
most of the Christian World, that they may not seem to need them, for
Legislation or Judgment. And these I have sufficiently confuted before.

LVI. The Universal Supreme Government either of Council or the College of the
diffused Clergy, is more impossible and unpracticable, and much worse than the
Sovereignty of the Pope.

For, 1. The Pope is a known Person, and it is possible to find him, to send to
him, to hear from him.

2. He is One, and it is possible to know his Mind without gathering Votes or
Literas formatas all over the Earth.

3. Most may send to him and hear his decision at least in an Age.

4. What he cannot do by himself he can depute others to do.

5. He is almost always in being, and the Church need not be so many Hundred
Years headless or without it is Sovereign Power.

6. He has some Cob-web shadow of right, in the Tu es Petrus, and Tibi dabo
Claves, and Pasce oves: But as to the said College and Council, all this and
more is contrary.

So that I do deliberately profess, that if I did believe that there were any
Universal Supreme Rector or Ministerial specifying Vnifying, Constitutive Head
or Governor under Christ, I should soon resolve that it is the Pope, there
being no Competitor so little incapable as he.

And all the Papists save a few Flatterers acknowledge that the Popes Power is
not absolute and unlimited, and that he has need of Councils as the King has
of Parliaments, not for constant Government, but partly for Legislation, which
belongs not to the Pope alone, and partly for Medicinal reparation and
execution; when the Church is diseased. So that they that are for the Pope as
the stated Supreme, are for Councils also, and would use Councils better than
the Aristocratical, that give them the Supreme Government, would use them. All
men know that they are rarely in being. Even Bishop Guning says he receives
but the first Six General Councils: To say, the Church has been headless, or
without it is Supreme Government just a Thousand Years, and is so still, is to
make it invisible in an Essential Part.

Is there now a visible Catholic Church, or is there none? If none, why would
they silence and damn us all for not obeying that which is not? If there be,
where and what is the Pars regens, the constitutive visible Supremacy? If in a
Council there is none. If in the College of diffused Bishops all over the
World, they are no Governors, they never so made Laws, they Govern not as such,
and so are no such Governors. They only Govern per parts, in their several
Precincts, as all the English Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs and
Judges do, and not as an Aristocracy. But if it be a Church now because there
is a Pope, say so, and hide not your opinion. We say It is a Church because
there is a Christ and Christians; and we know no other Matter and Form.

LVII. They that assert a Supremacy in a Council or College of Bishops, do
unavoidably introduce a Pope.

If they will call none a Pope but him that is absolute and unlimited (and no
Man a King, but an absolute unlimited Monarch) we will speak according to
common use, and let them speak as their Interest dictates to them, but remember
that the Controversy is but about the Name, and not the Thing. We take the
French Church for Papists, If they will call them Protestants, they are free.
But if we are agreed what a Pope is, the case is plain, as follows.

I. Mr. Dodwell (their most Learned defender, if number of words or greatest
self-conceit be the chief strength) tells you that if the Council be not
lawfully called, it obliges you rather to bring them to Punishment as a Rout
or Rebels, than to obey them: And that none but the President has Power to
call them. (And remember yet that this good Man is no Papist.) And indeed who
else but the Pope should call Universal Councils? The King in Scotland may call
a Scotch General Assembly, and in England a Convocation and Parlia^ent; And, 1.
The Emperor of Rome or Constantinople might call such Councils in the Empire as
were then called General; and did so. But who now shall call one out of France,
Spain, Portugal, Italy, Germany, Britain, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Moscovie,
the Turkish Empire, Armenia, Georgia, Mengrelia, Tartary, Abassia, Mexico,
Peru, China, etc. We are awake, and therefore cannot Dream of Princes doing it
by Agreement. We are yet out of Bedlam, and cannot conclude that all the
Bishops in the World will come together by common consent, or as the Atomists
say the World was made, by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms.

2. How shall lawful Councils be known from unlawful, if none have Authority to
call, approve, and difference them? If only ex factis, by their good or bad
Deeds, half the World will Judge (as they have done and do) one Council to be
spurious which another obeys.

3. What order shall be kept among them, if none have Authority to appoint the
Place, the Time, to Preside and Moderate, and to dissolve them? and who
pretends to this but the Pope?

4. When Councils Contradict, Condemn and Curse each other, who shall tell us
which of them to receive, believe, and obey?

II. And if we must have a visible Supreme Power, we must have one that
successively existeth, that the Church be not dissolved. And none pretends to
this but the Pope.

III. And if all National and Patriarchal Churches be but Parts of a visible
Catholic Church with a Humane Supremacy, then there must be some Power still
existent to give Patriarchs and Metropolitans their Power: Mr. Dodwell says it
overthrows all Government to appeal to Scripture as a Charter or Law of Christ:
None has more than the Giver intended him: None can give that which he has
not to give. The Inferior has not Power to give to the Superior: Who then but
a Pope can give Patriarchs and Metropolitans their Power? If for want of
Authoritative Collation of Power, all the Presbyterian Ordinations, Sacraments,
and Covenant-hopes of Salvation are Nullities and Sins against the Holy Ghost,
as Mr. Dodwell and his Tribe say; what better are all the Bishops and
Archbishops for want of a Superior conferring Power? which none pretends to
but the Pope.

IV. And who else shall judge Patriarchs, Metropolitans, and National Churches,
when they prove Heretics or Schismatics? Their Heresy and Schism is far more
heinous and dangerous than single Persons or Congregations. And Councils are
not extant: And we cannot send all over the Earth to gather Bishops Votes
against them unheard. It must be a Pope or no body on Earth, that must by
Governing Authority Judge them.

V. And who else shall be the stated Judge of new started Controversies? You
say, such there must be? shall they be undecided till the World have a true
general Council?

VI. And who shall an injured Person appeal to from a Tyrannical Metropolitan
or National Church, but to the Pope?

Many more clear Necessities there will be of a Pope on their Principles I
blamed the Author of the Divine Hierarchy, for naming such without an Antidote,
lest it should make men Papists: But I understand he is a worthy Protestant:
But verily there is no avoiding a Pope, by any that assert an Universal humane
Church Supremacy.

VII. And indeed I must not suppose them so immodest as to deny it. For it is
but the Pope's Absolute Power above the Councils and their Laws, and not Simple
Popery, or the Pope's limited Power that they deny. 1. They confess that they
hold Rome for the Mistress Church, as Grotius calls it; 2. And that the Pope is
Patriarch of the West, and the prime Patriarch: 3. And that he is Principium
Vnitatis to all the Church on Earth: And if so, they are out of the Church
which is One, that deny this. 4. That he is authorized to call General
Councils: 5. And to be their President, 6. And to be the chief Governor when
there are no General Councils, (and that is indeed always.) 7. And that they
are all Schismatics that do not thus far submit to him. And how much more Mr.
Dodwell gives the President, I have showed you in his own words.

VIII. As Mr. Thorndike threateneth England with God's Judgments, if they do
not amend the Oath of Supremacy, by making it acceptable to the Papists that
renounce not a foreign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, so others labor to prove
that the meaning of it is only to renounce the Pope's Jurisdiction here in
Temporals which belongs to the King, and not a Papal and Foreign Jurisdiction,
properly Ecclesiastical by the Keys: As you may see partly in Mr. Hutchinson's
alias Berry's Book, who on that Supposition took the Oath, (as many do) and
publicly professed himself of the Church of England.

IX. In the Description of the Reconciliation with the Pope, endeavored by
Archbishop Laud in Heylin's History of his Life, Page 414, 415, etc. All that
the Pope was to abate was, 1. That the Oaths of Supremacy and Fidelity may be
taken (I told you in what sense.) 2. And that the Pope's Jurisdiction here (but
no where else) be declared to be of Humane Right (that is, say ours, by the
Fathers in General Councils not without the Apostles, by whose Church-Laws we
are all bound.) 3. That all should be really performed to the King, so far as
other Catholic Princes usually enjoy and expect as their due, and so far as
the Bishops were to be independent both from King and Pope (but not from
subjection to either.) This (says he) no man of Learning and Sobriety would
have grudged to grant him. 4. Marriage permitted to Priests. 5. The Communion
in both kinds. 6. The Liturgy in English.

I ask any sober man now,

Qu. 1. Whether the Pope did himself think that by this bargain he ceased to be
Pope, and all Papists to be Papists?

2. Whether if the King had been thus far equalled with other Catholic
Princes, the Pope would not have supposed him, and his Bishops and Church to be
of the same Roman Catholic Church as they?

3. Whether in all this here be any renunciation of the Popes Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in England, but only of the Divine Right of it?

4. Whether here be any renunciation of his claimed Universal Jurisdiction over
all the Church on Earth?

5. Whether such an Universal Church Monarch (by Humane Right with some and
Divine with others) be consistent with the Protestant Doctrine, and that of the
Former Church of England?

6. Whether such a Bargain be the way to save us from Popery?

7. What to call or think of those Archbishops, Bishops, and Drs that are for
such a Bargain, and for Silencing two Thousand such Ministers as were Silenced,
and Ruining those that forsake them not, and yet cry down Popery, and accuse
those whom they Silence, and Ruin as befriending it? Readers, Did you think
till Experience told you that England had had such Clergy men? And do you not
yet understand them?

LVIII. The whole Christian World (or all the Earth) is less capable of one
Ecclesiastical Monarch or Supreme Aristocracy, than of one Civil Monarch.

This is easily proved to any that will understand what Church Government is.

1. Church Government consists in judging of the state of Men's Souls whether
they are capable of Baptism, and the Communion of Saints, and the Remission of
Sin, and whether their Professions be so sound in matter and understood by
them, and their practices such as show them capable or not? And an outward
matter of fact with its circumstances, which Magistrates judge, is far easier
judged of than all this in the understanding, will and practice.

2. It is about matters of supernatural Revelation and heavenly Mystery, which
is not so easily known as Natural and Civil things.

3. It is a work of personal ability and perforformance, like a Schoolmasters,
or Physicions, and can less be done by delegation.

4. There is no rule, or warrant in Scripture for such delegation, which
Magistrates may use. Nor for Church-Rulers making new sorts of Officers under
them to do their Journey-work, which Princes may undoubtedly make.

5. All that are under such a Supreme, must have far greater sufficiency for
their Ecclesiastical work, than every Civil or Military Officer needs for his,
as the different works require.

6 Such an Universal Monarch or Senate would be supposed still in being, and so
the Mundane Empire not dissolved; which here cannot be supposed.

7. Such a Monarch or Senate would be in some known place of the World where
men might hear of them and find them. But it is not so here, specially as to the
Sovereign College of Bishops or Council.

8. Such a Monarch or Civil Senate would be supposed to be Lords of all the
World, and therefore to have Wealth enough to pay Shipping, Traveling,
Messengers, Officers, and discharge all Public Expenses: But so has not the
Imaginary College or Council, no nor the Pope and Conclave.

9. Such a Monarch or Senate commanding all the World, would not have most of
the Kingdoms of the Earth the Enemies of them, and hinderers of their work;
whereas the Bishops have not the leave of one Prince of many to assemble and
govern.

10. Such a Monarch or Senate would have no Superior on earth but God, to
forbid and hinder them. Whereas our imaginary diffused College and Council, are
themselves the Subjects of abundance of Princes, Orthodox, Heterodox, Infidels,
Heathens, who are their Commanders, and may hinder them: So that our
Universalists plead that on necessity to the Concord and Being of Christ's
Church, all the Christian World must be under the Supreme Government of
thousands of the Subjects of various Princes, most of them Enemies: When all
Church History and Experience have told the World, how much Princes can do on
their subject Clergy.

LIX. To make the Church of England a subject part of the Church Universal as
Governed by a Foreign Supreme Power, (Pope, Council or College) is to make it
tota specie, quite another thing from what the Protestant Church of England,
and the other Protestant Churches are.

Proved; where the Supreme Government is altered or diverse, the Species of the
Society is altered or diverse. No man that knows what Government is, will deny
this. But here the Supreme Government would be altered or diverse. For the
Protestant Churches own no Supreme Universal Governor but Christ. And that the
Church of England owneth no such, I will prove anon.

2. A Kingdom, and a part of a Kingdom; a complete Political Body, and the mere
Part of such a Body (as a Corporation) are not of the same Species: But the
Protestant Church of England is a complete Society in it self, and the Church
of England as a mere part of a greater Society is not so. As Christ's Kingdom
and the Kings differ, so we maintain that the Kingdom of England, as such, and
as a mere part of Christ's Kingdom, are of different Species: And it would be
so as to a Humane Universal Kingdom, were there any such.

3. A Kingdom or Church under no Laws but Gods and their own, are not of the
same Species with a Kingdom or Church under Foreign Laws above their own. And
so it is here supposed.

4. A Kingdom and Church whose Justices, Judges, Captains and all Officers
receive their Power and Commission from a Foreign Sovereign Power, is
specifically diverse from that which does not: And so it is here.

5. A Kingdom and Church which may be punished by a Supreme Foreign Power, and
must be judged by them, is not of the same Species with that which may not.
But, etc.

6. A Kingdom and Church whose Subjects may appeal from their own King or
Church Governors to a Foreign Power, are not of the same Species with that
which may not: But the two Churches in question so differ: Therefore they are
not of the same Species: And therefore Mr. Thorndike and such, truly
acknowledge this as their foundation, that without owning One Universal
Governing Church, there is no Union, nor true Consistence in the particulars.

The Consequence is evident, That the Church, which according to Dr. Heylin, A.
Bishop Laud would have had, and which A. Bishop Bromhall, and his Defender Dr.
Parker, and Grotius; and his Defender Dr. Pierce, and Bishop Guning and his
Chaplain Dr. Saywell, and Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Dodwell, Bishop Sparrow, and all
of that mind are for, is not the Protestant Church of England, nor at all a
true Protestant Church: But as far as I can understand their words, it is the
same Visible Church-Form, (and Government) which the Councils of Constance and
Basil were for, and which the Papists French Church is for; (unless there be
any worse in the French Church-form than yet I know of.)

LX. We are further from denying or violating the Churches Unity, than they are
that feign an Universal Humane Sovereignty: Nor does our opposition to Popery
exclude our resolution as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with Papists,
and with all men.

I. We hold (as aforesaid) that all Christians are united in One God, one
Christ the Sovereign, one Body of Christ, one Faith, one Baptismal-Covenant
with Christ, one Spirit, one Hope of Grace and Glory; and must keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace: And that all Subjects must obey their
Rulers and Pastors in all lawful things belonging to their Office to command
and teach. And that as Particular Churches must be held for the Personal
Communion of Saints; so all these Churches must by Messengers, Letters and
Synods hold such correspondency, as the common good of the Universal Church and
their own strength and edification by the means of mutual COUNSEL and CONCORD
do require.

II. Accordingly we make not Regent Senates or Courts of such Councils, to make
Laws for the Christian World: But they are like the Assemblies of pious
Christian Princes, who study the Peace of the whole Christian World. Princes
are bound so to do as well as Pastors: That they do not, proves not that they
ought not: Their Kingdoms are but parts of the Kingdom of Christ. If they
should hold an Assembly in Europe for the suppressing of such a Heresy as
threatens the whole, or such a Tyrant as the Pope, or such an Enemy as the
Turk, it were well done, and had the same reasons and power as a Council of
Bishops. Bishops may not undertake Jurisdiction in other men's Bishoprics, nor
Kings in other men's Kingdoms. Bishops are bound to prefer the universal good,
and so are Kings.

III. And therefore the measure of such Communion by Consultation, by
Messengers, Letters, or Councils, is, 1. The public good; 2. And the capacity
of the Communicants.

We have Communion with all Christians in Abassia, Armenia, and all the Earth,
in Faith, Hope, Love, and all the Essentials of Christianity: But if John or
Joan here commit Adultery, and be excommunicated as impenitent, we are not
bound to send Messengers to the Antipodes, or all the World, to tell them of
it; no nor if a Bishop or his Chaplain turn Heretic: Nor are they bound to
send hither to enquire or examine it. And if the Excommunicate come to Armenia,
and desire Communion, they are justifiable for receiving him, and being
ignorant of our Excommunication. But Neighbor Christians and Churches live so
near, that they are capable of converse: And therefore Synods and Communicatory
Letters are there of great use: And so far as an Excommunicate man is like to
intrude into the Communion of other Churches, it is meet that his
Excommunication be published, and that other Churches receive him not without
just satisfaction. And so Councils are useful as far as propinquity makes men
capable of visible Communion: Especially to Pastors and Churches in one
Kingdom, where the Unity of the Civil Government gives them more capacity and
necessity of such Correspondency, than with Foreigners. And therefore the
Councils in the same Roman Empire had great reason for their Decrees to avoid
those Excommunicate by each other.

And yet many Councils, even under the Papacy decreed that he that is unjustly
Excommunicate by one Bishop may be received by another: But that supposes his
trial and proof of the Injury.

Therefore we come not so near the Universal Sovereignty of Councils as Dr.
Stillingfleet in the Defense of A. Bishop Laud, tells us Laud whom he defended
does. Who will have the old Councils confessed truly General, notwithstanding
the absence of the Extra-Imperial Bishops, 2. And will have such Councils to
have been received (the Four first) by all the Christian World, when it is known
how many rejected that at Chalcedon. 3. And will have such Councils to be
externally obeyed by patient submission when they notoriously err, by all
Christians till another Council as General and Free reverse their Decrees. 4.
And will have them have such Obedience as all other Courts. For mere Councils
of Bishops of several Kingdoms are no Courts, and have no proper Jurisdiction.

Chap. II. Why Parliaments and Archbishop Abbot and the Church of England
Antecedent to A. Bishop Laud, were against the Design of Coalition with Rome.
1. IT was not because they were Enemies to Christian Concord, or did not
desire it on lawful possible terms with Papists and all others; Nor was it
because they were maliciously bent to be cruel to the Papists, by denying them
the common Love which is due to Mankind, or any Benefits or Peace which was
consistent with the Nations Peace and Safety. But it was on such Reasons as
these following.

2. I. They took the design to be a real restoring of Popery under the Name of
Reconciliation and Peace; And they had an excuseable Opinion that if Popery
were set up, it was not laying by the Name, and calling it Reformation, or the
Church of England, that would deliver us from the Sin or Suffering. They were
not of the new Opinion, that none are Papists but those that would have the
Pope Absolute above General Councils, and Govern Arbitrarily against the
Canons: They took the foundation of Popery to be the Heresy that the whole
Church on Earth must have one Sovereign or Supreme Government, with Universal
Legislative and Judicial and Executive Power under Christ, in which it must be
United or made One Church. This they took to be Antichristian, the intolerable
Treasonable Usurpation of an Impossible thing, tending to the Confusion of
Mankind. But whether this Traitorous Sovereignty should be Monarchical or
Aristocratical, in Pope or Councils feigned to be General, or in both Conjunct,
and when Conjunct whether the Pope should be above the Council, or the Council
above the Pope, or each have a Negative Voice, or he have but the Calling and
Presiding Power; They took these to be but several sorts of Popery, or
differences among the Papists themselves. And they took it for a ridiculous
absurdity that a Council of men dead an Hundred or a Thousand Years ago (and
that only of men of one Empire called by their own Prince) should be taken for
the Vnifying Constitutive Sovereign Power of the Universal Church which now
existeth, and that the Body can live many Hundred Years after the Head is dead,
and yet be a Church of the same Species.

And for them that say the Bishops of all the Earth have a Jus Conveniendi and
are a Virtual Council, It is but to say (could they prove it) that they are a
Virtual Head, and not an Actual, and so that we have no Actual Universal
Church, but a Virtual.

And as for the new Dream that they are Actually the Supreme Unifying Power,
and Actually Govern the whole Christian World per literas format as, it is a sad
case with Christians when such deliration needs a confutation, and sadder if
such a Land or Clergy as ours must remedilesly Perish by believing or following
such a Dream. Shall all the Bishops of Asia, Africa, Europe and America, out of
the Dominions of the Turks, Persians, Tartarians, Indians, Papists,
Protestants, Abassines, etc. meet in despite of their involuntary forbidding
Princes? How, and by whose Call, and where and when? in how long time; and who
shall bear their Charges from next to the Antipodes, or from Abassia, Mexico,
etc. Must they be old Men fit for Council, or Boys fit for Travel, when the age
of a Man will scarce serve for their coming together, their business, and their
return, and execution? And what is all this to do? Is it to make new Universal
Laws? Has not Christ in Nature and Scripture given us enough for the Practice of
Christianity, without all this ado of Congregating Bishops for Legislation all
over the World? Oh that these Lawmakers would keep Christ's Laws? And if it be
for mutable Circumstances, is not every Church or Country sufficient for such
variable Determinations? Must men come from the Antipodes, Ethiopia or Turkey,
to tell me here what Clothes I must wear, or what place or time I shall Preach
in, or what Tune to Sing in, etc.

But if they must not meet, what Messengers must be sent to them all over the
World to gather their Votes? How shall we be sure that they truly state all the
Cases to them? And that they truly bring us back their Judgments? And that
those Judgments were truly past without hearing what could be said against
them? And is every single Bishop infallible; or the Majority only? and how
shall it be known what the Majority said? And whither shall all their collected
Votes be carried, and to whom? Is it to every Christian, or to every Bishop?
And how many Ages will this require?

And if it be not for Legislation but Judgment, if the Question be whether A.
B. be a Heretic, or C. D. be a Fornicator, etc. who shall bear the Messengers
Charges that must go through the World to all the Bishops to decide it? And
shall the Cause be tried without witnesses, or hearing the defense of the
accused? And must the accused and witnesses go through all the World? Reader,
is it not a shame to confute such Dreams? Had not I tried in with the Leading
Men I should have taken him for a Slanderer that had said that any English Dr.
and Bishop should maintain that the Collegium Pastorum through the World, is
that summa Potestas under Christ, which has the Chief Government of the
Universal Church in Unity, per literas formatas, and that our Concord lies
only in obeying this Power, and it is Schism not to unite in such Obedience.

3. II. Moreover the former Church of England and Parliaments thought that the
Oath of Supremacy which excluded a Foreign Jurisdiction, did mean as well the
Foreign Jurisdiction of the Pope as President of a Council, and that Council
with him, and of the Pope as Patriarch and Principium Vnitatis, and of the
Bishops of Italy, Spain, France, Poland, Mexico, Turkey, etc. as of a Pope above
Councils. And they were not willing again to Subject the King and Kingdom to
Foreign Priests, nor to be cheated into Slavery by the bare Name of [the
Catholic Church] and the [ Ecclesiastical Government.]

4. III. And they indeed took the Pope to be the Antichrist, (specially for his
Usurping an Universal Kingdom or Governing Power proper to Christ) And
therefore were angry with Archbishop Laud and his Chaplains, for leaving out
all such words from the Liturgy to avoid the Pope's displeasure; of which Dr.
Heylin (ubi sup.) gives you an account. See but Bishop Downame's large Latin
Book to prove the Pope Antichrist, who yet has written the strongliest for
Diocesan Bishops of any man (in my Judgment) that ever I read.

5. IV. And they thought that the Doctrinal differences were very many and very
great (and in diverse Points I believe they thought them greater than they are)
see the huge Catalogue gathered by Bishop Downame in the End of the foresaid
Book; Morton, White, Whitaker, Abbot, Field, Sutliffe, Chaloner, Bernard,
Crakenthorpe, and abundance more chief Drs. of the old Church of England have
opened them at large. But how small the new Drs. made them to be Dr. Heylin
fully tells you. And Archbishop Bromhall says ( ubi sup. p. 72, 73. when all
these empty Names and Titles of Controversies are wiped out of the Roll, the
true Controversies between us, may be quickly Mustered, etc. (See the rest).

6. V. But none doubted but the Differences about Worship were unreconcileable
till one Party much changed their Forms of Worship: Their great Mass of
superstitious Inventions (if not Idolatry, as the Church of England thought,
(and Dr. Stillingfleet even of late has charged on them) Protestants could
never be reconciled to. But of A Bishop Laud's reconciling attempts in Worship,
See Heylin Vbi supra in his Life. And Archbishop Bromhall says, P. 141.
Speaking against Chillingworth's true way of Concord, [ That Form which the
Protestants would allow, the Romanists cry out on as defective in Necessary
Duties, and particularly wanting five of their Sacraments. Nay certainly to
call the whole frame of the Liturgy The Mass Book.
into Dispute, offers too large a Field for Contention; and is nothing so
likely a way for Peace, as either for us to accept of their Form The Mass Book.
, abating some such Parts of it as are Confessed to have been added since the
Primitive times, and are acknowledged not to be simply necessary but such as
charitable Christians ought to give up and Sacrifice to an Universal Peace, and
would do it readily enough, if it were not for mutual Animosities of both
Parties, and particular Interests of some Persons.]

7. VI. And they thought it as unlawful to obey the Pope as Patriarch of the
West, or as President with his Council, if he imposed on us the Mass, or the
Worship of Angels, Dead Men, or Images, or any new Sacraments or unlawful
things, as if he did it as above General Councils.

8. VII. And they made no doubt but if the Pope and his Foreign Councils (and
all his attendant Trumpery) were once received as Principium Vnitatis
Vniversalis and the President of Councils, he would soon come in, in the same
Capacity that other Popish Countries do receive him.

9. VIII. For they knew that it is that same Man that is more absolute in
Popish Kingdoms, who would submit to some restraint in this: And that by
Possession, Agents, and that foreign help, he would easilier reduce this to the
Case of others, than the Case of any others to this.

10. IX. They had not lost the Remembrance of the Spanish Invasion, the
Gunpowder Plot, and the many Treasons of late by such committed; and it made
them fear both the Power and the Company of such a sort of men.

11. X. They remembered the heavy Taxes, Oppressions and the Rebellions and Wars
that had been in the times of Popery in England. And they had felt the ease and
sweetness of Deliverance, and were loath to return to that Captivity again.

12* XI. They had not forgotten Queen Mary's Days; Fox's Book of Martyrs was in
the hands of many: Nor had they forgot the French Massacre, or the greater
Murders formerly committed by Wolves in Sheepskins, who were known by their
bloody Fangs and Jaws.

13. XII. They saw that the same Clergymen who were for this Union with Rome,
were the chief Defenders of the King's absolute Power of raising Money without
Parliaments (as the known History of Abbot's Dejection, and Laud's Sibthorp's,
and Mainwaring's Cases show.) And this made them the lother to draw nearer
Popery.

14. XIII. They found the Power of the Clergy in the High Commission, and their
Courts and Councils so uneasy to them, that they greatly feared so great an
increase of it as the Coalition with Rome would cause.

15. XIV. They found that the Papists and reconciling Prelates were the
greatest Enemies to them whom they accounted the most Godly serious Christians,
Ministers and Laymen, not only Nonconformists, but such as they devised to
call conformable Puritans. And they were not for Uniting their strength against
serious practical Piety.

16. XV. They found that the profane Drunkards and ignorant Rabble greatly
rejoiced in the Bishops prosecuting such Puritans; And were loath to see them
much more so animated, by the Coalition with Rome.

17. XVI. They found so great a number of the Clergy that were for the
Coalition and Enemies to the Puritans, to gape so greedily after Preferment,
and live such indifferent lives, and Preach so unprofitably, and do so little
to cure the ignorance of the People, as made them fear, much worse, if we came
nearer the Roman Clergy, who are so much for blind obedience, and cherishing
ignorance that they may Rule.

18. XVII. They did not perceive that the Case of any Popish Country, Italy,
Spain, Portugal, Austria, Bavaria, Poland, no, nor France, was so much better
than ours as might tempt us to be liker to them than we are. Yea, that the best
of them both in Civil and Religious Respects are so much worse, as may well
deter us from such desires.

19. XVIII. And it is not to be doubted but they made some Conscience of their
Obligations to the King, and were loath he should be tempted to give away half
the Government of his Kingdom, yea, of himself to Foreigners, under the Name of
Ecclesiastical Government, (by such Courts as theirs.)

20. XIX. And no doubt they remembered what Doctrine against Kings and States
are subject to the Church and Pope, their Councils and Drs. do assert, and what
they have done to their disturbance and destruction. And therefore were loath to
give any more strength and advantage to men of such Principles and Pretensions.
If the Pope will give a Protestant King fair quarter, and promise him freedom
from his Tyranny, while the same man (according to his Canons) lays claim to
more, and exercises Tyranny in other Lands, he may soon break his Promise here.

21. XX. And no doubt but they saw how loath other Princes and States were to
return nearer Rome, that had once escaped, and to subject themselves to such a
Usurper: And they thought it unwise and unsafe for England to stand alone in a
singular odd condition, neither Papists, nor such Reformers as any of the rest,
and so to be strengthened by a Concord and hearty Friendship with neither.

22. XXI. And it is not to be doubted but the Lords and Gentlemen of England,
were unwilling to give up all their Abbey Lands, as long as they thought a
sufficient Ministry competently provided for: And unwilling to take the Pope or
Clergies promises for security for the continuance of their Possessions, yea
and to save them from being burnt as Heretics.

23. XXII. And no doubt but common reason told them how great a part of England
(not the unwisest nor the worst) would refuse consent to the Coalition with
Rome, and the nearer approaches when imposed, and therefore what a doleful
increase it would make of our Divisions: If we are so sadly divided already by
a few Oaths and Promises, and New Covenants and Formalities, and Church
Judicatures, how many hundred thousand more would dissent, if all were imposed
which the new Churchmen judge necessary to the Union with Rome?

24. And these would unavoidably draw on a grievous Persecution: For when all
this stir, loss, cost and hazard had been made to bring on such a general
Concord, Dissenters would not have been endured by the Clergy, when yet they
would be multiplied.

25. And how much such a Division and Persecution would weaken the Kingdom,
they that did not believe Christ (that a Kingdom divided against it self cannot
stand) might easily know by reason and the Worlds experience.

26. On such accounts as these the two sorts of Episcopal Conformists differed,
and the old Tribe called then the Church of England, resisted the endeavors
made by Bishop Laud and such as A. Bishop Bromhall, and the rest that were for
a Coalition with Rome. Till the latter got into the chiefest Chairs, and then
they called, their side The Church: And thus Church and Church here began our
strife. And the difference twisted with the Civil differences between King and
Parliament, widened and utterly exasperated by War (the A. Bishop of Canterbury
beheaded, and the A. Bishop of York being in Arms for the Parliament) each
Party claims the name of the Church of England: And the Party that is
uppermost does it with advantage; while sober men know that denominating a
Forma as existent in Materia capaci seu disposita, the Church of England is
nothing but a Protestant Sovereign, and a Protestant Kingdom of Subjects guided
by Protestant Ministers of the Word, Sacraments, and Keys.

So that in the Reign of King James, and of any Papist King, there was, and can
be no Protestant Kingdom or National Church, deficiente forma denominante, in
the Judgment of those Royalists that think Parliaments have no part in the
Legislation and Sovereignty: And according to them that think otherwise, it is
but a National Church secundum quid, in respect to the Power of Parliaments and
Laws.

But Particular Churches, Parochial, and Confederate, and Diocesan may yet
continue their Constitutive causes continuing: But not an informed National
Church.

Chap. III. They are deceived who are for the foresaid Papal or
Council-Jurisdiction, as if it were the way of Unity or Catholicism.
1. I Doubt not but the desireableness of Universal Concord is it which draws
many honest well-meaning men into the esteem of the Papal or
Conciliar-Jurisdiction. All things have a tendency to Aggregation or Unity as
Perfection; and nothing more than Christian Love. This held such good men of
old as Bernard, Gerson, etc. from favoring the Reformers, thinking that the
Papacy was necessary to Unity: This kept such as Erasmus and Cassander from
forsaking them: And this turned Wicelius, Grotius and others to them: And no
doubt but this inclines many in England to the French kind of
Church Government, and to approve, and follow Grotius. But they quite cross
their own desires.

2. Catholicism or Universal Concord consists in that which all the Christian
Church is constituted by, and in which all true Christians have still agreed;
Quod ab omnibus ubique and semper receptum fuit, as Vincent Lerinensis
speaks. The Baptismal Profession and Covenant expounded in the Creed, the
Lord's Prayer as the Rule of our Desires, and Hope, the Decalogue as the sum of
Duty, with the History of Christ's Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection and
Doctrine in the Gospel-writers, the practice of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
with Church Assemblies, for Teaching and Learning, Praying, and Praising God,
and this under Elders called thus to Guide their Flocks, with the belief of all
the rest of the Sacred Scriptures which are brought to our knowledge: This has
been ab omnibus, ubique and semper receptum: All Christians agree herein: And
in the observation of the Lord's day as a separated time for Sacred Assemblies.
And some Ceremonies and other little things most of them agreed in, but not as
necessary to their Unity, or Communion, but such as some differed about without
violation of Christian Love and Peace, as Socrates and Sozomen show in diverse
Instances, and of diverse Countries.

At this day All the Churches agree in these: And this much constituteth men
true Christians: And Christ has commanded all Christians to Love one another,
and Live in Peace; and the strong to receive the weak, and not offend the least
Believers, nor to please themselves, but others to their edification. The
Kingdom of God (which is his Church) is not meat and drink, but Righteousness,
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and he that in these things serves Christ,
pleases God, and is (or should be) approved of men.

I have proved all this so fully in my Book called The true and only Way of the
Concord of all the Churches, that I here dismiss it.

3. But when this pretended Universal Humane Jurisdiction was set up, it
quickly divided the Catholic Church, by making new Laws and Constitutions, as
if Christ's Laws had not been sufficient for Universal Concord; and as if he
that made Ministers the Teachers and Expounders of his own Laws, had given them
his Prerogative of Universal Legislation and Judgment. And ever since then the
Church has been torn into those fractions which continue our shame and grief
to this day. Those that were ready to receive any Law from Christ by his
Apostles, would never all agree in Humane pretended Universal Jurisdiction, nor
in the Laws which such pretenders make: Mutable, Local and Temporary
determinations of useful Circumstances, by their several Guides, suited to the
time and place for Edification, they submit to. But Universal Lawmakers they
will never all acknowledge and own, And their Canons are swelled to so great a
bulk, and are so confounded with contradictions and uncertainties, that they
are Racks and Engines to tear the Church (but utterly incapable of being the
Rule of Unity and Universal Concord.)

4. The thing which Paul feared has been our Ruin. The Serpent which beguiled
Eve (by pretense of advancement and greater knowledge) has turned us from the
simplicity that is in Christ. The primitive Unity is overthrown by departing
from the primitive Purity, Simplicity, and Love of all. And they that will ever
hope for Universal Concord, must endeavor the restoration of the Universal
Terms and Temper. Nothing next to fleshly and worldly lusts, has done so much
to cut the Church into all the Sects which now remain as in a Religious War, as
this same pretended Universal Jurisdiction, which our new Churchmen mistake
for the only cure: Which I have fully proved in my Breviate of the History of
Bishops and Councils, and in the Vindication of it against the Accusations of
Mr. Morris.

5. Obj. The Scripture gives but general Rules, ( that all be done to
edification, decently and in order) but there must be Laws of Discipline to
determine in Specie what is for edification, decency and order.

Ans. There are three sorts of these determinations: 1. Of things necessary or
meet for all the Christian World to be obliged to: 2. Things meet for some
Countries to be obliged to: 3. Things variable, which Congregations may use
variously, and also change as occasion changes. It grieveth us to read how
some Learned men that write on this Subject, abuse the World by confounding
these.

The first Christ has determined sufficiently in the Scripture, and no mortal
men have any power to make Laws Ecclesiastical or Civil to bind all the World.

The second of these the King may determine by the Counsel of fit men who
understand the case; e. g. what Translation of the Bible in the English Tongue
is fittest to be commonly used in the Public Churches. And if the King
determine it not, the Pastors in Synods may do it by way of voluntary consent,
but not as having as a Major Vote the Regiment of the Minor, and of the absent
or dissenters.

The third belongs to every Pastor over his own Flock, and may be altered as
there is occasion; viz. At what hour to meet, how long to Pray and Preach, in
what words, and variable methods; what person to admit to Baptism as fit, and
to Church Communion; and what individual to Reprove, Exhort, Catechize,
Excommunicate, etc. A General or Provincial Council need not be called for any
such thing as these.

6. Says Dr. Beveridge, Proleg. That which Right Reason gathers from Scripture
is of God, for Right Reason is of God.

Ans. True: But to gather it as Governors of all the World, or of other men's
charges (as if the Right Reason of the King of France would give Laws to the
King of England,) is one thing; and to gather it by a discerning Judgment to
teach our Flocks as Expositors, or to guide our own Practice, is another thing.

7. The Instance which he adds of the Trina Immersio in Baptism, shows that
such things were never made Laws for the Universal Church; for the Church never
used them universally, nor continued them, but quickly changed them.

8. Ibid. Says Dr. Beveridge, General Councils are those to which all the
Bishops of the whole World were called: It Is not necessary that they be all
there, but that all be called, and may come, if they will. But the five
Patriarchs must be there, or send their Letters. There was no General Council
which was not called by the Emperors command.

Ans. 1. All the Bishops of the World were never called to any Council, nor
near all. 2. What Authority had the Roman Emperors to call Bishops out of other
Princes Dominions? 3. There is no Historical proof that ever they did any such
thing. 4. The Subscriptions of the Councils show that the Bishops were only out
of the Roman Provinces (except some odd person, as Joannes Persidis at Nice,
which no man can give account of.) 5. Half the Bishops of the Empire were not
at the Councils. 6. If calling them make a Council General, though they come
not, then calling a Congregation, though they come not, makes it a
Congregation: What if none come? What if few come? Who knows how many must
come to make it a General Council?

9. Against what I have proved against Johnson alias Terret, that Councils were
General, but as to the Orbis Romanus, (as National) I never heard but one
Objection regardable, and that is, out of T^rrians or Pisanus Arabic Canons of
the Council of Nice, which place Ethiopia under Alexandria: But, 1. Dr.
Beveridge and many others have told us how little credit is to be given to
those Canons, lately vended by ignorant unlearned Men. And is it credible that
all the Eastern and Western Churches should be ignorant of them?

2. Ludolphus in his new Ethiopick History labors to prove that, the first
planting of Religion in Habassia was by Frumentius and Edesius, and that the
old Writers mistook Habassia for India: And if so, Habassia could ha^^ no
Bishop at Nice (and certainly had none there, nor any to be subject to
Alexandria, save Frumentius whom Athanasius ordained, and so by a voluntary
Submission depended on him, as a Child on his Father.

But whereas Ludolphus thinks Christianity was not in Habassia till Frumentius
days, because they had no Bishops or Pastors before; I answer, 1. His
Conjecture that it was Habassia that Frumentius went to, and is called India,
is uncertain. 2. He confesses the Ethiopick Tradition is that Christianity was
there before. 3. And it is not improbable that both agree, viz. That the
Eunuch, Act. 8. brought Christianity thither, but being a Lay man ordained no
Pastors, and so they had none before Frumentius. 4. But whoever well considers
the whole History of the Southern and Eastern Churches, may easily discern that
Habassia was never subject before to the Imperial Alexandria, but began their
subjection voluntarily to Dioscorus, who had been Patriarch of Alexandria,
after he was Banished.

10. It is a dreadful Judgment of God that the Understandings of Learned men
should be so far forsaken, as to make the Major part of the Christian World not
only the Pattern, but the Lawgivers to the rest, renouncing hereby the common
Experience of Mankind: It is God's great Mercy that all Christians agree in the
Essentials of Christianity: else they were not Christians. In Christianity we
are united to them all. But, 1. Even among the Heathens few were Philosophers;
And among the Philosophers few sound, and few of one Mind; And others, as well
as Seneca said, A wise man must be content with few Approvers: The Multitude
will not understa^^. 2. Even Nature makes but few Men of strong Wits. 3.
Education gives few Men the advantage of sound teaching, and great helps and
leisure. 4. Few Men have patience to hold on in hard Studies till they digest
the truth. 5. Few Men escape the snares of Temptations to bias them to some
corrupt opinions or way. 6. Few Men escape the fleshly worldly inclination,
which ever follows worldly interest. 7. He would be thought no Wise Man
himself, who would refer a Controversy about the Translation of a Hebrew or
Greek Text, or a difficulty in Divinity, Philosophy, Astronomy, Criticism, etc.
to the Major Vote of the University or Ministers of England, (or Drs. either;)
K. James had more wit than to make the Majority of the Clergy the Judges of his
Translation of the Bible. 8. We see among Godly Persons what various degrees of
Knowledge and Virtue, and consequently different Opinions there be. 9. It Is
actually known that most of the Churches and Clergy in the World are very
ignorant and erroneous: The Abassines, Copthies, Syrians, Armenians, Georgians,
Circassians, Mengrelians, Greeks, Moscovites, generally unlearned Ignorant men:
The multitude of the Parish Priests among the Papists are so: And too many
among the Protestants. If King James had not chosen Six extraordinary men for
the Synod of Dort, there had been worse work there than was.

And must we condemn God's Law of Insufficiency to be the Universal Law, that
we may come under the Universal Legislation of such men as these? Should we not
rather pity and pray for the Ignorant erroneous Majority of Churches, and study
how the few that are wiser, may help them into a clearer light?

And how should it be otherwise? who chooses the Clergy? In a great Part of
the Churches the Turk who is their Enemy chooses them, or as bad: He receives
into the Patriarchates of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem,
unlearned Fellows that give most Money, and they dare not displease him: And
all the Bishops of his Dominions in the entrance and exercise of their Office
accordingly are liable to corruption by servile dependence on the Infidels. In
Moscovy and other Countries ignorant and barbarous or tyrannical Rulers choose
them. Among Papists and Protestants, the Pope and Princes choose the Bishops,
and Lay-Patrons choose the Priests, for the most part.

11. To Unite in Sin (as the necessary terms of Universal Concord) is foolish
and sinful. But to Unite in all that is held by the greater part of Christians
is to Unite in much Sin -- Ergo --

12. It is only Universal Laws which are the Rule of necessary Universal
Concord: But it is only Christ's own Laws (Proclaimed and Recorded by the
Spirit in his Apostles and Evangelists) which are Universal Laws, Ergo it is
only Christ's own Laws which are the Rule of necessary Universal Concord.

I challenge all the Church Usurpers in the World to answer this Argument,
better than by deceiving words.

The Major is grounded on the natural Notice of Mankind. It is Duty only which
we speak of. Duty is made Duty by a Law, or Command of Authority: Universal
Duty must be made such by an Universal Law.

The Minor is thus proved. No Universal Law can be made but by a rightful
Universal Lawmakers. But there is no rightful Universal Lawmakers but Christ:
Ergo no Universal Law can be made but by Christ.

The Major is undeniable. The Minor is thus proved.

1. None can be a rightful Universal Lawmakers but such as has a rightful
Universal Power of Government, and that in Sovereignty: (For Legislation is the
first and chief part of Sovereignty.) But none but Christ has a rightful
Universal Power of Government or Sovereignty. Ergo -- Minor, None can be a
rightful Universal Governor or Lawmakers, to whom God never gave such Power:
But God never gave such Power to any but Christ: Ergo, etc.

None can be a rightful Universal Lawgiver and Governor who is naturally
incapable of it: But all on Earth are naturally incapable of it. Ergo, etc.

If there be any rightful Universal Governor on Earth, it is either a Pope, or
some Patriarchs, or a General Council, or the Pastors of all the Church on
Earth diffused: But it is none of these Four (as I have often proved, and am
ashamed to repeat.)

Chap. 4. The Deceits that are Pleaded for an Universal Humane Sovereignty.
1. THE great means by which the Popish Clergy have been themselves deceived,
and then deceived much of the Christian World, are especially these following.

I. By a false Notion of the Unity of the Catholic Church: As if it were
Vnified by One Humane Political Sovereignty Monarchical or Aristocratical (Pope
or Universal Council) which has Power of Governing all Christians on Earth, by
Universal Legislation and Judicature; and not only by Christ, who indeed is its
only Universal Governor.

II. By extolling Monarchy as the best means of Unity; and so inferring the
Papal Monarchy; so did Carolus Boverius to our late King Charles in Spain: As
if Princes were so weak as not to distinguish a National and a Universal
Monarchy? Let them try this Argument with any Papist King on Earth [ Monarchy
is the best Government. Ergo there should be One Monarch of all the Earth,
whose Subject you and all other Kings must be] and see whether they will be so
fooled into Subjection.

III. By dreaming of such a difference between Civil Government and Church
Government, that though no man in his wits pleads for one Humane King (or
Senate) to Govern the whole Earth by the Sword; yet it is our Religion to be
for and under One Sovereign Church Governor (Pope or Senate) of all the Earth:
whereas he is unfit to Govern one Church, who knows not that It is more
impossible for the whole Earth to be Governed by One Church Sovereign (Pope or
Council) than by one King or Parliament by the Sword.

IV. By confounding the Universal Roman Empire and Church, and the Universal
World, and dreaming that what is said of the first was said of the last: and
when the Church is called Catholic or Universal, and Councils General, only as
to the Roman Empire, they would persuade men that it is meant of all the World.

V. By pleading that Possession which Pope and Patriarchs, and Councils had in
the Empire, as if it obliged the same Countries to them when they are fallen
under other Princes. And by pleading to the same Ends all the Possession which
Popes, or Patriarchs, or Councils have got by deceiving any Nations of the
World.

VI. By mistaking the Nature and Extent of the Pastoral Office; because as
every Christian, so every Pastor is related to the Universal Church, therefore
they gather that there is one College or Council consisting of all Bishops in
the World (the Pope being President) who as an Aristocracy must soveraignly
Govern all the Christian World, by Legislation and Judgment: As if because
Physicions are Licensed to Practice any where in the Land, as they are called,
therefore, they might gather into a General Council and Command all the Land to
obey them as Law givers, in all Matters of Health and Physic? and might invade
the Hospitals at their pleasure? And so all the Churches and Church Affairs on
Earth must be governed by Priests of Foreign Lands.

VII. By first mistaking, and then falsely claiming Apostolical Power: Because
Christ chose a few whom he first personally taught his Will, and then endowed
with the Gift of Infallibility, by his Spirit, to Preach first and Record
after, his Doctrine and Laws, to oblige all the World; therefore they pretend
that ordinary Bishops who had no such Spirit, Office or Commission, may also
make Laws to bind all the World. And when every single Apostle had this Office,
Power and Spirit, but they yet a while lived together at Jerusalem, till their
dispersion, they pretend that at Jerusalem they were a General Council, and
that all Bishops therefore may Govern as a General Council: whereas the
Apostles Mission was Indefinite, and not Universal, (else they had sinned in
not going into all the World.) And it was easy to Guide the Universal Church,
while it was almost all at Jerusalem or near them. And their Office as to
Legislation differs from common Pastors, as Moses the Legislator's did from
the Priests, who were but to govern by his Laws, and not to make more.

VIII. By pretending a necessity of Judging and Ending Controversies, and
therefore of having one deciding Judge or Judicature for all the World. As if
any would be so mad as ever to expect that all Controversies about the
Mysteries of Supernatural Revelation and the unseen World should be ended in
this Life: As if Ignorance would be without Error. And is he a Man that
knows not how little it is that the wisest know? and how much Ignorance all
Mankind is guilty of? Have these Pretenders yet ended Controversies? Are there
not many Horse-Loads of Volumes of Controversies among themselves? Have they
yet written any Infallible or Determining Commentary on the Bible? Did not St.
Paul write, Romans 14. and 15, etc. for bearing with tolerable Differences. Is it
not the Great Wisdom and Mercy of God to lay men's Salvation upon a few plain
things, though a multitude besides remain as Controversies. Christ will decide
them all at the Great approaching Judgment: And is there any on Earth that can
decide them all? that has either so great Knowledge, or so Universal a
decisive Power? Why is the Christian World these Thousand or Twelve hundred
Years divided into Greeks, Armenians, Nestorians, Jacobites, Papists,
Protestants, etc. if there be a Humane Judicature to End all Controversies? And
are such Popes as reigned from a Thousand to Fifteen hundred, and such Bishops
as made up their Councils, (Men of Ignorance and Vice) fit to end all
Controversies on Earth.

IX. In order to these Ends they make a great cry of the Sects and Divisions
which are among Protestants, to draw men that love Unity to come for it to the
Church of Rome.

And first they impudently falsify the History of the Matter of Fact, and
persuade Men that the Differences among Protestants are ten times greater than
they are. They have thus pleaded it to my face when I had a Pastoral Charge at
Kidderminster: where we were all of one Religion and lived in love and Peace,
and had not one separating Assembly in a great Town and Parish; And where to
this day they live in Piety, Love and Peace, and I hear not of one person that
for any difference, breaks this bond of brotherly love, and lives in any
opposition to the rest. Yet Strangers are told, that we are mad in religious
Sects and Strife. Indeed zealous people that account all the Matters of the
World, but trifles in Comparison of things everlasting, do make a greater
Matter of them, than men of no Religion do. If among them one or two turn to
any dangerous Sect or Course, it stirs up much censure and opposition, when in
undisciplined Churches corrupted like the common World, multitudes in a Parish
may abstain from Sacraments, and in Coffee-Houses or at Visits familiarly talk
against the Immortality of the Soul, and against the Scripture and all serious
Religion, and it makes no great noise. An Act of Fornication once in many
Years among chaste religious persons, is a Scandal scarce ever to be expiated;
when among known Stews it is little talked of. Weeds are not suffered in a
Garden: But in the Commons who pulls them up? And what wonder if they strive
most about Religion who value it most? Dogs will fight for Bones and Carrion,
and Swine for Draff: But Men will sooner fight for Gold and Pearls, while Dogs
and Swine like peaceable Creatures pass them by, or tread them in the Dirt.

All true Christians are agreed in all that God has made necessary to
Christianity and Salvation: And no men on Earth were ever so wise, as to be
agreed of the meaning of every word besides in the Bible* Much less in all that
Usurping Universal Legislators will obtrude.

What a dismal noise and dangerous rupture does the Controversy make now about
Conformity in Britain? And what is our difference* We are all agreed, 1. That
there is only one God, the Governor of all the World, and of his Attributes.
2. That Man's Soul is immortal, and that he has another life after this to
live, and Heaven or Hell must be his end. 3. That Jesus Christ God and Man, is
the only Savior, and Lord of all. 4. That the Law of God is the chief
indispensible Rule of our Faith and Life, by which we must be judged. 5. That
we must live soberly, righteously and godly, loving God above all, and our
neighbors as our selves, and doing as we would be done by, superiors Ruling
for God, and inferiors obeying them under God; but none having power above him
or against him. 6. That God only is the final Infallible Universal Judge of
Controversies: That Magistrates are Judges who shall be punished or protected
by the Sword. And Pastors are Judges who is fit for Communion in the Churches
under their oversight: And every man a discerning rational Judge of his own
duty. 7. That without holiness, righteousness and temperance, (or mortifying
the lusts of the flesh by the Spirit) no man can be saved. 8. That no man
should sin wilfully for any price, or to avoid any danger even of death. 9.
That the Soul should be more cared for than the Body. 10. That no man can love
God and Holiness too much, nor obey him too faithfully. 11. That we should
delight in the Law of the Lord (and his Gospel) and meditate in it day and
night. 12. That serious, servent and faithful prayer is our daily ordinary
duty. 13. That we should live as we would be judged, and daily prepare for
death, that we may be found ready. 14. That we should use all worldly temporal
things for spiritual everlasting ends, knowing that else they are but vanity,
vexation and dangerous snares. 15. That we should fetch our joy from the hopes
of Heaven more than from all the possessions, pleasures and hopes on Earth.

These, and abundance more, we are commonly as to Profession agreed on: And
though this in sincerity will serve for our acceptance with God and our
Salvation, it will not serve for our acceptance or toleration with some men,
nor to avoid the cry of scandalous, intolerable Schism, Disobedience,
Obstinacy, and what men mind to charge upon us: Yea, though we are agreed that
Rulers in their several places must be obeyed in all things that are not
against the Law of God in Nature or Scripture.

But what now is the difference, I will add that if every Conformist and
Nonconformist in England were of so (unattainable) perfect knowledge as to be
agreed of the sense of every Syllable in the Bible, it would not serve to end
our Differences, nor keep us from Prisons, Silencing, and the present heavy
Accusations.

Wonder not at it: It Is an evident Truth. Our Difference is, 1. About the
meaning of some Oaths, Declarations, and subscribed Professions and Promises
imposed by Acts of Parliament. 2. About the meaning of several Rubricks and
other Words in the Liturgy and Book of Ordination. 3. About the meaning and
practice of several Canons.

Gods Law has agreed us all that Lying deliberately is a sin, and so is
Perjury, especially of thousands, and so is the wilful depraving of Baptism and
other Ordinances of God, and so is the unjust Excommunicating of the Faithful,
and denying them Baptism and the Lords Supper, and so is Sacrilege, and
Renouncing the Sacred Ministry when we are Vowed to it; and so is Schismatical
Dividing Christ's Church by needless and unlawful Snares and Engines. All these
we are agreed are heinous sins, not to be done for any Price. But we are
utterly disagreed whether to Conform would make us guilty of these sins. But
what! Are Learned men such miserable Casuists as not to know what Lying,
Perjury, Sacrilege, Profaning Baptism, Sinful Excommunicating, etc. are? We
differ about the sense of the Words Imposed, and of the Law and Canons: And
then how should we know who is the Sinner?

But Qu. Who is it that wresteth them from their usual signification? And who
is it that dare not do it?

But the Sacred part of the Imposers cry up the necessity of a Judge of
Controversies, (yea an Universal Judge, some of them,) to Expound the
Scriptures when men differ about the sense; and will not they procure you an
Exposition of a few controverted sentences in the Laws, or endeavor it, if
that be necessary to understand or end your Differences? Ans. No; whatever
comes of it, to Bodies or Souls, to Church or Kingdom, these Expositors of
Scripture and Enders of Controversies will not so much as Petition the
Lawmakers to explain their words. Yea though the Conformists are much
disagreed about it among themselves. Judges will decide particular Causes by
the Law: But to know the sense of the Law antecedently as our Rule, which is
required in one that Swears and Subscribeth to it, can be by no ones
Exposition but the makers of the Law. Else the Judges were the only Lawmakers:
For the sense is the Law: And he makes the Law that makes the sense, and not
they that make the words alone, which other men must put the sense on.

And if Popes, or Councils, Prelates or Priests, could on pretense of a
Judicial Expository Authority be Judges to all the Earth in what sense every
word of Scripture must be understood, it is they and not God that make the Law:
For God made but the words, if this be true, and the Bishops make the sense by
pretense of judging of it. To give an Universal Antecedent Obligatory
Exposition, is an Act of Legislation, and none but the Lawmakers himself can do
it. But to judge by this Law who shall be received, and who shut out of their
several Churches, the Pastors must do that.

X. Another great deceit is, by confounding Communion and Concord, with
Government and Subjection: And arguing that because all Christians must have
Concord and Communion, therefore they must be under one Supreme Humane
Government: As if Christian Princes were not as much bound to Concord as any
men on Earth? Or as if that Concord must be kept by one Supreme Universal
Senate or Monarch, and mutual Consultation and voluntary Agreement would not
serve.

Obj. But if God bind us to do all things in Concord, and General Councils and
Patriarchs determine the matter of our Concord, it comes all to one, in point
of Obligation?

Ans. 1. If it come all to one in the effect, why do you contend for so much
more in the Cause?

2. God binds Princes and States as much to Concord, and yet their voluntary
Treaties and Dyets, and a Supreme Government over them, do not come all to one.

3. God does not bind all Churches or Christians to agree in more than he
himself has commanded them. And therefore has given power to none on Earth,
to determine what more all shall agree in.

4. The Greater the Councils are caeteris paribus the more all Protestants
reverence them, because they signify the Concord of many: But, 1. We know that
there are none of them Universal as to the World, nor ever are like to be. 2.
We know that the Greater part are usually the worst; and that at this day the
far greater number of Christians on Earth (Papists, Greeks, Armenians,
Nestorians, Jacobites, etc.) are lamentably degenerate, ignorant and corrupt.
3. And we know that as God has not made the greater number the Governors of
the lesser, so neither does he bind or allow the less to consent to them to
their hurt. 4. And when Councils for mere Agreement, will degenerate, and Usurp
a Regiment over Dissenters, they change their Species, and bind us, not to obey
them, but oppose them as Usurpers.

XI. The last deceit that I shall here name is, Their pretense of the mischief
of letting Sinful or Heretical Kingdoms go unpunished, when singular Persons
must not escape: Therefore there must be a Supreme Power on Earth to correct or
punish National Churches or Kingdoms.

You may find the Argument in Dr. Sawell, (Bishop Guning's Chaplain, and Master
of a College in Cambridge) and many others.

This is so plain dealing that one would think all Kings and Kingdoms should
easily understand it.

But I answer it. 1. Why will this pretended necessity of correcting Kings and
Kingdoms infer One Universal Church Sovereign any more than one King or Senate
over all the Earth?

Perhaps you will say, The Church is one, but Kingdoms are many. I answer, The
whole World on Earth is One Kingdom of God, but particular Churches are many.

2. Kings and whole Kingdoms shall be punished as well as singular Persons: But
only by God the Universal King; or by permitted Enemies, but not by any Humane
Superior Governors. Kings are under the Laws of God and they shall be judged by
those Laws: If you lived in the due expectation of Death and Judgment, you
would not think them insignificant words, that the Just Universal Judge is as
at the Door, who only can Judge Kings.

3. The Ministers of Christ who know them, and live under them, have sufficient
Authority to admonish Kings and Kingdoms, and exercise Pastoral Care of their
Souls, by Preaching and Applying the Word of God; as their own Physicians are
fittest to take care of their Health, without sending to Rome, or over all the
Earth for a Council of Physicians. What work these Universal Rulers have made
by Excommunicating Kings and Interdicting Kingdoms, History acquainteth us: It
has not been such as should make any Man long for an Universal Church
Governor of Kings and Kingdoms.

4. Those Foreigners that think Kings and Kingdoms Heretical, and prove it, may
renounce Communion with them without pretending to be their Governors.

I have thought meet here briefly to repeat our Controversy, with the Reasons
and Deceits of the Usurpers; our own Judgment is for true Catholicism, even one
Catholic Head, Jesus Christ, one Catholic Church having no other Head or
Sovereign, One Spirit, One Faith, One Baptism, One Hope of Glory, and One God
and Father of all: And that all Christians should live in Love to others as
themselves, and in their several Churches under the just conduct of their
several Pastors, keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
That they should all know those that labor among them, and are over them in
the Lord, and highly esteem them in love for their work sake, and be at peace
among themselves, 1 These. 5.12, 13. That the Kingdom of God is not Meat and
Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: And he that in
these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God and approved of men, (who
judge as God would have them judge.) Romans 14.17. But if God be forsaking the
West as far as he has done the East, and dementation prognosticate perdition,
the Kingdom above shall never be forsaken. And we look for a new Heaven and a
new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. And seeing all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of Persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness, looking for and hasting to the Coming of the day of God? 2 Pet.
3.11, 12.

Chap. V. What a Foreign Jurisdiction by Councils or the College of Bishops is,
the Mask being taken off.
MEthinks Princes and States, and Churches, should not be cheated into a state
of Subjection without ever considering or examining what it is: And methinks no
honest Bishops should be unwilling that it be truly understood.

I. Consider what an Universal Legislative Power includes. It plainly implies
the insufficiency of Gods Words and Laws to those Ends for which this power is
pretended. Whereas this is the very point of the Protestant Cause as
differenced from Popery, that God being the only Ruler of the whole World none
else can make Laws for the whole, but only such By Laws for their particular
Provinces (as Corporations do under the King) for undetermined Circumstances,
in which Kingdoms and Churches may freely differ.

II. By this the Peace of the Christian World will be laid on these variable
Circumstances: As if all the World were bound to wear such Garments as France
or England wear, etc.

III. By this the Legislative Power of every Kingdom is taken away in all
matters of Religion (which are our greatest things:) For it is the summa
potestas only that has the Legislative Power: At least no Inferior has any
but from and under the Supreme; nor may contradict them. Whereas even the
Decrees of our National Clergy are no Laws with us, till the King shall make
them Laws.

IV. By this no Man can tell what degree of Power these Foreigners will assume:
As the Popes Ecclesiastical Power is now extended to Testaments, Matrimony,
Adulteries, Church Lands, etc. Among Christians to whom all things are
sanctified, they may challenge almost all. And when it becomes a Controversy
who shall judge? Certainly the Supreme Power is the Supreme Judge of their own
Rights.

V. I think it will oblige Kings, Lords and all, when Summoned to Travel out of
their own Kingdoms as Malefactors to answer what accusations are brought
against them. For certainly a Supreme Judicature must have its Forum, where men
must be heard before they are Judged, and where all that are Summoned must
answer. Or else Kings and Kingdoms must become poor Subjects to any Fellow that
the Foreign Sovereign will make his Chancellor or Legate.

VI. Who knows not how much the Government and Peace of the State will
depend on the Government of such an Universal Church Governor? When they have
Excommunicated the King, will not the Subjects the more dishonor him, if they
take the Excommunicators Power to be Supreme? What work has the Pope made by
Excommunications? Kingdoms have been engaged in War by it against each other?
Yea Subjects against their Kings? Yea Sons have deposed their Fathers, as the
Emperor Henry's Case acquaints us. Yea when the Pope has not meddled, Bishops
Councils have basely deposed the best of Kings, as Ludov. Pius Case tells us,
and the Empress Maud's in England, etc. In ad ordine Spiritualia all will fall
into the Foreign Sovereigns hands. They must be the Soul, and Kings but the
Body.

VII. It will unavoidably follow that Kings and Kingdoms must be subjected to
Foreign Princes by this pretense of a Foreign Church Jurisdiction. For he
knows little of the World that knows not that to be true which Dr. Peter
Heylin (on the Creed; of the Cath. Church) cites out of Socrates, that since
Emperors were Christians all things depended on their beck or will: Will not
they choose Bishops or Rule in the choice? Will not they overruled the choice of
such as are to be sent to General Councils; as King James chose the Six that
went hence to Dort? Is it not known that it is the Excellency and Merit of our
Clergy to be obedient to the Kings Will? And is it not so in the rest of the
World? Therefore those Princes that can command the greatest number of
Bishops, will be Governors of all the rest of the World, both over their Souls
and Bodies.

VIII. I desire it may be well considered whether the Government of all Kings,
for Soul and Body, will not fall into the hands of Mahometans and Infidels, or
at least the contest prove hard between them and the Papists. For it is no
small number of Bishops that are in the Mahometans Dominions? Turks, Moors,
Persians, Indians, etc. And if they know once the advantage of numbers they can
make more when they will: Even one to every Christian Congregation. And as
Ludolphus tells us of the Patriarch of Alexandria, that any ignorant sorry
Fellow gets the place, that can purchase it by Favor and Money of the Turks,
so it is at Constantinople as to the overruling of the Choice.

But that is not the worst: But by our Subjecters Principles the five Patriarchs
have such a Power in Councils, that it is no Council without them, or the
greater part of them. And four of the five Patriarchs are Subjects of the Turk,
and the Pope is the fifth or first). And will not the Turk then choose them,
and so be Master of our Religion, and of all the Christian World? Or if the
Pope get the greater Number of Bishops the Matter will not be well amended; as
the Trent Council has assured us.

And when the Empire was over the West, the Emperor had a chief hand in
choosing Popes: And who knows how soon it may be so again, and the new way of
Cardinals be cast by? And so we shall be the Emperor's Subjects.

IX. We know already that the far greatest part of the Bishops of the World are
lamentably Ignorant and Erroneous Men, and keep up Error and Divisions in their
several Countries, viz. in Greece, Moscovie, Armenia, Syria, Abassia, etc. and
in Italy, Spain, Poland, Hungary, Germany, etc. And are we bound to obey them
because they are the greater number? In Council or out of Council they are the
same men. What Nation under Heaven has Bishops just of the Mind of these with
us in England? or so sound and judicious as ours have been, and some yet are?
And must our English Bishops give up their Judgments to an erroneous. Majority
abroad? Is that our thankfulness to God?

X. How little difference is it to us, whether e. g. Image Worship,
Transubstantiation or any Sin be commanded us by a Council, or by the Pope? or
by him as Absolute or as Patriarch of the West, and Principium Vnitatis?

XI. What can a Principium Unitatis signify in the Universal Church, but some
Governing Power and Unifying Prerogative? Who but the King can be Principium
Vnitatis in the Kingdom? The Question will not be whether the Pope shall be the
Universal Monarch, but only whether this Monarch's Power be Absolute and Total,
or Limited and Partial with his Council. And Church-Monarchs that have these
Thousand Years conquered Church-Parliaments already may do so still.

XII. If the Pope have not the Universal Supreme Government in the Intervals of
Councils there will be none. And if there have been none these Thousand Years
(which must follow their Opinion that end it as the Sixth Council) why should
it be new made now?

XIII. We know already that Grotius and his Party are for the Popes Government
in chief in the Intervals of Councils; but not Arbitrarily, but by the Canons.
And I have after named you a multitude of Canons already, which we cannot
lawfully obey.

XIV. It will make an endless Controversy in the World, what Councils shall be
approved and obeyed, and which not.

XV. If the Pope must preside, he will have it near him: He will not Travel to
Syria or Armenia, etc. but they must come to him: And wherever the Council is
called, the nearest Bishops will carry it by numbers against the remote, who
will be few.

XVI. None can expect that the Pope as Patriarch and Principium Vnitatis, will
do his part for nothing: And the riches of this Kingdom is little enough for
the King, Clergy, and People. We cannot spare that which Foreigners will expect
(and have done in this Land).

XVII. While the same Man that is here owned as Patriarch and Principium
Vnitatis, is owned as of greater Power in Italy, Spain, Germany, and other
Lands, he will be strengthened to bring us to Conformity with the rest; and in
time to obtain all his claim.

XVIII. Are Strangers like to be fitter Judges of the Matters of England,
Armenia, Habassia, etc. than the Rulers and Clergy of the several Kingdoms, who
know the Persons they must Judge, and can hear both sides speak, and examine
Witnesses? etc.

XIX. The old and famous General Councils were not called to Govern Foreigners
and all the World, but only the Empire that called them: And why should the
Church Government now be any other, than Collateral with the Civil.

XX. I again and again say, that we are Sworn by the Oath of Supremacy against
all Foreign Jurisdiction. And by the Corporation Act, the Vestry Act, the Act
of Uniformity, the Militia Act, and the Oxford Oath, the Church and Kingdom is
most solemnly bound, never to endeavor any Alteration of Government in Church
or State: And if subjecting King, Kingdom, and Church to a Foreign
Jurisdiction, of such as pretend to an Universal Supreme Legislative and
Judicial Power, be not an Alteration of the Government of Church and State, I
know not what is: Nor what is National Perjury if the National Endeavor or
Consent to such Subjection be not such.

Add to all this the unavoidable effects of this Opinion of the Universal
Sovereignty, viz. 1. It engages the Owners of it to condemn all the Protestant
Churches, because they own no Universal Sovereign, nor the Pope as Patriarch or
Principium Unitatis: yea, and to disown almost all the Churches of the World
besides the Papists, as Schismatical.

2. They must Condemn all the Protestant Martyrs who rejected the Pope
absolutely, as dying for Rebellion.

3. They must needs censure their own Princes and States as Rebels, who subject
not themselves to this Usurped Sovereignty.

4. They will pervert all the Scriptures for Unity, and Peace, and Obedience,
and interpret it, as meaning this Usurpation.

5. They will think it their Duty to use their best Endeavor to subject all
Men to the Usurpers.

6. They will lose their due Charity to all that Consent not to this
Subjection, taking them for Enemies to the Churches Unity and Peace, and Rebels
against this Sovereign Power.

7. No wonder if such become grievous Persecutors, and stir up Princes and
Rulers against such Christians as Schismatics and Enemies of Peace; And as Dr.
Saywell and Bishop Guning tell the World, that the meeting of such in
worshipping God are the Conventicles of Schismatics, and the Cause of all our
Plots and Divisions. And if Obedience to this Universal Sovereignty be (as they
say) the only Cure of Schism, they must hold all our Parish Assemblies too to
be Schismatical Conventicles, whose Pastors own not the Usurpation.

8. Thus as the Pope has been the grand Divider of the Christian World, by
setting up a false Head of Union, so will these Men destroy all Unity quantum
in se by setting up a Usurped Sovereignty, and a false Principium Vnitatis; and
will be the grand Schismatics to cure Schism.

9. They will by a false uncertain Universal Law-making, not only make Christ's
Laws insufficient, but make Christianity a mutable, growing, uncertain thing;
when no man shall be able to know which are the Church Laws, and when the
Volumes of them will be perfected, and no more added.

10. When the Churches are thus Divided and Persecuted, and sound Preachers
Silenced, the Persecutors will be hardened in impenitency, fathering all their
Mischiefs on Christ which they do against him, and making Christian Fidelity
odious as Rebellion and Schism.

And they will never be able in their way, so much as to satisfy impartial
men, how true Bishops may be known, and who ad esse must be the Choosers of
them; much less prove their Universal Sovereignty.

Chap. VI. The Grand Consequential Case, Whether it be lawful for the
Presbyters to swear Obedience to those Bishops, who profess Subjection to the
Foreign Jurisdiction of a Universal Sovereignty? or for the People to live in
Obedience and Communion with the Presbyters that do so?
1. I Wish this Case about such Subjection and Communion may never make the
second breach between Conformists and Nonconformists, much wider than the first
is made.

I. Suppose the French Bishops will abate Idolatry, Owning Transubstantiation,
Adoration of the Host, and of Saints and Images, Latin Service, will allow the
Cup in the Sacrament, Priests Marriage, leave indifferent all other things that
are not above Four hundred Years old, Qu. Whether is it lawful for the
Protestant Ministers and all the rest to Swear Obedience to these Bishops, and
to the Protestant Laity and all others to join in their Communion?

II. Suppose Archbishop Bromhall profess subjection to General Councils called
and moderated by the Pope as President, and to the Pope as Principium unitatis
Vniversalis and Patriarch of the West; Or the Bishop of Eli profess subjection
to a Foreign Universal Jurisdiction, Is it lawful for the Bishops to Swear
Obedience to that Archbishop, or the Presbyters to such a Bishop, and for the
People to be subject to such Presbyters in Communion?

III. Suppose such Bishops would abate the Presbyters (a while till they are
strengthened) the Oath or Promise of Obedience, is it lawful to receive
Ordination from such Bishops, and live in subjection to them and Communion?

2. The Case is of great moment, and very tenderly and warily to be handled.

I. On one side, If no Promise or Oath be required, nor any practice in it self
unlawful, many will think it hard that they must separate from a whole Nation
or Diocese for another man's Sin, which they consent not to? specially if it
will cast them out of their Ministry and Maintenance. They will think, his
guilt lies only on himself. Else one man may over-turn the Liberties of a
whole Diocese or Land by his own proper sin.

II. Yea if the Oath or Promise be put on them for Obedience but in licitis and
honestis, they will think the case does little differ; as long as they consent
not to a Foreign Jurisdiction.

3. On the other side, If all men must or may obey them that profess Obedience
to a Foreign Universal Jurisdiction, may not one or two, or a few Bishops
subject the Kingdom to Foreigners at their pleasure? And that the more
dangerously, because without any noise or notable alteration, and so without
resistance? It is but the Primate or Archbishops, or Bishops, professing
subjection to the Pope or Foreign Sovereign, and the thing is done. The Bishops
being subject to the Pope, or other Usurpers, and the Priests to the Bishops,
and the People to the Priests, are they not all then subject to the Foreign
Usurper?

If the Kings Army in the days of H. 5. or Ed. 3. in France, were to be hired
over to the King of France, what need he more than that the General or Field
Officers Swear fidelity to him? And that the Captains be subject to the
Colonels, and the common Soldiers to them?

When the Kingdom was in continual War between King Stephen and Maud the
Empress, and between the Houses of York and Lancaster, the people were not
usually Sworn on either side: But the Bishops and the Barons did Swear and
Unswear, and Forswear, and Change sides as their Interests led them, and this
was the misery of the Land.

4. And yet the Case would be much easier if only the King e. g. of France
should subject himself to Foreigners, and forbid all to preach and publicly
Worship God that will not Swear Allegiance to him, and obey him as their King.

5. In these dreadful cases, we must distinguish, 1. Between such a Bishop as
is a Member of a Protestant Nation, and who turns against the Law of the Land
and the Consent of other Churches, and such as would draw the whole Land with
him, or is but one in a common Revolt.

2. Between a Minister who was Ordained and subject to the Bishop before he
revolted, and one that is Ordained and subjected to him after.

3. Between a Bishop whose revolt is professed, and one that denies it, or
keeps it secret.

4. Between living peaceably, and owning the Right of the Bishops Authority.

5. Between obeying him as a Magistrate and as a Church Pastor.

6. Between obeying him as a mere Bishop, and as the Subject of a Foreign Power.

7. Between obeying such a one when the Church accepts him, or when he is but
an intruder against their consent.

8. Between subjection in necessary cases where no better can be had, and in
cases unnecessary where we may have better.

6. And I shall speak my thoughts as in a dreadful case in these Conclusions.

I. If the Bishops revolt to a Foreign Jurisdiction be unknown, it makes not
that Obedience to him unlawful which was his due.

II. If a few Bishops revolt to a Foreign Usurper, it is easy to see that no
one should follow them against the contrary judgment of all the rest in the
Nation, and so forsake the National Concord.

III. If one or more Bishops be known to revolt to a Foreign Sovereign, a
Minister is not bound therefore to renounce Communion with all the Christians
or Churches in his Diocese, who are innocent: No nor with all that renounce not
Communion with him: For we know not whether they know his case, and have had
means to understand and do their Duty.

IV. So far as a Bishop exercises the Power of the Sword as an Officer of the
King, we must obey him though he be a Papist; in all things which he has true
power to command.

V. One that was Ordained by him before his revolt, may go on with his work and
live peaceably, and not openly renounce the revolting Bishop, till he have a
particular Call, for the Churches safety or the preservation of his own
innocence.

VI. If a man be necessitated to live where no other Ministry or Christian
Communion can be had, one that renounceth the Bishops Subjection to an
Universal Usurper, may yet be subject to him, and receive Baptism from him, or
administer it and other Ordinances of God in his Diocese, and acknowledge his
Office so far as it is described by Christ, and conveyed by just means, and
has the consent of the Church.

A man may have two Commissions to one Office, of which one is current and the
other null: If one that has Christ's Commission, shall also take one from a
Foreign Usurper, the latter is void, and the taking of it is his heinous sin;
but it does not nullify all his Administrations to the Church; because his
better Commission may so far stand good, as that his Baptizing, Ordination, and
other Administration of Gods own Ordinances shall not be null. And therefore we
use not to Rebaptize such as Papists Baptize, nor Reordain all that they ordain
to the Ministry in general.

VII. But it is rather a Duty to forbear all Church Assemblies where no other
can be had, than to profess con^^nt to a Foreign Usurpation, or pretended
Universal Sovereignty. For no sin must be done on pretense of necessity,
nothing being indeed necessary which must be got by sinful means.

VIII. If a Nation (as France) be subject to the Usurpers of an Universal
Sovereignty, or if a Nation show themselves to be designing such a Subjection,
or if one Bishop or more declare themselves for it, It is the Duty of Ministers
openly to disown and oppose such attempts, and ordinarily to disown the proper
Church Government, Ordinations and Communion of such Bishops: And it is the
peoples Duty to disown the Pastoral Conduct of such Ministers as openly follow
them.

For, 1. The design of this Universal Usurpation is Treason against Christ, by
setting up men to possess his Prerogative, and pretend to be his Vicars or
Chief Substitutes without his Commission: And it is a design to divide all the
Churches by false means of Union; and so to cast them all into that miserable
War which the Romanists these Thousand years have done: And consequently to
introduce an intolerable corruption of Discipline and Worship, Doctrine and
Life. And no man may lawfully join in so wicked a design, nor be so much as
neutral: If with single Fornicators, Railers, Drunkards, etc. we may not eat in
familiarity, much less with such Subverters of the Christian World.

2. And no Christian is actually a Churchmember under any one as his Pastor,
without mutual Consent: And it is not lawful to consent to take a Traitor
against Christ and the Church for our Pastor: He that is no Pastor should not
be taken for a Pastor: But if he either want any Essential Qualification (as to
be Christ's Minister for the Churches good,) or the Consent of the Flock he is
no Pastor to them.

3. The resolution of the Case against Martial and Basilides by the Carthage
Council with Cyprian, fully decideth the Case; proving by Scripture and Reason
if the people forsake not an incapable Bishop, though other Bishops are for
them, they greatly sin against God: And those that were but Libellatick, came
far short of the guilt of the Universal Usurpation.

4. And it is not the danger of suffering that will justify Subjection to such
Designers: For suffering must not seem intolerable to Believers: None are true
Christians but dispositive Martyrs.

5. Many old Canons were made against Presbyters Swearing or Promising
Obedience to Bishops, as a thing dangerous to the Church; much more is it
sinful to do it to such Church Enemies.

6. And Magistrates commands will not excuse it, because it is a thing
forbidden of God, and which no Man has right to command.

IX. The restriction of [ in licitis and honestis] makes it not lawful to
Swear or Promise Obedience to such. 1. Because even to subject our selves to
Usurpers is not licitum aut honestum though they command nothing else but good.
2. A Lawful Ruler must be obeyed only [ in licitis and honestis] And a Usurper
must not be as much owned as a Lawful Ruler.

If an Usurper should set up in England, and should falsely pretend the Kings
Commission, and should solicit the Kings Army to take Commissions from him, a
Loyal Subject might be deceived by him, believing that he had the Kings
Commission when he had none: And might at once be true to the King in Heart,
and do the things that Traitors do. But if he know that he has none of the
Kings Commission, but raises Arms against his Will and Law to strengthen
himself, every Subject ought to renounce him, and to renounce the Commanders
that follow him, and neither to Swear Obedience to them in licitis and
honestis, nor yet to bear Arms under them. And this is as true of a Parliament
or any Senate as of a single Usurper, should they falsely pretend that the King
or Law does make them the Governors of the Kingdom, and so Usurp the Kings
proper Power? And specially if the Total Legislative and Judicial Supreme Power
be absolutely in the King alone, as it is in God and Jesus Christ; which I add
because some think they may lawfully be subject to those Bishops that are
subjected only to Universal Councils or Church Parliaments so they do but
disclaim the Roman Papacy.

X. Though some may think that subjection to a pretended Universal Council may
stand with. Loyalty to Christ, because such a Council is a Chimera, or Non Ens,
and never will be in the World, and so can do no harm, (as one may be true to
the King, who yet Swears Obedience to an Assembly of Mortal Angels,) yet the
case is otherwise. For, 1. These Men that profess Subjection to Councils,
cannot be supposed to take such Councils for Chimera's or things impossible,
without being taken for mad Men. Therefore it is not a true General Council,
but something possible that they mean: And they use to say themselves, [ or as
General as can be well had.] So that such a one as that at Trent, or as they
will call General (as they do the old Imperial Councils) will serve their turn.

2. And let them disclaim Popery never so loudly, they mean still that the Pope
must be the ordinary Caller and President of these Councils, and the Chief
Patriarch and Principium Vnitatis Vniversalis: And so all will come but to a
limited Pope instead of an Absolute One? And is he not a Monarch though he must
Rule by Law? For they intend not that there be no Catholic Church all the time
that there are no Councils; and therefore they intend some Unifying,
Constitutive, Executive Supreme.

XI. Obj. But if we may not own a Bishop that subjecteth himself to the Pope or
other Foreign Usurper of Universal Government; then if the King be a Papist it
will follow that we must not be subject to him: Which all Protestants confess
to be false: Ergo, so is the Antecedent as of Bishops.

Ans. I deny the Consequence, speaking only of such a Kings Religion. Nero was
a Heathen, and it was lawful for Christians to be subject to him, for
Conscience sake: But it was not lawful to subject themselves to Heathen Bishops
(a contradiction.) A Heathen may be Gods Minister to preserve the common Peace,
and Execute the Laws of God in Nature, and the Just Subordinate Laws: But the
Office of a Bishop consists in another matter, viz. In teaching the true
Doctrine and Laws of Christ; and guiding the Church by them, and keeping out
all that is against them. And therefore no other man can be a Bishop that does
not this as to the Essentials. If the King command us to be Papists we must
disobey him: But if he command us to do things good and lawful, we must obey:
True Christianity is Essential to a Bishops Office, but not to a Kings, as King.

But if any put the Question, [ Whether a Ruler of a Protestant Kingdom, who
takes himself bound by the Laterane or other Council on pain of Damnation to
destroy all his Kingdom that will not forsake their Religion, be Publicus
Hostis? And whether by the Law of Nature every Nation have a right of
self-defence against open Enemies? I meddle with no such Cases as these.

XII. To conclude, I advise all Christians to live peaceably in their places,
but to take care whom they trust with the Pastoral Conduct of their Souls; and
not to be seduced to enter into a Confederacy, against Christ's Prerogative by
any pretenses of Humane Authority, or Catholic Unity, which really are against
Divine Authority, and the true Unity of the Church in Christ: For a thousand
years experience (even by our Bishops confession who own but the Six first
Councils) have told us by the sad confusions of the Christian World, that such
Pretenders to Unity in a Humane Universal Sovereignty have but [ caused
divisions and offenses contrary to the Apostolical Doctrine, not serving
Christ, but their own bellies, and by good words and fair speeches deceived the
hearts of the simple.

Our Unity consists in One Head Jesus Christ, One God, one Body or Church of
Christ, one Faith, one Baptism, one Hope, one Gospel and Universal Law of
Christ; and that we live in Love, and Peace, and Order, in Learning and in
Worshipping God in several Congregations under their respective Guides, as
consenting Volunteers; and that the conjunction of such under Christian Kings,
makes Christian Kingdoms; where by the Counsels of Pastors in their own
Dominions, they may keep that Church-Peace and external Order, which is left to
the trust of their determination; and that in cases of need, the Counsel and
Help of Foreign Churches be desired; and that Communion in Christianity be
professed with all the true Christian World; and that we wait for perfect Unity
in Heaven. But that Princes and Kingdoms be not brought under a Foreign
Jurisdiction, (specially if pretended Universal) instead of Foreign Counsel,
Communion, Peace and Aid.

Chap. VII. Of the second Part of the Design; to bring the Papists into our
Communion, as they were in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
1. Dr. Heylin says, That this was much of A. Bishop Laud's design, and that
it was in order to this that he made the Changes which he made. And Dr. Burnet
says, That even Queen Elizabeth thought that if she could some how bring all
her Subjects into one Communion, though of different Opinions, in one Age they
would come to be of one mind: And therefore she was desirous to have kept up
Images and other such things in the Churches, till the reasons and importunity
of some Divines prevailed with her.

2. If this be done, it must be either by the Papists turning Protestants, or
the Protestants turning Papists, or by meeting in some third State of Religion
between both, or by continuing in the same Church Communion without change of
their Religion.

3. I. If the Papists come into our Churches by Conversion, it is not then
Papists but Protestants that come in. There is no true Protestant that is not
earnestly desirous of this. But bare coming in to our Churches and Communion,
is not a renunciation of Popery.

4. II. That the Protestants should turn Papists for Union, is not openly
pleaded for by them that we have to do with: The name of Papists they earnestly
disown.

5. III. If it must be by meeting in some middle way, it must be by a change in
the Papists, or by a change in the Protestants, or both.

1. If the Papists change any thing of theirs, it must be either the Essentials
of Popery, or also the grosser errors and sins which are its most corrupt
Integral part, or only some mutable Accidents or lesser faults and errors.

1. If the Papists hold still that there ought to be one Universal Sovereign
Power of Legislation and Judgment under Christ on Earth, and that either the
Pope himself, with a General Council, or a Council where the Pope is President
and Principium Vnitatis, is this Sovereign, this is the Essence of Popery
continued.

2. If the Papists should qu^t this Universal Sovereignty, and yet hold their
other grossest Errors (as Transubstantiation, Image Worship, Praying in an
unknown Tongue, forbidding to read the Scripture translated, and such like)
They would be still Heretics, though not Papists.

3. But if they only retain some tolerable Errors, we should be willing to
receive all such to our Communion.

2. If the change must be in the Protestants, what is it that they must change?
If it be any Truth or Duty which they forsake, or any Sin which they must
commit, they cannot honestly so change.

But if it be any Errors or Sins that we must forsake, that is a very
desirable Change. Some men do ignorantly charge some Errors on the Papists
which they are not guilty of; or lay the Errors of some few upon the most:
Some make Errors which are but de nomine to seem to be de re: and lesser
Errors seem great: Some take diverse Truths to be Error: And some are ready to
call some lawful Customs of the Papists, by the name of Popery, and
Antichristian: Some would deny Papists the common Civilities and Liberties
which are their due. All such things as these we would have changed. And if
altering any indifferent Practice of ours, would win them from their Error to
the Truth, we should so become all things to all men, to save some.

6. IV. But if Papists must come to our Churches whilst Papists without any
other Profession of a Change, 1. If it be but to hear Sermons, which Heathens
may do, and if they voluntarily do it, I know few that will be against it. 2.
But if it be to our Sacramental Communion, I have these Reasons following
against it.

7. I. Local Presence will make us really no more of one Church if different
Religions make us incapable, than if we met at several places: Turks and
Heretics are not of our Church, if they should receive the Sacrament with us,
if they renounce not their Infidelity and Heresy, if it be known.

II. The Bishops say now that the Conformists whose hearts are against
Conformity, are more hurtful and dangerous to the Church than the
Nonconformists, as using the public Encouragements against them. How much more
will Papists be more dangerous among us, than without our Churches?

III. It will be a Profanation of God's Ordinance to give that Sacrament to an
incapable person: And if they be forced against their will to Communicate, the
Profanation will be the greater: The Sacrament delivers to the due Receiver
a Sealed Pardon of all Sin, and a gift of Christ, and right to Salvation; And
unwilling Persons are utterly incapable of these; willing consent even to the
forsaking of all for it, being the condition.

IV. It must be gross hypocrisy and dissembling in the Papists to come to our
Communion. They take Protestants for Heretics, and Protestants take them for
Heretics; And their Doctrine is against admitting Heretics to Communion. They
must hear with us their own Doctrines and Practices condemned; and they must
hear ours asserted, which they abhor. And what Peace will this hypocrisy keep?

V. It will tempt the Preachers to give over Preaching against any of their
Popish Errors, when they know how offensive it will prove to the Auditors: And
so the Protestants also will be wronged?

VI. It will overthrow all serious true Church Discipline: when our Church
Communion is crowded with men that hold the same Principles which Protestants
take to be Heretical, and Treasonable against Christ, and practice what they
call Idolatry, and are indeed of another Church, and under a Foreign
Jurisdiction. How can our Church Governors censure, and cast out any others
that be not greater Sinners than these men whom they would draw in? And what a
Church will that be that takes in all Sinners not worse than these?

VII. How will it look in the Eyes of God, and all just Men, that our Church
should ipso facto Excommunicate all those Protestants, how Learned, Pious and
Peaceable soever, that do but say that any thing in the Church Government,
Liturgy, and Ceremonies is unlawful, according to the Can. 5, 6, 7, 8. and
silence Protestants for scrupling Subscription or a Ceremony, at the same time
offer Communion to all the Papists that will accept it and come in?

VIII. It will unavoidably cause a far greater Schism in the Church of England
than has yet been made: For it will drive out the best, if not the greatest
part from its Communion: Can they think that such men will Communicate with the
Papists, merely because they come into our Churches, who have charged them with
Antichristianity, and such a Mass of Heresies and Errors as have done Bishop
Downame, Archbishop Usher* Bishop Morton, Bishop Hall, Bishop Jewel, Bishop
Carlton, Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Willet, and a multitude of such? Will they join with
them that have charged them with Idolatry, as Dr. Reignolds, Dr. Stillingfleet,
etc. have done? What though they commit not Idolatry in our Churches, will that
expiate the guilt of all the rest?

IX. Will this do more to Convert the Papists, or to Confirm them when they
hold us to be no Church, they will not take themselves to be Constitutive Parts
of the Church they come in. To tell them that all their Errors and Sins are no
greater than are consistent with our Communion, and when we shall tell them
that their Roman Church is a true Church, and we come so much over or nearer to
them, sure they will rather look we should come one step further, than that
they should come to us.

X. If we think it hard to keep out Popery now, how much harder will it be when
they are one Body with us* and have the most familiar Conversation with us, and
stand on equal terms. When masked and Church-Papists have served them most
effectually.

For my part I fear no man's Censure, for my open profession, that I hate all
Cruelty to Papists or by Papists; and that I would have nothing done to their
hurt, unless our own necessary defense against their hurting us, will hurt
them. And I am so far from desiring that they may be forced to our Communion,
either by the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, or any other way, that I would
not give them the Sacrament if they voluntarily came to it, without profession
of a change of their Understandings, Hearts, and Lives.

If the two Parts of the Design Conjunct (1. Subjecting the Church and Kingdom
to a Foreign Jurisdiction, 2. And opening our own Church Doors wide enough for
the Papists, to come in, and be imbodied in our Communion) be the way to Cure
or keep out Popery, I confess I am mistaken in the way.

Chap. VIII Why the Papists abating their Innovations of the last Four hundred
Years, or keeping them to themselves, will not make a Coalition lawful, as
Archbishop Bromhall thought.
1. AS to their keeping them to themselves and not imposing them on us, it
leaves them still as guilty of Rebellious, Heretical and Schismatical Doctrine
as before: and as Antichristian in Usurping a Universal Sovereignty, or
Legislative and Judicial Power: And therefore incapable of our Coalition, more
than an Impenitent Murderer is of Church Communion.

2. And there are not a few nor small Matters that are above Four hundred Years
old that found Protestants will never Unite with. And though Mr. Thorndike give
us so much quarter as to say, that It is the Authority that must necessarily be
owned, and not the Canons if that Authority will change them, 1. It is the
usurped Authority that we most disown. 2. And we have no assurance what Canons
that Authority will change; And Mr. Thorndike's, Mr. Dodwell's, and such Men's
great rule of Unity is, that none of us must question whether any of the Canons
of that Authority are contrary to God's Word, nor appeal to God and Scripture
against them. (Multitudes of Papists themselves renounce such Doctrine.)

3. I. And first, All this is built on the Sand: I have largely proved long ago
in several Books, that it is impossible for them to certify us who have this
Authority? Who it is that we must hear as the Catholic Church, and take
Universal Laws from, when there is no General Council? Or what Councils we may
be sure are General or what not? (Besides none were General but of One Empire.)
When they condemn each other: and when each call the other Heretical or
Schismatical? and when as Great a Number were at one as at the other; and the
same Authority chose and called both sorts? How shall we know which we must
obey? Is it by Scripture, Reason or Authority of Councils themselves, that we
must Judge? They cannot tell us.

4. II. (The Cause which I am pleading against is expressed by their Champion the
Lord Primate of Ireland, Archbishop Bromhall, in the words forecited, viz. [To
wave their last Four hundred years Determinations is implicitly to renounce
all the necessary Causes of this great Schism: And to rest satisfied with their
Old Patriarchal Power and Dignity, and Primacy of Order (which is another part
of my Proposition) is to quit the Modern Papacy, both Name and Thing.]

By this we see what the Protestant Church of England must be? or else be
Schismatics in the Judgment of these Learned Men.

I will here tell you why this will never Unite us, and why the old Church of
English Protestants could not close with Rome on these men's terms.

5. I. Salmasius de Ecclesiis Suburbicariis circa finem grants them that by
their Imperial Constitutions the Bishop of Rome was not a mere Patriarch, but
more than a Patriarch, a Caput Ecclesiae: This was not Christ's Institution,
but the Emperors and their Clergies in one Empire. But call it Patriarchal or
what you will, it contained such Power as (Christ having not given and Dead men
of another Kingdom being none of our Rulers) we are not obliged to obey; nor
indeed lawfully can do.

1. A Patriarch and Primate has some degree of Governing Power, or else
wherein does his Primacy consist? He calls Councils, Precedeth, etc. And if
he cannot command Archbishops, how can they command Bishops? And if they are
not Commanders of Bishops, why do our English Bishops in their Consecration
Profess, Promise and Swear all due Obedience to the Archbishops? And 1. We
cannot yield to bring England under the guilt and brand of Perjury, by
submitting to the Foreign Jurisdiction of a Roman Primate or Patriarch,
contrary to the Oath of Supremacy. 2. We know already how many false Doctrines
and Practices the Roman Church and Patriarch have espoused: And we can no more
receive all these Errors from a Patriarch than from a Pope.

6. II. But we will freely confess to you that we neither are nor can be such a
sort of Protestants as the Regnant Church of France is, which persecuteth the
Protestants, nor as these Men called the Church of England in such Proposals
would have us be.

I will give you a Catalogue of some Determinations of above Four hundred Years
old, which the Church of England before Bishop Laud could not receive.

7. I. Mr. Thorndike also consents to rest in the Canons sent by Pope Adrian
to Carol. M. about An. 773. And C. 23. ex Clem. is [That Archbishop, Presbyter
or Deacon taken in Fornication, Perjury or Theft, be deposed, but not
Excommunicate.]

II. Can. 28. is [ That a Bishop who obtains a Church by Secular Power be
deposed.] And yet we are called Schismatics for not obeying (alas, I dare not
name the things) the Bishops that have many Score or Hundred Churches by
Secular Power. And must we Unite in this?

III. Can. 11. is [ Condemned Clerks shall never be restored, if they go to the
Emperor.] And must we Confederate against such Bishops in England?

IV. C. Laodic. there recited 33. is that [ None Pray with Heretics or
Schismaticks]: When we knowing how the Roman Party are counted (at the best)
Schismatics by Greeks, Syrians and Protestants, and all these counted
Schismatics by them, it will be but Schism, to separate from almost all
Christ's Church on Earth as Schismatics.

V. Ex Can. Sard. 2. [ That a Bishop that by Ambition, changes his Seat, shall
not have so much as Lay Communion, no not at the end.

VI. Ex C. Afric. c. 15. That there be no Reordaining or Translation of Bishops.

VII. No man must receive the witness of a Layman against a Clergyman.

VIII. The Second General Council at Nice sets up the Adoration of Images,
cursing all from Christ with Anathema that are against it, or doubt of it.

IX. Even the contrary Council at Constantinople of 338 Bishops anathematizeth
all that do not with a sincere Faith crave the Intercession of the Virgin Mary
as the Parent of God and Superior to every Creature visible and invisible. And
all that confess not that all who from the beginning to this day, before the
Law and under the Law, and in the Grace given of God, being Saints, are
venerable in the Presence of God in Soul and BODY, and seek not their
Intercessions.

Yet they conclude with the Conc. Nice 2. That Christ's Body Glorified is not
proper Flesh, Def. 7.

X. The said Second Council at Nice says [ Every Election of a Bishop, Priest
or Deacon which is made by Magistrates shall remain void, by the Canon which
says [ If any Bishop use the Secular Magistrate to obtain by them a Church,
let him be deposed and separated, and all that Communicate with him.]

Thus our English Bishops and Parish Ministers are deposed, and all their
Communicants to be Excommunicated.

XI. Ibid. Can. 4. Those that for Gain or Affection of their own shut out any
Ministers, or shut the Temples, forbidding the Divine Ministry, are sharply
condemned (which would fall on Silencing Bishops).

XII. Can. 15. Forbids one man to have two Churches, which would break our
Clergy, specially the Bishops that have Hundreds.

XIII. Can. 7. Forbids any Temple to be Consecrated without Relicts, and
orders Temples that have no Relicts to be put down.

XIV. A Council of Bishops in France depose the best of Kings, Ludov. Pius.

XV. Another Council at Aquisgrane deposes Lotharius.

XVI. Theodora's Council at Constantinople is again for Images.

XVII. They so far deceived Kings, that Carolus Calvas in a Council at Tullum
says, That no man may depose him without the hearing and judgment of the
Bishops, who are called the Throne of God, by whom God decrees Judgment, and
to whom he subjecteth himself.

XVIII. An. 868. In a Council at Rome under Hadrian 2d. to detect the Thieves
in Monasteries they are to be made receive Christ's Body and Blood.

XIX. An. 869. The Constantinople Council called by the Papists the 4th, and
the 8th General one, C. 3. Curses those that think Images are not to be
Worshipped with the same honor as the Gospel, as teaching by colors what the
Scripture does by words,] saying, [They shall not see Christ's face at his
second coming that adore not his Image.

Yet C. 8. They depose Bishops that made men Swear to be true to them. (And so
our Bishops must be deposed for the Oath of Obedience to them.)

XX. The C. 11. is that [All Bishops bearing on Earth the Person and Form of
the Celestial Hierarchy shall with all Veneration be worshipped by all Princes
and Subjects; And shall not go far from Church to meet any Commanders or
Nobles; Nor shall light from their Horses like Supplicants or Abjects that
feared them; nor fall down and Petition them: Else the Bishop shall be
separated a Year from the Sacrament, and the Princes, Dukes or Captains two
Years.] Is this like the Law of Christ? Are all Princes under it?

XXI. C. 12. Princes as Profane may not be Spectators of that which Holy
Persons do: and therefore Councils are held without them.

(Who would think that our Bishops or Priests could subscribe to these, and to
the 39 Articles, and the Oath of Supremacy also?)

XXII. Can. 14. says, [That a Layman shall have no Power to Dispute by any
reason of Ecclesiastical Sanctions, -- For though a Layman excel in the praise
of Piety and Wisdom, yet he is a Layman and a Sheep, and not a Pastor: But a
Bishop, though it be Manifest that he is destitute of ALL VIRTUE OF RELIGION,
yet he is a Pastor as long as he exercises the office of a Bishop: and the
Sheep must not resist the Shepherd.] Princes and Parliaments must note this.

XXIII. An. 876. A Concilium Titin. makes Charles Emperor against Ludovicus,
the Popes expressly claiming the Power of electing, approving and making
Emperors as his right. And Stephen 5 alias 6. with Bishops and Lords depose
the Emperor ( Carolus Crassus) after, as too dull. And the Pope tells the
Emperor Basil, that the Sacerdotal Dignity is not subject to Kings, and that
Kings are authorized to meddle only with worldly Matters, and Popes and Priests
with Spiritual; Therefore their Place is more excellent than Emperors, as
Heaven is above Earth. And the Disciple is not above his Lord.

XXIV. An. 888. A Council at Mentz says, [That a King ruling impiously and
unjustly, is a Tyrant and not a King.]

XXV. Ibid. Whereas Clergymen were accused for getting their own Sisters with
Child, it was decreed, that no Presbyter accuse a Bishop, nor any Deacon a
Presbyter: And that no Prelate be Condemned but under Seventy two Witnesses,
and that the chief Prelate be Judged of no Man; And a Cardinal Presbyter under
Forty two Witnesses, and a Cardinal Deacon under Twenty six, and Subdeacons,
Acoluthes, Exorcists, Readers, Door-keepers, not under Seven Witnesses, and all
these without Infamy having Wives and Children. (O secure Wickedness!)

XXVI. Ibid. The Punishment of one Murdering even a Priest is, To forbear Flesh
and Wine, and not to be carried in a Coach, and not to come to Church in Five
years, nor to the Sacrament in Twelve.

XXVII. An. 895. In Council. Tribur. If the Bishop command the people to meet in
one place, and the Magistrate in another, they must obey the Bishop, and not
the Magistrate: He and all his Company shall obey the Bishop.

C. 10. No Bishop shall be deposed but by Twelve Bishops, nor no Presbyter but
by Six Bishops.

XXVIII. An. 912. A Council at Confluence decree that none Marry within the
Seventh degree.

XXIX. An. 1049. Leo 9th and his Council of Bishops sit at Rhemes, though the
King forbad them. But they decree that no man be promoted to Church Government
without the election of the Clerks and the People.

XXX. An. 1050. Two Councils condemn Berengarius and Jo. Scotus's Doctrine of
the Sacrament. As others after did at Rome, and forced him to recant and
profess Transubstantiation in sense.

XXXI. The Pope and Bishops An. 1055. Interdict the whole Kingdom of Castile,
unless King Ferdinand submit to the Emperor Henry, where they require him.

The choice of Popes by Cardinals introduced.

No man is to hear Mass of a Priest that he knows to have a Concubine (a
Wife).

Pope Alexander declares King Harold a Usurper, and set up William the
Conqueror as in Right.

He brings in the Payment of Peter Pence to the Pope.

XXXII. Greg. 7. Claims Presentations and Investitures: Excommunicateth and
deposes the Emperor in a Roman Council, and Excommunicateth all Bishops that
were for him: Absolveth his Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance: Saying, [
It is meet that he be deprived of Dignity, who endeavors to diminish the
Majesty of the Church:] Commands that no King dare to resist his Legates:
Calls the King of France a ravening Wolf: Declares in Council their Power to
put down Kings: Challenges Spain as St. Peter's Patrimony: Threatens the ruin
of the Prince of Calaris if he make not his Bishops shave their Beards:
Challenges Peter Pence of France.

I would transcribe out of Binnius the Pope's 27 Dictates or Determinations
containing all the Papal Usurpations or most, but that it is tedious, and you
may there see them, or in my Summary of the Bishops Councils, page 356
translated.

XXXIII. An. 1074. In a Council at Rome, Priests are not only forbidden
Marriage, but commanded to put away their Wives.

XXXIV. An. 1078. A Roman Council pronounces all Ordinations null, not made by
the common Consent of Clergy and People]. (And must we agree to nullify almost
all the Church of England.)

XXXV. An. 1079. A Council forced Berengarius to Recant.

And An. 1080. another Excommunicateth and deposes the Emperor.

XXXVI. An. 1085. A Council at Quintilenburg makes the Emperor's Claim of
Investitures, and not obeying the Pope to be Heresy, and calls it by the Name
of the Henrician Heresy; that is Loyalty, or not being against Kings at the
Pope's Command. And this Heresy is after often Condemned.

XXXVII. Victor's Council, An. 1087. declares that Simoniacks are Heretics
and Infidels, (and all Lay Patrons are Simoniacks with them that claim
Presentations and Investitures) and not to be communicated with; and that it is
better communicate with God only in secret than with such.

XXXVIII. An. 1090. A Council at Mel^ia decree that no Layman has Right or
Authority over a Clergyman, or may invest any.

XXXIX. An. 1094. A Council at Constance decree against Married Priests.

XL. An. 1095. A Council at Clermont command that no Bishop or Priest make any
Promise of Allegiance to a King or any Layman: And that every Lay-labourer
abate or pay the Tenth of his Wages to the Clergy.

XLI. About 1100. a Council decreed that all Bishops of the Henrician Heresy
(for Loyalty) be deposed; and if dead, dig'd up and burnt.

XLII. An. 1108. A Council at Benevent decree, that if any take a Benefice from
a Lay-man's Presentation, the Giver and Taker shall be Excommunicate.

XLIII. An. 1180. A General Council (as they call it) at Laterane under
Alexander the 3d, called the Eleventh General Council, condemning those whom
they call Catharoi, Puritans, absolve Inferiors from all Duty and Fidelity to
them; and promise Indulgence to those that fight against them.

XLIV. An. 1215. was the great Fourth Laterane General Council, under Pope
Innocent 3d. which obliges Princes to exterminate all that are against
Transubstantiation, etc. and else deposes, excommunicateth and damneth them.

Thus you see what must be the Protestant Religion, when our present Church of
England is United with the Roman.

Obj. Some of these were but Provincial Councils.

Ans. And are you not in England for obeying Provincial Councils? I Will then
omit transcribing Spelman's.

Chap. IX. Whether the Instance of the Apostles Church Government prove an
Universal Sovereignty in the Bishops, further considered.
1. THE pretense of all the Bishops in the World to the Government of all the
Church on Earth, as one Aristocratical Senate, College or Court, is so
monstrous a fiction, that were it not for that shadow of an Argument which they
fetch from the instance of the Apostles and their pretended Succession, I
should think it would expose the pretenders to be taken for distracted men: And
therefore whether this instance will prove them in their wits, let us further
try.

2. The Apostles Commission is contained in Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. All power is
given to me in Heaven and in Earth: Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and
lo I am with you always even unto the end of the World.

Here, 1. Christ's proper Universal Power is both the cause of their
Commission, and the matter which they must Preach. 2. Their appointed work is,
1. To make Nations Christ's Disciples, 1. By Teaching: 2. By Baptizing them. 2.
To Teach them when they are Disciples. That which they must teach them when
they are Disciples is, To observe all Christ's Commands. These Laws or Commands
are but what Christ himself commanded these Disciples. To the performance of
this Commission he promised them to give them the Holy Spirit to bring all
things to their remembrance, and to lead them into all Truth, and to be with
them even to the end. The Spirit thus eminently given for this special work,
was Christ's promised Substitute, or as Tertullian calls him his Vacarius and
Agent, so that what the Spirit so commanded Christ commanded: Christ's
Commission to them contained much proper to themselves viz. By this
extraordinary help of the Spirit to Remember what Christ had commanded them,
and what they had seen him do, and to deliver it with special Power, and seal
it with special Gifts and Miracles, and to Record it Sufficiently and
Infallibly as his History, Doctrine and Law, for the use of the whole World
unto the end. And so he was with them to the end of their Age, and is with
their recorded Word to the end of the World. And his Commission contained much
common to others, that is, To Preach the same Christ, and gather Disciples, and
Baptize them, and to teach the Disciples all those Commands which Christ had
delivered to his Apostles by his Mouth or Spirit; And with these also in this
Work Christ will be to the end of the World.

3. Here we must first consider what was the Apostles Power and Work. 2. And
then whether all Bishops have the same. 3. And what the extent of their Work
was, when they are sent to all Nations, or all the World.

4. 1. It is plain that [ All Power] is not theirs but Christ's: They are but
his Ministers.

2. They are not Authorized to be Legislators themselves, so as to make any
Universal Law as their own; But only to be Teachers of the Laws of Christ, even
such only as they received from him.

Accordingly they never made any Universal Law as their own; But only told the
World what Christ Commanded by his Word and Spirit.

3. They were not made an Aristocratical College to do this by the authority of
a Major Vote: For as the same Spirit of Truth was given to every one of them
singly, so singly they were herein as Infallible as altogether.

4. Accordingly they Preached abroad the World the same Gospel by the same
Infallible Spirit. Paul did not so much as speak or consult with any Apostles
before he Preached, as receiving his Gospel not from Man but from God, Gal. 1.
and 2.

5. The Universal Laws Promulgate by them, are the matter of the several Books
of the New Testament: And there is not one of all these, written in the Name of
the College or Senate of the Apostles, but every one of them by that single
person whose name they bear, or imply. If Christ's Law had been to have been
made or delivered by the authority of a College as such, some one of the
Gospels or Epistles would have been so written.

6. Yet while they abode together at Jerusalem no doubt they lived in Concord,
and held the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, and believed and spoke
the same things; And so they did when they were dispersed abroad the World. And
no doubt but their consent was more useful to convince others that they spoke
Truth, than themselves who otherwise knew it.

7. In cases not revealed by the Spirit, they had the same use for consulting
and reasoning the case and learning of others, as all other men: In this case
reasoning was to help them to know: But in case of Inspiration Reasoning did
but express and exercise their Knowledge.

8. As that Act. 15. was no more a General Council, than the other Sacred
Converse of the Apostles till they dispersed themselves, so in their
determination they lay it upon the Holy Ghost: And Paul and Barnabas had before
by the same Spirit accordingly determined: But because they were not of the men
that had received their knowledge from Christ's own works and mouth in converse
with him on Earth, no wonder if the Jewish Christians desired fuller
satisfaction.

5. II. From hence it is apparent, 1. That ordinary Pastors or Bishops who have
not the same Commission, nor the same Inspiration or promise of it, nor the
same gift of Tongues and Miracles to confirm their Doctrine, have none of the
extraordinary Apostolical work to do. The Commands which Christ gave his
Apostles to teach the World, are already told us and recorded by the Apostles.
They left not part of that work undone for others after them to do. If they
had, how could the Bishops have known but from the Apostles themselves what
Christ Commanded? And what means have they to know it but what all other men
have? The Scripture now (added to the Law of Nature) contains all that can
pretend to be an Universal Law: For no Law but of a Universal Lawgiver, can be
Universal. And if all Bishops pretend to Apostolic Inspiration, they must
prove it by Miracles or pass for Fanatics: And methinks those among us, who
deride even the pretense of Praying by the Spirit, when it means no
Enthusiasm, but the illuminating, quickening and sanctifying influx of the
Spirit, should hardly believe that all or most of the ignorant and erroneous
Bishops of the World have Apostolic Inspiration. If they have, are not their
Decrees and Writings God's Word, and equal to the Scriptures?

God's Law is not so imperfect a thing, nor Christ so imperfect a Lawgiver, as
that more and more must be added to it, and no man can tell by whom, nor when
it will be perfect. Nothing unnecessary is fit for an Universal Law; And all
that is Universally necessary Christ has done already. An Universal Lawgiver
is a Christ: If a false pretender, he is a false Christ.

But all Pastors are Successors to the Apostles as ordinary Ministers, in that
ordinary part of their work; viz. To Preach Christ, and make and baptize
Disciples, and teach them to observe all that Christ commanded the Apostles, as
Official Guides of their several Flocks: And to do this in order, decently, and
to edification: And being the Church-Guides, it is their Office to judge of
their own acts, that is, when, where, in what words to Preach and Pray, and
whom to Baptize, and to whom to deliver the Sacraments of Communion, etc.

6. III. But the next doubt is of the extent of the Apostles Office, and next
of the Bishops and ordinary Pastors.

And, 1. It is evident that what the Apostles did in delivering Christ's
Commands in writing (in the Scriptures) though at first and most immediately it
was for the use of particular Persons and Churches, yet was intended for all
the Christian World, as being the Word of the Universal Bishop and King.

2. But their Personal Vocal Preaching was confined by natural necessity. Their
Mandate or Commission was but indefinite, or limitedly universal. Christ never
bound them to go to every Nation or Person in the World; else how greatly had
they sinned? They went not into the fourth part of the Earth: And in those
parts, not to one person of many hundred or thousands: Yet their Commission had
no positive prohibition restraining them from any one place or person: But
Natural Incapacity restrained them. They were to go as far as they could, and
speak to as many in the World as they could. And this Mandate was given to each
one; nor do we read that ever they went abroad all twelve together, nor ever
met when dispersed to consult; nor ever judged any cause or persons as a
College, after.

It was easy for them to meet when they dwelt together; and easy to govern
all Christians when they were all before them or at hand: And easy to record
Christ's Laws and Doctrine by which all must be governed to the end, being
thereunto inspired by his Spirit. But as the Church grew greater, they
increased the number of Pastors; but gave them no Universal Sovereignty.

7. And now what pretense can ordinary Ministers or Bishops have for
Universality of Sovereignty, Legislation and Judgment in an Aristocratical
Senate or Council? If they were Apostles they must but teach men to observe all
Christ's Commands. They may do their proper work as far as they have capacity
and ability: If they can Preach at the Antipodes we shall pray for their
success: But sure they will not do it as a Senate; or Church Parliament: To
leave them no excuse Christ has left no Universal Legislation or Judgment to
do.

The continuance of the Question so often answered [ How shall Controversies be
ended? And who shall Judge? When they never attempt to confute our answer,
shows that they are so full of themselves, that they have not room for the
plainest Truth that comes from others. Judgment of Controversies is Private or
Public, that is, either Private Men's Discerning Judgment, or Governors
Deciding Judgment: The Private is either that of each single person for
himself, and this is every man's as he is a Rational, Moral Agent, who cannot do
his Duty undiscerned, or it is for the guidance of Charity to others: And that
is either the Judgment of an Arbitrator, or of a private Instructor or
Reprover: Hitherto there is no difficulty who shall Judge.

Public Judgment supposes a forum, Tribunal, and a Ruling Judge: And every
one is Judge in proprio foro, in his own Court: The Magistrates in their
several Degrees are Judges in their several Courts, who shall suffer or be
Protected by them. And the Pastors in their several Churches, who shall be
Baptized, and used as of their Communion; and who not. But there is no
Universal forum or Court to judge all the World, but Christ's: None out of this
Kingdom, are public Judges of King or Subjects. Other Princes and Prelates all
over the World, have a judicium privatum whether they will take our King and
Kingdom for Christians, and Communicate with them, or not; and such a judgment
have we toward any other Nation: But a Ruling Public Judgment none has out
of the Kingdom Civil or Ecclesiastic. All Controversies shall be ended by
Christ at last: It Is Madness to think of ending all till then; so that there is
no Judgment but Christ's, that is, Universal and Final for the ending of
Controversies or deciding any Cause by Government.

And were there nothing but a double incapacity. 1. NATURAL, and 2. POLITICAL
or Accidental by the restraint of the Princes of the Earth, I have often showed
here, that a Dream of an Universal Sovereign Council or Senate, yea or Pope, is
utterly irrational.

8. But if the Apostolic Succession prove not such a Sovereignty, will not the
Ancient General Councils do it? No I have often enough proved that General
Councils were but General in the Empire: While they kept sober and humble they
never claimed more; Nor was there any on Earth that had power to call them out
of all the World: And when they claimed more, they broke the Church, and by
Usurpation brought on Desolation. There is neither Scripture, nor reason, nor
obliging example, for extending the Ecclesiastic jurisdiction beyond the
Civil, but much of all these against it.

9. And what man can think that a claim is the proof of a title in those
Councils which began to transgress the bounds of Civil jurisdiction? The many
Councils which have been for Arians, Eutychians, Nestorians, Monothelites,
Adoration of Images, Papal tyranny, etc. and the many that have contradicted
and condemned them, tell us that the Right of Councils must have a better proof
than their own affirmation: And the far greater number of Christians that have
approved or received the Erroneous, tell us that they need a better proof than
the reception of the greater part. How great a part received Greg. 7th.
dictates, and the Councils that Hereticated Royalists as Henricians? But that
proved not that these things were just. Pope Vrbans Letter to King Lewis 13th
of France 1629. (in the 2d. part of the Cab. p. 213.) says [" Your Ancestors
have ever born as much respect to the exhortations of Popes, as to the
Commandment of God.] But do these words prove that this is true? No more does
it that Leo the first was Caput Ecclesiae Vniversalis because he so called
himself. The Grand Signiour (in his Defiance of Maximilian the Emperor ibid. p.
12.) calls himself [ God in Earth, Great and High Emperor of all the World, the
Great Helper of God, King of Kings, the only Victorious and Triumphant Lord of
the World, and of all Circuits and Provinces thereof.] And more Persons are
Mahometans than Christians (and more Heathens than either, or both) and yet
none of this proves Truth and Right.

10. I have marvelled that Carol. Boverius should think it a fit Argument to
move our late King Charles 2d. in Spain to turn Papist, that Monarchy is the
best Government in the State, Ergo, the Papal Monarchy in the Church: Did he
think the King so dull, that he could not distinguish Particular Kingdoms and
Monarchs, from Universal? How would the King have taken it, if he had said [
Sir an Universal Monarchy is the best humane Government: therefore you must
subject your self and Kingdom to one Universal Monarch.]

But the pretense of an Universal Democracy, Aristocracy, or Church-Parliament
is more absurd and worse, as I have proved.

11. Do our Changers of Government think that it is a small matter, of which
King and People will take no notice, but be decoyed into by degrees in the
dark, to make King, Lords, Bishops and all the Kingdom the Subjects of a
Foreigner, and of a Parliament of Prelates who are themselves the Subjects of a
Multitude of Foreign Princes, (Mahometans, Heathens, Greeks, Papists, etc.) As
the Child said [ My Mother rules my Father, and I rule my Mother, and my
Father rules the City: Therefore I rule the City,] So we may then say the King
rules England; and a Council of Foreign Prelates rule the King; and Heathen,
Mohammedan, Moscovian, Armenian, Papist, etc. Princes rule most of the Bishops
in Council: Ergo these Princes rule the King.

Do they know what it is for Pope or Prelates abroad to be made Judges
Ecclesiastical of all persons and causes here; and to have Power to
Excommunicate King, and Lords, and depose Bishops, and silence Ministers, and
Hereticate Dissenters, and Interdict the Kingdom? etc. Again and again I say,
that I wonder if those men that have promoted so many Oaths, and Promises (in
the Acts of Corporations, Uniformity, Vestries, Confinement, Conventicles,
Militia, ( never to endeavor any alteration of Government in Church or State;
can possibly blind the Nation to think it no alteration to Subject King, Church
and Kingdom to a Foreign (pretended Universal) Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction?
Whether it be Perjury or Treason is no debate for me; but I am sure that in
ordine ad Spiritualia great temporal power will follow, and Excommunicating and
Anathematizing Kings and People, has not hitherto been a Toothless thing. But
quos perdere vult Jupiter hos dementat.

12. And what if they had found Ancient Councils Excommunicate some men without
the Empire? What pity is it that any where Lords, yea Bishops and Clergy men
should be bred up in such Ignorance as to think that all Excommunicating is an
act of Government? I said before, any Neighbor Prince, Nation or People, any
number of Bishops, when they hear another Nation turned notorious Heretics may
renounce Communion with them, and declare the reason of it, because they have
made themselves incapable: Governing Excommunication per judicium publicum, id
est, per personam publicam seu Rectorem is one thing; and a declared
renunciation and refusal of Communion, per judicium privatum, that is, by an
equal or private person is another thing. I am not bound to stay till Turk or
Pope is Excommunicated by their Governors, before I renounce Christian
Communion with them. Paul's charge, 1 Cor. 5. With such a one no not to eat,
and Tit. 3.10. A Man that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition
avoid; and St. John's Bid him not good speed, etc. may bind equals that have
but judicium privatum discretionis, when no Superior Ruler Excommunicateth the
Sinner.

Chap. X. Some Questions about General Councils, to be resolved before all the
World can subject Kings, Kingdoms, Souls and Scripture to their Government or
Decrees, and take them for the Vnifying Ruling-Power over the Universal Church.
NOthing can be more necessary to all Christians, Learned and Unlearned, than
to be sure of the truth of that which must be the foundation of all our
obedience and our hopes: And therefore if it be the General Councils Actual or
Virtual (in the chief Patriarchs and Metropolitans, or supposed College of
Bishops) which is the Unifying or Constitutive Regent part of the Universal
Church, and on whose credit we must take the Scripture to be God's Word, and
from whose Judgment we must not appeal to Scripture or to God; it is the primum
necessarium that we be sure of the Authority and Infallibility or Credit of
such Councils.

And first, we are to consider the matter of their Determining Power. 1. There
are Things; 2. Words; 3. The signification of words to be judged of.

2. There are Truths of Natural and of Supernatural Revelation to be judged of.

3. There are the Essentials of Christianity, the Integrals and the Accidents
to be judged of.

4. And the Judgment is, 1. Witnessing, 2. Teaching, 3. Or judicially Deciding.

We must first know who are the Judges. 2. What is their work. 3. How certain
they are.

Qu. 1. Did not Apostles and other Preachers singly convert men (even
thousands) before there was any General Council? and that by such evidence as
the single Preacher brought? Or was it by the Argument of Universal Consent
that every one then was converted? e. g. the Eunuch, Act. 8. The Jailor and
Lydia, Act. 16. Cornelius and his house, Act. 10. The three thousand, Act.
2.37, etc.

Q. 2. Did none that St. Paul wrote his Epistles to believe them till they were
told that all the Teachers and Bishops of the Churches gave them their
Authority? Were the Gospels written by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John received
only by the Argument of the Councils or Colleges Authority?

Q. 3. Did not Christ that sent out his Preachers by two and two, and bid them
shake off the dust of their feet as a Witness against those that did not
receive them, expect that they should be received and believed without the
Authority of a Council?

Q. 4. Did Christ or his Apostles ever institute a General Council, or Unifying
College of Bishops to be the standing Aristocratical Government of all the
Universal Church as one?

Q. 5. Would not this have been plainly done, if the certainty of Scripture and
Salvation, and the Churches Unity had been founded on it?

Q. 6. If thousands were then made Christians without the knowledge of Councils
or College, may they not be so now?

Q. 7. Was the Church no Church, or ungoverned for the first 300 years when
there was no General Council?

Q. 8. And were not Christians all that while sure that the Scripture was true?
And were they not of the same Faith as now?

Q. 9. Was it not Constantine that called the first General Council at Nice?
and had he any Authority to call any but his Subjects?

Q. 10. Do not the Subscriptions of the Ancient Councils show that they were
General only as to the Roman Empire, and not to all the World?

Q. 11. How shall we be sure that the Council of one Nation or Empire is Ruler
of all the other Kingdoms of the World?

Q. 12. When Councils of equal number, and called by equal Authority of
Emperors, condemned one another (in the days of Constantius, Valens,
Valentinian, Gratian, Arcadius and Honorius, Theodosius senior and junior,
Martian, Zeno, Basiliscus, Leo, Philippicus, Anastasius, Justinian, etc. how
were all men and women sure which was of Conciliar Power, and which not? As to
their faulty carriage each accused other.

Q. 13. Seeing so many then erred, and are called Heretics at this day, (as
the Councils of Tire, Ephesians. 2. Arimin, Sirmium, Milane, Constantinople,
Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Rome, etc.) how shall we now be sure which err
not?

Q. 14. If we must believe Scripture on the credit of Councils, must we not
also believe which Councils are true upon the credit of Councils? And if so, is
it on the Authority of that same Council, or another? If of the same, then must
every Council, even the Heretical, be so believed, or which, and how known? If
of another, must the Church suspend its belief of one Council till another is
called to attest it? And on what account is that other to be believed? And what
if the later condemn the former, and the next condemn that (as Florence and
Pisa, Constance and Basil?)

Q. 15. Is it all the Council agreeing, or the major Vote against the rest that
has the credit or authority aforesaid?

Q. 16. How shall we be sure that the minor part are not in the right?

Q. 17. How shall all the distant World be sure the Votes were truly taken?

Q. 18. Why was the major Vote counted invalid if the Patriarchs were against
it? And are those Patriarchs of Divine Authority and infallible?

Q. 19. What if one or two Votes turn the scales for a majority? and what if
afterward more come in on the other side and turn it back the other way (as the
Constantinopol. Council did in Nazianzens case) are both the sides infallible
or authoritative? So at Ephesians. 1.

Q. 20. Who must call a valid Council? What if the Pope call one, and the
Patriarch of Alexandria another, and the Emperor another? which is valid?

Q. 21. Is the Church no Church in the long intervals of Councils?

Q. 22. If it be, where is the Visible Constitutive Supremacy or Power? If in
the Patriarchs and Metropolitans they are divided, and account each other
sometime Heretics, and sometime Schismatics?

Q. 23. Who has Authority to make Patriarchs now or Metropolitans for all the
Christian World?

Q. 24. Must we now obey the major part of the old Patriarchal Seats?

Q. 25. If it be in all the Bishops of the Earth, 1. Who shall go to them all
over the World with all our Church cases? 2. Who shall judge which of them are
Heretics while they hereticate each other? 3. Who shall assure us that their
Votes are truly gathered? 4. Who shall bring them from all over the Earth to
the person to be judged? 5. Can they judge truly without hearing the accused
and their witnesses? 6. Where at this day may we find their Decrees by which
they Rule, except in Councils?

Q. 26. Must a General Council (or this College) consist of all the Bishops of
the World, or but of part?

Q. 27. If of all, is such a Council possible, or lawful?

Q. 28. If of part, who shall choose them? And seeing undoubted experience tells
us that most of the Clergy every where in such cases obey the Power that has
the Sword, whether the choice that is made in the Turks Empire will not be made
by the Turk, and in other Kingdoms of Heathens, Infidels, Papists, Heretics,
by their several Kings and Magistrates? And can we be sure such are infallible?

Q. 29. If the Empire of Abassia have but one Bishop (the Abuna) shall that
Empire have but one Vote in Councils, and be ruled by the rest? And is it not
certain that those next the Antipodes, and remotest Kingdoms, can send but few?
and must they therefore be ruled by those near the place who will be many?

Q. 30 Yea, is it not wickedness or madness to attempt to call aged Bishops (or
any) from all the Christian World, to displease prohibiting Princes, to hazard
their lives in travel many years, to forsake their Flocks so long, and by
differing Languages not able to understand each other; nor like to live long
enough to bring home the Decrees, when perhaps they must sit so many years in
Council as they did at Trent (wearing out the lives of many Popes) (And what is
the necessity of all this?)

Q. 31. If those few that are sent do that which the rest at home dissent from,
is it valid? e. g. King James chose Six to go to the Synod at Dort, and most
then consented, and most now dissent; The Parliament chose a Synod of one Mind,
and the King by his Clergy one of another.) And how shall we know that the
Churches own the Acts of their Delegates, and dissent not (as the Greeks did
after the Council of Florence? Can all Men and Women rest on things no better
known to them?

Q. 32. Seeing that it is notorious that the Bishops of almost all the
Christian World, except part of Europe, are very unlearned ignorant Men, (
Armenians, Georgians, Iberians, Mengrelians, most of the Greeks, Moscovites,
and the numerous Easterns called Nestorians, and Jacobites, and Copties, etc.
and abundance of the Papists also in Europe) How shall we be sure that so many
Ignorant Men (and too vicious) will do the work of Wise or Infallible Judges of
the Christian World, if they do but meet together in Council? (much less as
scattered and called a College.) Must not this be by an undeniable Miracl^? And
has God promised to Govern his Church by constant Miracles; yea, as many
Miracles as there be ignorant and wicked Bishops, and that through all
Generations?

Q. 33. Does it not require great Knowledge of History to be sure what Councils
there have been, and which were Orthodox and which Heretical, which valid and
which invalid, and what they did? and which side had the Major Vote? And is all
this Historical Knowledge necessary to Salvation, in Learned and Unlearned?

Q. 34. Yea, Is there one Priest of many that has such certainty of such
History of Councils, when Writers so much disagree?

Q. 35. Seeing Historians are but like other men, and all men are liars or
untrusty, and it is notorious that Ignorance, Faction, Temerity and Partiality,
if not Malignity, has filled the World with so much false History, that except
in Matters of Public uncontradicted Evidence, no man well knows what to
believe, How shall all Christians lay their Salvation on so great knowledge of
History as is necessary to certainty herein?

Q. 36. If the belief of Councils (or the College of Bishops as wide as the
World) be fundamentally necessary to Duty, Unity, or Salvation, Is it not
necessary that all know what are their Decrees and Laws? And how can they know
this when Councils and Decrees are so Voluminous; and few Priests know them?
and when the World is yet disagreed, what Canons or Laws are obligatory, and
what not? But they contradict and condemn each others Laws?

Q. 37. If a Layman should know but one part of the Councils Decrees about
Faith or Obedience, will such a defective half Faith and Obedience save him? or
must he know all?

Q. 38. If you say that all this Historical Knowledge is not necessary to the
Laity, but they must believe herein the Priests or Bishop that is over them. 1.
How is this then a belief of Councils? 2. What shall the poor People do, that
one of many hundred of them never see their Bishop, much less ever spoke with
him. 3. And are their Priests infallible herein or not?

Q. 39. Does not this by the deceitful noise of the Catholic Church and
Councils, and a College of Bishops, make every Parish Priest's word the very
Foundation into which all men's Faith must be resolved? And he that says [I
believe the Scripture, because the Church and Councils propose it or attest it,
and I believe that the Church and Council say it, because the Priest says it]
Does he not say as much as [I believe the Scripture, Church and Councils upon
the bare word of the Priest?]

Q. 40. Is it not hard for the People that know their Priests to be sottish,
ignorant, profane, drunken, malicious men, to lay all their Salvation on a
supposed certainty that these Priests say true?

Q. 41. If the Parishioners know also that their Priests never read the
Councils, and confess that he is ignorant of them, and know him also to be a
common liar, Can they certainly believe the Scripture and the Councils, and the
Matters of Faith, and duty contained in both, upon the word of such a Priest?

Q. 42. Can they that are unlearned and never see a Bishop, tell whether the
Parish Priest and the Bishop say the same? Or whether their Bishop be of the
same Mind with the other Bishops? and whether the Bishops e. g. of England be
of the same Mind with the Bishops of France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Denmark,
Sweden, etc. and they of the same Mind with the Greeks, etc.

Q. 43. Is it a Divine Faith that is resolved thus into the mere belief of Man;
yea, of an Ignorant Priest or Prelate? or but a Humane?

Q. 44. If we and all men had no other certainty of the Scripture but the word
of such a Priest, or the Decree of a Council, would it be more or less certain
to us than now it is?

Q. 45. Have none of all those Christians a true Divine Faith, who are
converted by Protestant Preachers, who teach them to believe the Scripture upon
other Evidence than a Councils word?

Q. 46. By what Evidence does a Council know the Scripture to be God's Word? Is
it only by the Testimony of a former Council? If so, How did that former
Council know it? and so the first Council that had none before to testify it?
And what use is there for the assertion of the later Council, when it is done
already by a former?

Q. 47. Why does not one Council determine of all that is necessary to
Salvation, but leave it still undone? But if it be done, must new ones be
called to the end of the World, to say the same thing over again, and do that
which others had done before them?

Q. 48. Is not the Law the Rule of Duty and Judgment? and must all Christians
be Judged at last by the Bishops Canon Law? And seeing Sin is a Transgression
of the Law, and it is harder to obey a Thousand Laws than a few; Are not they
the most Mortal Enemies to Christians who make them so many Laws, and make
Salvation so hard a work?

Q. 49. Seeing Christ was above three Years teaching his Apostles before he
died, and after his Resurrection [ was seen of them forty days, and speaking
of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, and being assembled together
with them, commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
Promise of the Father, even the Spirit to lead them into all truth, and bring
all things to their remembrance, and their Commission was to teach all
Christians to observe whatever Christ commanded ( Act. 1.3, 4. Math. 28.19,
20.) is it to be believed that yet Christ by himself and his Spirit in these
Apostles did not make all the Laws that are Divine, and enough for the Universal
Church to observe as necessary to Salvation and Universal Concord?

Q. 50. Is it not enough to Salvation and Church Concord for all the Pastors of
the Churches to agree, 1. In preserving these Laws and Doctrines of Christ? 2.
And to teach the People to know and obey them? 3. And to defend them against
Adversaries? and 4. To make them the rule of their Communion by the exercise of
the Keys? 5. And by their own Authority to determine of variable Circumstances
of Worship (such as the Place of meeting, the time, the translation, the
subject for the day, etc.) Is there besides all this a necessity of Universal
Laws for the Salvation and Concord of Believers, and of a standing Sovereign
Power in Priests, Prelates or Patriarchs or Pope to make such Laws?

Q. 51. Have we not better assurance that the foresaid Apostles taught by
Christ, and inspired by the Holy Ghost, had Authority and Infallibility for
this work, than we can have that Pope, Patriarchs, Prelates or Priests have it?

Q. 52. When some English Prelates and Priests tell us that he is a Schismatic
that obeys not the Universal Church, and that Schism is a damning Sin, do
they not Preach mere desperation to all that have not more knowledge than I
have, who cannot possibly find out a Governing Universal Church, nor its Laws,
though I would willingly find it and obey it?

Q. 53. Do they not Preach common desperation who say that Schism is a damnable
Sin, and he is in that guilt who suffers himself to be Excommunicated by
Prelates for not obeying them in any unsinful condition of Communion? (as H.
Dodwell speaks.) Do not such Carnifices animarum make it necessary to
Salvation, to know all the unsinful things in the World which a Prelate may
impose to be unsinful? And is any man on Earth so Skilful? How many indifferent
things are there which the wisest man may doubt whether they be indifferent: Of
old it was thought enough to know the few things which God made necessary: and
now these Tormenting Uniters make it necessary to know the multitude of things
indifferent to be such?

Q. 54. Must we needs know what sense perceives, by the credit of a General
Council or all the Bishops of the World? As whether I see the Light or Colors?
What taste my Meat has, etc? If not, why may I not take Bread to be Bread, and
Wine to be Wine, on the credit of my senses, though the Bishops or Council say
the contrary?

Q. 55. Must I have the Authority of a Council or College of Bishops to believe
that there is a God, and that he is most Great and Wise and Good, most Holy,
Merciful, True and Just? or to know that there is a Life to come, and the Soul
Immortal? or that men must not hate the Good, and love the Evil as such, nor
live in Murder, Theft, Adultery, Perjury, etc. Does not the Law of Nature bind
men without a Council of Prelates? And can they null that Law by their
pretended Sovereignty?

Q. 56. Must every man have the Sentence of a General Council (or College as
wide as the Christian World) to satisfy him of the truth of Christianity
before he is Baptized, and made a Christian?

Q. 57. Must we know what the Council or spacious College says, before we
believe the Creed, Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments? or did the ancient
Christians receive them only on such Authority? Did not every Baptizer expect a
Profession of the Creed?

Q. 58. Was not the Bible received before there was a General Council?

Q. 59. Have not Councils differed about the Canonical Books of Scripture? See
Bishop Cousins of the Canon, Compared with the Council of Trent.

Q. 60. Must we have new Councils to deliver us again the same Creed and Bible?

Q. 61. Is it not a reproaching of Christianity, to tell the World that after
1691 Years it is not yet fully known what it is, but we must have new Councils
to tell it us, and to make it up?

Q. 62. Did Councils only receive the old Apostles Creed, when they made so
many new ones, or added so many Articles?

Q. 63. Was the Primitive Church of the same Species with the present Romish
and Imposing Church, when he was then a Christian who professed belief of the
Creed as the Christian Symbol, and to desire according to the Lord's Prayer,
and Practice according to Christ's Commands? And now so many other things are
made necessary hereto.

Q. 64. Do not those men deal falsely who subscribe the 39 Articles of the
sufficiency of the Scripture as to all things necessary to Salvation, and yet
say that it is necessary to Salvation to obey the Bishop of the place in all
unsinful things, and consequently to Believe them all to be unsinful?

Q. 65. Is it by the Divine Authority of a Council or Mundane College of
Prelates, that we know which are the true Writings of Ignatius, Irenaeus,
Clemens R. and Alex. Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierom, Augustine, etc? Or do their
Critical Writers send us to the College or Council to know? If not, why may not
the Canon of Scripture be known (yea much better) by mere Historical Tradition
and inherent Evidence?

Q. 66. Is it not by History and not Church Power that we know what Popes have
been at Rome, what Councils have been called, and what they decreed? And may
not the same way secure us of the Matter of Fact about the Scripture?

Q. 67. Has any Council or College yet Decreed which are the true and current
Copies of the Original of the Scripture? and which of the various Lections are
true? If they had agreed but of the vulgar Latin, would Sixtus 5th and Clemens
8th, have Published Editions so vastly different? If they never did it yet,
when will they do it?

Q. 68. Did ever Council or College determine which is the truest Translation?

Q. 69. Did ever Council or College give the Church a Commentary on the Bible?

Q. 70. Did they ever write a Decision of the multitudes of Controversies about
the meaning of several Texts, and the multitudes of Doctrines which are yet
controverted among Papists themselves and all the World?

Q. 71. Is it a Satisfaction, or a gross Cheat to tell us of a necessary Church
Power, to Expound Scripture, and Judge of Controversies, who yet will not do
it, but leave all unexpounded and undecided?

Q. 72. Was Gregory Nazianzen a Fool, that spoke so much of the hurt that
Councils do, and resolved never to go to more?

Q. 73. Can I know that Pope or Council have Authority given them by Christ,
before I believe that Christ is Christ, and had Authority himself?

Q. 74. Can I know that Christ's Promise to Pope, Council or Prelate is true,
before I know that the Promise of Justification, Adoption and Salvation are
true: that is, Before I am a Christian?

Q. 75. Can I believe the Promise of Pardon and Salvation, or the Promise made
to General Councils or Prelates, without knowing the meaning of those Promises?
And can I believe the Churches Power from God, without believing the Promise of
it? And if I can understand all these Promises without a Council, why may I not
understand more? And how then do I receive all Scripture from a Council?

Q. 76. Do those that Preach to convert Infidels, in Congo, China, Japan,
Mexico, among Turks, etc. Preach first the Authority of General Councils (or a
Mundane College) as the Primum credendum, upon whose credit Christianity is to
be received? Has this been the way to Convert the World?

Q. 77. If Paul curse an Angel from Heaven if he bring another Gospel, and Paul
charge Timothy to see that men Preach no other or new Doctrine, must there be
Councils or a College to make either a new Gospel, or a new Doctrine, or
Universal Law?

Q. 78. If men were saved without believing the Canons and Decrees of Councils
before they were made, even by simple Christianity, is it not necessary Mercy
to let men be so saved still?

Q. 79. If it be not a new Gospel, but mutable Accidents which the Church Laws
do determine of, what need there an Universal Power or Sovereignty, or an
Universal Law for such, when diverse Churches and Countries may have diverse such
Accidentals, and the same Churches may change them as they see cause?

Q. 80. If it be not Legislation but Judicature that we must have an Universal
Judge or Power for, what are the Cases that they must Judge? Sure it is not
whether John or Thomas shall be judged capable of Baptism? or of the Lord's
Supper? or whether he be an Adulterer, a Drunkard, and impenitent therein, and
so to be Excommunicate? Must all the World come before all the World? Shall
Millions of Sinners be unjudged till all the Bishops of the World Judge them?
If it be Persons accused of Heresy, Schism or any Sin that must be judged,
must they not be heard, and their witness heard before they can be judged
justly? But if they Judge not of Persons but of Doctrines, whether they be
Heresy or not, this will make no Alteration or Reformation, till it be judged
what persons are guilty of such Errors or Heresies; And if particular Pastors
on the place must judge all such persons, is not the Scripture the Rule of
Faith a sufficient Rule to judge of Heresy by?

Q. 81. If it be whole Churches that are to be judged, will not a brotherly
power of disowning their Communion serve, without a Governing Power? Had every
one a Governing Power to whom the Apostles commanded with such not to eat, nor
bid them good speed? May not Princes renounce Communion with Neighbor Princes
and Nations without being their Governor?

Q. 82. In conclusion does it not remain that this pretended Universal
Sovereignty (Monarchical or Aristocratical) is the device of the Prince of
Pride, a Treasonable Usurpation over all Princes, disobedience to Christ, Luke
22. and Antichristian Usurpation of his Prerogative, and a base Captivating of
the Souls and Reason of Mankind, to a pretended Power which common sense,
reason and experience, fully proves to be a natural impossibility, or that
which in practice no Mortal Man or College is capable of.

Chap. XI. A Breviate of the Papists Faith and Church Doctrine, both the
Monarchical and Aristocratical sort.
1. WE must believe that Christ has a Church before we believe that he is
Christ, the Redeemer.

2. We must believe that this Church is Infallible or our Governor before we
can believe that Jesus is Christ, and our Governor.

3. We must believe that Christ Promised Infallibility or Governing Authority
to this Church before we can believe that he is Christ.

4. We must believe that this Promise is true and shall be fulfilled, before we
believe the Gospel Promise of Pardon and Salvation, that is, before we are
Christians, or believe the Scripture.

5. We must believe that the Pope is Christ's Vicegerent or Vicar General, (or
General Councils at least) before we can believe that Christ is Christ.

6. We must believe that the Words of the Apostles were Intelligible (else why
did they speak) but their Writings are not, till a General Council make them so
by an Exposition.

7. We must believe that it is intelligible which be true Bishops and Councils,
and what is the meaning of their Voluminous Decrees; but it is not intelligible
what is the sense of the Scripture till Councils tell us.

8. We must believe that God is the great Deceiver of the World, by sense and
things sensible: e. g. by sense, which takes Bread to be Bread, and Wine to be
Wine.

9. We must believe that all men are Heretics who deny not their senses; and
all that believe sense (even of all the sound men in the World) shall be
Damned. That is, All that believe God speaking by things sensible.

10. We must believe that God who is the great Deceiver of the World, even to
and by the senses, yet has given a Spirit of Infallibility to those Popes and
Prelates (in Council) who live in worldliness and wickedness.

11. We must believe that an unlearned Pope and Prelates, who never understood
the Original Tongue, but are ignorant men, are by Miracle in Council inspired
with the gift of right expounding the Scriptures which they never studied or
understood before.

12. We must believe that every Priest how ignorant or wicked soever, does by
pronouncing the bare words of Consecration, work many Miracles, turning Bread
into no Bread, Wine into no Wine, making quantity and other Accidents to exist
without Substance, etc. And that he can work such Miracles every hour of the
day; and if he can but get into a Bakers Shop or Vintners Celler to say Mass,
may in malice undo the poor men when he will, by turning all their Bread and
Wine into none.

13. We must believe that the Roman Empire was all the Christian World, or
that a Council General as to that Empire, was General as to all the World. And
that the Roman Emperor or the Pope called the Bishops of all the World
together: And that the humane Primate of one Empire, was Governor of all the
World.

14. We must believe that now that Empire is dissolved, the Laws then made
bind all the Princes and Churches on Earth, viz. that a defunct power still
rules even those that never owed them obedience.

15. We must believe that we in England are rightfully under a Foreign Church
Jurisdiction, contrary to the Oath of Supremacy.

. 16. We must believe that all Temporal Lords must be sworn to extirpate all
Protestants, and to perform it if able, on pain of Excommunication, Deposition
and Damnation; And that if they do not the Pope may execute this penalty of
Excommunicating and Deposing them, and giving their Dominion to others, and may
Absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance. Council. Later. sub.
Innoc. 3. Can. 1, 2, 3.

17. We must Swear never to expound the Scripture but according to the
Concordant sense of the Ancient Fathers, who never expounded much at all; much
less ever agreed in any Exposition of them all.

18. We must believe that God has given the Church, (that is, the Pope and
Councils) a Power to Expound hard Scriptures, and to end Controversies, and
that this is a great Blessing to us; When yet neither Pope nor Councils will
give us a Commentary on the Bible, or exposition of hard Texts; nor will
determine most of the Controversies that now trouble us.

19. We must believe that the Governing part of the Church is to be obeyed,
and Gods Word received but by their Proposal, when yet it is not known who is
the Governing part, Pope or Council, nor which Councils be true and which but
false Conventions; nor can they assure us how we may ever come to know it.

20. We must believe those Councils to be true and credible, which contradict
and condemn each other: and that both are in the right.

21. We must believe both that all Gods Word in the Sacred Scripture is true,
and that Councils and Popes say Truth when they contradict it.

22. We must believe that those Popes were true Popes and continued the valid
succession, and were Governors of all Christian Souls, whom General and
Provincial Councils condemned as Simonists, Heretics, Infidels, Atheists, or
Devils Incarnate: and yet that Councils are to be believed as the Proposers of
our Faith.

23. We must believe that General Councils have Universal Jurisdiction, when
there are none such, nor ever can be, nor ever were.

24. We must stay for the ending of our controversies, till we know that which
cannot be known, viz. what the Major Vote of all the Bishops on Earth Judge of
them: or till such Councils end them as caused them and their continuance.

25. When we have such Infallible Proof of the Scripture History as we have of
the former Kings and Laws of the Land, by evidence of Natural certainty, we
must exchange it for the uncertain determination of Popes and Councils,
depending on their Authority, Knowledge and Honesty; And the Infallibility of
these who in all their lives else do show much fallibility: And were either
Pope or Council Infallible no man that is not Infallible himself in judging of
their Infallibility, and also in knowing what it is that they propose as de
fide, is ever the nearer an Infallible Faith.

26. They must make it necessary to us to know that the Greeks, the Armenians,
and all other Christians who are twice as many as the Papists, have some way
forfeited their Authority and Credit: or else how shall we know that they being
the Majority, are not to be believed before the Pope and his VVestern Councils.

27. They make more Cosmography and History necessary to Salvation than God
made, or Vulgar Heads are capable of. The name of Rome is not in the Creed: It
is not necessary to Salvation to know that there is such a place as Rome in the
World: Much less to know all Countries on Earth where Christians dwell, and
which of them are of this Opinion or that; and which part has the major Vote
of Bishops, and is to be believed. If you say, They are Nestorians, Jacobites,
Greeks, etc. the People be not bound to know what any of these names signify.

Chap. XII. A humble Expostulation to the zealous Antipapists, Conformists and
Nonconformists, whether they are innocent as to promoting Popery?
THIS is not written to cast on you any contempt or reproach: I acknowledge
that I take you for the best Ministry, that any Nation on earth enjoys: But
it is to try if it may be to promote our common Repentance, and to Reform the
Nominal mistaken Reformation, of those that have sinned by extremes; which by
the assumed name of Reformation, have wronged God and Truth, and men's Souls,
with the greater advantage and success: But especially, if it may be yet to
stop such from a sinful progress, that they may not ignorantly set up Popery,
by crying down the name, and persons.

I. We have not sufficiently considered, how the Popes came to the Greatness
that they have attained, and how and by whom it is kept up: I mean, how much
the zealous Godly Christians did and do contribute thereto.

1. It was the great shame of other Churches by multitudes of Heresies, Sects
and Contentions, that made Rome seem as a Post for those to hold by, that had
by turning round become so giddy, that they could not stand.

2. When the best Pastors were persecuted, by proud Courtiers, erroneous
Councils, factious Bishops, and Arrian Heretics, because Rome had more
Concord, Quietness and Power, they used to seek help from the Bishop of Rome in
their necessity, and he was ready to take the advantage by helping them, to get
the reputation of Supremacy: So did he by Athanasius, and Chrysostom, and the
Eastern Bishops under Valens and Constantius, though Basil complains of the
Western Bishops for minding them no more: The Popes owning of Augustine and
Prosper, was a great help to him against Pelagius.

3. When the Bishops under the Pagans had endured Martyrdom, and Torments, and
Banishments for Christ, their godly Flocks, when Christianity had conquered,
thought none so fit for honor and power to govern and protect them, as the
tried survivers: And who could then be so fit? And so it was first the most
pious Christians that advanced the Bishops, and over-advanced them: And
specially the Roman Bishops, because very many of their Predecessors had been
Martyrs and Confessors. Though we had many able Lay-Magistrates here, which
Constantine had not quickly, yet those that put down Bishops were glad that the
Power of Institution and Induction, and of Universities and Church Maintenance,
should be in the hands of Dr. John Owen, Dr. T. Goodwin, Mr. P. Nigh, Mr.
Bridge, Mr. Sydrach Sympson, and such other. And if the disposing of such
advantages for Religion were now committed to Dissenters, whom would they
sooner choose for Power therein than their most esteemed Pastors?

3. When Emperors, Kings and Lords did pill and oppress the poor Commons, (as
in England in the Reign of William the Conqueror* W. Rufus, etc.) the Bishops
were the only men that by the Power of the Pope were able to control them, and
for the honor of their Office, often attempted it: And therefore the innocent
oppressed People were glad of the Pope's help and theirs, to ease their yoke.

4. It was the Godly People to promote Christianity, and honor the memory of
the Martyrs and Saints, that bring in the Praying at their Graves, and building
Altars first, and Churches after to retain the honor of their names; and that
carried and kept their bones and clothes as honorable Relicts, and recited
their names in their Service, and kept and honored their Pictures, and after
prayed to them. Much of that Superstition that is now most decried by us, was
brought by the most religious sort.

5. Almost all the Societies of Friars and Nuns, Benedictines, Franciscans,
Dominicans, Carthusians, Jesuits, Oratorians, etc. have been set up by the most
zealously Religious, when any fancied a peculiar way of strictness, the Bishops
being against it, they made friends to the Pope to give them his License to
serve God in their own devised way, and to have Government in their own Society
without the Bishops control: And the Pope craftily granted it, that they might
all be his own, and maintain his Power which they were necessitated to depend
on. So Dr. Goodwin and Dr. Owen told King Charles 2. that they desired of him
but what the Religious Orders had of the Pope. To serve God according to their
judgment, and hold their Liberty from the King, and not to be under the Bishops
or Presbytery. More such instances I might produce to show you by what sort of
men much of Popery came in, (but Pride and Worldliness did most.)

II. I humbly desire it may be thought on, whether some have not ignorantly
given up the whole Cause to a Foreign Jurisdiction, by their Prophetical
Exposition of Christ's Epistles to the seven Asian Churches, Rev. 2. and 3.
while they take them to mean seven Ages and States of the Catholic Church, and
two of them to mean the blessed Thousand years State. For whether by the Angel
be meant, the Bishop alone, or the Bishop with his Elders, or the Presbyters as
a College, it is plain one Governing Power over each Church (whether Monarch or
Aristocracy) is there mentioned by the word Angel. And if the Universal Church
have such in all Ages, and that by Christ's Institution, should we be against
it? Even that which the Thousand years shall have?

III. It is a very ordinary Doctrine with us, that the Jewish Church was the
Universal then in Infancy, or at least a Type of it: And if so, that Church had
one summa Potest^s, both in Magistracy and Ministry, sacredly Civil and
Ecclesiastical: And Christ plainly offered to gather them under him, and
continue their Polity (though not their Laws,) and set up twelve and seventy over
them accordingly. You I say, Though one Aaron was their Head, yet Christ is now
the only High Priest, it follows not that the Universal Church must have one
Humane Priest or King.

I answer; By your way it will follow, that it must have one Uniting Specifying
Humane Sovereignty Civil and Ecclesiastical. If Aaron be down, so is not the
Sanedrim, Civil or Priestly. Christ plainly offered to continue them in one
Visible Body, by his choice of twelve and seventy. And it is an Aristocratical
Universal Jurisdiction that is as bad as the Monarchical. 2. Christ was not a
Priest according to the Order of Aaron, but of Melchizedeck. 3. Christ is
Universal King as well as Priest; and has National Kings under him supreme:
Therefore his being King or Priest in Israel, would not exclude the necessity
of a supreme King or Priest under him. And if Israel was the Catholic Church
in Type or Infancy, it would follow that it also must have one such Head.

IV. Too few Protestants have sufficiently answered the Papists Argument fetched
from the instance of the Apostles, viz. The College of Apostles ( Peter called
Primus) were one Aristocratical Governing Power over the Universal Church: Ergo
such a Polity was instituted by Christ. And Christ never revoked this
institution. Government as well as Word and Sacraments, is an ordinary work to
be continued. And not as Miracles, Writing Scripture, Witnessing what they saw
and heard, the extraordinary part of the Apostles Work. Ergo in this they have
Successors.

This is the plausiblest of all Arguments for an Universal Jurisdiction. I have
showed you how it prevailed with Bishop Guning and other New Churchmen (I am
not willing to say, The new Church.)

How it is to be answered I have before showed, and more fully in my Treatise
of National Churches.

V. Have not the old and many later Nonconformists advantaged Popery by
decrying all Episcopacy or Imparity of Ministers? When it is so plain that
Christ did set Twelve above Seventy, and kept up the number by Matthias? and
gave power to Apostles, and they to other to be exercised over other Churches
and Pastors? And when it is apparent that all the Churches for many hundred
years, had Episcopal Government, (though not such as Popery and Tyranny has
since brought in:) Those called Heretics and Schismatics were for it: The
Novatians and Donatists over zealous for it, Nestorians, Eutychians,
Monothelites, Macedonians, Acacians, and all the Sects in the time of Heathen
Persecution: I find not that Aerius (alone excepted) did ever call it unlawful,
or saw that it was better for the Churches to be with them. But that the
Bishops and Presbyters Officers were equal.

And will it not greatly confirm the Papists to find such Protestants reject
the judgment and practice of all the ancient Churches, and differ from the rest
of the Christian World.

VI. But it advantaged them much more than our opinion; when the Scots Covenant
was imposed as the necessary terms of Ministry and Magistracy: Thereby
weakening the Protestants by a doleful Division, that by opinions were divided
too much before. When so great a part of the Kingdom, Clergy, Gentry and
Vulgar were for the renounced Prelacy, to shut all these, and all of their mind
that ever should come after, from Ministry and Magistracy, such men as Usher,
Beadle, Downame, Davenant, Brownrig, Ward, Prideaux, Field, etc. Oh how many
and how great! was this to unite the Protestants, and to strengthen them
against the United Papists?

VII. And alas how greatly have those Zealous Protestants confirmed the
Papists, and dishonored the Church and Christ their King, that maintain that
the Church became Antichristian in Anno 300 or 400, or at least 606, if not as
soon as Christ by Constantine took possession of the Imperial Visible
Government. I will not aggravate this as it deserves: But I wonder not if it
make thousands of Papists.

VIII. And Protestants too many have greatly hardened Papists, by too bold and
forced Expositions of the Apocalypse; and laying too much of the stress of their
Cause on it (as that Pagan Rome is not the Babylon there meant, nor that Rome
as the Mother or Nurse of Pagan Idolatry the Whore; nor the Pagan Empire the
Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, nor the Pontifical, Oracular,
Foretelling, and Literate Tribe, the Beast with two Horns, nor the Jew and
Gentile Miracle-working persecuted Christians (radically Epitomized in Peter
and Paul) the two Witnesses; and that Antichrist is spoken of in the
Revelations; and that Christ intended it as a Prophecy of all the great Affairs
and Changes of the Church to the end of the World.] I say, laying the stress of
our Cause on these, is next to giving it away. When a Papist shall call for the
proof of this, and ask whether John and the seven Churches understood it; and
what one man on Earth so expounded it of a Thousand years, or a Thousand four
hundred after Christ? and why Mr. Mede says, That the Waldenses were the first
of all Mortals that took the Pope to be Antichrist. And whether the Book was
written for none but a few men that agree not of the sense of it, so near the
End of the World?] It will puzzle the Hearers before all these, and many such
Questions are well Answered. When we have so much plain Evidence against Popery
in the whole Bible, to lay it mainly on these Expositions of the Revelation,
(where I find not three men in thirty that differ not in great Material Points)
is almost to betray it: when such a man as John Fox, P. 111. Vol. 1. Swears
that he had a Revelation contrary to much of this, which he repeateth in his
Comment on Revelations.

Specially those that venture to foretell thence the Year of Antichrist's fall,
and other particulars, which time confuteth, do expose us to the Scorn of
Confirmed Papists.

IX. Protestants have too often advantaged Popery, by ill answering the
Question, Where was your Church before Luther? Pleading the Catholic Churches
invisibility. When non apparere and non esse are often equal in Argumentation:
Greatly dishonouring Christ, as if so near the end of the World, the Albigenses
and Waldenses, (and some Papists that found fault with the Papal Miscarriages,
had been all the known Church for Eleven hundred Years: To tell the Mahometans
that the Kingdom of Jesus after so long endeavors, was scarce bigger than
Wales, is not the way to honor Protestants, or Christ.

And then they think to repair the dishonor by their Prophecy of the
Millennial Kingdom, which tieth the knot harder than before.

X. Running from them into Errors on the other extreme, and spotting the
Reformation with many such Errors, has greatly hardened and increased
Papists. Especially those Antinomian or Libertine Opinions, that overthrow both
Christianity and Morality; and that which infers these which too many have
promoted: such are the wrong Opinions about Reprobation, and the Cause of Sin,
and the extent of Redemption, and the false sense of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and of Justifying Faith, and of the meaning of Works that
justify not, and that to Believe we are justified and elected, is to believe
God's Word, or is Fides Divina; and that the Covenant of Grace has no
Condition, and is made only with Christ, and that both obeyed and suffered in
our Person in Law sense, so that we did in Law sense suffer in and by him, and
yet fulfill all righteousness by him, and were reputatively sinless from first
to last; that therefore we are justified by the Law of Innocence or Works that
condemns us, having perfectly kept it by Christ, that our works being not
meritorious are not rewardable; Too many such Doctrines are Published here and
abroad, by such as Maccovius, Cluto, Cocceius and some before them. And when
Papists find one gross falsehood, they think all our Religion is such.

XI. It greatly confirms Papists when they find our Writers falsely to accuse
them, of any Doctrine which they hold not: which is very ordinarily done by
those that never read them, on the mere credit of some Reverend Ministers that
so accused them before; For instance, of the Point of Merit, when men read
their Books of Self-abnegation, Annihilation, Self-abasing, and Nothingness,
renouncing Merit, even in distributive Justice, etc. Some have wondered and
said, How much further are the Papists from trusting to or boasting of their
Merits, Works and Holiness than we are?

XII. But Protestants have no way promoted Popery more than by their manifold
Divisions and Sects, and their mutual enmity and miscarriages. I need not name
them. God has made Unity and Concord so necessary and amiable to Man, that
Nature and Grace abhor the contrary. Satan is the Divider of Christ's Kingdom:
and a Kingdom divided cannot stand. Multitudes turn and continue Papists, not
knowing where among so many Sects to fix their choice, especially when* they
see and hear us Revile, Censure, Silence, Imprison and Persecute one another as
intolerable, they think they may do so by us all, and judge of us as we do by
one another. And to vilify us, is to value themselves. Which Sect, say they,
would you have me turn to, if I turn?

XIII. Specially if we fall into odious Scandals as well as Sects, the Crimes
of Men seem the fault of our Religion, When they have recited the Miscarriages
here from 1642, till 1660. they think they have decided all the Controversies:
And also when they can recite the Munster Madness, and others such.

XIV. Has the Silencing of Two thousand such Ministers, and shutting the
Church Doors against desired Unity and Concord, and keeping out Candidates, and
giving advantage to Papist Rulers to give full liberty for Popery, done nothing
to its increase? What has done more to advantage Popery, by disabling
Protestants, and disgracing their Ministers of each Party, and keeping up the
hopes of Foreign and Domestic Enemies, than casting the Nation into a kind of
Intestine Hostility, and keeping it so by the Dividing Laws and Canons? which
though it was principally the effects of secret Popish Projects, yet had no
Anti-Papists by false Prejudice, Malice, Revenge and worldly Interest, had a
hand in the effecting, and since in defending it, they had been more innocent.
And I would the Provocation had not driven many Nonconformists into harder
thoughts of Bishops and Liturgy than they deserve, or than they had before the
experience of their usage. But it is hard when for Innocence and Duty men must
lie [and many die] in common Jails, and have all they have taken from them, and
be left to Beggary or Charity, to keep up as great an esteem of the Authors or
Abettors of such Hostility, as if they were men of Love and Peace. When they
see men Hanged for taking away a small part by Stealth or Robbery, it must be
more than ordinary. Patience and Love, that shall cause men to think and say no
harm, even by honorable and Right Reverend men, that even by Law and Judgment
said to be just, shall take away all, and much more than all. We had not
procured hatred by our importunity in 1660 and 1661. in Pleading and
Petitioning to prevent all this, if the certain foresight of it in its Causes,
had not seemed very dreadful to us: And yet we do not see the End: The
Hostility continues, if not increases, even while the Blood and Flames of
Germany, Hungary, Transylvania, Savoy, Flanders, and Ireland and partly
Scotland, loudly cry to us, Fire, Fire; and instead of avoiding the like, we
are as busy as ever to bring more fuel, and increase the flame. And O
dreadful odious Case! All is as for God, and Religion and the Church, that is
thus done against God, Religion, the Church and the whole Land and our
Posterity.

XV. And by our several ways of Unjust and Causeless Impositions, we have
hardened the Papists in defending their more numerous Snares. They say, If an
Independent Church may bind its Members, to take their Covenants, to submit to
their popular Examinations and Discipline, to avoid Communion with the Parish
Churches, and not to forsake their Church but by tried Reason or Consent: And
if a Convocation may impose what is done in England on terms so sharp; why may
not the Pastors and Councils that have greater Charge and Power, do as much and
more?

XVI. The Sectarian weak-headed part of Protestants have greatly advantaged
Popery, by their ignorant calling every Ceremony, and Form, and Opinion that
they distaste, by the Name of Antichristian: and saying, O this is Popish, or
taken out of the Mass Book; when some of them know not what Antichristianity
is, saving as every Sin against Christ is Antichristian, nor know they what the
Mass Book is, nor what Popery is; And its well if some knew better what
Christianity is.

When men hear that a Bishop, a Surplice, a sumptuous Church Edifice, a
Ceremony, the Liturgies, a Holy Day (and it is well if not the use of the Creed
and Lord's Prayer) be Antichristian, they are tempted to think that Popery
called Antichristianity is no worse a thing than these; and so honor Popery,
and deride its Accusers.

I would these named were all the wrongs that Protestants have done to the
Protestant Cause of Reformation, and all that they have ignorantly done for
Popery. But we hope our great Intercessor will procure forgiveness for them
that know not what they do. But must the Church still suffer so much by its
zealous Friends?

Chap. XIII. What is the Duty of all other Christians toward the Papists in
order to the Promoting of the Common Interest of Christianity?
THough I have distinctly answered this Question in the Second Part of my Key
for Catholics, I will here answer it again, lest I be thought to run into
Extremes, or encourage the Extremes of others; by all that I have here and
elsewhere said. And as to the chat of Ignorant Faction, that will say I
contradict my self, I will answer it with Contempt and Pity.

I. First, we must lay deep in our Minds, and inculcate on our Hearers the
common Fundamental Truths and Duty: That Love is the Second great Commandment,
like to the First: That it is the fulfilling of the Law: That he that dwells in
Love dwells in God, and God in him: That he that loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, loves not God whom he never saw: That some love belongs to Enemies,
and much more to Brethren: That as much as in us lies we must live peaceably
with all Men: Yea, and follow Peace with all men.] And that these are Duties
that nothing can dispense with.

II. We must acknowledge and commend all that is good among them; and must
truly understand in what we are agreed: That is, They acknowledge all the same
Books of Scripture to be the true Word of God which we acknowledge. They own
all the Articles of the Creed which we own: and of the Nicene and
Constantinopolitan Creed. They own all the Lord's Prayer, and all the Ten
Commandments, saving that they take the Second to be but part of the First, and
divide the Tenth into two. They teach in their Catechisms, all the Beatitudes,
Math. 5. and the Moral Virtues, and the Graces of Faith, Hope and Love, etc.
And he that practically and sincerely does all this has many Promises of
Salvation in the Scripture.

III. We must not untruly fasten on them any Error which they hold not, nor
put a false sense on their words, though we may find many Protestants that so
charge them; nor may we charge that on the Party which is held but by some whom
others contradict. How far many Protestants herein mistake and rashly wrong
them (In the Doctrine of Predestination, Free Will, Grace, Merits,
Justification, Redemption, Perseverance, etc.) I have freely showed in my
Catholic Theology and End of Doctrinal Controversies; And Ludovicus le Blank
after others has excellently opened.

IV. We must not take all the Laity to own all that the disputing Clergy write
for; when they neither understand it nor consent to it.

V. As we must distinguish between the Essentials of Popery, and their
Integrals or other Corruptions, so we must not charge any with the first merely
for being guilty of many of the other: Else we must call all the Greeks,
Moscovites, Abassines, Armenians, etc. Papists.

VI. We must still distinguish between Christ's Catholic Church, unifyed by his
own Headship only; and the Papal Church, unifyed by a pretended Universal
Humane Head, Monarchical or Aristocratical. And so we must distinguish between
a Christian as such, and a Papist as such. And we must hold Communion with
Papists in Christianity, though not in Popery; And must grant that those that
hold Christ's Headship and Christianity more firmly and practically than the
Pope's Headship and Popery, and seeing not the Contradiction, would renounce
the Papacy if they saw it, may be saved.

VII. To profess utter averseness to all Reconciliation with them, and to
declare them no Christians but Antichristians, that must be the Objects only of
our Hostility, is to be Adversaries to the first mentioned Fundamentals, and to
the common interest of Peace and Christianity.

VIII. We must disclaim their opinion that say that the Church became
Antichristian in 300, or 400, or 600, or any time before the Popes claimed
Universal Jurisdiction over the Christian World, as well as in the Roman
Empire. And then the Papal revolt did not reach one half the Church.

IX. We must not impute the Papal or Patriarchal Vices and Pride, to the
generality of the inferior Bishops, though in Councils too many were very
Factious: For even a Heathen Amm. Marcellinus tells us the great difference, by
Papal Pride, and lower Bishops Humility and Virtue.

X. We must not take the Question, whether the Pope be Antichrist as more
necessary than it is; Nor make the Decision an Article of Faith, nor lay more
of the stress of our difference on it than we ought: For we have many far
clearer Arguments against them from plainer Scriptures.

XI. Therefore we must not force the vulgar to Disputes with Papists, without
cause, on forced Expositions and Suppositions that turn the Revelations against
Rome Papal as the Babylon and Antichrist there meant, when so much may be said,
and is by some Protestants to make it likely that it is but Rome Pagan that is
there meant. We must not give their Disputers the advantage of Challenging us
before the Vulgar, to name one Man for a Thousand Years and more after Christ,
that expounded the Revelation as we do, or that took the Pope to be Antichrist.

XII. We must not imitate the great Novel Expositors of the Revelation, that
make the seven Churches to be seven States and Ages of the Universal Church,
and two of them to be in the World to come after the Conflagration; and
consequently, that if by the Angel of each Church be meant the Bishop (either
alone or with his Elders, as most think old and new Expositors) then an
Universal Humane Head is of Gods Institution. And if that be true, then P^pery
will be right in its Essentials, and we in the wrong. We must take heed
therefore of the ignorant factious Zeal of over-doers, that make men Papists by
false opposing them.

XIII. We must take heed lest we make any one falsehood a part of the Protestant
Religion and Reformation (much less many plain falsehoods as too many do). For
when Papists find any such Untruths, they will judge of our Religion in the
main by those.

XIV. We must see that in the Form of our Government and Worship, we own not
Principles of Confusion, and set not up our selves, our devised terms of Church
Admittance and Communion, and thereby seem to justify such Additions among
Papists and others.

XV. We must live in Love and Peace and Concord among our selves, that our
Fractions, Sects, and Errors and envious Oppositions, make us not a scorn, and
make not Papists think that we are mad, and that there is no way to Unity and
Peace but in Popery, uniting under one Humane Head.

XVI. We must own Christian Communion Indefinite, and as Universal as Capacity
allows, while we disown. Universal Humane Jurisdiction. But we must
understand well the difference.

We are ex Authoritate Imperantis bound to obey Jurisdiction: But to hold
Agreements nothing binds us but God's general Commands for Peace and Concord,
and our own Contract and the common good. So that if Councils agree on any
thing contrary to these Ends, no Church is bound by such their Canons, nor to
consent. Just as a Diet of Kings and States are free to consent or dissent to a
Major Vote, as the reason of the thing requires (and no further) for the
common advantage of Christianity. But have no one King Universal to whom they
are all Subjects.

XVII. Yet if any King and People will be so slavish as to subject themselves
to a foreign King or Jurisdiction, their own consent may oblige them as far as
Self-enslaving may do.

XVIII. We must not deny what good use God has made of Rome's Grandeur, Unity
and Concord: It Is like else Christianity had not kept up such advantages of
strength, wealth and concord against the great Power of the Mohammedan and
Heathen Enemies.

XIX. We must not by the Scandals of some Persons or Fraternities, be drawn to
think the rest are like them, nor to deny but such men as Bernard, Gerson, and
abundance of Friars, and Nuns, though zealous for the Roman Concord, were godly
excellent Persons: Even in the dark Ages of their Church, what abundance of
most learned School Doctors had they, in which much Piety also appeared (as in
Bonaventure, Aquinas, Henricus ab Hassia, and many such. As also in many of
their Bishops, as Borornaeus, Sales, etc. And in the Oratorians, and many most
Learned Jesuits. All this we must heartily confess and honor.

XX. The common Interest of Humanity, Christianity and God's foresaid
fundamental Precepts, oblige Protestant and Papist Princes to Confederate how
to live peaceably among themselves, and to unite against the Common Enemies,
while they cannot yet agree in the Points of Difference. That so far as they
are agreed, they may walk by the same rule.

XXI. I think we should hurt no Papist in Body or Goods, any further than is
necessary to our own Defense, and the Defense of the Truth, and Souls of Men,
and the Kingdoms safety. But win them by Love.

XXII. Because a factious Solicitation of the ignorant to submit to their
foreign Jurisdiction, is enmity to Kings, and States, and Churches, as against
their Essential Rights, the unpeaceable managing of Disputes and Endeavors to
such Treason and Slavery, may be as much restrained by Law, as Men may be
restrained from teaching that Wives must forsake their Husbands and lie with
other Men, and Children forsake their Parents, and Soldiers their Kings and
Captains, and all obey the Pope against them.

XXIII. Yet because they will say that we dare not hear the truth, I think it
not amiss, if they be allowed some time, when the Rulers think fit (not to
challenge weak Ministers at pleasure to Dispute) but in a fit Assembly to say
what they can, so be it they will withal there hear what can be said against
them, by some able Divine chosen by the King, Bishop or Ministers? who also
should choose the time and place.

These terms are better than the unreconcileable Hostility kept up by the terms
of Antichrist and Heretic.

XXIV. And (though the unlearned have safer and better Books enough to read) I
think it will do much to rectify men's Judgments that are inclined to extremes,
and to mellow and sweeten their hearts into Christian Love, if the Learned
would read the Devotional Pious Writings of Papists; such as Bernaud, Gerson,
Gerhardus Zutphaniensis, Sales, Kempis, Thauleros, Benedictus de Benedictis
Regula Vitae; Barbanson, Ferus, the Oratorians, and in English, The Interior
Christian, Parsons of Resolution, Baker, the Life of Nerius, and of Mr. de
Renti, and other such.

They would find there so much of God as would win their affections to a
Brotherly Kindness, while they find so much of that which is in themselves.
Holy breathings after God, are savory to those that have the like. I know those
that have read or heard such books as these, that have said, How have we
misunderstood the Papists? If an esteemed Minister should Preach part of The
Interior Christian. or such another book, and not tell his hearers whose it
was, I doubt not but many godly people, would cry it up for a most excellent
Sermon: When as if they before knew that it was a Papists they would run away.

I do not by any of this encourage any raw ungrounded Protestants to cast
themselves on the Temptation of Popish Company or Books: But that you may see
that I write not this rashly and without just cause, I will instance in one
Book called Bunnys Resolution; It was written by Parsons, one accounted a most
traitorous Jesuit, and Edmund Bunny Corrected and Published it; (and Parsons
Reprinted it with more Popery, reviling Bunny for being so bold with his Book,
as to sponge out the Popish Errors. I have met with several eminent Christians
that magnified the good they had received by that Book.

When I was 21 years of Age, the Bishops severity against Private Meeting
caused many excellent Christians in Shrewsbury to meet secretly for mutual
Edification: At one of these where was of Ministers Mr. Cradock, Mr. Rich.
Simonds, and Mr. Fawler (cast out at Bridewell Church since) Mr. Simonds said,
that there were some godly women in great doubt of the sincerity of their
Conversion, because they knew not the Time, Means and Manner of it, and desired
all that were willing to open the case of their own, to satisfy such. I
remember but one that could tell just the Time, Means and Manner, but with most
it began early, and was brought on by slow degrees; but so as some One Time and
Means made a more observable change than any other: Among these three spoke
their own case, that after many Convictions, and a love to Piety, the first
lively motion that awakened their Souls to a serious resolved care of their
Salvation, was the reading of Bunnys Book of Resolution: These three were Mr.
Fawler, Mr. Michael Old (for Zeal known through much of England) and my self.
And having since heard of the same success with others, (when yet now there be
many Books that I had rather read) I have reason to think that God notified his
will, that we should (instead of rash hatred) profit by each other, and love
his Word whoever writes it.

XXV. And we are the more obliged to behave our selves with all due tenderness
to Papists and all other exasperated parties, in the Consciousness of the
aforesaid guilt that we have fallen under, to their hardening and hurt.
Weakening the Protestants is strengthening the Papists. Repentance is so hard a
work, that it seldom goes well down with any party to hear of their sins,
especially the most heinous, because they are most frightful and odious. But
yet it is so necessary a work to Repent, necessary to the sinners, and
necessary to this Land, that a Dying Minister of Christ (who daily lamenteth
his own sin) should not for fear of the anger or reviling of the impenitent,
omit so necessary a work, while Danger and yet Hope seem to tell us that this
is the time.

Having often done it to the displeasing of many, I will, though it yet
displease, add this brief warning.

If the remembrance of the years 1643 to 1660. of all that was done in England,
Wales and Scotland, against Order, Peace, Government, Ministry, sound Doctrine
and Discipline, by the Sectarian Army and the Antinomian, Anabaptist and
Separating Ministers and People that encouraged them, and the fatal end they
came to without any bloodshed to overcome them, and the consequent changes: I
say if all this convince not the Separating Sectarian sort of professors, that
they have been heinously injurious to the Protestant interest, and have
ignorantly kept up the life of Popish hopes, I know not what means can convince
such men.

II. And if after all the Miseries of former divisions and uncharitable
violence, before and in the Wars, those that have added the greater burdens,
and revengefully done what I love not so often to mention, by Laws, execution and
additional reproach, upon Corporations, Churches, Universities, Ministers, and
brought and yet keep the Land by resolved obstinacy, in its divided dangerous
sinful state, and lock up their Church door against desired Unity and Concord,
and all this for nothing, but to justify the revengeful changers and their own
complying acts, I say again, and again, if all this after the last thirty years
experience added to all before, seem to the guilty no wrong to the Protestant
interest, nor to the Nations Peace and Hopes, nor any advantage to Popery, nor
any sin against Christ in his Servants, the Lord take some extraordinary
effectual way, to convince, heal and save so blind and obdurate a people: for I
see no hope of ordinary means.

The God of Peace have mercy upon an Ignorant Unpeaceable World, and prepare us
by Faith, Hope and Love for the World of Love and Peace. Amen.

Postscript.
1. I Perceive some cannot digest it, that a Christian Sovereign should be the
Head, that is, the Forma informans, specifica and unifica of a National Church,
and that it is not said to be a National Sacerdotal Head, either Monarchical in
one primate or Aristocratical in several Metropolitanes or Diocesanes, as one
College and Persona politica; Or as Mr. Hooker, Dr. Beveridge, and the
Republicane Politicians, and most fanatics think, in the Major part of the
Body, ruling by their Representatives and chosen Proxies, which is called a
Democracy; or mixed of these by natural right.

2. And if any thing with these men were strange, it would seem strange, that
the same men that subscribe to or approve the Canons of 1640 for the Divine
making or institution of Kings and that fill Pulpits and Books with Invectives
against Rebels Fanatics and the Parliaments Wars, and many Writers of
Politics, for holding that the King is singulis Major and universis Minor, and
that the Power of the Head is from the Majority of the Body, and that the
Legislative Supremacy is in them radically as in the Majestas Realis derived to
the King as the Majestas personalis, should come themselves to build their
Church Power on so rotten a foundation; And that the poor Nonconformists long
called Rebellious, must now become against such Churchmen the defenders of the
Sovereigns Power. But such is the case of this blind, giddy, factious World.

3. According to my usual (despised) method, I will distinguish the
Controversy de re, from that de nomine: And I may say.

That de re all men are agreed of all these following things.

1. That Civil Power in genere is of Gods institution: and his Laws made their
supreme Law, and his Will and Glory their ultimate end.

2. That as all are thus bound, so Christian Sovereigns are both bound and
qualified as from God, and for God, and therefore are sacred persons.

3. That the forcing power of the Sword is only committed to Magistrates; to be
exercised FOR and UNDER GOD, and by Christians for and under Jesus Christ; And
therefore such Christian Princes are not to be called Civil, as exclusive of
Religious or Spiritual work, but as exercising their power pro civibus, for the
good of their Kingdoms, even religious.

4. That God is the Author or institutor also of the Sacerdotal Office; and
has specified it in his Word: And that the Magistrate or the sacred Ministry,
can neither of them put down each other, nor alter any part of either Office
which God has instituted.

5. That it belongs to the Sacerdotal Office (or Clergy) to be the official
Preachers of the Gospel, and to judge by the Power of the Keys, who is fit, or
unfit, for Church entrance by Baptism, and for Church Communion, and to
Baptize, and administer the Lords Supper, admonish, suspend and excommunicate
from their communion, such as deserve it, and to absolve the Penitent.

6. That the Priesthood (or Pastors) have no power to use the Sword, by force,
(on Body or Estate, by Stripes or Mulcts) nor yet to force or require the
Magistrate to do Execution by the mere Sentence of the Clergy, without trying
and judging the Cause himself.

7. The Pastors that the Magistrate chooses for the care of his Soul, may
declare him unfit for Communion if by impenitency in gross scandal he deserve
it; but may not disable him from Government, by a public dishonouring
Excommunication; much less send such a reproach abroad in the Land or World.

8. The Bishops, and all the National Clergy are Subjects to the Sovereign, as
Physicions and Philosophers etc. are. And he is Governor over them in matters
of Religion which belong to the determination of National Laws, as well as in
worldly things. The Pastor as the Physicion is judge judicio privato personali
how to use his own Art and Work, and when, and on whom: But the King is Judge
judicio publico of all that is to be the common Rule: As that Physicions use no
Poisonous Drugs, take not too great Fees, what Hospital he shall be over, etc.
And so for the Ministry, that they preach not Heresy, or Schism, and Strife,
that they neglect not their Work, that they use a fit Translation of the Bible,
that they have due Maintenance, Place, etc.

9. The Sovereign is Judge whether his Christian Kingdom shall be divided into
Provinces, Diocesses, and of what extent they shall be, or shall have one
Primate, or all particular Churches shall be equal; or some Tolerated and
Privileged from the Diocesans.

10. The King may make public Laws for Family Religion, that all Children be
taught to read, and learn Catechisms, and Scripture, and use the Lords day in
pious Exercises, and submit to their Teachers, and forbear profane contempt or
abuse of Persons or Things.

I think the whole Matter is decided in these ten Particulars.

4. II. Now de nomine the question is what is to be called the FORM, and what
but the MATTER of the Church as National. For of a Church as Congregational, or
as Diocesan, or a Provincial we have no controversy: No more than of a City or
School.

And seeing every Politic Society consists of the Pars Imperans and Pars
Subdita, all grant that the Pars Imperans as related to the Pars Subdita, is
the Specifying or Unifying Form and Head; it is then clear that all the Clergy
being but the Pars Subdita under the Government of the summa potestas (whether
Kings alone, or King and Parliament, or an Aristocracy) they can be but the
Matter of the Church as National, and not the Formal Head: For a Body Politic
of one Species can have but one Head of that Species. So that to make a
Primate, or two Metropolitans, or a Synod of Diocesans, or a Convocation
representing all the Clergy, to be more than the Matter of a Church as
National, is to make them the summa potestas or Sovereign, and to depose King
and Parliament.

5. Obj. But the Regiment being of two Species, so is the Policy, Society and
Supremacy: Each is Supreme in sua specie.

Ans. 1. So then you would have two National Churches and Sovereigns: If you will
extend the Controversy but to the Name, it may be the better born: But then
acknowledge the Equivocation, and give us the definition of each Church, and
use not the Name of the Church of England for your own Form only.

2. But a Subject Policy is not the Supreme and denominating Policy: It Is
private and subordinate as to National. The Physicions, the Soldiers, the
Mariners, etc. though they are in hoc fit to overruled the King and
Parliament, are not therefore the Sovereign Power of the National Body Politic.

6. Obj. But theirs are matters of small moment, but the Clergy are Rulers in
matters of Salvation.

Ans. Unhappy dividing Rulers they have been here and in most of the Churches.
But, 1. I have proved that Kings are Rulers also in matters of Salvation as
great as theirs, and over them: 2. Was not Moses, and David, and Solomon, and
Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah, and Josiah, etc. the Sovereign Rulers of Church and
Priests, though an Vzziah might not offer Sacrifice or Incense? 3. The proper
Governing power of Bishops is but over their own Flocks, and they may not Rule
in other Men's Diocesses, much less over King, Parliament and Kingdom, further
than the Sovereign gives them Political Power.

7. Obj. They may command Kings and Kingdoms in Christ's Name to obey God and
forbear Sin.

Ans. True; so did every Prophet; so may any one Minister: Yea a Foreigner, a
Salvian, a Luther, etc. But this is Gods Government Nunciative, and not
Political: And so if the Metropolitans, Diocesans, Convocation or a General
Council command as in Christ's Name, and prove their Commission as Messengers
from him, we will obey Christ in them: But if one Man bring better proof from
Scripture that he speaks from Christ, he is to be obeyed before a Council
that proves no such thing. This sort of Divine Authority lies in Evidence
(which most Bishops on Earth now have not) of the truth of their Message, and
is but Nunciative, and works only on voluntary Believers and Consenters.

And if the Controversy de nomine be whether a Christian Kingdom as such may
be called A CHURCH what pretense have the deniers? Not a notatione nominis: The
Church in the Wilderness is a Scripture Name: And sure the Jews Church was not
denominated from the Priests only: Moses is ofter named as its Head than Aaron.

8. Obj. But are not Judges and Bishops a part of the Pars Imperans as well as
the Sovereign.

Ans. Only subordinate in their Provinces: They are but as the Kings Hands and
Tongue. They are Subjects themselves, and have no Political Power but what he
gives them.

2. If you might so far distinguish of them as Imperant under the King and as
Subjects, as to say that Judges and Bishops are as the Wife in the Family that
has a Governing power over Children and Servants* that makes her not the
denominating Head of the Family, but a Subject of the highest Rank*

9. Qu. What if a Christian Kingdom had no Pastors?

Ans. Then they were but an Embrio, or half Christian, and not materia
disposita for a full formation. The Matter and Privation (that is, Dispositio
receptiva) are Essential to the Body, though they be not the Form.

10. Qu. But what if under an Infidel King, a Christian Nation be confederate
under Bishops.

Ans. They are no Christian Kingdoms, but a Christian Nation, and are many
confederate Churches, and may be called One Church equivocally and secundum
quid as confederate Kingdoms may be one Kingdom: But they are but materia
disposita sine forma as to a National Church properly so called, and as such.

11. Qu. Are those of the Church of England that are not Conformists?

Yes, if they conform to Christianity, and are Subjects of the same King.

12. There is an odd Writer that has lately published a book to prove that the
Act of Toleration freeth not Nonconformists from the guilt of Schism. Doleful
is the case of such a Church and Land, where the Learned men after near thirty
years silencing, imprisoning, and ruining multitudes, know not to this day what
they are, or what they hold, and who it is that they do all this against. How
can such wink so hard as not to know that we took it for no Schism to assemble
for Gods Worship before the Act of Toleration, while they have done all this
against us for so doing? Could they think us so mad as to suffer Jails and
Ruin and Scorn (and Death to many,) for known Schism? And if we took it for a
duty before, how can we take the Act of Toleration to be it that must justify
us?

But such men Englan^ suffers by, that cannot distinguish between Fo^m Divinum
and Humanum: We believe that Go^s Command justifies us in foro Divino, for
obeying it: But the Law justifies us in foro humano: G^ds Law and Judgment
will keep us from Hell, and at last silence our silencers: But the Kings Laws
bring us and keep us out of Jails, and from the Jaws of them that envy our
Liberty and Lives.

13. It Is a question considerable, whether England be a Protestant Church or
not, if it have a Papist King? To which I say, we must distinguish between a
professed Papist and a concealed one. 2. And between a King that has the total
Sovereignty and Legislative Power, and one that has but part of it, and the
Parliament another part. 3. And one whose Laws are for Popery (or his power
above Laws used by Commission) and one who rules by Protestant Laws. And so

1. A Kingdom under a total Popish Sovereignty, ruling by Popish Laws or
Mandates above Law, is no Political Protestant National Church, tho all the
Clergy were Protestants: The form that denominateth is Papal: And yet it is not
a Papal Church or Kingdom: Because the matter is essential, and its disposition
without which non recipitur forma. It is a Christian Church, neither Protestant
(save equivocally) nor Papist, but mixed.

But if Bishop Morley and those Conformists that give the total Legislation and
Sovereignty to the King alone be not in the right, nor they that make it
traitorous to suppose that the Kings Authority speaking by Law, may be set
against his Personal Will, Word and Commission, then the Parliament and Laws
remaining Protestant, the Kingdom and Church may ye be so called, though not in
the fullest sense. For then the Laws being the Kings public voice, and the
effect of a Power above his own alone, (...) them though he be a Papist he Rules
as a Protes^ant. But it is otherwise if his Commissions ( e. ^. to the French
or Irish to Invade the Land) be ^bove Law, and may not be resisted on any
pretense whatsoever: So great a stress lies on this poi^t of Conformity.

14. But I will leave another case to the consideration of others. ^f
Metropolitans, or Primates, if Diocesans or Convocations, be the summa
Potestas, Ecclesiastica, and a Church be truly Societas Politica, or governed;
Qu. Then what Religion was the Diocesan Church of Gloucester, while Godfrey
Goodman was Bishop? Or the Diocesan Churches of Eli, of Norwich, of Oxford,
etc. while Dr. Guning, Dr. Sparrow, Dr. Parker, etc. were Bishops? Or the
Church of England and Ireland, while Dr. Laud, Dr. Neale were here the
Metropolitans, and Dr. Bromhall Primate of Ireland.

15. As to the Learned Dr. (now Bishop) Stillingfleet, that makes the Church
of England to have no visible Informing Constitutive Head or Sovereign, but to
be Governed by mere Consent of men Agreeing in a Convocation representing the
whole body, I am sorry I have said heretofore so much against it; as if the
Consent of all Writers of Politics regardable, had not been answer enough, who
agree that all Politic bodies are essentiated by the Pars Imperans, or summa
Potestas, and the Pars subdita, as the Materia disposita: And I so much honor
the National Church of England, as that I shall not yet grant (till it is
further deformed) That It is no Political Body, but a mere Confederating
Community, lik^ a Confederacy of Kingdoms.

But if ever it come to that, you may say, that when the same Land has many
sorts of Confederate Clergies, it has as many Churches; and which is the best,
I think is not known in France, or Spain, or Italy, or here by the Major Vote;
nor has Nature put a Ruling Authority in Major Votes of Lay or Clergy, as born
with them, before Contract give it them by Political Constitution.

All Is well in Heaven: The Lord fit us for it.

March 30. 1691.

Since the writing of all this I have read Bishop Stillingfleet's excellent
Charge to his Clergy; which would give me hope not only of the continuance of
the Protestant Reformation here, but also of such a further Reformation as may
procure our Concord, or at last move the Lawmakers, so far to amend the Act of
Uniformity as may procure it; were it not that the deluge of the wickedness in
City and Country, and the paucity of Men qualified for his described Work, and
the Power and Number of the Enemies of it, makes me fear that it will die as
unpracticable singularity.

But I humbly recommend to the Clergy the regard especially of these passages
in it. I. Page 12. Those that have the smallest Cures are called PASTORS, and
Linwood notes that Parochialis Sacerdo^ dicitur Pastor, and that not only by
way of Allusion, but in respect to the Cure of Souls; but we need not go so far
back: What are they admitted to? Is it not ad Curam Animarum?] Ask Dr. Fuller
Dean of Lincoln, then, Whether it be Ministerial Truth to publish that Parochus
was never called Pastor, till the delira^ion of this and the former Age.]

II. Page 25. [I hope they are now convinced that the Persecution which they
complained lately so much of, was carried on by other Men, and for other
design^, than they would then seem to believe.]

I am glad that you are convinced of it. You are mistaken in us; we believed it
ever since 1660. But we know that it was Sheldon, Morley, Guning, Hinchman,
Sparrow, and many more such that were the great Agents of it, in Court,
Convocation, and Parliament. I thank you for disowning it.

III. I rejoice to find it proved, Page 37. that The Bishop is judge of the
fitness of any Clerk presented to a Benefice,] which as it puts us in some
(faint) hopes for the future, so for the time past it tells the Bishops whose
the guilt is of the Institution of all the incapable Clergy.

IV. Page 40. He proves that Visitations should be Parochial.

V. He comfortably purposes to reduce Confirmation to its true use: And tells
Ministers their Duty of Certifying the Receivers fitness.

VI. In a word, I entreat the Reader to compare this Charge, with the
Visitation Articles of Bishop Wren, Pierce, and such others, and the Charge
against them in Parliament, and observe the difference, and be thankful for so
much.

April 3. 1691.

FINIS.

