Truth and Innocence TRIUMPHING OVER Falsehood and Envy, OR, Jasper Batts's
Vindication against William Roger's Un-christian and False Insinuations, in his
Book Mis-called, The Christian Quaker, etc.
I Could the better have sat down in silence under the Unchristian, and
Slanderous Insinuations in that Book cast out against me, especially when I
consider so many of the Lords ancient and faithful Servants, by this Adversary,
are made my Companions herein: And also the Darkness, Envy and Confusion, in
the said Book manifested; having also the evidence of the Lords spirit for my
own Innocence.

But some necessity is upon me to Write, and give forth a few Lines in Answer
thereunto, and confutation thereof; and so much the rather, because its not so
much My Reputation, as Truth it self, that this Adversary strikes at; and
therefore also willing to be a companion with my Brethren, in a Testimony
against this wicked undertaking.

And this is my Testimony in general; That it is in its self a Work of
Darkness, and from the Accuser of the Brethren, which must be cast down for
ever: And such is the Blackness and Foulness thereof, That as yet, (though
doubtless several were concerned in their purses, to assist the bringing forth
thereof) I have not heard of one particular person that owns the same: And am
not without hope, that several of those so concerned, may in time see their
folly, and Repent thereof, as many others have done, who were beguiled by the
same spirit.

And now, as to my own particular, wherein Truth is concerned with me; for this
is that which is chiefly in my eye, to answer to in this Book part 2. pages 82,
89. he thus expresses himself Doubtless should any man accuse Jasper Batt (
one of those that judged John Story and John Wilkinson without hearing them
speak for themselves) That he went about Preaching, thereby occasioning
sometimes Twenty Pound Fines, sometimes Forty Pound Fines, to be imposed on the
Hearers, and encourage them to be valiant for Truth, and to offer up all
(whilst his Estate was well secured out of the Persecutors reach, or at least
nothing to be found of his own to pay such his Fines) he would think John Story
very ill employed, to have a hand in giving forth a public Testimony against
him, to be read in all the monthly and quarterly Meetings in England, before
he had either spoken or written to him to know what he could say for himself,
that he might have opportunity to hush it up by writing a Paper of
Condemnation, if so be he were guilty. [He farther saith] We cannot believe
that Jasper Batt has not done as bad as this in signing with the Sixty Six at
E. Hooks' s Chamber; and if the case stated in his Name be not groundless, it is
then notorously wicked.

Thus plainly insinuating, as if I had designed First, to secure my own Estate,
and then Exhort others to give up All for Truth, and occasioned such to be
fined as abovesaid. To which I Answer, this Insinuation is Un-Christian, being
against the Rule that Christ gives, in case a Brother Offends which is; Tell
him his Fault between thee and him, etc. Now this I affirm, that W. R. nor any
other on his behalf, never did in the least question me, or express to me any
dissatisfaction concerning me, touching what he thus insinuates; which
according to Christ's Rule he ought to have done: And therefore his thus
proceeding is Un-christian.

And this I farther testify in the Lords Presence, (who knows that I lie not)
that I never disposed of, or secured any part of my Estate, to avoid the loss
thereof, for Truths Testimony; but have managed the same according to the
Understanding the Lord has given me for its service. For when I was first
convinced of Truth, I soon received it in the love thereof, and gave up my self
and all I had to be serviceable therein; and being called by the Lord to spend
near my whole time in its Service, the Lord in time so disposed of my
Condition, that I was necessitated, either to put off the management of the
Estate which the Lord had given me, or give up my Testimony, as then required
of me; that part of my Family being removed, that were any way capable to
manage the same in my absence, and intently waiting on the Lord for his
Council, and advise with faithful Friends: I was fully satisfied (and so am to
this Day) that my place was to keep my public Testimony, and let my Estate;
which I did accordingly, disposing of part thereof to my Children, as becomes a
Father to provide for his Family, and this was done (the Lord knows) that I
might be the more at liberty in the Lords Service; and as Paul advised Timothy,
2 Timothy 2.4. He that goes a warfare, intangles not himself with the things of
this Life, that he may please him who has Chosen him to be his Soldier. And
farther, that this ordering of my Affairs was not to avoid Sufferings on the
Act against Conventicles, is the more Evident, because it was done a
considerable time before that Act was made.

And this also I farther testify, that it has been my care and diligence,
since the Lord called me into his service, as on the one Hand, not to run when
he sent me not; so also, not to neglect the Duty he required of me: And this is
my great Comfort to this day, whatever this Adversary, or any other judges of
me, I have walked in the Simplicity of my Heart before the Lord, and have, and
do enjoy the Testimony of his Love, and assistance of his Presence, which is a
large reward unto me; Glory to his Name for ever. And so this his Insinuation
is very False and Envious.

W. R. speaks of giving out a Paper of Condemnation, for occasioning others to
be fined for my Preaching, and my Estate secured, and not to be found, as he
insinuates, etc. I Answer, what would he have me Condemn? Is it the securing my
Estate from suffering? ( I never did it) I am not guilty herein, therefore no
Condemnation belongs to me for that: Or would he have me Condemn my Appearance
publicly, with a Testimony for God, when the Lord requires, and moves? And
draw into Holes, Corners, and under Hedges, as some of our Opposers have done.
his plainly appears to be of that Spirit that would lay waste all our Meetings,
and Extinguish the Doctrine and Life of Christanity, that would justify the
fearful and wicked, and condemn the Righteous, which is an Abomination to the
Lord: what Darkness and Confusion does this Spirit run into!

And whereas W. R. insinuates, my Fine to be laid upon others. If I am Fined,
or any other, for speaking in the Name of the Lord, and others suffer on that
Account, its well for me to answer the Lords requirings in speaking, and for
others also to frequent our Meetings; and so that Suffering being for well
doing, shall not be without a Reward from the Lord: For happy are ye when ye
suffer for Righteousness sake; and that were evil to disobey the Lords
Requirings, either in frequenting, or speaking in Meetings, and is for
Condemnation by the Truth, what ever W. R's judgment is of it.

That J. Story and J. W. were judged without a Hearing, is utterly false; they
having been heard with Witnesses face to face, at a Meeting where were present
several of the Sixty Six mentioned: of which Meeting, and Proceedings, W. R.
has given a large Testimony of the Lords Peace amongst them, and their great
travel of Love and Life for J. S. and J. W. an Account whereof may be seen in
Bristol-Friends Answer to W. R's Book: at which Meeting, after hearing of all
Parties, they were judged to have entertained a wrong Spirit; and for several
other Offenses against the Church of Christ, as by a Narrative thereof may
appear. And from a Meeting in London, 1676. they were by many ancient and
faithful Brethren, advised, and warned in the Lords Name (as he then required)
not to offer their Gift, nor meddle in the public Affairs of the Church, until
satisfaction was given to the Church so offended: which Advice and Warning was
wholly rejected by them. And then at the Meeting at London, 1677. in Unity with
the former Judgment given after Hearing of Witnesses face to face, and their
rejecting the Advice and Warning (aforesaid) given them the year before, a
Testimony was given against them by more than Sixty Six: so as to the things
for which they were judged, and a Testimony given against them, they were fully
heard before judgment; and so the Charge is False.

And now all this truly weighed, the Case stated in my Name is groundless, and
so Not notoriously wicked in Me: But then, whether it be not Notorious
Wickedness in W. R. thus to Insinuate, and publish in Print against me while
Innocent, let Gods Witness in all judge: for I never secured my Estate from
suffering for Truths Testimony, nor out of the Persecutors Reach: for I have,
and still had an Estate Real and Personal, held in my own Name, and not made in
trust to any other. And if it be wickedness so to secure an Estate in Trust,
when no Consideration, but to save from Suffering for Truths Testimony, W. R.
then ought to look nearer Home before he thus range abroad; but some will be
meddling while they count themselves Wise. And so the Wickedness, Falsehood,
Envy, and Confusion, rests on W. R's. own Head, for which in due time, the Lord
will Reckon with him.

And whereas W. R. speaks of me and my three Companions, Part 2. page 91.
that speak of some in a Paper of ours, that despise Government, and speak evil
of Dignities, and he Accounts not us to be such.

To which I Answer, that many of the Lords little Ones, and faithful Servants,
have been despised, and spoken evil of by several that are joined to that
Spirit in which this our Adversary appears to be; but as far as I have heard or
understood, he have out-stript them all, as this his work of Darkness does
manifest. Now Christ Jesus says of his Disciples, and little Ones, He that
despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me. And this is a Dignity rightly claimed by the Lords faithful Servants to be
his Disciples, and little Ones: then if they that Reproach and Despise them,
despises God and Christ, such despises Dignities, and speaks Evil of them.

Many other Contemptible, Scornful, Deriding, and Reproachful Expressions
against me, and many others of the Lords servants, he has uttered in his said
Book: All which I Trample under foot, knowing my own innocence, and leave him
to the Judgment of God for the same: but cannot yet well let pass without some
notice taken, how much he pretends a Conscentious concern for truth, to print
this his Book: And I well remember how Rabshaketh that blasphemous General,
could pretend as high for his War against the Lords people; who says, And am I
now come up without the Lord against this Land; the Lord said unto me, Go up
against this Land and destroy it, Isa. 36.10. And this also I cannot well omit
without notice, what he says, Part 2. Page 92. viz. A hoping, that for the
future, Jasper Batt will learn more modesty, than to account himself a
Governor, etc. And I may say it would be well, if W. R. would learn so much
modesty as to forbear to insinuate such falsehood; for when, or where, did I
ever account my self a Governor: But as the Lord has given me a Testimony,
against deceit, and wickedness, and for his everlasting truth, I hope he will
preserve me faithful therein to the end. Herein I may be scorned, and
reproach't for the same by W. R. or any other of Truths Adversaries: And in the
sense of the Lords power and presence with me, shall rejoice; and Triumph over
it all; well knowing that the Truth in it is simplicity must Reign over all at
last.

And this is that which is before me at present, to write in vindication of
Truth, and my own Reputation; well knowing other of the Lords servants are
concerned more largely to answer, and testify against W. R's work of darkness
and confusion in that Book manifested; being well satisfied, that I am counted
worthy to be a companion with them; And so commit my self and cause to the
Lord, and his witness in all to judge: In whose Peace and Love I rest, A
servant of Jesus Christ.

J. B.

Some of William Rogers his scornful bitter Words against Jasper Batt, and his
Three Companions, etc. With some Observations upon them.
William Rogers in his Book (falsely) Entitled the Christian Quaker, etc. part
2. p. 92. has these Words. All these (viz) J. Batt and his Three Companions,
and the rest of the Sixty Six Subscribers, are by their Paper Manifest, to have
Run in the very way of Cain by Persecuting the Brethren, and have appeared as
Raging Waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame by their hard Speeches,
which are the very Marks and Fruits of those who despise Government according
to the Scriptures, which J. Batt and his Brethren has directed us to peruse.

Observe, William Rogers Complains much against Judging; but who amongst us
equals him therein? Let his Words above Cited, as also what follows, with
abundance more of like Nature in his great Confused Book, speak for him, or
against him, in the Understandings and Consciences of all Judicious and
impartial Readers.

Can he prove that J. Batt, or his Three Companions (and the rest he here
mentions) have ever Charged J. S. and J. W. and the Wiltshire Friends, or the
Bristol Friends, who write and speak severely against them, to have run in the
very way of Cain.

How does this his bitter false Judgment agree with the Scriptures Cited by him
against judging part 2, and p. 90. Mat. 7.1. Romans 14.10. Let the Reader
Examine, and seriously Consider the same. He has rendered us in the very way of
Cain ( Observe the Emphasis). The very way of Cain is not only Envy, but also
Actual Murder. The living God knows, that this is a very uncharitable, false,
and wicked Judgment, for which the Lord will Rebuke him. Gods faithful witness
in our own Souls, justifies us from his false and malicious Charge.

First, What was written concerning J. S. and J. W. (of which W. R.
complains) was not written in any degree of Envy against the said persons.

Secondly, God does know, that we never endeavored to murder the said J. S.
and J. W. nor any other person concerned in this Controversy against us. But
Cain did not only endeavor to murder, but did actually murder his innocent
Brother. We being wholly clear, not only of the Act, but the very intention of
murder, are therefore Not in the very way of Cain. For we could be very glad to
see J. S. and J. W. and the rest concerned with them, condemn that which is
Evil, and return into Unity with Friends, who are in the Love of God toward
them, and in peaceable Unity one with another in his Spirit.

W. R. in his Book scoffingly writes against Friends concerning
Excommunication. See part 2. p. 84. But has not he, to the utmost of his
power, endeavored to excommunicate, not only J.B. and his Three Companions,
but all the Sixty Six mentioned before, without giving them Gospel Order; or at
least many of them he has not dealt with, according as Christ commands
(Amongst which the faithful Ministers struck at by W. R. are sound in Doctrine,
as well as in Life and Conversation) and his Apostles direct. Therefore his
uncharitable dealing toward us, Christ and his Apostles testimony witnesses
against.

If W. R. could make the Church of Christ believe, that We are in the very way
of Cain: then, no doubt, they would declare against us as persons with whom
they could have no Unity, in their Christian-Faith and Religion, and so he
would get us denied by the Church of God, the Pillar and ground of Truth. But
they have a true Sense and Knowledge of us, to be Men fearing God, and lovers
and practisers of Christian Virtue, in Life and Conversation, led thereinto,
and preserved therein by the pure Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is
Captain of our Salvation, and Bishop of our Souls, and true Head of the living
Body, his Church, who Reigns in, and over every Member, who leads us into Love
one to another, and to live in Peace and Unity one with another, and preserves
therein; and teaches to love Enemies; to do good to them that despightfully Use
and Persecute. These that are thus taught are far from the very way of Cain,
which is Envy and Murder, These envy no man: But hate Pride, Arrogance, and
every evil way; such Christ does own.

W. R's. Envy and bitter Words cannot get them Excommunicated out of Christ's
Church, though they may be denied by him, and such as he is. But his words or
denial is of no Value with us; and many others that fear God.

Again, W. R. says in page 89. part 2. We now are sensible, that the said, J.
Batt and his Three Companions (having assumed the place of Judges) will not
think our Arguments deducible from the Light within sufficient, to Evidence
their Ignorance and Weakness, no more than if they were four blind Priests, who
neglecting the Heavenly Gift in themselves, may seek a justification of their
Priestly Jurisdiction from the Scriptures without.

Observe. His comparing us with four blind Priests, as aforesaid, is both
Scornful, Malicious, and greatly Unjust. Herein he renders us, 1st. As blind as
the blind Priests. 2 dly. As much neglecting the Heavenly Gift in our selves,
as they. 3dly. As great Slighters and Contemners of the Light of Christ within,
as they. Oh Unrighteous Judgment, I do deny W. R's aforesaid pretended Sense,
It Is grossly False, and Slanderous. For we are of the Apostles Faith concerning
the Light of Christ within; who says, Whatsoever is reproved is made manifest
by the Light; and that which does make Manifest, is Light. But neither the
Light of Christ within us, nor the Scriptures of Truth without, nor yet W. R's
Observations thereupon, has manifested to us, that to be our Ignorance and
Weakness, which he in his Uncharitable Lofty Mind calls so. But suppose we
were Ignorant and Weak, will no softer Words serve W. R. against us for this,
than to Judge us to be in the very way of Cain, for Weakness and Ignorance? if
he could prove both against us, will not prove his Charge against us true. For
they who are in the very way of Cain, are more than Weak and Ignorant; they are
grossly Wicked and Profane, in Envy, Murder, etc. O William! Thou want
Charity, 1 Cor. 13. Col. 3.14 2 Timothy 2.22. Tit. 2.2.
in this Judgment, which is the bond of perfectness, as the Apostle said. He
also said, If I want Charity, I am nothing; but he had it, and therein was
accepted of God: But thou without it wilt be rejected.

W. R. It appears in part 2. p. 91. that thou art offended at J. Batt, and his
Three Companions, for citing the Epistles of Peter and Jude, in their Reply to
the Bristol-Paper, and desiring them to be read, and rightly applied, etc. It
appears as if thy offense were, because they did not inform those to whom they
wrote, how to apply the aforesaid Scriptures. And it appears, because the said
Epistles are cited to be read, and rightly applied; Thou take occasion to
compare I. B. and his Three Companions, to Four Blind Priests, who neglecting
the Heavenly gift in themselves, may seek a Justification of their Priestly
Jurisdiction from the Scriptures without. The unjustness of this comparison is
showed before. But William, thou have brought Scriptures in defense of what
thou writest in thy Book against Friends, and thou have not informed them how
to apply them Right. Of which, I conclude, thou have heard something already,
and may hear more hereafter. Some other of thy Companions, who write against
Friends, have brought Scriptures to prove what they Write; but have not rightly
applied them, nor informed Friends so to do. Art thou willing to be Judged for
not Teaching them, as aforesaid, as thou have Judged U^? Namely, to be As Blind
as Priests, etc. Why should thou be Offended at our citing those wholesome
Epistles? do thou herein show a right esteem for those Holy Scriptures?
cannot we cite Scriptures, and leave People rightly to apply them, as Guided by
that Holy Spirit, that Guided the Holy Men in giving them forth; But for so
doing, be by thee Judged To neglect the Heavenly Gift in our selves, and to be
as Blind as Four Blind Priests? It seems to appear in thy Book, that thou have
an Opinion, That the Tree of Knowledge is good for Food. But it were better for
thee to wait upon God in the Light of his Son, and therein to be Obedient to
Him, that so thou may Eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Life; which Food would
fill thee with Charity, without which thou can not be Accepted of God, who is
Love (or Charity) as the Holy Apostle Testified.

The word Dignity expressed in Peter and Judes Epistles, cited by J. Batt, and
his Thrre Companions, W. R. does Paraphrase upon, in a scornful manner, against
the said Friends, and others; as may be seen in part 2. page 92.

Observe, The word Dignity signifies Honor, as the Dictionaries render it. How
often does W. R. in his Book, call J. S. and J. W. Honorable? And in his
Preface to the Reader, p. 3. he calls J. S. and J. W. Two ancient and
honorable Laborers in the Gospel of Christ, whose Conversations and
Doctrines, I have not known or understood to be exceeded in Godliness, by any
Mortal Man whatsoever, says he. But W. R. thus high applauding J. S. and J. W.
as Not exceeded by any Mortal Man whatsoever, has not answered the Witness of
God in our Consciences; and his Narrative, and their Paper of Condemnation
prove the contrary: And has not W. R. herein applauded J. S. and J. W.
somewhat like, as the Samaritans did Sim. Magus?
Does he not herein highly Honor or Dignify them? Why may not God Honor or
Dignify his Servants; who seek not the Honor that comes from the Earthly Mind;
but that which comes, from God only? God has said by the Mouth of the Prophet,
Much more might be said to this; and that from the Scriptures of Truth, as well
as inward Experience. But this in short at present.
Them that Honor Me, I will Honor: And before True Honor, goes Humility.
Much more might be said to this; and that from the Scriptures of Truth, as well
as inward Experience. But this in short at present.


The word Government is also Paraphrased on by W. R. in the two aforesaid pages
in a bitter and scornful manner, against J. Batt, and many of the Lord's
Servants. To which I say, on the behalf of Christ and his Church, That we own
no other Government in his Church, but that which is upon his Shoulders; as God
has promised. He is one in the Male, and in the Female; as the Holy Apostle
said; who is Prince of Peace, and keeps his Subjects in Peace, and Unity one
with another.

J. B.

London, Printed for John Bringhurst, Printer and Stationer, at the Sign of the
Book in Grace Church Street. 1681.


