Dr. BATES's SERMON UPON THE DEATH OF THE QUEEN.

A SERMON Preached upon the much Lamented DEATH Of our Late Gracious Sovereign
QUEEN MARY. To which is Added the Address of Condolence TO His MAJESTY BY THE
Dissenting Ministers. By WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

Psalm 112. 6. The Righteous shall be in Everlasting Remembrance. LONDON,
Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil: M DC XCV.

TO The Most Illustrious WILLIAM Duke of BEDFORD.
May it please your Grace,
IN this Season of Griefs that overspreads Three Kingdoms, I thought it not
unbecoming me, to add one Voice to the Consort of Mourners.

The Universal Goodness of the Queens Life, is attended with a Sorrow of Equal
Compass at her Death. If we Consider the Causes of it, our Sins, the just
Incentives of Gods High Displeasure, and the Chain of fearful Consequences that
may ensue; What Heart is such a frozen Fountain as not to Dissolve, and mix
flowing Tears with the Current that will be permanent in Times to come.

I have presumed to inscribe your Most Honorable Name in the following Sermon,
knowing that notwithstanding the meanness of the Composure, the Subject of it
will be very pleasing to your Grace, as being the Expression of Homage to the
Memory of the Incomparable Princess, our Sovereign by a Double Title, by her
Resplendent Virtues, and by her Crown. I am

My Lord, Your Graces very Humble and Obedient Servant, William Bates.

A SERMON Preached upon the much Lamented DEATH Of our Late Gracious Sovereign
QUEEN MARY.
PSALM 102. verses 26, 27. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea, all
of them shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them and
they shall be changed. But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.
THIS Psalm was according to the judgment of the best Interpreters Composed
during the Captivity in Babylon: And in the former Verses the Prophet reflects
sadly upon the Churches Afflicted State, and his own Misery and Mortality:
Verses 14, 23, 24. He extends his view to the Ruinous Prospect of the Fabric
of Heaven and Earth: They shall decay, and, be destroyed, either in their
substance, or qualities and use: Perish by Consuming, or be changed by a
purifying Fire. From this Consideration he turns his Thoughts to the immutable
Constancy and Eternity of God, But thou art the same; thy Compassionate Favor
and Power never decline; and thy years shall have no end. Upon this ground he
raises his Hope, that God will revive and restore his Church; the children of
thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee.

The Proposition that I shall Discourse of is this.

That the Unchangeable Everlasting Perfections of God are the sure Foundation
of the Churches Hope in its Desolate State.

In the managing of it, I shall first consider the unchangeable Perfections of
God.

2. How they are the Foundation of the Churches Hope.

In Discoursing of the first Head I shall premise, that the most sublime
Spirits in Heaven cannot fully discover and comprehend the intimate and
unsearchable Perfections of God. He dwells in that Light which is inaccessible,
the astonishing Glory of his Essence. How little then of his Nature is known
here? In the present state of Union with the Flesh, we cannot contemplate
things purely Spiritual without some material resemblances. Humane Knowledge
and Language begin by the Senses, and in the ascent of the Mind to the Supreme
Region, we are constrained to make use of the most refined sensible
Representations of Divine Things, as rising steps, lest our Thoughts, by their
own weight, fall into gross matter.

The Holy Spirit in great Condescension reveals God to us, in Expressions
suitable to our Capacity and Conception; but the Understanding must be
attentive to correct the Imagination, that we may not offend his Majesty, and
lessen his Glory. In the Text, the Eternity of God is set forth, His years
shall have no end: And he is styled, The ancient of days: Which signify the
unequal spaces of transient Time, and are proper only to created things that
have a successive duration, and are Metaphorically attributed to God. Eternity
that is proper to God, is a duration permanent, indivisible, and wholly present
in it self. All the numbers of motion and measures of Time are comprehended and
lost in the vastness of Eternity, as a few drops of Rain that fall into the
immense Ocean. It Is said of God, He is, and was, and is to come. There is Rev.
1. 4.
no past or future in God, but with respect to his Works. Our Savior declares,
I am the first, and the last; wherein he attributes to himself a Perfection
truly and manifestly Divine.

The absolute immutability of the Divine Nature is by a comparison declared in
Scripture: God is styled, The Father of Lights, in whom there is no Isa. 44. 6.
variableness nor shadow of change. The great Luminary of Heaven has various
Aspects and Appearances in its Rising and Meridian, and Setting; is changeable
in its Approaches and Recesses, from whence different Shadows are cast: But the
Father of Lights has an invariable tenor of Glory, he is without motion and
mutation. God is absolutely exempt from all change in his Nature, and from all
accidental change. The Reason of this is evident from the consideration of his
necessary self-existence, and from the absolute simplicity of his Being.
Selfexistence is the intrinsical Property of Gods Nature: He defines himself by
it, I am that I am. He directs Moses to tell the Israelites, I am has sent
Exodus 3.
me unto you. This and the Wonder working Rod were his Credentials to authorize
and dignifie him in their esteem, and to induce them to believe his Message.
Jehovah, which is the same with I am, is the essential, supreme, and singular
Name of God, whereby he is distinguished from all Created Beings: It exhibits
the clearest Character of the Deity. There are other Divine Titles that
signify particular Attributes, but Jehovah declares his Being from himself,
independent upon any cause; his necessary Eternal Nature the Root (if I may so
speak) from which his Perfections spring and flourish. All other things are
from his Causality; every spark of Life, every degree of Being is from him: But
the most excellent Creatures compared to him, are but as dark shadows without
reality. Therefore God assumes to himself, I am, and there is none besides me.
It Is said the whole World compared to him, is like a drop of the bucket to the
sea, or the dust of the balance to the globe of the earth; nay, is less than
nothing. There is a greater distance between God and the Angels, than between
the Angels and their native nothing: For they have derived, and dependent,
limited Beings, but God is all Perfection, all Greatness and Goodness from
himself.

This necessary Self existence of God is the Foundation of his Immutability:
Thus he declares, I am the Lord Jehovah, I change not: He is necessarily Mal.
3. 6.
and eternally himself, and all that he is, without the least change for a
moment. Absolute necessity of Existence invincibly infers the infinity of
Existence: For the limits of any Being are determined by the productive cause
of it. Of Created Beings some excel in one thing, some in another, according to
the Will of the Maker. Every change in the substance of things is either
perfective or corruptive, and both are equally impossible in God. For nothing
can accrue to Infinite Perfection, and nothing can be wanting to it. Any
accession to his Excellency implies, there was a defect before, if any
impairing, there would be a defect afterward: From hence it follows, either
that he was not God before, or that he shall cease to be God afterward, it
being absolutely impossible that any Perfection be wanting in the true God.

The absolute simplicity of the Divine Nature does infer the immutability of
it. It Is true the Perfections of God are expressed by different titles, and are
apprehended by us under different conceptions, yet they are all the same
Infinite Nature. There is no composition and mixture of Wisdom, and Power, and
Goodness in God, but he is all Perfection in the Unity of his Essence.

Eternity is a resultance from his independent Nature: For we cannot conceive
of a Being necessary in it self, but it must be Eternal; From everlasting to
everlasting thou art God. Whatever is made is perishable, either from the
principles of its composition, as the Bodies of Animals, which being made of
jarring Elements, dye by Natural Expiration, or may be destroyed. The Angels,
though Spiritual Substances, are mortal to God, he can by a word annihilate them:
Nay, their Immortality depends upon his Power, the productive and conservative
cause of their Beings. He only has Immortality, the inseparable 1 Timothy 6.
Perfection of his Nature, and bestows it upon others.

The Eternity of God is inseparably connexed with his Immutability: For that
Being that cannot change, cannot cease to be. These Attributes infer and
illustrate one another. Those things which Time bestows, it takes away: Flowers
that are of a springing accomplishment, gradually wither: But the Sun shone
with as much luster and force the first day as ever since, and continues in its
perfection. God was from Eternity, and therefore is always the same in
himself. He is not more Powerful when he Works, nor Wise when he Governs, nor
more Just when he Punishes, nor more Good when he bestows his Benefits. The
Immutability of the Divine Nature is proper to every Perfection: I will mention
some of them.

The Divine Wisdom is so perfect there can be no addition to it. From Eternity
it fixed the best end of all things, the Glory of the Creator; and appointed
the fittest means to obtain it. His all-discerning Eye with one imperious view
comprehends all events necessary and contingent. He sees all real effects, and
all possible in himself: For he perfectly understands his own Power, and his
own Will. To his Coeternal Knowledge nothing is past, or to come: Nothing
occurs new, or appears old.

The Divine Power is not capable of accession or diminution. In the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength. It Is a Perfection inseparably inherent in his
Nature: O Lord be exalted in thine own power. Psalm. 21. Esaias.
The Lords arm is not shortened: With the least strain of his Power he can do
all things. We have a constant visible demonstration of the unchangableness of
these Attributes: For the same Infinite Wisdom and Power are requisite to
manage the World as to make it. Without his directing Light and supportting
Power, that Frame of the World would disband, and the full Harmony of it be
turned into confusion. He upholds all things by the word of his Heb. 11.
Power. The manner of sustaining and governing this great World, is as Divine
as the thing it self. For no less than Infinite Power can do things by a
commanding Word.

The Mercy of God endures for ever. This is renewed every Morning and Moment:
It Is from his never-failing Compassions that we do not fail. This is our
continual Advocate to deprecate the Evils we deserve, and obtains all good
things for us. It Is Mercy supports and sweetens our Lives, that are so frail,
and so often forfeited. The unwasted Treasure of Mercy supplies our Wants,
satisfies our Desires, allayes our Sorrows. The Divine Mercy vanquishes our
Fears, comforts us in the Hour of Death, and crowns us after it with
Everlasting Life.

The Holiness of God, the brightest Ornament of his Essence, is unchangable:
It Is without spot or wrinkle, that may stain its Absolute Purity. This is the
Radical, Fundamental Rule of Order in the Divine Government. It Is as impossible
the Will of God should decline from Moral Good, as that his Understanding
should not discern it. From hence our Savior declares, That Heaven and Earth
shall pass away before the Law shall be abolished. If the Pillars of Heaven
should fall, and the Foundations of the Earth be overturned, there would be no
loss to God: For by one Act of his Will he can Create a New World; but if the
Law, the Copy of his Holiness, were altered or abrogated, it would be an
Imputation upon his Holy Nature, as if it were Arbitrary and Mutable, and
consequently he should cease to be God.

Briefly, Divine Immutability is the full and constant State of Perfections in
the Deity. And the Blessedness of God* that consists in the fruition of
himself, has a necessary connection with this Attribute. Immutability is the
ground that supports it, and the perfection that crowns it.

Secondly, The Churches hope in its extremity, is supported by the unchangable
Perfections of his Nature that establish his Covenant with his People. It Is
styled, An Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure. This will be
evident by considering the Immutability of his Counsels and Decrees, and of his
Words and Promises.

1. His Counsels and Decrees that concern the recovery of the Church from its
despised and desolate State. The unchangable Perfections of his Nature are the
Foundation of his unchangable Decrees: For there can be no change of them from
within, and no controlling of them from without. The Perfection of his
Knowledge is such, that he can never be surprised with a sudden new event, that
should induce him to alter them: And his Power that is truly Infinite will
effect them. His Decrees are expressed to be the Council of his Will; those
Determinations being most complete that are the product of Council. There are
no Temporary Decrees that begin upon an unforeseen emergency, for it would then
follow, there were a Change in God: But they were before the Foundation of the
World, and shall be accomplished in real Effects, either immediately by his own
Power, or by secondary means. The Counsel of the Lord shall stand. The Decree
of Election, the Original Spring of all the good his People enjoy or expect, is
of infallible accomplishment. It Is the Observation of Adhuc usque in finem
seculi multiplicandi and justificandi sunt: Tamen verba praeteriti temporis
posuit de rebus etiam futuris, tanquam jam fecerit Deus, quae jam ut fierent,
ex aeternitate disposuit.
St. Austin, that although the number of the Elect shall not be actually
complete till the end of time, yet the Apostle speaks of Eternal
Predestination, as if it were finally accomplished already: Whom he
predestined, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified;
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. For his Eternal Will, the
product of his Eternal Love, can never be frustrated.

2. His Word endures for ever: It Is more stable 2 Pet. 1.
than the Center. The strength of Israel cannot lie; 1 Samuel 15. 29.
for he is not a man that he should repent. The Immutability of his Nature
gives Firmness to his Counsels, they are unretractible, and Fidelity to his
Promises, they are inviolable. The Apostle confirms Believers in the hope of
Eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie, promised. His Truth is an Attribute
so Glorious to him, that in the solemn proclaiming of him to the Israelites,
it is peculiarly mentioned and placed next to the Deity, The Lord thy God is
God, the faithful God, that keeps Covenant Deuteronomy. 7.
and Mercy. It Is so sacred and dear to him, that he magnifies his Word above
all his Name. Therefore he revealed himself by the Name Jehovah to Moses, which
employed, he would be the same in performing as he was in promising; and
accordingly by the Miraculous Strokes of his Power delivered his People from
the Bondage of Egypt. This is the ground of the Psalmists Confidence, Thou O
Lord shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance Psalm. 102.
unto all generations. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion, for the time
to favor her, the set time is come. From the Immutability of the Essence of
God, he infers the constancy of his Promises, which declared by his Prophets
the fixed time of their restoration.

In short, by the Covenant of God, his Church is received into Communion with
him, and because he lives, it is impossible they should perish. In this the
force of our Saviors Argument consists against the Sadducees, who denied the
Resurrection: That Jehovah was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, therefore
they should be raised to a Glorious Immortality.

The Application of the Point.
From hence we may understand the Reason of the supreme and solemn Adoration
that all intelligent Creatures are obliged to pay to God; it is for the absolute
and unchangeable Perfection of his Nature, whereby he is infinitely superior
and separate from all created Beings. There are different Degrees of Excellency
in the Creatures, but in comparison with God they all vanish and are equally
nothing. As if one should be raised to the Region of the Stars, and cast a look
down on the Earth, the highest Mountains with the Valleys would appear an equal
Plain. God's incommunicable Name is, I am; he is alone from himself infinite
and immortal, and in propriety of Speech he only is: all other Beings are
derived and dependant on him, and have but a Countenance and Shadow of Being.

Let us consider Men and Angels, that in Nature are more excellent than other
Creatures. The first Man in the Perfection of Paradise was mutable, his natural
Life was in a continual Flux, and to be preserved by the Fruits of the Garden.
If he had persevered in his Obedience, after a short Immortality on Earth, he
had ascended to Heaven alive in his entire Person, but he must have been
changed in his Ascension, for Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven. He had Strength to stand, but was free to fall; and that Freedom to
Evil was a Branch of Imperfection. There is a woeful Proof of this in his
rebellious Disobedience, for which he lost more in a Day than his Progeny can
recover to all Ages. The Angels are superior Spirits, yet they were charged
with Folly, that is, a Slipperiness and Mutability from which God alone is
entirely exempt. The Elect Angels, who continued faithful when such mighty
Numbers were false, and deserted their Duty, (and fell from their original
Purity and Glory) are not absolutely unchangeable: their Confirmation and
Stability is from the continual Irradiations and Influences of Divine Grace,
that preserve their Minds from Error, and their Wills from irregular Desires,
and consequently they cannot sin, nor forfeit their Felicity; for all Sin
proceeds from Error in the Mind, and Disorder in the Will.

In the Perfection of Glory the Angels are not without Change; their
Understandings and Wills are variously tinctured and colored by Diversity of
Objects: their Minds are illustrated with new Discoveries of the Divine
Counsels in their gradual Accomplishment. The Apostle tells us, Unto
Principalities and Powers is Ephesians. 3. 10.
made known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God. With the intellectual
Change their Wills receive new Impressions of Joy. At the Incarnation of our
Savior a Chorus of Angels sang with celestial Harmony, Glory to God on high,
on Earth Peace, good Will toward Men. At the Conversion of a Sinner there is
new Joy Luke 15.
among those blessed Spirits: but the blessed God is always the same. It Is from
the Consideration of God's Peerless Excellencies that the glorious Seraphims
are for ever in a Posture of lowest Reverence before the Throne, and magnify
him by the transcendent Title that separates him from all Creatures of the
highest Order, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Host: the Earth is full of thy
Glory. The most proper Affection due to that infinitely excelling Object, is
Admiration mixed with humble Fear.

2. This should confirm our Trust in God at all times. The Psalmist's Induction
is from hence, Thou art the same, and thy Years have no End. The Children of
thy Servants shall continue, and their Seed shall be established before thee.
We will consider this Security of the Church in the present and the future
State.

1st. While the Church is in this lower World the Sphere of Mutability. The
first Sin of Adam opened a Passage to innumerable Evils, that either oppress
us, or are impendent over us: Man at his best Estate is altogether Psalm. 39.
Vanity: not only when languishing and wasting by Diseases, when afflicted by
Disasters, but in his fairest Flower and best Vigor. Nay, the higher his
Exaltation is in this World, the more he is exposed to the Storms of
Mutability. How shall Man, a Creature so impotent and apprehensive of Dangers,
compose the Disorder of his Passions? How shall he support his Spirit in an
unsafe and unquiet Condition? The present World, as it is insufficient for our
Satisfaction, so it cannot afford us Protection: it cannot fill the Immensity
of our Desires, nor extend to the Eternity of our Duration, nor preserve us
from Afflictions here. The seeming Felicity hence is like a Feast in an empty
Dream, mere imaginary Food, and vanishes in a little while. What then can quiet
our Fears under imminent Evils? what can revive and support our Hopes in our
Distress and Exigencies but the unchangeable God, whose Love, and Power, and
Truth, are everlasting? Therefore we are encouraged to trust in the Lord for
ever, because in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting Strength. He sits in Heaven,
his Throne is unshaken, when things below are whirled about in a vertiginous
Circle. Creatures may promise us Relief in our Troubles, but they are so false
or fading, that we shall be deceived in our Reliance on them, and
Disappointment will increase our Vexation; yet our carnal Constitution strongly
inclines us to depend upon them, either for the obtaining what we desire, or
for the preventing what we fear: The Reason is, because we see things with the
Eyes of Flesh, and accordingly esteem their Strength and Sufficiency as it is
visible to us. Therefore we are so often directed not to put our Trust in
Princes, nor in the Sons of Men, in whom there is no Help: His Breath goes
forth, he returns to his Earth, in that very Day his Thoughts perish. They are
distinguished from others in the Quality of Living, but are under the same hard
and inflexible Necessity of Dying. They cannot retain one Ray of the
superficial Luster of their Crowns, to enlighten the dark Shadow of Death: they
carry no Relics of Majesty into the next World, to impress a Reverence upon
others. All Flesh is Grass, and the Glory of it as the Flower of Grass: the
Grass withers, and the Flower thereof fades; but the Word of the Lord endures
for ever. God is our living Strength, a sure Refuge to which we may fly in our
Extremities. He can compose a raging World, or preserve his Church in it, as he
did the Ark in the Universal Deluge. The Prophet alleges this Reason of his
Confidence, Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy one? we
shall not die. And accordingly the Prophet Jeremiah argues; Thou O Lord
remainest for ever, thy Throne is from Generation to Generation! Wherefore Lam.
^. 19, 20.
do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?

2dly. In the next State we shall be unchangeably happy in his influxive
Presence. Here there are many Vicissitudes, strange and sudden Prosperity and
Adversity, Riches and Poverty, Health and Sickness in the Circulation of time
succeed one another: as in a Voyage, the change of the Winds, sometimes a
Storm, and after a Calm, the unquiet Agitation of the Ship, the Sickness of the
Passengers, are Accidents that happen to those who sail in the Ocean: but when
they arrive at the Port, all is at an end. Thus when we shall come to Heaven,
all the Variations of Time shall end in a permanent stable State: Our
Blessedness shall exceed all our Desires, and exclude all our Fears: it shall
be complete and surrounded with Eternity. There God is All in All.

The Text I have been discoursing of, is very applicable to the Occasion; for
we are instructed by very afflicting Experience how fallacious our Hopes are,
that depend upon dying Creatures. The excellent Queen, from whose Inclination
and Power the Kingdom expected such diffusive Good, and for a long Continuance,
was in the Prime and Vigor of her Age taken from us.

How convincingly verified are the words of the wise Preacher, Vanity of
Vanities, all is Vanity. Those who are styled Gods by Deputation and
Vicegerency, and Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
Children of the most High, shall die like Men: they are made of the same frail
Materials, and liable to the same Accidents with the lowest of the People.

That we may have a due sense of our heavy Loss, I shall endeavor sincerely
and briefly to represent what she was, and what a Blessing we enjoyed in her
Government.

I know that the praising of the Dead is usually suspected to be guilty of
Flattery, either in disguising their real Faults, or in adorning them with
counterfeit Virtues, and such Praises are pernicious to the Living. The
Temptation to Excess in this kind is never so dangerous as in the Funeral
Encomiums of Princes. The most regular Discretion is requisite in managing such
Subjects: Flaunting Language, and high sounding Words the more Poetical, are
less Persuasive, for they seem to proceed from a vain Ostentation of Eloquence.
The discovery of the Paint of Art in a Funeral Sermon defeats the End of it,
for it lessens the Credit of the Speaker, and the Esteem of the Person spoken
of. The suspicion that more is said than is true, induces a Thought that there
is less Praiseworthy than there is. But when the excellent Goodness of a
Person in a uniform Tenor of Life was illustriously visible, the naked
Narrative of her Actions will be a more effectual Amplification of her Worth
and Praise, than the most lively and graceful Colors of Language can impart.

Before I proceed, it is necessary to consider two Acts of Divine Providence
concerning the Queen, that are eminently observable, and were principal
Ingredients in our miraculous Deliverance.

The first is, That She was not early engaged in the Belief and Practice of
Popery, a Religion so contrary to Reason and Divine Revelation. Children before
they come to the free Exercise of Reason, are very receptive of the first
Impressions: especially the Instructions of Parents enter with Authority and
Efficacy into the Minds, and more especially if they partake from them as the
secondary Authors, not only Life, but high Honor and Riches. There is the
clearest Evidence of this, for in all Nations Children receive their Religion
from the Quality of their Parents. Now it is truly wonderful, that the Queen's
Father being so amorous of his Religion, did not take the season of instilling
it into her, before she could with Understanding make a Choice of it. It
increases the Wonder, in that the Priests were Attendants in his Court, who
being deeply struck with Superstition, are watchful to take all Advantages to
propagate it. If she had been tainted with it, how unhappy had it been to her
self, how pernicious to others? If the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how
great is that Darkness? Darkness! Popery is a Religion that begins in inward
Darkness, and leads to utter Darkness. If her Mind had been prepossest with so
dangerous Errors, how hard to have represented Truth convincingly to her? The
Wool that has imbibed a dark Tincture, can never receive a lighter Color. The
change of Inclinations that are deeply set in the Will is very hard, and the
change of Opinions concerning Religion that have first possessed the Mind, is
equally if not more difficult. How pernicious had it been to others? For the
corrupting the Mind of a Royal Person with a false Religion, is like poisoning
a public Fountain, that conveys Infection abroad. How admirable was the
preventing Mercy of God, that as soon as she was capable, she was instructed in
the knowledge of the saving Truth; and that her Mind and Heart were so firm and
fixed in it, that she was neither seduced nor terrified from it. This
preventing Grace was an illustrious Mark of her Election.

2. The Disposal of her in Marriage to a Prince of the Reformed Religion,
raised by God to oppose the proud Aspirer, and check the Current of his Fury,
who usurps the Glory of Heaven, and breaks the Peace of the Earth; who
arrogates a Sovereignty over Conscience, and has compelled such vast Numbers to
abjure the Truth: whose infamous Ambition has turned Europe into a Stage of
bloody Confusion. Our Serenity and Tranquillity, the flourishing of Peace and
Truth, are from the benevolent Aspect and favorable Influence of these two
bright Stars in Conjunction.

I shall in speaking of this excellent Queen, not insist on the Privileges in
the Order of Nature that eminently distinguished her from others. Her Descent
was Royal: but this is only an external Circumstance, and derives no Moral
Value to a Person. The Splendour of Extraction, like Varnish in a Picture that
gives more Life and Luster to the Colors, makes the Virtues or the Vices of a
Person more conspicuous.

Her Body was the beautiful Temple of a fairer Soul: Her graceful Presence
inspired Reverence and Love in those who saw her, and appeared worthy of
Empire. But visible Beauty is often joined with foul Deformity in the same
Person.

I shall begin with her Piety toward God. This is the first Duty of Man in
Order and Dignity, and the most considerable in its Consequences: it is the
Foundation of all Royal Virtues. In the Public Worship of God, she was a
bright Example of solemn and unaffected Devotion. She prayed with humble
Reverence, heard the Word with respectful Silence, and with serious Application
of Spirit, as duly considering the infinite Interval between the Supremacy of
Heaven and Princes on Earth: That their Greatness in its Luster is but a faint
and vanishing Reflection of the Divine Majesty. One Instance I shall specify in
this kind: When her Residence was at the Hague, a Lady of Noble Quality coming
to the Court to wait on her on a Saturday in the Afternoon, was told she was
retired from all Company, and kept a Fast in preparation for the receiving the
Sacrament the next day. The Lady staying till five a clock, the Princess came
out, and contented her self with a very slender Supper, it being incongruous to
conclude a Fast with Feast. Thus solemnly she prepared her self for spiritual
Communion with her Savior. When Moses was surpised at the sight of the
flaming Bush, and intended to come near to it, he was warned by a Voice from
Heaven, Draw not nigh hither: Put off thy Shoes from thy Feet, for the Place
wherein thou stand is holy Ground. By the familiar figure of putting off the
Shoes, is signified the purifying our selves from all Defilements. And
certainly the Presence of the Son of God is more peculiar in that sacred
mysterious Ordinance, than it was in the burning Bush; accordingly we should
sanctify our selves, and approach with holy Fear.

Her Religion was not confined to the Chapel, but every Day she had chosen
Hours for Communion with God, of which he is the only Discerner and Rewarder.
Some that are High in the World, think it sufficient to pay a Complemental
Visit to God once a Week, and content themselves with the external Service, tho
destitute of Holy Affections, which are the Life of Religion, or at best are
satisfied with a few expiring Acts of Devotion: But the good Queen's
Conversation was in Heaven, she was constant in those Duties wherein the Soul
ascends to God by solemn Thoughts and ardent Desires, and God descends into the
Soul by the Excitations and Influences of his Spirit.

Her Religion was not only exercised in Divine Worship, but was influential
into her Practice. The Law of God was written in her Heart, and transcribed in
her Life in the fairest Characters.

She had a sincere Zeal for the healing our unhappy Divisions in Religious
Things, and declared her Resolution upon the first Address of some Ministers,
that she would use all Means for that Blessed End. She was so wise as to
understand the Difference between Matters Doctrinal, and Rituals; and so good
as to allow a just Liberty for Dissenters in Things of small Moment. She was
not fettered with Superstitious Scruples, but her clear and free Spirit was for
the Union of Christians in Things essential to Christianity. This revives in me
the sorrowful Remembrance of the late Excellent Archbishop, tho in Place
incomparably inferior to the Queen; their Principles and Temper, their Designs
and Endeavors were for Peace: And the hopes of obtaining it are weakened by
the fatal Conjuncture of their Funerals.

The Holiness of her Life was Universal. She was Born and Lived in the Court
that shines in Pomp and flows in Pleasures, and presents charming Temptations
to all the Diseased Appetites. Pride that destroyed both Worlds, and cleaves so
close to Human Nature, reigns there. The Love of Pleasure is a soft Seducer,
that easily insinuates through the Senses, and captivates the Soul. It Is an
Observation of St. Chrysostom that the three Hebrew Martyrs that were preserved
unpolluted in the Court of Babylon, was a greater Miracle than the preserving
them unsinged in the Fiery Furnace. In the absence of Temptations the Corrupt
Nature is sometimes so concealed that it is hardly known to it self; but when
tempting Objects armed with Allurements offer themselves, the corrupt Nature is
presently discovered: Especially if a Person comes to the License of the
Scepter, that swells Pride, and authorizes the exorbitant Desires. To be humble
in such a high Elevation, to be temperate in the midst of the freest Fruitions,
is the Effect of powerful Grace. Who ever saw in the Queen an Appearance of
Pride and Disdain? How graceful was the Condescendence of her Greatness? Who
saw any Disorder in her Countenance, the Crystal wherein the Affections are
visible? Her Breast was like the Pacifick Sea, that seldom suffers and is
disturbed by a Storm. She was so exempt from the Tyranny of the angry Passions,
that we may have some conjecture of the Felicity of the State of unstained
Innocence, of which one Ray is so amiable. And was so abhorring from the
sensual Passions, that nothing impure durst approach her Presence.

In her Relation to the King she was the best Pattern of Conjugal Love and
Obsequiousness. How happy was her Society, redoubling his Comforts, and
dividing his Cares? Her Deportment was becoming the Dignity and Dearness of the
Relation. Of this we have the most convincing Proof from the Testimony and
Tears of the King since her Death. Solomon adds to many Commendations of a
virtuous Woman, as a Coronis, that her Husband praises her. The King's
declaring, that in all her Conversation he discovered no Fault, and his
unfeigned and deep Sorrow for his Loss, are the Queen's entire Elogy.

She had an excellent Understanding that qualified her for Government. Of this
her presiding in Council in times of Danger, and preserving the Tranquillity of
the Kingdom, were real Proofs.

Her Charity, that Celestial Grace, was like the Sun, nothing within her
Circuit was hid from its refreshing Heat. Love is the clearest Notion we have
of the Deity: God is Love. A Prince in no Perfection resembles God more than in
his communicative Goodness. If it were known what this good Queen did, and what
she designed to do, among all her relucent Virtues, Charity would be
illustrious.

Her wise Redemption of Time from unconcerning Vanities for Domestic Affairs,
was the Effect and Indication of her tender and vigilant Conscience. She
considered her Glass was continually running, and all the Sands were to be
accounted for. How should this great Example correct those who are lavish of
nothing so much as of Time; which, being lost, is irrecoverable? The Sun
returns every Day, but Time never returns.

In her Sickness, Patience had its perfect Work. Her Disease was uncomfortable,
yet with resigned Submission she bore it. When the Danger of it was signified
to her, she had no fearful Thoughts about her future State. It Is a cruel
Respect to sick Persons, especially to Princes, to conceal from them their
Danger till Death steals insensibly upon them. Indeed considering their past
Lives, and their present Anxieties, the Advice of approaching Death is an
Anticipation of it. But the Spirit of this excellent Saint was not afraid of
Evil-tidings, but fixed, trusting in the Lord. Her Care had been to secure the
Love of God in the best time of her Life, this mixed Cordial Drops in the
Bitterness of Death.

In short, to finish my Discourse, all the blessed Virtues were eminently seen
in her that might render her Government an entire Happiness to the Kingdom.
This erected her a Throne in the Hearts of her Subjects: and the Honor the
wise Poet attributes to the Emperor Augustus;

Victorque volentes
Per populos dat jura,
That he ruled a willing People, may more truly be said of this excellent
Princess, She was Queen of the Affections of the People, and governed them
without Constraint. Her Praiseworthy Actions will eternize her Memory, when
other Princes, divested of their secular Pomp, shall either be buried in dark
Oblivion, or condemned in History.

The Earthen Vessel wherein all these Treasures were deposited is broke, and
the instructive Providence should persuade us to look to our living Strength,
the blessed God, fixing our Trust in him. He bestowed this rare Instrument of
his Goodness: He can preserve his Servant, our Sovereign Lord, who by the
Divine Assistance has the Honor of establishing our Religion and Liberties at
home, and gives hope of restoring it abroad, from whence it has been so cruelly
and perfidiously expelled.

FINIS.
THE Address of Condoleance TO His MAJESTY, BY THE Dissenting Ministers.
May it please your Majesty;
THO we come in the Rear of the Train of Mourners, to pay our Tributary Tears
for the unvaluable Loss in the Death of your Royal Consort, and our most
Gracious Queen, yet our Resentments of it are with as tender a Sympathy as are
in the Breasts of any of your Subjects. This gives the sharpest Accent to our
Passions, that the Considerations which are most proper and powerful to allay
our Sorrows, exasperate them: for while we remember what She was, how general
and diffusive a Blessing to three Kingdoms, the severe stroke of Providence in
taking Her from us, is most afflicting. Such a Concurrence of high Perfection
shined in Her Person and Actions, that would have made Her Illustrious in a low
Condition; and in Her exalted Station they were attractive of the Eyes and
Admiration of all. Her Mind was above the Temptations that attend the Throne.
Majesty was mixed with that condescending Humility, that tender and beneficent
Goodness, that She was easily accessable to all for their Relief and Support.
Her Piety and Purity were so conspicuous, Her Affections were so composed and
temperate, that the Court, that is usually the Center of Vanity and
Voluptuousness, became virtuous by the Impression of Her Example. Her
Conversation was so regular, that Her Enemies (if Goodness in such a bright
Eminency had any) could not fasten a Taint upon Her. Her Royal Endowments for
Government, Wisdom, Magnanimity, Vigilance and Care in managing Affairs of
State (without which the highest Princes are but civil Idols, useless and
unprofitable to the World) these were in such a degree of Excellency, that in
your Majesty's constrained Absence, while you were defending the Interest of
Christendom, against a potent Enemy abroad, with the Sword of War, She sweetly
ordered all things at home with the Scepter of Peace. She is gone, and must
return no more: O astonishing Grief! But it becomes us with humble Submission
to acquiesce in the Divine Disposal. The Will of God is always directed by
Infinite Wisdom, and is the Rule of Goodness. We must refresh our Sorrows with
the hope that She is entered into her Savior's Joy, whom She imitated and
honored, and that She is made happy in the Love of God and the Light of his
Countenance for ever.

We humbly beseech your Majesty to accept the renewed Assurances of our
inviolable and constant Fidelity to your Person and Government; and that we
shall influence all that are within our Compass to persevere in their Duty: We
shall earnestly pray to the blessed God to keep you in the best Protection, his
encompassing Favor, to support your Spirit with Divine Comforts, and to
continue long your precious Life, so necessary for preserving the pure
Religion, and the Civil Rights of this Kingdom.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE four last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell, practically
considered and applied: In several Discourses. By William Bates, D. D. Printed
for Brab. Aylmer.


