A Funeral Sermon ON THE DEATH OF Mrs. Mary Paice, Late Wife of Mr. Joseph
Paice Merchant OF CLAPHAM.

Who Died April 8th. 1700.

By Edmund Batson.

LONDON: Printed by Samuel Bridge in Austin-Fryers, 1700.

blazon or coat of arms Academiae Tantabrigiensis Liber.


To His much Respected Friend Mr. Joseph Paice Merchant.
SIR,
THOUGH no Man can put asunder, whom God has joined together; yet if He who
makes the Union will make a Separation, Who durst say, what do thou? The
absolute Sovereignty of God, and his irresistible Power considered, has
repressed the Exorbitant Passions of Heathens under Temporal Evils: Though the
Gospel assists us with diverse more special and consolatory Arguments, yet we
often come short of their Sedate Temper and Self-Government.

Your Affliction must be confessed Great, in the loss you sustain: And though
the Advances of Death were from Time to Time apprehended, yet its Arrest was
sudden; and this gives no small Accent to the Calamity. But the Subject of the
ensuing Discourse is capable of affording Relief, Great and Suitable.

The Doctrine of a Glorious Resurrection is propounded by the Apostle, as a
particular Lenitive to moderate Sorrow upon the Departure of our dearest
Friends, who die in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14. Its Efficacy and our Advantage
by that Article depends upon our believing it: If ye believe that Christ died
and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
There is great Reason to believe your departed Relative among the number that
sleep in Jesus, so that your Peace and Comfort will be according to the Degree
of your Faith in his Death and Resurrection.

I confess, it owing to your Self, that I insisted on this Subject, or rather a
Particular Interposure of Divine Providence, which without praevious Thoughts
or Inspection fixed both your Eye and Mind together on this Text. I cannot omit
to mention it as a thing which deserves a thankful Remark, that in so dark and
sad a Season, you should be led to so bright and Joyful an Argument. What could
have been suggested more Great and Supporting!

The direct Influence this Truth has upon the Life of Man in General renders
it useful to all; As there is no Man lives, and shall not see Death, Psalm
89.48. So no Man that dies, and shall not be raised: And since the kind of our
Resurrection will be answerable to our Manner of Living and Dying, this
necessarily claims our best Circumspection and Diligence. Our natural State is
that of Apostates or Revolters from God: The Great Business of such Creatures
is Conversion or Reunion with God through Christ. When we thus return and
enter our Selves into the number of His Covenanting Renewed ones, we becomes
entitled to Redeeming Grace in all its Parts. And who is there that would not
be redeemed? That would not (how slight soever his Present Thoughts are) when
it comes to the utmost Point, give the whole World were it his, to be saved
from Wrath and Hell? That would not rather with the assured Christian commit
his departing Spirit into the Hands of God, and his Flesh to a hopeful Rest in
the Grave, than to fall under the Seizure of the Devil, and the Arrest of Death
together? The great Danger is least Men deceive themselves by separating
between the Effects and Benefits of Renewing and Redeeming Grace, and therefore
I have taken some Care to Guard against this, as the limits of the Time and
Discourse would allow. I know Men are secretly dissatisfied with the Terms of
God; they would be Redeemed, but not subject to the Redeemer; they would live
to themselves, and when they can live no longer, would Die in the Lord: But
this is so Gross, they dare not utter it; and so full of Guilt, as that it will
effectually consign them to an irreversible State of Dissatisfaction and
Torment for ever.

I am Glad, that while I comply with your Request in the Publication of this, I
can also testify the great Respect I bore to the Person whose Decease
occasioned it, and contribute in this way to the Embalming Her Precious Name. I
shall not fail to direct my best Desires to God, that He (who alone can) would
fill up every Relation vacated by Her removal, by more plentiful Communications
of Himself; that Her Humble and Pious Example may live in your Memory; that Her
hopeful Descendants may tread in Her steps; that you may all attain to the same
full Assurance of Hope; that God will be your God and Guide unto Death, and
afterward Redeem You from the Power of the Grave, and receive You, that you
may all (together with Her) be for ever with the Lord: In whom I am

Dear Sir, Your most Affectionate Servant, Edmund Batson.

A Funeral Sermon.
Psalm 49.15. But God will redeem my Soul from the power of the Grave; for he
shall receive me. Selah.


IT is generally known on whose and what account we are now to divert from our
usual Course and Subject: If the Determination of Events had been in our
Judgments and Wills, our present assembling had been rather to have adored and
praised Divine Goodness for the Recovery of our Deceased Sister than as now
mournfully to solemnize Her Funeral, But our Exit no more depends on our
Judgments or Wills than our Entrance into this World; which is not at all, but
the Keys of Life and Death are in the Hands of One, who works all things
according to the Counsel of his own Will, and whose Judgment and will is as
much more kind and beneficial to us, as more true and Impartial than ours can
be: And tho we should suppose (as we are too apt to do) our Understandings and
Desires altogether free from Irregularity and Mistake. Yet our Impotency keeps
us unfit for such a Province as determining events; especially the Grand and
comprehensive events of Life and Death, to which Omnipotency is equally
necessary, with Unerring Wisdom: No less a power can continue Life than that
which can create or give it: By all our Thoughts and Labor, and Substance, we
can no more add a Year, or a Day, to our, Time, than a Cubit to our Stature,
the bounds of both being immutably fixed: Who can stop the Conquests of Death?
Notwithstanding the summoned Advice of Man, the Use of all things which Wisdom
or Skill may direct, and Wealth procure, and sanctified too by incessant
Supplications to the supreme Being, Death is still Victorious: It irresistible
introduces it self whether we are willing or unwilling; ready and prepared or
not: Such as conversed with us, took sweet Counsel together with us in the
House of God, delighted themselves with us, and gave us delight, become Death's
Captives before our Eyes, are bound in its Bonds: And we can no more save our
selves than rescue or redeem them: And this indeed would be a most Mournful
Case, if either.

1. There was no one that could redeem them; if there was no power Superior to
their own that could effectually break the Gates of Death, and lose them from
its Bonds: if there could be none found that might be, par negotio, competent
for such a work: Or if,

2. They were such as were not to be redeemed; but to be left under the power
of Death: so that their dying out of this World should be a certain
introduction of the second Death which is Eternal, if they were found without
those qualifications, that might Rank them among that number to whom the
Almighty Redeemer has appropriated and confined his Care and Power.

In either of these cases Christians cannot without inexpressible Grief behold
the Conquest Death makes over Apostate Creatures, and Lament the Exit of a
Sinner, because it is his Entrance into a place of Torment from whence there is
no Redemption.

In either of these Cases Relatives may with some color of Reason abandon
themselves to sorrow and Mourn as those without hope, because they really are
such.

But this is not the case here, Death and the Grave in our present View is not
so mournful a Spectacle: Their aspect, (which is always various according to
the State of the Person related to) is not so Frightful and Horrid: Inexorable
Death, its true, has suddenly snatched away one from us, and the Grave has
swallowed Her up. But Help is laid on one that is mighty to save. There is one
that has destroyed him, that has the power of Death, that is the Devil: Heb.
2.14. And therefore can redeem a soul from the power of the Grave and swallow
up Death and the Grave in Victory. As he has absolute Power over this Visible
World of ours and does measure out the time which each of its Inhabitants is to
spend here. So Death and the Grave are also within the limits of his Dominion:
and an Authority of emitting thence is conjunct with his Authority and Power of
commanding our Entrance into it: Neither is it to be questioned, but that
Person on whom Death has now laid its hand and transmitted to the Grave, is
interested in and under the custody of that Benign Power which will in a
seasonable time bring her up from thence.

The supporting Virtue of this and such like Truths to the Deceased under her
Chronical Distempers, and the Consolatory use of it, to her Surviving Consort
has given him just Reasons for the Recommendation of this Text to be spoken to
on this occasion. But God will redeem my Soul from the Power of the Grave; for
he shall receive me. Selah.

The Adversative Particle, But, refers us to something that was spoken before:
The Doctrine of the Resurrection is insinuated as a most effectual remedy
against inordinate fears and dejection of mind in an evil time: This has an
advantage above other remedies because it suits with the natural Disposition of
Mankind to draw relief under trouble from a pre-apprehended Deliverance: Those
who erroneously built their hopes of a Resurrection upon their Wealth, and the
multitude of their Riches, made it to serve for this purpose, but the
unservicableness of their Wealth and Wisdom and the vanity of their Trust
thereon is detected by their daily subjection to Death, who not only cuts them
down, as at verse 7.8, 9, 10. but afterward feeds on them: v. 14. And
therefore tho the Doctrine be true and of sovereign and infallible use in such
cases, yet because the Foundation of their Hopes is false they can have no safe
retreat hither from their forementioned guilty Fears: But I build my Hope upon
a truer bottom; tho their fears in an evil Day or Hour of Death may reasonably
remain, yet I have no reason to fear, for it is God, one that can and one that
will redeem my soul from the power of the Grave, and receive me, Selah. This is
the plain connection of the words with the precedent part of the Psalm.

I shall enquire into the true Import of both Phrases, and then look upon them
in their Mutual respect, and the light they cast upon each other.

But God will deliver my soul from the power of the Grave: The word Soul must
be taken in an accommodate Sense, and, without enumerating the various
Expositions, it seems most properly to signify the Humane Life, not the Soul
or Body singly, but the Union between both, because this is that, that suffers
the Intercision by Death: And this Metonymical Construction is justified by
many Places of Scripture, where the Circumstances of the Text do at first view
determine this to be the true and only Sense of the Word: Isa. 53.12. He has
poured out his Soul unto Death, compared with Matthew. 20.28. And to give his
Life a Ransom for many.

From the Power of the Grave: The Original Word is comprehensive of the whole
unseen World, both in its Upper and Lower, in its Happy and Miserable Regions.
The known Controversy in which this Word is concerned, has occasioned a
fuller search into its Primitive and Ancient Signification. And though it be of
that Latitude, yet its Sense is peculiar according to the Circumstances of the
Place wherein it is used: And here, I conceive, it is most properly understood
of the State and Place of the Dead, so that the import of the Expression, God
will redeem my Soul from the Power of the Grave; is, That he will not leave me
in that State wherein Death lodges me: Death will separate my Soul and Body,
and turn my Body to Dust, but God will not suffer it to keep me always in that
State: He will not suffer it to Exercise a perpetual Dominion over me: Though I
am captivated by it, yet He who is stronger than Death will break its Bars, and
give me a seasonable. Release: The Word Redeem seems to govern and direct us in
Understanding the whole Phrase, and leads us so to conceive of the Power of the
Grave, and our being in or under it, as that with Reference to it, the Word
Redemption might be properly applicable and used. And this Construction is
confirmed by that Parallel Text, Hosea 13.14. where the Captivity of the Jews
is called a Death, a being under the Power of the Grave: But says God, I will
ransom them from the Power of the Grave, I will redeem from Death, O Death I
will be thy Plague, O Grave I will be thy Destruction: But more fully by that
of the Psalmist, Psalm 16.9, 10. which though spoken by David concerning our
Lord Christ, as the Apostle Peter determines, Acts 2.25, 26, 27. Yet may truly
and properly be spoken of every sincere Christian that is his Member: My Flesh
shall rest in Hope, for thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine
Holy one to see Corruption.

For He shall receive me: i. e. He shall take me entirely to himself: The Form
of our Covenant between us, is, that I should give up both Body and Soul to
him, and that he should receive both, that where he is, I, in my whole Person,
may be. He has received me into his Grace and Favor: He has accepted me in
the Beloved; He has adopted me into his Family, that I am no more under the
Dominion of Satan, as one of his Household or Slaves: And this is a Pledge and
Earnest, that he will receive me to himself, into the Mansions of his Glory;
where I shall no more fear the Arrest of Death, or be molested with any other
natural Evils.

Now having seen the Sense of the Words; there is something material to be
observed; if we look on them in their Mutual Aspect, and Relation to each
other. And

1. The latter Part of the Words does direct and confine our Apprehensions of
the former: There is a Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust, Acts 24.15.
These are specified by their different Ends: One is a Resurrection unto Life,
the other unto Damnation, John 5.9. And it is determined, which Resurrection
must be here meant, by that which is added, For He shall receive me: All must
be raised, and though it is by the same Almighty Power, yet not to the same
ultimate Purpose and End: Some are raised, that they may be sent into the most
remote and reimpassible Distance from God: Others, that they may be taken into
the nearest Union with him.

2. There is a Mutual Security inferred from the Expressions on each other. But
God will redeem my Soul from the Power of the Grave, for he shall receive me:
He must first redeem me from out of the Hands of Death, before he can receive
me: My final Blessedness consists in my Reception with him: This Blessedness
must reach to the Body (which is an essential Part of the Man) as well as the
Soul, otherwise it is not Complete and Perfect: And it is his Word, whereon he
has caused me to Hope, that where he is, his Servants shall also be, John
12.26. This makes it necessary that the Body be raised: Good Actions, and
whatsoever is a part of Divine Service, or belongs to us to do as his Servants,
though designed by the Counsel and Resolution of the Spirit, yet are performed
by the Ministry of the Flesh: And the Body is the Consort of the Soul in all
its Obedience and Sufferings: They must be both offered as one living sacrifice
to God, Romans 12.1. They must both concur to render us his Servants; therefore
their Concourse is necessary, that his Servants may be where he is.

And because it is a God, one who is infinitely powerful and faithful, that is,
to make me thus finally and perfectly Blessed, I have no Reason to doubt, But
he will redeem my Soul from the Power of the Grave: His rewarding Goodness as
well as his revenging Justice must be made manifest: And how can that be,
unless the Body be raised, that the entire Person may be capable of a just
Recompense: If I am one of those whom he will receive, it is impossible that I
should be held under the Power of Death, or remain its Captive any longer, than
for such a Season, as the Method and Order of his working makes needful.

And there is an equal Necessity inferred also on the other side: Because He
will redeem my Soul from the Power of the Grave, therefore He shall receive me
to himself: There is a Mutual Insurance, because it is equally impossible for a
Believer to be redeemed from the Power of the Grave, and not be finally and
perfectly Blessed, as to be perfectly Blessed without being first redeemed.

3. This Mutual Relation between the Words, does intimate a Manifestation of my
belonging unto God: Resurrection alone simply considered, does not prove me to
be his; but when he shall both raise me and receive me, it is thereby
manifestly determined whose I am: Here it is still liable to Question, both as
to my self and others, To whom I belong, and though I find this weighty
Question sometimes comsortably resolved, yet at other times I cannot discern,
or take the Comfort of, any such Answer: But then it will be finally decided.
Redemption from the Grave, is a demonstrative Argument of his Interest in us,
to which we cannot but Assent: As the Jews professed a readiness to believe
that Christ belonged to God, and was his Son, if as a Father he would deliver
him from the power of Death on the Cross, Matthew. 27.43. The Honor of our Lords
Relation to the Father was much eclipsed by his poor Life, and ignominious
Death: And though his darkest Nights were enlightened with some discoveries of
his Deity, yet they were vanishing and transient: But in his Resurrection he
was declared to be the Son of God with Power, Romans 1.4. And the Father
publicly owned him in the Face of a contradicting World: The glorious
Resurrection of Believers will be an illustrious and convincing Evidence, that
God is their God, and that they are his People.

The Doctine or general Proposition from the words is this.

True believers tho they die, yet shall not perpetually remain in a state of
Death, but be raised and received up into Glory.

That they die, as well as others, tho they are delivered from the Sting of
Death, is necessary for diverse reasons Bates of Death. cap. 4.
, namely, for the more Eminent Exercise of their Grace, and Illustration of the
Divine Glory; for the preserving a due and just difference between the Militant
and Triumphant State of the Church: And that the sinful frailties which cleave
to them here may be abolished; and they prepared for the Caelestial life, of
which the Natural Body is incapable.

And it is likewise necessary that they remain under the power of Death for a
time: that the established Order of Providence might be preserved; Bates: ut
supra.
and that the Glory of our Redeemer at his second appearance might be greatned,
together with their own Glory, by their simulraneous Resurrection and
Glorification, and Triumphant Entry with him into Heaven. But it is not of this
that we are to speak.

All are equally subject to the stroke of Death, but all are not again redeemed
from its power. Death and the Grave is not universally Overcome as to all: It
still remains a Conqueror over Multitudes, and will be finally victorious over
them. But tho Death works in Believers and surronds them on every side, and
at last gains a temporal conquest over their bodily Life: Yet hereafter that
Vanquished Life shall revive; and that more Noble Life which is hid with Christ
in God, shall be consummate and made perfect. In this present State Christians
may vanquish the fears of Death: But it is at their Resurrection when their
corruption shall have put on Incorruption, and their mortals shall have put on
Immortality, that the saying shall be brought to pass which is written: Death
is swallowed up in Victory: O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy
Victory? Thanks be to God who gives us Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ:
1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57. I shall briefly State the Grounds of the blessed
Resurrection of true Believers, and show you its necessity, and then make some
Application of this Point.

The Ensuring Grounds of a Believers Resurrection are principally two.

1. The Resurrection of Christ: 2 Cor. 4.14. Knowing that he who raised up
Jesus from the dead will also raise us up by Jesus. 1 Cor. 6.14. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
for if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep
in Jesus will God bring with him. Christ rose not as a Private, but as a
Public common Person. Our Nature was raised in his Person, and therefore in
our Nature all true Believers. He rose as the First Fruits of them that sleep,
1 Cor. 11.20. And upon this account our Resurrection is secured; and not our
Resurrection merely, but in all its happy Modifications and Issues; as the
First Fruits offered to God, did not only assure but sanctify the whole
following Harvest. And this security, tho of something future, is so strong
that that the Apostle illustrates it by an opposite Instance wherein the
security is actually and most lamentably felt: as at 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. for as
by Man came Death so by Man comes the Resurrection from the Dead: As in Adam we
all die: so in Christ shall we be made alive; but every man in his order,
Christ the First Fruits, afterward them that are Christ's at his coming: so
that as our Death and the Death of all that shall come into Being, is secured
by Adam's: so with an equal but more joiful certainty; the Resurrection of
Believers is secured by Christ; wherefore because he lives they shall live
also. John 14.19.

This inferring a believers Resurrection from Christ is grounded on three
reasons.

(1.) He is the Meritorious Cause of our Resurrection. The Prayer of the
Prophet, (as it engaged the Divine power) raised the Shunamites Child, 2 Kings
4.33, 34. the dead Soldier revived at the touch of the Prophet's Bones, chap.
13.21. How much more shall the will of Christ and the power of his Death raise
us. Baxter 's Sts. Rest. p. 1. cap. 5. Sect. 2.
He was our Surety when under the arrest of Death, and making full satisfaction
to the Justice of God, merited not only our Impunity, but our Advancement: Now
having finished the work of our Redmption by his sufferings and Death, his
Resurrection is but the just consequent of his Passion and Discharge or
Acquittance: upon this our Justification is grounded, Romans 5. ult. Now the
price being paid, and the Acquittance received, there is no Bar against our
happy Resurrection any more than against his, because the Price was paid in our
stead; and the Acquittance received is for the use of the principal Debtor
whoever receives it.

Furthermore the Redemption of Christ extended to the Body as well as to the
Soul; otherwise he had been but an incomplete Savior, therefore Christians who
have experienced the virtue of his redeeming Grace, are said to wait for the
final act of his Redeeming Power in the Redemption of their Bodies. Romans 8.23.

Athanas. de Inearnat. verbi.
Whether there should have been no Resurrection of the Body at all if Christ had
not died, and whether he died so far for all both just and unjust to raise
them, as some think. Or whether there should have been a Resurrection of the
Body if Christ had not died, and Man should have still suffered both Temporal
and Eternal Death, in toto supposito, in his whole Person; as others think:
Cocceus de faedr. Cap. 2. Sect. 2.
yet certainly in the present order the Resurrection of Believers must be
ascribed to the Merits of the Cross, and looked upon as the fruit of Christ's
Death: so that it remains as sure as the virtue and efficacy of his Passion.

(2.) He is the effective Principal or cause of our Resurrection: All power is
given him in Heaven and in Earth, He is the support of our Bodily Life and the
Author of that Spiritual Life we live as Believers, and by him all things are
upheld and do consist: therefore it is requisite that all things should be
likewise beholden to him for their Restitution. It must be a Mediating Power;
the power of a Mediator to preserve things in being where their being is
forfeited, and Annihilation deserved; and likewise to heal the disorders Sin
has introduced among all kind of Beings that relate to the Use and Comfort of
Apostate Man. And as he is the Author of this Restitution among the Creatures,
so likewise of the Resurrection of Man which will be accompanied therewith. By
his General Power and Agency wicked Men shall be raised: He is Lord of the
whole unseen State, who as he can commit, so can bring forth, having the Key of
Death as well as of Life: He will exert his Power to recompact the scattered
parts of their Bodies, and as a Judge Authoritively Summon them to appear
before him. But Believers are raised, tho not by an Inferior, yet by a more
benign and advantageous power: His own Resurrection put him in the Possession
of that Power which do effectually secure ours, Romans 14.9. For to this end
Christ both died and rose, and Revived that he might be Lord both of the Dead
and Living.

(3.) Christ's Resurrection is the Example or Pattern of a Believers: because he
arose, therefore they shall rise and shall so arise as he did; and be restored
to Life according to his Pattern: Phil. 3.21. Our vile Bodies shall be changed
into the likeness of his most Glorious Body: His Body was raised the same, so
shall ours, and yet his Body was improved by the Resurrection, so shall ours
too, and so much the more improved than his, as they need it more; whereupon as
to our Bodily State we shall become like the Angels that are in Heaven, Mat.
22.30. As we shall be purged from all our present Infirmities, so we shall no
longer need the means of bodily Sustentation: for the Children of God which are
the Children of the Resurrection, are equal unto the Angels, and can die no
more Luke 20.36. Our Lord was raised that he might ascend and be glorified; so
shall we, God will redeem our Souls from the Power of the Grave that he might
receive us to himself.

The Second Ground is,

2. The Inhabitation of the Spirit: And this is a more immediate or proximate
Foundation of this blessed Privilege. Resurrection simply considered, has its
dependence only on the Will and Power of God: but it is of a Glorious
Resurrection that we here speak. The mere Resurrection of the Body is absolute,
but a Resurrection unto Glory is conditional, and therefore appropriate to some
only; and the Author of this Glorious Resurrection has determined to whom it
shall be vouchsafed. He himself has confined it to such as have a work of
Grace effectually wrought by the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them. Now the
Inhabitation of the Spirit in Believers will more clearly appear as the Ground
of their Resurrection, by considering these two things

(1.) The Spirit of Holiness is the vital bond of Union between Christ and
Believers; by virtue of which union his Resurrection does assure theirs. Christ
and Believers constitute but one Mystical Body; it is the Spirit of Holiness
which thus unites them, of which they both must necessarily tho not equally
Partake. He is the Head, they are the Members, and therefore must have
Communion with him in his Resurrection and Life. Whatsoever Glorious or
Inglorious Change the Head suffers, the Members must feel something of the same
in a proportionate Degree: And this is so Infallible that the Apostle argues
not only from the Negation of Christ's Resurrection to the Negation of ours; but
from the Negation of our Resurrection to the Nullity of Christ's, 1 Cor. 15.13.

This Union is continued even while Believers are under the Power of the Grave.
The Relation of Christ to the Father did not cease when he was detained by
Death in the Bowels of the Earth; tho the Comforts of that Relation were
suspended yet the Relation it self never brake of. So in a State of Death the
Union between Christ and Believers remains: It is the Man who dies, not the
Christian. Both parts of the Human Person are separated from each other, but
neither of them separated from Christ: Hence it is that when their Spirits are
returned to God, their flesh does rest in Hope, and their Bodies take a joiful
and quiet Repose in their Beds of Dust, because He to whom they are so dearly
and Indissolvably United will not leave them under the power of Death for ever.
But,

(2.) The Spirit dwells in Believers not only as a bond of Union between Christ
and them, but as a Principle of Power for their Resurrection. Romans 8.11. But if
the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; He that
raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies by his
Spirit that dwells in you. The Resurrection of Christ is ascribed in the
Scripture to all the Persons in the Trinity: It is ascribed to God the the
Father, because he is the Fountain of action in the Deity as at Acts 3.15. and
it is ascribed to him as he is the God of Peace, as invested with that Title,
because he was the Person to whom satisfaction was made, as at, Heb. 13.20. And
it is ascribed to the Son himself because all that he did as Mediator was to be
his own Joh. 2.19, and chap. 10.18. But the efficiency is ascribed to the Holy
Spirit: Whether we consider him as given by the Father, or giving himself a
Sacrifice for our Sins; he is said, by the Eternal Spirit to offer up himself
Heb. 9.14. so whether the act of his Resurrection be spoken of as done by the
Father or by himself, yet it is by the Spirit which proceeds from both, 1 Pet.
3.18. Now the Spirit that dwells in Jesus dwells in Believers: And as it
abode in him, and acted in him to the offering up himself to the Death of the
Cross, and afterward presided over his Body in the Grave, and put forth its
Power in raising him: So far does it act in Believers while here and preside
over their dead Bodies to the same purposes. And thus to ascribe the
Resurrection of Believers to the Spirit of Christ is but congruous with other
acts of Divine Goodness and the precedent workings of the Spirit: For as he
quickens the Souls of Believers and raises them from Death in Sin, and conforms
'em to the Image of Christ, so it is requisite that He should be the Author of
their Corporeal Resurrection and likeness to Christ also.

Now the Resurrection of Believers being fixed on these Grounds: We shall next
briefly consider its Necessity.

When Death, which was introduced by Sin, has been reigning, and acting the
part of a Conqueror over Mankind, and bringing all both just and unjust under
its Dominion; it is necessary that sooner or later it be overcome and swallowed
up of victory; it is necessary that some of its Captives be released, that some
Souls be Redeemed from its Power; Otherwise,

1. The Glory of Christ Redeemer would suffer a great and perpetual Eclipse.
And, 2. The Felicity of Believers would never be Complete and Perfect.
1. The Glory of Christ Redeemer would suffer a great and perpetual Eclipse.
The Perfection of Beings in their several Kinds was the Glory of the Creator:
To be redeemed from the Power of Sin, and be left under the Power of the Grave,
were it supposeable, would be such an imperfect Redemption as we cannot but
apprehend to be inconsistent with the Wisdom, and Power, and Love, and absolute
Perfection of the Redeemer. That Creatures capable of Immortality should be
left in a State of Discipline and Probation here, and that their Future State
should be according to their present Behavior and Deportment, carries nothing
of inconsistency in it: But that these Creatures, capable of Immortality, when
they have demeaned themselves aright, and gone through their State of Trial
with Approbation, should be left under the Power of Death, and not entered into
their Masters Joy, is such a dealing as we cannot conceive worthy of God: That
Death and He who has the Power of Death, that is, the Devil, should perpetuate
their Authority over the sincere Servants of Christ, and take their Reward from
them, How Inglorious a Person would this bespeak our Redeemer to be?

Moreover as he is the Head of the Mystical Body, his Honor suffers a visible
Diminution by the Absence of any Member: There is so much lost of his Praises,
as should belong to those that are thus kept back: For who can declare his
Righteousness in the Grave? Or Praise him in the House of Silence? Psalm 88.11,
12. Psalm 115.17. We are not to imagine our Lord so careless of his own Glory,
when he has already done so much for that end, and when it is still in his own
Power, (as he is absolute Lord of the whole unseen World) to perfect his own
Praise. As surely as he has triumphed over Death and all Principalities, so
surely will he make all his Members to Triumph over them, and that for his own
Glory: And none shall be detained under their Dominion, unless such as by their
own choice while here, remained in an inviolable Union with Death and the
Prince of Darkness, that is, the Devil.

2. The Felicity of Believers would never be Complete and Perfect: The
Perfection of their Personal Felicity necessarily requires the Concourse or
Union of all that is essential to, or constitutive of the Person: The Body and
the Soul from their first setting out in the World to the Grave run the same
Race, therefore they must enjoy the same Reward: There is, it is true, a great
inequality in their Operations as respecting Holiness, so there will be a great
inequality in their Enjoyments; but both must have their proper share: And it
would not be beseeming the Divine Goodness, to deal so differently, as that the
Soul should be Everlastingly Happy, and the Body lost in forgetfulness: That
the one should be glorified in Heaven, and the other remain in the Dust.
Besides this, we may justly conceive of a fixed innocent Inclination in the
glorified Soul to her former Dear Associate; and therefore the satisfying such
an Inclination by their Reunion, must contribute to the Felicity of the Person.

Their Relative of Mutual Happiness would be likewise impaired, if any that
truly belonged to their Number were wanting, and still kept under the Power of
Death: For they are all inviolably United in Love, which as it were transforms
one into another, and causes the Glory of every Saint to redound to the Joy of
all: And every one both adds to, and shares in the Felicity of the whole. Here
there are many Vicious Allays of Love among true Christians, and they do not
duly sympathize with one another in their Conditions of Life: But in Heaven
they are of one Heart and one Soul; there is an exact Agreement of Tempers and
Inclinations; so that could we suppose the Body of one detained as an Eternal
Prisoner of the Grave, and such a ones Happiness thereby impaired, the whole
would suffer therein.

But I come now to the Use.

Now as this Doctrine of the blessed Resurrection of Believers, being fixed on
the forementioned Grounds and Reasons, must needs be acknowledged a great
Truth; and one of the true and faithful Sayings of God: So upon strict Enquiry,
it will appear a very comfortable Truth: And that

1. With respect to the present Afflictions and Sufferings of this Life; and
particularly the Frailties, and Diseases, and Weakness, and Vileness of these
Bodies. The Dictates of Reason, and the Prescriptions of Moralists are
ineffectual to form the Soul to true Patience and Contentment, under bodily
Sufferings: But Faith and Hope in a blessed Resurrection administers powerful
Support: And as this excels all natural Topics, so all the consolatory Points
in Revealed Religion do ultimately center and terminate in this. For if our
Hope was only in this Life (whatever may be propounded to us) we were of all
Creatures most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. To know that our Bodies shall be raised
to an immortal, incorruptible Glory; and changed into the likeness of Christ's
Body, makes us more unconcerned about their Condition, and more contented that
God should have the entire Disposal of them here: This sweetens the most bitter
Cups, alleviates the most heavy Burdens, and renders all bodily Distempers and
Pains supportable and easy: And furthermore, it directs us so to behold, so to
account of, so to improve these present momentary Afflictions, as that they
might Work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor.
4.17.

2. With respect to our own Personal Dissolution. This is the thing which
Nature so much abhors; to come under the Power of Death, to be divulsed from
all the Enjoyments of Life, to be confined to the dark solitude of the Grave,
to see Man no more in the Land of the Living; this is a frightful and
disquieting Thought: And inasmuch as this is a thing universally known, it is
also universally feared: There is a lawful fear of Death, when this Passion is
regular both as to its Object and Degree it is excellently Useful: As a wise
Counselor, or faithful Guardian, it keeps Reason awake and active, so as that
it might sustain the Evil in the best manner, which it could not prevent. And
there is an inordinate fear of Death, which as a Tyrannous Master does
continually disquiet and torment the Soul, and keep a Man all his Life time
under Bondage. The Philosophers attempted to moderate and govern these anxious
Fears, but in vain Bates Har. of Attr. cap. 17.355. p. Octa.
. All that they could oppose against this cruel Enemy, while they were without
the Knowledge and Belief of a glorious Resurrection, was ineffectual. But the
Gospel furnishes us with real Remedies. Christians cannot be afraid to Die when
they know they Die in the Lord, and belong to one who will redeem them from the
Power of the Grave, and swallow up Death in Victory: Were we to be Eternal
Captives to Death, and Prisoners of the Grave for ever, there were some Reason
to dread it: But when God speaks to us as to Jacob descending into Egypt: Fear
not to go down into the Grave, I will go down with thee, and I will surely
bring thee up again: So that hereby we are as sure of overcoming Death as
suffering it; as sure of being Conquerors as of being Combatants; how are all
excruciating fears hereby expelled! In our own Strength indeed, and acting
separately from God we cannot overcome: No one can save himself from going down
to the Grave, or by Price or by Force procure his Releasement and Discharge
from its Captivity any more than from its War. But in Relation to God we are
more than Conquerors. To be more than Conquerors is to be Triumphants:
Christians may thus Triumph in this Persuasion, that though they taste Death, the
common Lot of every Man, yet they shall be redeemed from it, so as not to be
hurt by the second Death, and neither Death, nor Life, etc. shall be able to
separate them from the Love of God in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.37, 38, 39.

Neither is this Doctrine of a blessed Resurrection, only an Argument of
Support and Comfort under the Apprehensions of Death; but also a Just and
Rational Incentive to Desire our Dissolution: How willingly did Elias let fall
his Mantle, that he might ascend to Heaven? How willing was Paul to be
dissolved, that he might be with Christ? How desirously and boldly did the
valiant Martyrs encounter with Death, that interposed between them and their
glorified State? This upbraids our backwardness, who profess to be enlightened
and persuaded of that blessed and perfect World. A loathness to Die in
Christians is directly repugnant to their Hopes, and a reproach to their
Christianity it self. We are not to obtain Heaven by an immediate Translation
to it; Death is a necessary intermediate way, and there is a natural bitterness
in it, which makes it unpleasant: It Is a dark Passage from this to the other
World, though under the Custody and Dominion of our gracious Redeemer How Is
Domin. Redeem. over the Invis. World, p. 49.
. Yet notwithstanding this, Believers are still to reckon their Mortality their
Advantage, and to bless God, that they are not to spend their Immortality in
the present State.

But you will say, We should not fear Dying if we did know our Interest in
Christ, if we were assured that we were of that number, whom he will redeem
from the Power of the Grave, and receive to himself.

It must be confessed, there are but some whom God will thus Redeem; others are
to be left under the conquest of Death, and of him that has the Power of Death
for ever: And these have reason to fear and Tremble at the thoughts of Death,
and much more at its approach; but then consider, none are among that number
but such as Voluntarily put themselves into it, and wilfully continue,
notwithstanding the means which the great Redeemer uses to educe and recover
them. Death is no where perpetual but where it is self-procured: None lie under
it, and abide under it, but they that loved it, and refused to to take hold of
the Paths of Life. None die unintrested in the Redeemer and his Power, but such
as rejected him while they lived. Therefore,

2. Use. Let this admonish us to take care and provide that we be of that
number to whom this blessed privilege belongs: Since it is not common to all
but proper only to some; with what solicitude should we concern our selves, and
follow on the Enquiry till we arrive at a certainty in this matter? Since the
enquiry is of highest importance, and admits of a plain and true solution; it
can never be justified as rational to continue in a dubious uncertainty. Who
would not covet to be in a special Relation to the Almighty and Gracions
Redeemer, and to be one of those whom he will Redeem from the Power of the
Grave? The knowledge of this alone can preserve the true comfort of our lives;
and fill us in Death with Joy Unspeakable and full of Glory. Let us therefore
with assiduous diligence endeavor to make our Calling and Election (and
therewith our Glorious Resurrection) sure. This matter will quickly be brought
to an Issue with every one of us; either Death will Triumph over us, and prey
upon us as Eternal Trophies of its Conquest; or through Divine Grace and Love
we shall be delivered and Triumph over it.

There are Two or Three Things, will ascertain our State, and let us into the
Knowledge of what our final Issue will be.

1. Are we Regenerate Creatures: We are naturally Apostates from God, and in
open defiance against his Sovereignty and Laws; and there can be nothing but a
fearful Expectation or looking for of Death and Vengeance which shall devour
and consume such Adversaries; until we cease to be Adversaries, until the
contrariety of our Natures against him be subdued, and we become new Creatures.
Our Expectations cannot rationally be altered, but upon a precedent Change of
State. The Resurrection of Christ is the Ground of this blessed Hope in
Believers (as has been shown) but their Regeneration is the Evidence of it. A
Soul that passes out of this World unrenewed, must never expect a Reunion with
a raised Glorified Body. The Body indeed shall be raised and reunited to the
Soul, but it will be in order to complete the Misery of the Sinner. Redemption
from the Power of Sin, and Redemption from the Power of Death are Coextensive,
and have both the same Subjects, Rev. 20.6. Blessed and Holy is he who has
part in the first Resurrection, on such the second Death has no Power. There
is the Privilege, and there is the Character of the Person to whom it belongs:
It is in vain to think of dissolving the Divine Order, or separating what God
has joined together: None ever was or shall be so blessed as to be exempt from
the Power of the second Death, but such as are Holy, and have Part in the first
Resurrection. Though the Soul be the immediate Subject of Regeneration, yet it
respects the whole Person: The Understanding, and Conscience, and Will, and
Affections are all changed in this Work: And the bodily Members and Senses are
destinated by the renewed Soul, and employed in new Services; and are no more
the Members of Unrighteousness, but Instruments of Service to Jesus Christ,
Romans 6.19. The Laws of the great Redeemer are the Rule of Duty to the entire
Man, and are obeyed or violated by the Soul and Body in Conjunction. Now where
there has been this entire Obedience yielded by a Man renewed in his whole
Constitution, it shall receive a just recompense of Reward; and those that have
followed Christ in the Regeneration; when the Son of Man shall sit on the
Throne of his Glory, they shall sit with him judging the Twelve Tribes of
Israel? Mat. 19.28.

2. Are we Dead with Christ: If we be Dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him. If we be planted together with him in the likeness of
his Death, we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection: If we suffer
with him we shall reign with him, Romans 6.5, 8. Our likeness to Christ must be
begun in our present embodied State. This is the fixed Order of Heaven. The
other World is the World of Perfection, where the Image of Christ or of the
Devil is completed, according to which of them was begun here upon Earth.

None can have Communion with the Redeemer in his glorious Resurrection, but
such as have Fellowship with him in his Sufferings, and are conformable to his
Death: Phil. 3.10. A Man that continues to Live, cannot while such, be the
subject of Resurrection, He must first Die. So our Self-denial and
Mortification, and Dying with Christ as necessarily precedes our Communion with
him in his glorious Resurrection.

3. Are our Hearts and Affections now with God and Christ in Heaven. Nothing
less than an Heavenly Conversation can justify our looking for a Savior, who
shall change our vile Bodies into the Image of his most glorious Body, Phil.
3.20, 21. A Terrene Temper of Mind, and an Heart unlimitedly engaged in the
World, does absolutely contradict the Hopes of a blessed Resurrection, and
Reception into Heaven. It is the Nature of Hope (as it is a Christian Grace) to
engage the Soul in a serious Pursuit of that which is hoped for: And also to
give it a deep Tincture of its Object before it is actually enjoyed: Therefore
if we don't savor heavenly Things above all carnal and worldly Delights, and
seek them with the greatest Diligence, our Hopes are Fallacious: The Wise and
Holy God cannot act so Inconsistently with Himself. (How Inconsistent soever
Men's Actions and Hopes may be) as to bestow Heaven and Glory upon one that
never desired or esteemed or sought it, that would always prefer the Honors
and Emoluments of the World before it. This would be to violate the Rules of
Discrimination, which he himself has fixed; and such an Inglorious
Amplification of that blessed Kingdom as would leave it almost undesirable; and
the Privileges of Christians would cease to be Privileges when others may
have an equal share in them.

These Enquiries do in short recur to this. Have we a sure Interest in Christ
who is the Prince and Lord of Life? Have we received him in all these Respects
wherein he is to be received, and absolutely resigned our selves to him as our
Lord and Savior? Has there passed such mutual Acts between us and him of
giving and receiving, as that thereupon He may be truly called ours, and we as
truly said to be his? He will finally redeem none but his own. Have we
remaining Indications of this in our Hearts and Lives? Have our Course in this
World been ordered agreeably thereto in continued Dependence and Subjection? In
a Word, Is our closure with him sincere and truly Unitive, and do we
accordingly live to him, and with him, and carefully abide in him while we are
in this Earthly Tabernacle? If so, we may commend our departing Spirits into
his Hands, and our Flesh may rest in Hope, and we shall have Confidence, and
not be ashamed at his Coming. The infallible Word has given us this, as the
only Ground of our Hope, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has Life: And He
that has not the Son has not Life. John 11.25, 26. I am the Resurrection and
the Life, He that believes in me, though he were Dead, yet shall he live, and
whosoever lives and believes in me shall never Die. Every true Believer has
a Life in him (by Virtue of his Union with Christ) which is Immortal, and not
liable to the touch of Death, a Life that shall not End in the rottenness and
darkness of the Grave, or in a Horrid Hell, but run on through the Territories
of Death and the Grave into Everlasting Life. And besides this, His bodily Life
in the Reunion of Soul and Body shall be revived; the Pains, or (as some rather
read it) the Bands of Death shall be loosed, and it shall be impossible for
him, any more then the Prince of Life himself to whom he is United, to be
holden by it, Acts 2.24.

Now having made this Use of the Doctrine in General; I shall make some further
Improvement of it, as it refers Particularly to the Case at Present before our
View. That which is spoken of Believers indefinitely, that they shall not be
left under the Power of Death and the Grave, but be raised and glorified, may I
doubt not without one disagreeing Judgment or Voice be truly spoken of the
Person whose Decease has given this special occasion and additional to the
usual Business of this Day. Therefore, Let this Point assisted by this
unquestionable Instance, work some correspondent Effects, and leave some
suitable Impressions upon us: And what can those be but of Imitation and
Peaceful Submission or Satisfaction of Mind?

1. Let this Doctrine assisted by this known Instance, impress us to Endeavors
of Imitation. When a Man Prospers in the World and increases in the Favor of
his Fellow Creatures, we presently enquire into the Methods and Rules of such a
ones Conduct, and are ready to govern our Selves, as near as our Circumstances
will admit, by the same. How much more studiously should we imitate one, that
in the the truest Sense is Prosperous and Happy, and being entitled to the
Divine Favor both in Life and Death, is therefore Interested in his full and
final Redemption? Tho such an one is now gone from our lower World, and has
left us, yet Her Example remains. We have known what manner of entering in She
had among us, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. 2 Timothy 3.10.
and Her manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-Suffering, Charity and Patience:
Her Temper was Rare and Excellent, and truly deserving of Emulation: Her
natural Patience and Fortitude of Mind, Great and Uncommon. Her Prudence and
Discretion obvious, as well as useful in the Sphere wherein She acted. Her
Contempt of the Vanity and deluding Greatness of the World; Her Holy
Indifference of Life, and Resignation to the Will of God, are more especially
to be imitated because they depend more upon our own Endeavors than the
former. The natural cheerfulness and pleasantness of Her Spirit was Great and
Delightful, yet Grave and Solid: But considering She was not only under, but
had received the Sentence of Death in Her Self, it must be ascribed in great
Part to Supernatural Reasons, and a Pre-assurance of Future Blessedness. This
is evident by the Fears She often expressed, least others knowing Her outward
and bodily, better than Her inward State, might make censorious and prejudicial
Constructions, and believe Her rather insensible of, than Resigned to the
Divine Will.

Her Death was no less Serene and Calm than Her Life: With Her wonted Composure
of Mind She bore Her last bodily Disorder, and without Sigh or Motion expired
in a Moment; as if it had been designed She should Experience a Victory over
Death, almost without conflicting with it, or tasting its bitterness. With that
tenderness did Her Gracious Redeemer Govern and Overrule the Stroke of Death,
having before disarmed it of its Sting! So gently were the Bands of Life
untwisted!

The sighing Part She has left to us, who are yet in the Vale of Tears, and
have the Valley of the Shadow of Death yet before us to pass through: And how
can a Communion of Saints do less than Sigh, when there is one Hand and Heart
the less to be lifted up in its Prayers, and one Instrument, or well tuned
String the less in its Consort of Praises? How can a Family do less than Sigh,
when deprived of so amiable and useful a Relative? Such Strokes cannot but be
lamented: But let our principal Care be, that the Person hereby removed be
Imitated; in Her Humble and Truly Charitable Temper, and in Her Holy
Inoffensive Life and Deportment; whereby She adorned the Doctrine of Christ,
and recommended Religion as an amiable and acceptable Institution to all that
Conversed with Her: Let us be followers of Her in all Things, wherein She was a
Follower of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. And show the same Diligence to the full
Assurance of Hope to the End, and be Followers of Her, who through Faith and
Patience do now inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.11, 12.

And it is reasonable that all Relatives, according to the Degree of their
Relation should account themselves more obliged to this Use. May Her Example
therefore with Her Name live in their Remembrance: Particularly may Children
remember, and not forsake the Law of their Mother, Prove. 1.8. Prove. 20.3.
but so attend to it as that they may be blessed after Her. May Servants also,
Remember Her that had the Rule over them, and spoke to them (by an Exemplary
Conversatition) the Word of God, whose Faith follow, considering the End of Her
Conversation, Heb. 13.7. The concluding Part of a Christians Life does not only
bear a Testimony to His or Her preceding Course, but demonstrate the singular
Advantage of Faith and Holiness, and therefore (being observed) is mightily
Assistant to our Imitation.

2. Let this Doctrine attended with this Instance, impress us, to a Peaceful
Submission of Mind, and Satisfaction in the Divine Pleasure: It becomes
Christians to attain a submissive and satisfied Temper through the Power of
their Faith and Hope: How absurd is it for such to expect and find more Cure
of their Grief and Sorrow from Time, than from Reason and Grace? Though there
be a smartness in the Dispensation, yet receive it with submissive Silence;
considering, it is God who has done it: Psalm 39.9. This sad Event is not the
Fruit of Blind Chance, but both as to Time and Manner, the Act of Infinite
Wisdom that cannot err, and of Infinite Power that cannot be resisted, and
(which is more Consolatory) of Infinite Goodness and Kindness to his Departed
Servant. Can we imagine, that a glorified Soul does wish to be again embodied
for a Residence in this our lower World? Or prefer a painful, afflicted, and
tempted Life before the Blessedness of Her Celestial State, and the hopeful
Rest of Her Dear Associate? Can we imagine that a Glorified Soul is in the
least dissatisfied with Her Translation, or leaving the Body; when the Body (as
She knows) is not left in Hell nor suffered to see Corruption?

Was not this Her Habitual Sense while remaining among us, that to Depart and
be with Christ was best? And was not this the Ultimate and Highest End of our
Solemn and Renewed Addresses to God in Days of Prayer on Her Behalf; while we
professed to ask Her Continuance in the Flesh, with a sincere and most absolute
Resignation to the Divine Will? If then not only the Will of God be done, but
Her Will accomplished, and also our Prayers answered, it is reasonable that Our
Wills should be abundantly satisfied: And it cannot be otherwise than
unreasonable, that Our Wills should be repugnant either to God's or Here Is,
which with a most joyful Concurrence have taken Place, and are now to remain
the same for ever. To be thus Self-willed in such a Case, as it carries much of
Unreasonableness and Irreligion in it, so likewise an Inconsistency with a pure
Rational and Christian Love toward our departed Relatives. Our Savior tells
his Disciples whose loss of him, and of his Bodily Presence was much greater
than any of ours) If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said I go to my
Father, John 14.28. A true and pure Affection does directly and chiefly
Terminate in the Happiness and Exaltation of the Person loved. Now Death is a
sure Advantage to Believers; and their Descent into the Grave is an infallible
step to their Glorious Preferment.

To look upon the Case before us with an Eye of Sense, it is all over black and
sad: Death has killed and taken Possession of one of us; it has turned a
living Creature into a dead Clod, it is laid among such, and Buried in the
Grave, and our Eye of Sense carries us no further. But when by an infallible
Word, we are assured that the Power of Death shall be abolished, and this
Mortality put on Immortality, and this Corruption put on Incorruption, we must
no more Mourn as those that are without Hope. To Consider and Believe, that God
will redeem his own from the Power of the Grave, and receive them; takes away
all Causes of an unremitting and reliefless Sorrow, at his taking away any of
ours, of whom we are persuaded that they belonged to him.

FINIS.

