GULIELMUS BATESIUS, S. S. Theol* Prof. Aetat: 62* Nov: 1687.
Sold by N. Ranew and I. Robinson. 1688.



THE SURE TRIAL OF Uprightness, Opened in several SERMONS Upon PSALM. xviii. v.
23. I was also upright before him: and have kept my self from mine Iniquity.

By WILLIAM BATES; D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

The PREFACE.
IT IS the blessed Privilege obtained by our Savior for his People, that
sincere though imperfect Sanctification is graciously accepted of God the Judge
of all. This sincere Holiness is strictly and indispensably required by the Law
of Faith, in the hand of the Mediator: Without it we cannot partake of the
Treasures of Mercy and of Glory that are revealed in the Gospel. It Is therefore
a matter that infinitely concerns us, both in respect of our present Peace and
future Blessedness, to make a true discovery of our Uprightness. And usually
all the Fears and Inquiries about our Spiritual State issue in this, whether we
are upright or not? The assurance of our Uprightness, is a Fountain of Relief
in all perplexing Jealousies about the Favor of God: for notwithstanding our
Defects, he will spare us, as a Father spares his Son that serves him.

This great Question of our sincerity may be cleared by a due observing our
Hearts and Ways: for Conscience is an inseparable Faculty of the Soul, and even
in the Heathen accused or excused, as their Actions were exorbitant or regular
according to the internal Law, and consequently gave testimonies of their
wickedness, or moral Integrity. The Scripture indeed tell us, The Heart of Man
is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? But
this primarily respects the discerning it by others; as the Apostle says, Who
knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man which is in him? There may
be the affectation of the name of Religion, joined with a disaffection to the
thing: there may be solemn Formality without cordial Godliness; an acting of
Piety and personating Devotion for vile Ends. But though the impure Artist
under a Vail of Hypocrisy may be concealed from others, yet he is not from the
conviction of his own Mind.

I shall add further, that many from ignorance or carelessness, may presume they
are in a State of Salvation, when they are in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond
of Iniquity. There are many carnal Shifts made use of to palliate the evil
condition of Men's Souls, but their Security proceeds from the neglect of due
examining their Hearts and Lives. It will be a vain excuse at the last Day, to
plead, the Serpent beguiled me: for it is not merely our deceivableness, but
willingness to be deceived, that exposes us to mistake our spiritual Condition
by the insinuations of Satan. As the wise Philosopher Plut. de adul.
observes, A Man is the first and principal Flatterer of himself, and therefore
apt to be deceived by other Flatterers. But if we take the Candle of the Lord,
and impartially search our selves, though the Heart be such a dark Labyrinth,
that every secret turning cannot be discovered; though all the Deflections and
Errors of our Ways cannot be exactly known, yet we may understand the habitual
frame of our Hearts, and the course of our Lives.

It Is the End of the following Sermons, to direct Men in the discussion of
Conscience, that they may not from an erring Mind, and corrupt Heart, deceive
themselves in a Matter that so nearly concerns them, and incur the double
Punishment in proportion to their Guilt, as our Savior foretells, When the
Blind lead the Blind, both fall into the Ditch.

Many useful Rules are laid down by Divines, whereby true Grace may be
discerned from Counterfeit: but the plainest Trial and Level to the perception
of the lowest Christian, is, Whether there be a sincere respect to all God's
Commands, without the reservation of any known Sin, how pleasant soever, to the
carnal Appetites, or the exception against any known Duty that is displeasing
to them. If Men would retire from the Vanities and Business of the World into
themselves, and search their Spirits with that seriousness that is due to so
weighty a Matter; if with a resolution to know the State of their Souls, if
Conscience were inquisitive as under God's Eye, that has a full prospect into
every Breast, they might have an inward Testimony of their Sincerity or
Deceitfulness. The Apostle refers the decision of our State with respect to
God, to the Testimony of the enlightened Conscience: If our Hearts condemn us
not, (of any habitual indulged Sin) then we have peace toward God. If our
Hearts condemn us, God is greater than our Hearts, and knows all things. From
the neglect of trying themselves, many live in a Cloud of Delusion, and from
inward Darkness pass to outer Darkness for ever.

The sure Trial of UPRIGHTNESS.
PSALM. xviii. 23. I was also upright before him: and have kept my self from
mine Iniquity.
THE Title of this Psalm declares the Occasion of it: David spoke unto the Lord
the words of this Song, in the day that the Lord delivered him from the hand of
all his Enemies, and from the hand of Saul. It Is a clear Evidence of his
Heavenly Mind, that after his Victories and Triumphs, when his Throne was
established in Peace, he recounts the signal Acts of Divine Providence with
holy Ecstasies of Praise and Thankfulness, and leaves an everlasting Memorial of
God's excellent Goodness to him. Carnal Persons in Extremities, may be ardent
in Requests for Deliverance, but when it is obtained, they retain but a cold
remembrance of God's preserving Mercy; nay, they often pervert his Benefits:
the affluence, and ease, and security of their Condition, occasions the
ungrateful forgetfulness of their Benefactor. Self-love kindles desires for
what we want, the Love of God inspires a holy Heat in Praises for what we enjoy.

In the Psalm, the inspired Composer displays the Divine Perfections in lofty
Figures of Speech, suitable to Sacred Poesy, and in a relative endearing Way as
manifested in his Preservation. He attributes such Titles to God, as are
significant of the Benefits he received: Sometimes God discovers the crafty and
cruel Designs that are formed against his People, his Eye saves them, and he is
styled their Light: Sometimes he breaks the strength of their Enemies, his Hand
and Power saves them, he is styled their Defense. Here the Psalmist, with
exuberant Affections, multiplies the Divine Titles, The Lord is my Rock, and my
Fortress, and my Deliverer; my Shield, and my high Tower, and my Refuge, and my
Salvation: A Rock is a Natural, a Tower an Artificial Defense; both are used to
express the safe Protection he found in God. He then sets forth the extremity
of his Danger, to add a Luster to the Name of his Preserver: The Waves of Death
compassed me; the Floods of ungodly Men made me afraid: His ruin was imminent,
and seemed to be inevitable: But in that distress, his servent Prayer, his
crying to God pierced the Heavens, God heard his Voice out of his Temple, and
speedily in the best Season came for his deliverance. He was seen upon the
Wings of the Wind; he rode upon a Cherub, (those swifter Spirits) and did fly.
He describes the Terrors of his coming against his Enemies: The Lord thundered
from the Heavens; he sent down his Arrows, and scattered them: his Lightning
discomfited them. The Acts of Justice reverst, have the Ensign of Mercy on
them: The drowning of the Egyptians in the Red Sea, was the preserving of the
Israelites. Briefly, He ascribes his deliverance to the Favor of God as the
sole Mover, and the Power of God as the sole Worker of it. He delivered me,
because he delighted in me. His free and compassionate Love was primarily
active, and drew forth his Power in its most noble Exercise for the Salvation
of David. Such an ingenuous and grateful Sense the Psalmist had of the Divine
Mercy: this gave the sweetest relish of his deliverance; this was his true
triumph after the final conquest of his Enemies. Indeed his Enemies were unjust
and cruel, and God vindicated the justice of his Cause against them: therefore
he says, The Lord rewarded me according to my Righteousness; according to the
cleanness of my Hands has he recompensed me. He declares the Holiness of his
Conversation: I have kept the Ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed
from my God. And as an eminent Instance of this, he says, in the words of the
Text, I was upright also before him: and kept my self from mine Iniquity.

In the Text there is a solemn Declaration of David's Uprightness, by his
attesting God the Searcher and Judge of the Heart; I was upright before him: and
by an infallible proof of it, I kept my self from mine Iniquity.

There is one Difficulty to be removed before I come to discourse upon the
Proposition, and that is, how this Profession of Uprightness is reconcilable
with David's Actions in the Matter of Uriah? Whether we consider the Quality of
his Sins, the crimson Guilt, and killing Circumstances that attended them;
especially the deliberate and cruel Contrivance of Uriah's Death: or whether we
consider the fearful Interval between his Sin and Repentance: for like some
fair Rivers that in their Current suddenly sink under Ground, and are lost in
their secret Passage, till at a great distance they rise and flow again: thus
it was with David, he that was so conspicuous in holiness of Life, sunk into a
Gulf of Sensuality and Cruelty, and for a long time was unrelenting and
unreformed, till by a special Message from God by the Prophet Nathan, he was
renewed to Repentance, and restored to the forfeited Favor of God.

To this Objection some Learned Interpreters answer, That the Declaration of
his Innocence and Integrity, must be understood with a tacit Exception
according to the Testimony of Scripture concerning him, That he did that which
was right in the Eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he
commanded him all the days of his Life, save only in the Matter of Uriah. That
Sin, though a dreadful Provocation, yet did not blast the Uprightness of the
rest of his Life, and make it unacceptable to God. 2. This affirmation of David
may refer to his afflicted State, when his Conscience was tender and vigilant,
and his Passions so subdued, that though Saul, his most unrighteous and
implacable Adversary, was at his Mercy, and he could as (...) have cut off his
Head, as the Lap of his Garment; though he was provoked to take his full
revenge on him, and put an end to his own Fears, yet he rejected the Motion
with abhorrence; God forbid I should lift up my Hand against the Lord's
Anointed: He spared Saul, and would not by such an irregular Act obtain the
Kingdom, though elected to it by God himself. By this we may take an estimate
of his Integrity, which God rewarded at last.

The Proposition that I shall discourse of is this, That the preserving a Man's
self from his Iniquity, is an undeceiving Evidence of Uprightness.

In the managing the Doctrine, three Things are to be considered and unfolded.

1. What Sin may be denominated a Man's own. 2. What the preserving ones self
from that Sin implies. 3. How this is an undeceiving Evidence of Uprightness.
1. What Sin may be denominated a Man's own.

In general, every Sin that a Man commits may be styled his own, as it is the
issue of his corrupt Nature, and the Offspring of his depraved Will. St. James
expresses it, Every Man is tempted, (that is, effectually) when he is drawn
away of his own Lust. The Devil may solicit and excite, but without the
consent of the Will he can never fasten Guilt upon us. Every actual Sin is in
some degree voluntary: But some Sins, in an eminent propriety and peculiar
manner, may be called our own; such as there is a strong tendency to commit,
either from the natural I^^lination, or Custom, that is an accessory Nature, or
from special respects that engage the Will and Affections. As in the natural
Body composed of various Members, some are more dear and useful, as the right
Eye, and the right Hand: So in the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, as the
corrupt Nature is styled by the Apostle, from the variety and union of the
vicious Affections, there are some particular Lusts, either for Pleasure or
Profit, are as the right Eye, or right Hand, in our Savior's Language, so dear
to Men, that they will lose Eternal Life rather than be separated from them.

These reigning Sins, that have a complete dominion in the Unregenerate, are of
different kinds in several Persons. I will proceed in the discovery of them. 1.
By a direct Light, from their Causes. 2. By a reflex Light from their Effects.
The Causes of special Sins are either Natural or Moral: The Natural are the
different Temperaments of Men's Bodies, and the Connection of the Passions, that
so strongly draw the Will, that we may as certainly understand what vicious
Actions are naturally consequent, as Astronomers foretell the Eclipses of the
Lights of Heaven.

I will begin with the consideration of the different Temperaments of Men's
Bodies, which are the secret Springs of their Inclinations and Aversions. It Is
requisite to premise, that Original Sin, the Poison distilled through all the
Faculties of Man by propagation, is an universal supreme Evil: It Is a Seminary
of all (...). Pl^^.
corrupt Desires, from whence the Issues of actual Sins are derived: and that
some are less inclined to notorious Sins than others, is not from naked Nature,
but from the singular distinguishing Mercy of God.

This Depravation so general and deplorable was observed by the wiser Heathens,
who were ignorant of the Cause of it, the rebellious Sin of Adam, the common
Father and Representative of Mankind. This Corruption of Nature does not
extenuate, but aggravate our Guilt: As the Psalmist with deep sorrow
acknowledges his native inherent Pollution; In Sin was I conceived, and in
Iniquity brought forth. I know many bold inquiring Wits have presumed to
examine the Decrees of God concerning the lapsed State of Mankind: but it is
much safer Quaeris tu rationem, ego expavesco altitudinem. Tu ratiocinare, ego
miror. Aug. Sermon. 7. de verb. Apost.
to admire the Divine Providence, than to argue; to believe the Revelation,
than to dispute against it.

But although the Stultus omnia vitia habet, sed non in omnia natura pronus
est: omnia in omnibus sunt, sed non omnia in singulis extant. Omnia in omnibus
insunt; sed in quibusdam singula eminent. Senec. de benef. L. 4.
corrupt Nature virtually includes all Sin, yet there is not an equal
propensity to all in every Person: as in waste neglected Grounds, some Weeds
are ranker and rifer than others, from the quality of the Soil; so some kinds
of Sin are more predominant and evident in the Lives of Man, according to their
peculiar Dispositions.

For the unfolding this, we are to consider, That the Soul of Man in its state
of Union, has a continual dependence upon the Body, both in its intellectual
and moral Operations. Consider it as a Spirit, and in its separate State, it is
capable of acting as freely and independently as those pure Intelligences that
are distant from alliance with gross Matter: but consider the Spirit as a Soul
consociated with a Body of Flesh, there is a strange circling Influence between
the Soul and the Body: The Dispositions of the Body suitably incline the Soul,
and the Inclinations of the Soul affect the Body. In the Intellectual
Operations as the Animal Spirits are qualified, some are of subtle and quick
Wits, others of stayed and solid Minds; some are fit for Contemplation, others
for Action. And in moral Actions the Soul works by the active Power of the
sensitive Faculties, and the Actions resemble the Instruments. The Complexion
of our Minds as well as Manners is usually suitable to our natural Temperature.
I will more distinctly unfold this. In the Humane Body there is the united
Figure of the World, the heavy Earth, the liquid Water, the subtle Air and
active Fire enter into its Composition: from the mixture of these Ingredients
results the Temperature of the Bodies; and as the Qualities proper to them are
predominant, Men are denominated Sanguine or Melancholy, Choleric or
Phlegmatic: Such as the Constitution is, such are the Inclinations, and such
are the Actions that flow from them. It Is observable, that brute Creatures are
either fierce or tame, bold or fearful, stupid or docile, as their Blood is
hotter or colder, of a finer or thicker Contexture. And in Children there is an
early disclosure of contrary Dispositions according to their Temperaments: thus
some are soft and ductile, others stiff and stubborn; some are of a sweet
pliable Temper, drawn by Counsel and the Cords of Love; others of a baser cast,
will not be led by Reason and Kindness, but must be constrained by Fear; some
are of an ingenuous Disposition, blushing at any thing that is indecent and
disparaging; others defy all Modesty, and will not change Countenance though
surpised in a soul Action. As the inclination in Animals to Actions proper to
their Kind, is discovered by their Offers before they are fit for Action: Birds
will attempt to fly before their Wings are formed; so in Children, Inclinations
to particular Vices appear according to their different Constitutions, before
their sensitive Faculties are capable of complete Acts.

More particularly, those Persons in whose Complexion Blood is predominant, are
usually light and vain, sensual and riotous, insolent and aspiring, bold and
presumptuous: Those in whom Phlegm is the principal Ingredient, are idle and
slow, cold and careless in things of Moment; the most ardent Exhortations are
lost upon them, as Bags of Wool dead the force of Bullets, in yielding without
resistance. Those who are timorous and deeply tinctured with Melancholy, are
suspicious, sour and inexorable. The dark shadows of their Minds are believed
as visible Testimonies of Dangers; and their silent Suspicions as real Proofs.
They are jealous of all Persons and Things: If in Conversation there be speech
of the Virtues they are conscious to want, or the Vices they are secretly
guilty of, they imagine it is directed to their Reproach. They are intractable,
and often revengeful; for Melancholy is a viscous Humor that retains the
Impressions of the Passions. Those who are Choleric by Nature, are heady,
various, violent, and create perpetual trouble to themselves and others. Such a
Soul and such a Body united, are like two Malefactors fastened with one Chain.
In short, according to the Elemental Crasis of our Bodies, Objects affect our
Senses, and the Fancy with the lower Appetite, are the Center of the Senses,
and there is so near an activity and refeference between the Passions and the
reasonable Faculties, that the Understanding and Will receive Impressions
accordingly, as the Passions are excited and moved.

It Is observable, that the corrupt Nature in the Language of Scripture, is
usually called Flesh, not only as it is transmitted by Carnal Propagation, but
as it is drawn forth by Carnal Objects, and exercised by the Carnal Faculties.
And as the same Constitution is heightened in some, and is in a remisser degree
in others, so the Lusts proper to it are more or less exorbitant; as the same
sort of Vines produce a stronger or weaker Grape, according to the quality of
the Air and Soil wherein they are planted. That vicious Inclinations spring
from the different Temperament of Men's Bodies, there is pregnant proof in the
visible diversity of Lusts that are peculiar in degrees of Eminence in some
Families, some Countries, and the several Ages of Men's Lives. We often see
hereditary Vices transmitted by descent: Some Families are voluptuous, others
vindictive; some sordid and covetous, others profuse; some ambitious, others
servile, resembling their Parents, from whom the secret Seeds of those
Dispositions are ingenerate in their Temper. So in different Climates,
according to the Impression made on the Natives by the Air and Diet, they are
distinguished by their Sunt tam civitatum quam singulorum hominum mores: gentes
aliae iracundae, aliae audaces quaedam timidae quaedam in vinum and recuerem
pro niores. Live. Hist. L. 45.
proper Vices (not so generally found in other Nations) as by their
Countenances: some are formal and superstitious, others wild and barbarous;
some are crafty and treacherous, others are wanton and luxurious. As some
Diseases reign in some Countries, that are less frequent, and not so fatal in
other places. The Apostle tells us of the Cretians, That they are always Liars,
evil Beasts, and slow Bellies; their habitual Vices fastened this universal
Character upon them.

And according to the alteration made in the Bodies of Men in the several Ages
of Life, their vicious Affections run in several Channels: the Spring is the
same, corrupt Nature; and the Issue will be the same, the Lake of Fire; but the
Course is different. St. John distinguishes the Corrupt Inclinations that are
predominant in the World, under three Titles, The Lusts of the Flesh, and the
Lusts of 1. John 2.
the Eyes, and Pride of Life: These Lusts have their proper Seasons, and
successively take the Throne in Men's Hearts.

In Youth, the Lusts that in propriety are called the Istae voluptates duae
gustus and tactus solae sunt hominibus communes cum bestiis, and ideo in
pecudum numero habetur, quisquis est his serinis voluptatibus praevinctus. Aul.
Gil.
Lusts of the Flesh, imperiously reign. Youth is a kind of natural Drunkenness,
the Blood runs Races, and with a Heat and Rapture hurries many into sensual
Excess and Riots. Youth is highly presumptuous, easily deceived, and ^aereus in
vitium flecti monitoribus asper.
refractory to Reason: the superior Faculties, the Understanding and Will, are
basely servile to the Carnal Appetites. The wise Preacher intimates this in his
bitter Irony; Rejoice, Eccles. 11.
O young Man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days of thy
Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: but
know, for all these things God will bring thee to judgment. Vain Mirth, and
loose Desires, are usually indulged in the spring of our Age: therefore the
Apostle emphatically warns Timothy, though a mortified young Man, Flee youthful
Lusts.

In the maturer Age, the ^^^sual Passions are cooler, less vigorous and active,
and youthful Lusts are changed for other* Lusts that are not so scandalous, and
leave not such a visible stain, but are as destructive to the Soul. It Is very
observable in humane Nature, that as the Affections in their sensible
Operations decay, the Understanding improves and recovers its ruling Power:
it is visible in many Instances, that Men in their staid Age despise those
things that had a ravishing force upon them in their unsettled Youth. But when
the Mind is tainted Conversis studiis aetas animusque virilis. Quaerit opes,
and amicitias, inservit honori.
with a false esteem of present things, (as it is in all those who are in a
state of polluted Nature) it leads the Will and Affections to pursue Riches and
Dignities. Carnal Wisdom is distinguished by St. James into three kinds; it is
earthly, sensual, devilish, with respect to the tempting Objects in the World,
Riches, Pleasures, Honors. The Sensual Wisdom is in contriving and appointing
the Means that may accomplish the Desires of the Flesh. After the Flesh is
satiated, the earthly Wisdom designs earthly Things, and uses such Means as are
fit to obtain them: to ascend in Power and Command, or to raise Estates, with
wretched neglect of the Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness, that should be
sought in the first place, and with the most ardent Affections and Endeavors.
In conjunction with this, the devilish Wisdom is practiced; for Pride and
Ambition are Satan's Original Sin, as Envy and Slander are his Actual Sins. He
is continually vexed at the recovery of fallen Man, and is his constant
Accuser. And whilst Men are eagerly contending for the World, they are excited
from Interest and Envy, to blast and defeat their Concurrents that would be
superior or equal to them. This worldly Wisdom, though a more solemn Folly, yet
is as woeful and pernicious as the sensual Wisdom; for God is injuriously robbed
of his Right, our highest Esteem and Affections; and Men deceived with the poor
Pageant of the World, neglect their last and blessed End, and justly perish for
ever.

Old Age has its peculiar Vices. It Is true, it mortifies the Affections to some
Vanities. Vespasian the Roman Emperor was so tired with the Pomp of his
Triumph, that in the triumphant way, he often reproached himself, that being an
Old Man he was engaged in such an empty and tedious Show. And Charles the
Fifth, in his declining Age, preferred the Shade of a Cloister before the
Splendour of the Empire. But it is attended with other vicious Inclinations. Old
Men are usually querulous, impatient, discontented, suspicious, vainly fearful
of Contempt or Want: and from thence, or some other secret Cause, are covetous
and sordid in sparing aginst all the Rules of Reason and Religion. Covetousness
In frigidis semibus vehementius inardescit.
is styled by the Apostle, The Root of all Evil; and as the Root in Winter
retains the Sap, when the Branches have lost their Leaves and Verdure, so in
Old Age, the Winter of Life, Covetousness preserves its vigor when other Vices
are fallen off. Usually the nearer Men approach to the Earth, they are more
earthly-minded, and which is strange to amazement, at the Sunset of Life, are
providing for a long Day. Briefly, every Age has its special Vices suitable to
the Constitution of Men's Bodies in them, and we must accordingly make our
enquiry to discover our own Sin.

2. The Connection of the Passions duly observed, will discover the predominant
Lust. The Passions are the Motions of the sensitive Appetite, whereby the Soul
approaches to an Object that is represented under the pleasant Colors of Good,
or flies from an apprehended Evil. They are called Passions, because in those
Motions there is a flowing or ebbing of the Spirits and Humors, from whence a
sensible change is caused in the Body, and the Soul is in unquiet Agitations.
It Is very difficult to know their Original, though the sensible Operations are
very evident: Consider the Soul as a Spirit, it is exempt from them; the Spirit,
as a Soul, is liable to them. Whether they are derived from the Soul to the
Body, or from the Body to the Soul, is hard to determine. They are of excellent
use, when subordinate to the direction of the renewed Mind, and the Empire of
the sanctified Will: When in their Rise, Degrees, and Continuance, they are
ordered by the Rule of true Judgment. What the Winds are in Nature, they are in
Man: If the Air be always calm without agitation, it becomes unhealthful, and
unuseful for maintaining Commerce between the distant Parts of the World:
moderate Winds purify the Air, and serve for Navigation. Ad ulteriora noscenda.
And thus our voluble Passions are of excellent use, and when sanctified,
transport the Soul to the Divine World, to obtain Felicity above. But when they
are exorbitant and tempestuous, they cause fearful Disorders in Men, and are
the Causes of all the Sins and Miseries in the World. From hence it is that Sin
in the Scripture is usually expressed by Lust; The Lusts of the Flesh Gal. 5.
are manifest: those who are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts thereof. Every Man that is tempted, Jam. 1.
is tempted of his own Lust. The Reason is, because the corrupt Desires of the
Soul, when inflamed, are the Springs of its Actings, and strongly engage the
Mind and Will, and all the active Powers, to procure their Satisfaction.

Now Sin being the Obliquity of the desiring Faculty, we may discover what is
the predominant Sin, by considering what Affection is most ardent and violent,
and consequently most depraved and disordered: and this we may, by observing
the connection between them; for they generate one another. As the Diseases of
the Body, tho the Disorder of Nature, yet have certain Causes, and a regular
course in their Accession, Inflammation, and Revolution: as in the Changes of
an Ague, a shivering Cold is attended with a fiery Heat, and that with an
overflowing Sweat; in like manner the irregular Passions are productive of one
another. Love is the radical Affection, and when it leads to a desired Object,
has always hatred in the Rear, if disappointed and and crossed in its Desires: So
Joy in the fruition of a dear Object, is attended with Grief, that lies in
Ambush, and immediately seizes upon the Soul when the Object is withdrawn. And
as in the Vibrations of a Pendulum, the Motion is always as strong in
proportion one way, as it was the other; so according to the excess of Love,
will be the excess of Grief. Of this we have an eminent Instance in David,
whose Sorrow for the Death of his rebellious Son was as immoderate, as his Love
the Cause of it.

2. I shall now consider the moral Causes of habitual Sins, the various
Circumstances of our Lives that are influential to give a Custom to Nature, and
Viciousness to Custom. As the Sea has Rocks and Sands, Gulphs and Currents,
Tempests and Calms, so the present Life has symbolically in its different
States, that endanger us in our Passage to the next World. The different
Conditions of Life I will consider under four Heads.

1. The several Callings wherein Men are engaged. 2. The opposite states of
Prosperity or Adversity that are attended with suitable Temptations. 3. The
Society with whom we are conversant. 4. The Quality of the Times wherein we
live.
1. Let us search for the predominant Sin in the Callings wherein* we are
engaged; for according to their Quality, Temptations surround us, and are
likely to surprise us. The Spider spins his Web, where Flies usually pass to
entangle and destroy them: so the subtle Tempter lays his Snares in our
Callings wherein we are conversant. John the Baptist therefore, when the
Publicans addressed to him for Instruction, Master, What shall we do? said to
them, Exact no more than what is appointed you: And to the Soldiers he said,
Do Violence to no Man, neither accuse any falsely; and be content with your
Wages: He warns them against Rapine, and Force, and injurious Accusing others,
of which Sins Publicans and Soldiers were usually guilty. I will, to be the
more instructive, particularly consider some Callings, and the Sins that
evidently attend them.

The Sacred Calling of Ministers does not secure them from Temptations; but
such is the corruption of their Hearts, and of the World, that it exposes them
to dangerous Temptations. The Devil scales us on the Temple-side, and often
gets possession of our Hearts. Ministers are often guilty of a spiritless
formality in the managing Holy Things. In the composing of Sermons, the Mind is
exercised about the Matter, Order, and Expressions, without Holy Affections
suitable to Divine Truths: partly, because from Custom the most solemn and
concerning Things pass through the Soul without serious Regard and Application;
and partly, because the Ministerial Office obliging us to furnish our selves
with the knowledge of the admirable Mysteries of Godliness for the instruction
of others, we are apt to make that the only End of our Studies; like Vintners
that buy great quantities of Wine for sale, and not for their own use. There is
not in many Ministers a spark of that Heavenly Fire which the reflexive
Meditation on Spiritual and Eternal Truths inspires into the Soul, which our
Savior came to kindle. Their Knowledge is not lively and operative, but like a
Winter's Sun that shines without vital Heat. If they are enriched with rare
Talents, they are apt to profane that Holy Ordinance of Preaching, by secret
Aims and Desires of Vainglory: The Temptation is more dangerous, because
esteem and praise for Intellectual Excellencies that are peculiar to Man, and
wherein the Eminence of his Nature consists, is very pleasing, even to those
who are of an unspotted Conversation, and free from Carnal Pollutions.

Chrysostom confesses of himself, That Habet enim multitudo vim quandam talem,
utquemadmodum tibicen sine tibiis canere, orator sine multitudine audiente
eloquens esse non possit. Cicer.
when he preached to a thin Auditory, his words died on his Lips, and his
Spirit was quenched; but when he was encompassed with a numerous full Assembly,
his Spirit was enflamed, and he breathed Fire. The attention and applause of
the Hearers, the regarding one another with Wonder, as if never Man spoke
better, the reigning over the Spirits of Men by powerful Oratory, are apt to
inspire vainglorious Conceits into the Preachers. And many carried along by
the Current of their injudicious Auditors, are curious to bespangle their
Discourses with light Ornaments, to please the Ear, and are not studious to
preach Christ and him Crucified, in a style distant from all shadow of vanity,
to save the Soul.

Another Temptation attending that Holy Calling is, from Humane Passions, which
Ministers often bring up into the Pulpit with them, and with a counterfeit Zeal
vent their Animosities against those of whom they are jealous, as diminishing
their secular Interests. God under the Law severely forbids the offering up
Sacrifices by common Fire, but only by Celestial, that was preserved Day and
Night upon the Altar by the Priests: it is symbolical, that the reprehension of
Sinners by the Servants of God, should not be expressed with heat of Anger
against their Persons, but with holy Zeal; that Love to their Souls should be
the pure Motive of the severest Rebukes.

Lastly, The great danger is, lest Ministers have a respect more to the
temporal Reward of their Office, than the divine End of it. Therefore St. Peter
with that Solemnity enjoins Evangelical Pastors, to feed the Flock of God,
taking 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre,
but of a ready Mind: Neither to act as Lords over God's Heritage, but to be
Ensamples to the Flock. It Is true, the Labourer is worthy of his Reward; and if
we sow Spiritual 1 Cor. 9. 11.
Things, is it a great Matter (as the Apostle says) if we reap your carnal
Things? But tho it is natural and regular to eat to live, yet to live to eat is
prodigiously brutish; so it is a most guilty vile Intention to use the Sacred
Ministry for obtaining secular Things. This will corrupt the Heart, and hinder
the discharging the Office with sincerity and constancy: For the End is the
Rule and Measure of the Means, and a worldly Minister will frame his Sermons,
and order his Affairs to obtain the World. If it be for his Secular Interest,
he will appear as an Apostle, full of Zeal against Errors and Sins: but if the
preaching the Doctrines of Truth and Holiness be prejudicial to his worldly
Designs, he will neglect his Duty to preserve the Minds of Men untainted from
destructive Errors, he will mollify the Threatenings of Scripture, rebate their
Edg, and thereby harden the Hearts of presumptuous Sinners. As it is observed
Pravitas ^^^tuminum ad similitudinem sui vitem configurat. Columel. L. 4.
of the Vines, if they are supported upon crooked Stakes, they will grow so; so
carnal Preachers will conform themselves according to the Humors of those upon
whom they servilely depend.

In Courts of Judicature, the Temptations are intimated in the wise Advice of
Jethro to Moses, That he should choose Men fearing God and hating Covetousness.
Without the overruling Fear of God, Judges will not do their Duty evenly and
courageously: Humane Respects will tempt them to bend the Rule to the obliquity
of their Minds and Desires. When they are influenced by the Fear or Favor of
Men, they will part with Justice, and Conscience, and true Honor, and their
Souls. And how often does the weight of Gold turn the Scales in Judgment, and
preponderate the Reason of the Cause with those who are most solemnly obliged
to universal rectitude in the discharge of their Office? Judges should so
impartially, and with that noble Resolution perform their Duty, as to disourage
all Attempts to pervert them. Zeuxes having painted a Boy carrying some Grapes,
so colored according to Nature, that the Birds Aves male existimare de tabula,
no^ ad volaturas si puer similis esset. Plin. lib. 35.
peck'd at them: An Observer said, The Birds discredited the Picture; for if
the Boy had been drawn with equal Life, they had not been so bold to fly at the
Grapes; a sign they fancied the Grapes true, and the Boy painted. Thus whoever
tempts those who sit in Judicature to unworthy Things, disgraces their Dignity,
and constructively declares that he esteems them to have an appearance of
Virtue without sincere Zeal for it. And how many who are pleaders, by
fallacious Colors commend a bad Cause and discredit a Good, and thereby expose
themselves to that terrible denunciation, Woe be them that call Good Evil, and
Evil Good. A degenerous Mind, and mercenary Tongue, will plead any Cause to
obtain the Ends of Avarice and Ambition: as if, according to what an Italian
Lawyer said of himself, They were the Advocates of their Clients, and not of
Justice.

In short, every Calling has its Temptations: In the various ways of Commerce,
there are deceitful Arts which an upright Man observes and abhors. Some
Callings expose to more Temptations than others; so that without Circumspection
and Care, Men are undone in the way of their Callings. Some engage Persons in
such a throng of Business, that from one rising of the Sun to another, they
never seriously remember God or their Souls. It Is therefore a Point of great
Wisdom in the choice of a Calling, with a free Judgment to consider what is
least liable to Temptations, and affords more freedom of serving God and
regarding our Spiritual State; for the Body is not the entire Man, and the
present Life is not his only Duration. The Apostle directs Christians to choose
such a State of Life, that they may have an advantage of attending upon the
Lord without 1 Cor. 7. 35.
distraction.

I shall add, That the several Relations wherein we stand, as Husbands,
Parents, Masters, and Wives, Children, Servants, have peculiar Temptations: and
many whose general Conversation seems fair and blameless, are not observant of
their Relative Duties. A Husband may be harsh and unkind, a Parent fond and
viciously indulgent, ('it was Ely's Sin that brought Ruin upon his Family) a
Master may be severe and rigorous. Superiors who are to instruct and govern
Families by Holy Counsels and Examples, often neglect their Duty; and by their
evil Carriage, set a Copy which their Children and Servants transcribe, and
derive a woeful Guilt upon themselves from their multiplied Sins. And how often
are those in lower Relations careless of their proper Duties: Wives
disrespectful, and not observant of their Husbands, Children disobedient,
Servants unfaithful? If Conscience be enlightened and tender, it will regard the
whole compafs of our Duty, it will see and feel our sinful neglects in any
kind, and make us careful according to the extent of its Obligation.

2. The opposite States of Prosperity and Adversity, have suitable Temptations
adherent to them.

Prosperity is beset with the thickest and most dangerous Temptations. In a
Garden the Tempter lay in ambush, and made use of the Fruit that was pleasant
to the Taste, and pleasant to the Eye, and desirable for Knowledge; and by
those Allurements corrupted and ruined our first Parents, to the loss of their
Innocence and Felicity. Although Prosperity be a Blessing in it self, yet it is
often more destructive than Adversity, by the inseparable and engaging Snares
that surround the Persons that enjoy it: Pride, Luxury, Security, Impiety, grow
and flourish in Prosperity. Affliction calls home the wandering Spirit, makes us
reflect with solemnity upon our selves, excites us to arm our Minds with
Religious Resolutions against the World; whereas Prosperity relaxes and
dissolves the Spirit, and foments the Lusts of the Flesh. Those who live in the
Courts of Princes, where the Height of Honor, and the Center of Pleasure are,
where Ambition, Hypocrisy, Avarice and Sensuality reign, are encircled with
dangerous Enchantments, and usually are charmed and corrupted by them. The
Court Life is splendid to the Eye, but very perilous; like a Ship that is
finely carved and painted, but so leaky, that without continual pumping it
cannot be kept above Water; so without the strictest guard over their Hearts
and Senses, the prosperous cannot escape the Shipwreck of a good Conscience,
and fall into many foolish Lusts that drown Men in Perdition. Yet this state of
Life many aspire to as the most happy. When Lot separated from Abraham, he
chose the pleasant Genesis 13.
fruitful Country that was like the Garden of the Lord. Sad choice! the Land
was the best, but the Inhabitants the worst: Within a short time the cry of
their Sins reached as high as the Throne of God, and brought down showrs of
Fire and Brimstone, that turned that natural Paradise into an Hell.

Riches has a Train of Temptations, and Poverty is not exempt from them. 'Twas
the wise Prayer of Agur, Give me Prove. 30. 8, 9.
neither Poverty nor Riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the
Lord? or lest I be poor and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain. A full
Estate entirely possesses the Heart, and excludes the eternal World from the
Thoughts and Affections: it is therefore wise Advice, If Riches increase, set
not your Heart upon them, intimating they are a Snare to the most in the
corrupt State. They often induce in Men's Minds an ungrateful Oblivion of their
Divine Benefactor, as it is charged upon Israel, Their Hearts were exalted,
therefore they have forgotten me. They incline Men to presume upon
Self-sufficiency, and to rob God of the Homage that is due from his Creatures,
an humble thankful dependence upon his Providence every day. The Psalmist
says, They trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of
their Riches. They are engaging Snares to renounce Religion, whenever the
Sincere, and open profession of it, exposes our Estates to hazard. Briefly, as
the Israelites made an Egyptian Idol of their Egyptian Jewels; so worldly
Things are abused for worldly Lusts. The most who enjoy Prosperity, perish by
the abuse of it: It Is a rare effect of Divine Grace to preserve the Heart and
Conversation pure in such a contagious Air, when a thousand fall at thy side,
and ten thousand at thy right Hand. And the contrary state of Poverty and
Affliction in any kind, if sharp, has its peculiar Temptations; Discontent, and
the use of unlawful Means to obtain what they want and desire, is the Sin of
the Poor. The Afflicted are ready to faint under the weight of Sorrow: The loss
of one Comfort blasts all the Content of their Lives. There is a perpetual
consumption of their Thoughts and Time in revolving the afflicting
Circumstances of their Condition, and they are apt to think as if God were
regardless or very severe to them. Fearful depth! they wretchedly neglect the
means that might alleviate their Sorrows, and refuse to be comforted, as if
they were Persons consecrated to Calamity; thus Life is lingered out in
continual Languishings, or ended with deadly Grief.

If the Affliction be singular and extraordinary, Sorrow often increases to
such dismal Degrees, that most woeful Effects proceed from that Passion. The
Anguish of Spirit either breaks out in unkindly and unholy Expressions, or
inwardly festers with Repining, vexatious Thoughts at their Condition. Stubborn
Spirits are impatient of the Evils they suffer, and insensible and undervaluing
of the Blessings they possess. They neither look upward to the Hand of God that
disposes all Evils, nor inward to their Sins, the most righteous procuring
Cause of them: But serious Reflection would constrain them to acknowledge that
God punishes them less than their Sins deserved, and that their Dross needed
the vehemence of the Fire to purge it away: A meek yielding our selves, and a
complying with the blessed Ends of his afflicting Providence, will make us to
understand by Experience, that all our sharpest Sufferings were most wisely and
divinely ordered by our Heavenly Father.

3. We must search for our peculiar Sin in the Society with whom we are
conversant. Our Company that we choose, and are frequently engaged with,
discovers us to others and may to our selves. It Is a true Glass that by
reflection makes visible the Countenance and Complexion of our Minds. Love
proceeds from Likeness, and the Election of Friends from a correspondence in
the Tempers of Men. It Is true, there may be Foreign Motives of Friendship and
Commerce, with others from our Secular Affairs and Interests; but Inclination
is the internal Cause of Friendship. It Is visible, that Carnality in its
various kinds, cements Friendships: the Intemperate, the Lascivious, the
Worldly, are endeared to one another by the resemblance in their Minds and
Manners. Besides, Examples if often in our view, and especially of those whom
we love, have a strange Power to change us into their Likeness. It Is the
Observation of the wise Man, He that has fellowship with a proud Man, will be
like him. The vicious Affections of the Heart Serpunt vitia, and in proximum
quemque transiliunt, and contactu nocent.
transpire in Words and Actions, and insensibly infect others: and in familiar
Society the Contagious Evil the more strongly infects, being immediately
conveyed. If our intimate Friends are worldly Wise, who mind earthly Things,
sagacious to forecast Advantages, and active to accomplish their Designs, we
may judge of the strain of our Affections; for if our Conversations were in
Heaven, if our frequent and serious Discourses were of Things above, how to
improve Spiritual Riches, our Company would be ungrareful to them: without
Sympathy there can be no complacence in Society. The Garlic and Onions of the
Egyptian Earth, is more tasteful to their Palats than the Bread of Angels.
Besides, by constant familiarity our Minds are apt to be corrupted to value the
World as our substantial Felicity, and our Hearts to be corrupted with the love
of it, which is of the Spring of Men's Sins and Misery. Thus if we are
Associates with the Voluptuous, there will steal into the Heart an allowance of
Sensuality, and a dislike of Holiness as a sour Severity. If unregenerate Men,
though of a civil Conversation, be our chosen and familiar Friends, our Zeal
for Religion will decline, and lukewarmness be insensibly infused into us.
Briefly, as the Wax receives the Figure of the Seal that is applied to it, our
Minds receive a likeness from the Impressions of Examples. Therefore a Prudence
discreet and severe is necessary in the choice of our Society. In the Humane
Life there is no mistake more dangerous than in the choice of Friends with whom
we are usually conversant. It Is a comprehensive Rule, and most useful for the
guiding us safely to Heaven, to select the Wise and Holy to be our
bosom-Friends. As a Ring touched by a Loadstone drawsanother by an impressed
Virtue, so in holy Society there is Divine Grace attractive of the Hearts of
others. He that walks with the Wise, shall be wise; but a Companion of Fools
shall be afflicted: That is the penal Consequence of being corrupted by them.
The Sensual and Luxurious, by their converse, pervert good Dispositions in
others, and heighten evil Inclinations into Habits: They are Satan's
Instruments to draw Men into his Snares, more familiar Devils to tempt and
destroy Souls. He that chooses evil Company, is like one that voluntarily
frequents a House infected with the Plague; who is either a Fool and disvalues
Life, or desperate and seeks Death.

4. We must consider the Quality of the Times we live in, to discover what Sin
is predominant in us. There are Evil Days in the Apostle's Language, with
respect to the Temptations and Troubles that are concomitant with them, and a
wise circumspect walking is requisite to preserve our Innocence and Purity.
Sometimes those who are dignified with Titles and Powers, are leaders in Sin,
and their public Practices are so commandingly exemplary, that they easily
prevail upon many to follow them; for that is the way to insinuate into their
favor, and obtain secular Advantages and Rewards. From hence it is that some,
as if the opposite Forms of Religion were but different fashions of the same
stuff, will put on a new Livery according to the Master they serve. They have a
politic Faith, you may coin them a Philip and Mary, or an Elizabeth, as the
Mintage of the Times vary. But the Example of the High and Noble is no safe
Rule: A Rule of Gold, tho of value for the Matter, yet if crooked, it is useless
as a Rule. In some Ages the Poison sheds it self into the whole Body of a
Nation, that rarely any are untainted. The old World was drowned in sensuality,
and Noah only escaped. And in the next Age, how did Idolatry, like an
overspreading Leprosy infect the World, and Abraham hardly escaped. In Jeremy's
Time the Land mourned for Oaths and Curses; Men were turned breathing Devils,
and spoke the Language of Hell before they came there. Sometimes all Degrees
are so corrupt, that Vices pass for Virtues, the rage of Duelling for Heroic
Valor, Luxury and Sensuality for innocent and amiable Qualities; and Holiness,
tho a Divine Excellency, and the very Beauty of the Deity, is despised and
derided: Thus Men glory in their Shame, and are ashamed of their Glory. Now
there is no Tyranny more violent than of a corrupt Custom, no Contagion more
catching than of National Sins. The Apostle reminds the Ephesians, that in
their Heathen State they walked according to the Course of the World. We are
therefore strictly commanded, not to be conformed to the World, but transformed
by the renewing of our Minds, that we may prove what is the Good, the
acceptable and perfect Will of God. It Is the eminent effect of Grace to resist
the Torrent of the Times, and to value the Conscience of our Duty before all
Worldly Respects: accordingly it is recorded to the everlasting Honor of
Jehoshaphat, That he walked in the Commandments of God, and not according to
the Doings of Israel.

2. I come to show how the peculiar Sin may be discovered from its Effects, and
the discovery from hence is more sensible, than from the Causes: for Divine
Grace may control the Efficacy of the Causes, that a Christian may abhor the
Sin to which there are strong Temptations, but Effects emergent from inward
Lusts, discover the habitual frame of the Heart.

1. The Sin that is frequently and easily committed, and difficulty retracted,
is a Man's peculiar Sin.

1. Frequently. Single Acts do not denominate a Person, but Habits that proceed
from repeated Acts, are characteristical. Noah's single Act of Drunkenness,
which might proceed from his ignorance of the strength of the Wine, or the
weakness of his Brain, did not argue his being addicted to it: but frequent
relapses into that Sin, denominates a Man a Drunkard. A train of sinful Actions
is from a disposition strongly bent to them. If a Man be of a choleric Nature,
Anger will be his quotidian; if of a Sanguine, licentious Mirth will be his
tertian. It Is the Character of Man in his unregenerate polluted State, he
commits Sin, it is his Trade; and as any particular Lust has dominion in his
Heart, such is the course of his Life. When the Inclination leads to a Calling,
a Man applies himself continually to it; for the Work produces Delight, and the
Delight strongly inclines him to work: Thus according to the tendency of our
corrupt Natures is the constant practice of Sin. We may as surely judge of the
active Powers of the Soul by the Actions that proceed from them, as of the
vigor of the Sap in the Root, by the number of the Fruits of the Tree. It Is
said of the Scoffers, they walk after their own Lusts: which implies the
habitual practice of Sin, the license and pleasure they take in a carnal Course.

2. The Sin that is easily committed is our own. As the Divine Nature in a
Saint makes him fit for every good Work, but especially for the exercise of
that Grace that is eminently regent in his Heart, upon the first Call of
Conscience, he applies himself to his Duty: so the corrupt Nature prepares Men
for evil Works, and its special tendency is presently inflamed by a suitable
Object. This Indication is clear, with respect to the Sins of the desiring and
angry Appetites. The more quick and speedy the Power of a Temptation is, the
more strong is the vicious Inclination. When Achan saw a goodly Babylonish
Garment and a Wedg of Gold, he coveted them and took them: the immediate rise
of his Affection upon the presence of the Object, his presumptuous Sacrilege,
notwithstanding the terrible Interdict, was a convincing sign of his worldly
Mind. So it is said of the young Man in the Proverbs, that was enticed by the
blandishments of the Harlot, he went straitway after her. When the alluring
Object presently inveigles the Senses, and easily obtains the consent of the
Will, we may truly infer what Passion reigns in the Heart. So a Man that is
soon angry, whose Passion like Tinder takes fire at a Spark, a small Occasion
may understand what his Nature is. A Man of a cool Spirit, of meek and
mortified Passions, is not easily incensed.

3. The Sin that is difficultly retracted. There are Principles of Conscience
in lapsed Nature, concerning Good and Evil that cannot be rased out, and are
improved and heightened by revealed Light; from hence there is often an internal
Conflict between the convinced Mind, and the corrupt Heart: But the darling
Lust controuls the Efficacy of those Principles, for Nature and Custom are of
all things most hardly to be changed. Properties inherent in the nature of
things are inseparable: Thus wallowing in the Mire is natural to a Swine, and
though washed, will return to it. When a Lust is deeply rooted in Nature, Men
cannot cease from Sin. We have a sad Instance of this in St. Austin, before his
entire and blessed Conversion. He declares in his Confessions, how extreme hard
it was to divorce himself from sensual Delights; they were incarnated in his
Nature, ingrafted into his Affections, and the separation from them was as the
fleaing him alive. When he prayed for Chastity, it was with a restriction, Make
me chaste, but not too soon: In the vigor of his Age, the sinning Season, he
was averse to be weaned from those poisonous Breasts. 'Till Divine Grace
changed his Nature, he could never rescue himself from the Intanglements of his
Iniquity.

Custom in Sin usually proceeds from Inclination; and with as strong a sway
determines the corrupt Will as Original Nature. Can the Ethiopian change his
Skin, and the Leopard his Spots? then may you who are accustomed to do Evil do
Good. Dreadful difficulty! some habitual Sinners are secure and stupid, and of
such depraved obstinacy, that they will not resolve to cleanse themselves from
their Defilements. In others there are some sparks of Religious Fear; but
notwithstanding the stings of Conscience, continue in the practice of Sin. The
charming Lust so long indulged, is imperious and peremptory; and till
Omnipotent Grace unbinds the Charm, they are never released from the circle of
confessing their Sins when their Desires are sated, and committing them with
new Heat and Rapture upon the returning Temptation. Though Convictions be
heightened into Resolutions, the next Temptation hinders the Effect: They
rescind their solemn and sacred Engagements, perfidiously break double Chains,
the Law of God with their own Vows, grieve his Spirit and wound their own; from
hence it is evident that such Sins are properly Men's own.

2. That Lust to which others are subservient, has the supremacy in the Heart.
In all the Dominions of Satan, there is some special Lust that is his Viceroy,
and keeps possession for him. There is an Order in the Kingdom of Darkness, one
Sin wants the assistance and countenance of another sometimes to disguise and
palliate it, or for the doing it. The reigning Sin has, as it were, its Court
and Council, its Guard and Attendants. To illustrate this by its contrary, it is
observable there is a concatenation of Virtues, and the superior Virtue is
assisted by other Virtues in its Exercise: as Justice in dispensing what is due
to others, is assisted by Fortitude and Temperance, which regulate Fear and
Desire, that often hinder its most noble Exercise: and the Actions immediately
flowing from Courage or Temperance, are ascribed to Justice, to which they are
subservient; for the End and Intention constitutes the Kinds in the ranks of
moral Things, either Virtues or Vices. It Is the Observation of the Philosopher,
that one who does an Act of Robbery that he may have Money to corrupt a Woman,
is not so much Covetous as Incontinent. Joseph's Brethren sold him into Egypt,
dipped his Garment in Blood to deceive their Father, and thereby contracted a
Crimson Guilt: but Cruelty and Hypocrisy were subordinate to their Envy: They
hated him, because the Father's Love to them was faint in comparison to the
warm Beams reflected upon Joseph.

2. The Darling Corruption ingrosses the Thoughts. There is a natural levity
and featheriness in the Mind, a strange inconsistency and discurrency of the
Thoughts, but Love will fasten them intensely upon its Object. From hence it is
that habitual and delightful Thoughts are the best discovery of our Hearts and
our spiritual State. Words and Actions may be overruled and counterfeit for
diverse Reasons, but Thoughts are the invisible productions of the Soul, and
without fear or mask, without restraint or disguise, undissemblingly discover
the Disposition of the Heart. Thoughts are the Immediate Offspring of the
Soul; and as the Waters that immediately flow from the Spring are strongest of
the Mineral, so the Thoughts are most deeply tinctured with the Affections. A
Saint is therefore described by his meditating Psalm 1.
in the Law of God Day and Night, which is the natural and necessary Effect of
his Delight in it. Uncounterfeit Religion Definitio brevis and vera virtutis,
ordo est amoris.
and Holiness consists in the order of Love, as St. Austin briefly and fully
describes it. The Will is carried to its Object and End by the Motion of Love,
and Love applies the Mind entirely to the Object to which it is strongly
inclined. When the Heart is corrupt, the ordinary Current of the Thoughts is in
the Channel of our Lusts. The contriving Thoughts, the Devices of the Mind, the
contemplative Thoughts and inward Musings are conversant about the beloved Lust
that engages the Mind to it. Thus when Covetousness is the reigning Passion,
the Mind is in continual exercise to compass secular Ends: it is full of
Projects how to order the Means most successfully to increase Riches, and how
to remove whatever may obstruct the main Design. The Spirit is captivated, and
like a drudg in a Mill is continually grinding for the satisfaction of the
earthly Appetite. When the more sensual voluptuous Passions are predominant,
the contriving Thoughts are to make Provisions Romans 13. 1.
for the Flesh to satisfy the Lusts thereof. The Understanding is debased to be
the Pander and Caterer for the intemperate and incontinent Appetites. The
ambitious Spirit lays the Scene how to obtain his desired Honor, and forecasts
how to ascend to some place of Eminence: so Anger sowred into Revenge, envies
at the Excellencies and Advancements of others, turns the Mind to plot Mischief.

The contemplative Thoughts and Musings of the Mind, are also fixed on the
darling Lust. As a Holy Believer in whose Heart the desire of enjoying God in
Heaven is the supreme Affection, frequently ascends in his Mind thither, and by
solemn serious Thoughts substantiates his future Happiness, and has an
unspeakable glorious Joy in the lively hopes of it: Thus the unrenewed Heart
turns the Thoughts to the desired Object, either in representing it in all its
Charms, or in reflections upon the enjoyment of what is past, or in expectation
of what is to come, and pleases it self with the Supposition instead of
Fruition. A proud Person entertains vainglorious thoughts of his own Worth,
and worships the vain Idol himself: In his Mind he repeats the Echoes of
Praise, that his foolish Flatterers lavish upon him. It Is recorded of
Nebuchadnezzar, that as he walked in his Palace, he said, Is not this great
Babylon that I have built, for the House of the Kingdom, by the might of my
Power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? His high towering words were the
Expression of his Thoughts, and discovered Pride to be the reigning passion of
his Heart. The sensual Wretch surveys his Carnal Paradise, and personates the
Pleasures of Sin by impure Imaginations: his fancy runs riotously over tempting
Beauties: by an active Contemplation he contracts a new Stain, and induces a
new Guilt upon himself: he commits the same Sin a thousand times, by renewing
the pleasant Thoughts of it, and by carnal complacence in the remembrance.

In the silence of the Night, when a Curtain of Darkness is drawn over the
visible World, and the Soul not diverted by sensible Objects, is most free in
its Operations, then the Thoughts are conversant about the beloved Sin. It Is
said of the Malicious and Revengeful, They plot mischief upon their Beds. The
rich Fool was contriving how to bestow his Fruits and Goods, and entertaining
himself with the thoughts of festival voluptuous living, in the Night wherein
his Soul was required. And in the Morning the Virgin Thoughts are prostituted
to the beloved Lust. In the time of Divine Worship, when the pure Majesty and
special Presence of God should unite the Thoughts, and compose the Soul to a
holy solemn Frame, then the beloved Lust will be so impudent and outrageous as
to break into the Mind the Chamber of Presence, and seat it self there. As
Lot's Wife led by an Angel out of Sodom, turned a lingering Eye toward it, so
the Carnal Heart even in religious Service and Addresses to God, reflects upon
the sinful Object, that has an attractive force upon it. It Is charged against
those fine Hypocrites in Ezekiel; They sit before Ezekiel. 33. 31.
thee as my People, and hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with
their Mouth they show much love, but their Heart goes after their
Covetousness. It Is reckoned as an high Aggravation of their Guilt, Yea in my
House have I found their Jer. 23. 11.
Wickedness, says the Lord. The familiar Lust will haunt Men in the Divine
Presence. This makes them cold and careless in Holy Duties; this makes their
Devotion so faint and dilute, that God is infinitely provoked by them. In
short, the darling Lust does so entirely and intensely fix the Mind upon it,
that Men's Accounts are dreadfully increast by the swarms of wicked Thoughts
that defile their Souls: and in the Day of Judgment, that is called the Day of
Revelation, there will be a discovery made to their everlasting Confusion.

4. The Sin Men desire to conceal from others, and from Conscience, and are apt
to defend or extenuate, and are impatient of reproof for it, has a special
Interest in their Affections. Every Sinner is a Master of this Art, to
counterfeit the Virtues he wants, and dissemble the Vices that he allows. It Is
the Observation of Solomon, God made Man upright, but he sought out many
Inventions; especially to palliate and hide, or to excuse his Faults. Sin in
its native deformity is so foul, that Men employ a great deal of Art and Study,
either to conceal it under a Vail of Darkness, or a deceitful Mask of Virtue,
or by various Excuses to lessen its Guilt and Ignominy. Adam patched up an
Apron of Fig Leaves to cover his Nakedness, a resemblance of his care to hide
his Sin. David could not expect to deceive God; but to hide his Adultery with
Bathsheba from Men, he sends for Uriah from the Army, that he might have gone
home to his Wife. It Is observed of Caesar and Pompey, whose ambitious Spirits
aspired to Sovereign Power, they made use of some Ensigns of Royalty, to
accustom the People by degrees to them, yet were crafty to hide their Design.
Caesar sometimes appeared publicly with a Wreath of Laurel on his Head; but
lest the People from his wearing that appearance of a Crown, should be jealous
of his Intention, pretended it was only to supply his want of Hair, and cover
his baldness* Pompey wore a white Fillet curiously wrought about his Leg, in
pretense that his Leg was hurt; but in truth, because it was a Diadem, a Royal
Ornament, Pompeio candida fascia crus alligatum habenti, dictum fuit, non
refert in qua part corporis sit diadema. Aul. Gell.
for which he was reproached by some strict Observer. There are innumerable
Arts used to cover Men's respective Sins. I shall only instance in one that is
usually practiced: How do many, like the crafty Lapwing that flutters at a
distance from its Nest, appear zealous against the visible Sins of others, that
under that shadowy Deceit they may hide their own? Their Words feathered with
severe censure fly abroad, wounding the Reputation of others for lesser Faults,
that they may not be suspected to be guilty of worse Sins secretly cherished by
them.

But if the beloved Sin be evident, Satan assists the corrupt Mind to frame
such colorable Pretenses either to defend or excuse it, that it may not appear
in a ghastly manner, attended with strict Judgment and an everlasting Hell.
When a Lust has enticed and drawn away the Will, the Mind is engaged to give
color to the Consent, and either directly, or in an oblique way to represent
the Sin that it may appear less odious and more amiable. Sometimes the
Understanding is so perverted by the impression of Pleasure, that Conscience
allows Concupiscence. It Is a repeated Observation of a Vitia nobis* sub
virtutum nomine obrepunt. Temeritas sub titulo fortitudinis latet. Moderatio
vocatur ignavia, pro cauto timidus accipitur. In his magno periculo erratur.
Senec. Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and umbra. Juven. 14 Sat.
wise Philosopher, that Vices were disguised under the resemblance of Virtues,
and Virtues disparaged under the names of Vices; from whence the Understanding
and Will, the Mind and Manners were depraved, and shame was cast upon the
Virtuous, and boldness given to the Vicious. Profuseness is styled
Magnificence, Violence, Valor, Dissoluteness, Gentility, Fraud and Craft,
Prudence. On the contrary, Sincerity is blasted with the name of Folly,
Patience reputed Stupidity, and Conscience Superstition. The Proud will set off
the the lofty Humor and Carriage as a decent greatness of Spirit, and vilify
the Humble as low and sordid. The Choleric will engage Reason to justify his
Passion; he will allege the Provocation would anger an Angel. The Lukewarm in
Religion, will represent lukewarmness as a discreet Temperament between the
vicious Extremes of a Wildfire Zeal, and a profane coldness and neglect. The
Earthly-minded will put flattering Colors on Covetousness, to make it appear a
praiseworthy Virtue, a prudent provision for time to come. If Men are quite
destitute of defense, they will by a mild construction extenuate the guilt of
their darling Sin. The incontinent Person will make a Canopy for his Lust, as
only a humane Frailty. The Intemperate will excuse his Excess, as free Mirth
and harmless Society. Many Apologies are made for the Sins Men indulgently
commit; some will plead in excuse, a prone necessity of Nature; some, the
Custom of the Places they live in; some, their unsettled Youth; any thing that
may lessen the turpitude in the view of Conscience, or in the Opinion of
others. Now pleading argues Love, and Love denominates the Sin to be their own.
Hoc equae omnium est, vitia sua excusare malint quam effugere. Senec. Epist. 50*
From hence it is that so many contract a desperate hardness, and are
irrecoverably depraved. But if Men cannot hide or excuse their beloved Sin,
they are impatient of reproof for it, and with secret Discontent, or stormy
Passions, reject Admonition. Some of fair Tempers and Conversation, if a
Minister or Friend be faithful to their Souls, and with holy Zeal urges the
divorcing Command of God between them and their pleasant Sins, and represents
sincerely the Guilt of their sinful course of Life, they become fierce and
vehement, and recoil upon their Reprovers, as arrogating imperious Authority,
or for Rigor and Severity, or importinence in admonishing them; and sometimes
recriminate, that the Reprover is as bad or worse himselfl: ike a River that
passes without noise, till it meets with the Arches of a Bridge that stops its
free Current, then it swells and roars. In short, the indulgent Sinner will
endeavor to defend his bosom-Sin, or to subdue his Conscience that it may not
torment him for it.

5. The Sin that the enlightened Conscience reflects upon, with anguish and
bitter remorse, is usually that which has been indulged, and whereby God has
been most dishonored* There is so deep an impression of the Deity in the Soul,
and our duty and accountableness, that it cannot be utterly defaced: and though
the rebellious Will and Affections control it for a time, yet it remains for
the Conviction and Punishment of Delinquents. Conscience is a Spy in our
Bosoms, and observes in order to a discovery; and what is written in its
Register cannot be razed out. It Is true, a Spirit of Slumber sometimes seizes
upon the Wicked, and Conscience is so stupefied, that they sin without
reflection and remorse; but there are times wherein Conscience is roused up
like a Lion, and tears them in pieces according to the fearful Threatening. This
is sometimes done by the powerful preaching of the Word: The Apostle describes
the Word of God by its admirable efficacy; It Is quick and powerful, and sharper
than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder the Soul and
Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the Thoughts and
Intents of the Heart* When the Word by a piercing Application discovers the
bosom-Sin, and the fearful Judgment that attends it, so that the Guilty cannot
obscure the Evidence of the one, nor avoid the terror of the other, then
Conscience bleeds afresh that was seared before. There is recorded a wonderful
Instance of this in the Acts of the Apostles; when Paul the Prisoner reasoned
of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix trembled: The
discoursing Per omnem saevitiam and libidinem Jus regium servili ingenio
exercuit. Tacit. Lib. 5. Hist.
of those Virtues that were directly contrary to his habitual Enormities, ripped
up his Conscience to the quick, and struck into consternation that lofty
Sinner. From hence it is that many decline a sharp and searching Ministry,
which is always the Token of a guilty Heart. The Word shining upon the
Conscience (...).
(like the reflection of the Sun upon the Waters that made them appear like
Blood) makes Sins to appear in their crimson Guilt, their bloody Aggravations.
Our Savior tells us, that the evil John 3. 20.
Doer neither loves or comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved.
When a powerful Preacher, as a second Conscience, as if he knew the Hearts and
Ways of Men, sets their Sins in order before their Eyes, and closely applies
the Threatenings of Divine Vengeance to them, Conscience often joins with him,
and as a faithful Echo repeats the terrible Truths to their conviction and
anxiety*

In times of Affliction, when our Sins find us out, we usually find out our
Sins. In full Prosperity Men are strangers at Home, and rarely look inward:
they will not endure the Inquisition and Judicature of Conscience: Wealth and
Wickedness harden them against the most serious Counsels, the most solemn
Reproofs and ardent Exhortations: they are blind to the Sun, and deaf to
Thunder; but a sharp Affliction clears the Eyes, unlocks the Ears, opens the
Heart, and pricks the tender Vein. The awakened Penitent will make an exact
search to find out the Achan, the troubler of the Soul, and the special Sin is
so in the interpretation of the vigilant and afflicted Conscience. The bitter
remembrance of that Sin is answerable to its Guilt; the more it was indulged,
the more the Law of God was despised, the more it wounds the Spirit: when the
Pleasure is past, nothing remains but the Sting and Poison. Joseph's Brethren,
who so long had been insensible of their treacherous selling him to Bondage and
Misery; yet in their Fears Conscience remembers it with aggravations of their
unnatural Cruelty: And they said one to another, We are verily guilty
concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

Lastly, Consider the several kinds of Sins to find out your own: some are of
Omission, some of Commission; some are Spiritual and Inward; some are Carnal,
and acted with Noise and Notice; some distinctly flow from visible Causes; some
spring from an unsuspected Fountain. There are many of a civil composed
Conversation, who are careless of spiritual Duties, of holy Communion with God
by raised solemn Thoughts, and ardent desires, of watchfulness over their
Hearts, to regulate their Aims and Affections by the pure Law, and are
insensible of their Neglect and Guilt. The unrenewed Nature has a strong
reluctance against spiritual Duties. Many are righteous to Men, and unrighteous
toward God; they do not pay those Duties that are indispensibly required from
reasonable Creatures to the blessed Creator: the highest Love for his
Perfections and Benefits, an obedient respect to his Commands in their Actions,
a resigned submission to his Will and Wisdom, an entire trust in his fatherly
Providence, and zeal for his Glory. Many rob him of that Time that is
consecrated to his Service: the Lord's Day, (though it is our Privilege as well
as Duty to keep it Holy) when the Public Worship is at an end, as if the
remainder were unsanctified, they wretchedly waste in complemental Visits, in
civil Matters, in Discourses impertinent to the solemn Work of it. Many who are
diligent to provide for their Families, yet are as bad as Infidels in
neglecting to instruct their Children and Servants in the saving Doctrine of
the Gospel, to command them to be circumspect in their Ways, to set before them
a living Pattern of Holiness, and carelessly suffer their precious Souls to
perish for ever. How many who* are not guilty of open rebellious Sins against
the Law, yet neglect the great indispensible Duty of the Gospel, an humble,
unfeigned, entire closing with Christ as their Prince and Savior. They presume
upon their moral Virtues, of the safety and goodness of their Condition: they
never had a feeling sense of their want of the imputed Righteousness of Christ
to reconcile them to God, nor of the Holy Spirit to make them partakers of the
Divine Nature; as if only the Profane, Riotous, notorious Sinners, had need of
his most precious Merits and Mediation to abolish their Guilt, and save them
from Hell, and of the Holy Spirit to sanctify them. From hence it is that many
civil Persons remain in an unrenewed State, and are the natural Subjects of
Satan, and die in their Sins. Some are regular in a course of Religious Duties,
they pray, hear the Word, receive the Sacrament, but without those Holy
Affections that are the Life of Religious Duties, yet content themselves with
the external bodily Service, which is neither pleasing to God nor profitable to
their Souls. Some cherish a secret Pride that they are not so bad as others;
some a vain presumption of the Divine Favor, because they serve God in a purer
way of Worship than others, when they neglect substantial Religion that
recommends us to his gracious Eye. Some will severely reflect upon the visible
Sins of others, whilst there is an unperceived consumption of the spiritual
Life in themselves. This may seem to proceed from the hatred of Sin, when the
real inward Motive is to quiet Conscience by an appearance of Zeal against Sin,
and make it inobservant of their inward voluntary Defects. The most excellent
Things may be counterfeit, Satan may transform himself into an Angel of Light;
sinful Affections may be varnished and gilded, so as to be mistaken for Divine
Graces. Briefly, the Heart is an everlasting Deceiver, and without a perpetual
watchfulness, we are in danger of close Corruptions that will blast our
Sincerity. To find out our Sin, it is requisite to search where we may think
there is little reason to expect the finding it.

2. I will now consider what the preserving himself from his peculiar Sin
implies.

1. An abstaining from the practice of that Sin. When David had an opportunity
to destroy Saul, his unrighteous and implacable Enemy, and secure himself, when
excited to it by Abishai, who would have dispatched him at a Blow, yet he
rejected the Temptation with abhorrence; The Lord forbid that I should 1 Samuel
26. 11.
stretch forth my Hand against the Lord's Anointed; thus he preserved his
Innocence and Integrity.

Our Savior tells us, He that commits John 8.
Sin, is a Servant of Sin: an indulgent course of Sin denominates a Person a
Slave of Sin, and a Rebel against God, and is utterly inconsistent with
Sincerity. It Is true, an upright Man may fall by sudden surreption, by an
insinuating Infirmity into a foul Sin, from which he has a settled aversation,
and keeps himself in the general Course of his Life: and that single Act of Sin
is a blemish of his Integrity, but retracted by a speedy Repentance, does not
denominate him a Hypocrite. One may be pale from an accidental surprise by
fear, or red through a sudden flush of Blood from Anger, yet not be so by
Complexion; for the Complexions, Pale and Sanguine, are drawn by the Pencil of
Nature, the lively Characters of the predominant Humors, and are usually
visible in the Countenance.

But although an upright Person keeps himself from the gross Acts of Sins that
are clearly against natural Conscience, and supernatural Grace; yet whilst we
are clothed with Flesh, the Body of Sin does not finally expire, and
Temptations are as importunate as Flys about us, (from whom the Tempter has his
Title) that it is morally impossible to be absolutely undefiled: therefore
Uprightness requires that we should carefully consider our weak side, what
Passions we are most inclinable to by our Temper, and so diligently fortify our
selves against them, that they may not have dominion over us; and though we
cannot arrive, yet we may advance toward the complete conquest of Sin. And in
our endeavors against the Sins to which we are most inclinable, and that often
foil us, Constancy is inseparable from Sincerity. If we neglect the humbling of
our Souls for unavoidable Infirmities* the earnest seeking for the Divine Mercy
and Grace, and a careful watching against them, we so far decline from
Uprightness.

2. It implies the mortifying the inward Affection to that Sin. The Rule of our
Duty requires this: Cleanse your Hands ye Sinners, purify your Hearts ye Jam.
4. 8.
double-minded. The Will is the proper Principle of Sin, and from the
depravation of the free Faculty actual Sins proceed. As the Love of the Subject
is the Strength of the Prince, so the Love of any Sin preserves its Dominion.
There may be a concurrence of Circumstances to hinder the actual commission of
Sin, of which the Heart is guilty. An unclean Person, when separated from the
Object of his impure Desires, may languish in his Lusts, and by contemplative
commission be guilty before God. A malicious Person may keep the Fire of Malice
in his Breast, without the least discovery by a Spark or Smoke in his Words or
Actions, waiting for an opportunity that he may take his full Revenge, and is a
Murderer in his Wishes. The rapacious desire of another Goods Latro est
etiamantequam inquiret manus: fecit enim quisquis quantum voluit. Senec.
without actual Robbery, induces the Guilt of Thest. There may be an invincible
Bar between the sinful Affection and the Object.

Sickness or Age may so waste the vigor of the Body, that we cannot perform
the gross Acts of Sin: But this Abstinence has no moral Value, for it only
proceeds from the disability of the Instrumental Faculties. If one in a
Consumption leaves his Revelling and Licentiousness, it is no sign of Divine
Grace, but of wasted Nature. As in a sick Person the Appetite fails, the Soul
abhors Job 33.
dainty Meat; but if he recovers, his Appetite revives, and is more craving for
his Abstinence: Thus many who could not enjoy their pleasant Lusts in the time
of Diseases, being restored to strength, their vicious Affections are reincited
by new Temptations, and with greater excess act over their old Sins, as if they
would pay Interest for their impatient forbearance. An old Sinner may retain
and cherish the Fire of Lust in his Heart, when Age has snow'd upon his Head:
As in Mount Aetna the sulphurious Fire and Snow are near together. But as the
Philosopher observes, If a young Eye were put into an old Man's Head, he would
see as clearly as ever. So if natural strength were restored in an unconverted
Sinner, he would be as ardent and active in prosecuting his carnal Desires as
before.

Terrors of Conscience may stop the current of Men's Lusts: Fear has Torment,
and is inconsistent with the Pleasures of Sin: the fear of visible Vengeance,
that sometimes strikes the Wicked, or the apprehension of Judgment to come, may
control the licentious Appetites from breaking forth into actual commission of
Sins. But as when the Lions spared Daniel, it was not from the change of their
wild devouring Nature, for they destroyed his Accusers immediately, but from
the suspending their hurtful Power: so when a strong fear lays a restraint upon
the active Powers, yet inward Lust is the same, and would licentiously commit
Sin, were the Restraint Amari licet, potiri non licet.
taken away.

The keeping ones self from Sin, that is the sign of Uprightness proceeds from
the mortification of the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts thereof. The
Apostle tells us, Carnal Circumcision, without the Circumcision of the Heart,
was of no avail to obtain the Favor of God: So the outward forbearance of Sin
without inward Purity, can never commend us to the Divine Acceptance. A Rebel
may be driven from the Frontiers, but so long as he keeps the Royal City, he is
unsubdued: So if a Lust keeps possession of the Heart, tho the executive Powers
may be retained or disabled from the outward Acts, it still reigns.

3. I shall now prove that the keeping a Man's Self from his special Sin, is an
undeceiving evidence of Sincerity.

1. God approves it: I was upright before him. God has not Eyes of Flesh, he
does not see as Man sees. The deepest Breast is as clear as Crystal in his
sight. He weighs the Spirits of Men, and exactly knows what is true Gold, and
what is counterfeit. He is the Searcher and Judge of our Hearts, and his
approbation is the strongest Seal of our Uprightness. As God said to Abraham,
Now I know Genesis 22. 12.
thou fear me, in that thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from
me. So if we Sacrifice at his Command, the Sin that is as dear to us as Isaac
was to his Father, the Sin of our Love and Delight, the Sin that is ours by
Choice and Custom, then we shall hear the blessed Testimony from Heaven, that
we love God in sincerity; he will own us as his Friends. Sincere Christians can
appeal to God in the Psalmist's Language, and with his Affections; Lord, search
me, and try me, and see whether there be any way of Wickedness in me: they are
not conscious of any indulged course of Sin, which would make them fearful of
his pure and piercing Eye.

2. It will appear that the keeping our selves from our peculiar Sins, is an
infallible proof of Uprightness, by considering in what it consists. In
Scripture Uprightness is equivalent to Perfection and Integrity, and opposite
to Guilt.

1. It Is equivalent to Perfection; Mark Psalm. 37. 37.
the perfect Man, and behold the Upright; for the End of that Man is Peace. The
absolute perfection of Holiness is not attainable upon Earth, none are refined
to a height of Purity without Mixtures and Allays: But according to the
mitigation of the Gospel, the Saints, whose Aims, Desires, and Endeavors are
to obtain Perfection, are accepted in the Blessed Mediator as perfect. Now the
indulgence of any darling Sin, is utterly inconsistent with Perfection in the
mild sense of the Gospel, and consequently with Uprightness. This will be more
evident, by considering, that Uprightness is equivalent with Integrity. The
Psalmist prays, Let Integrity and Uprightness preserve me. Integrity implies an
uniform equal respect to all the Divine Commands. When Conscience of our Duty
to God, and the reverence of his Authority shining in his Law, inclines us to
obey all his Will, we are upright. Partial Obedience that divides the Precepts,
and complies with those that are agreeing with our Carnal Affections and
Interest, and neglects the rest, is an inconsistent with Sincerity as Death and
Life. As the Soul in the natural Man is a vital Principle from whence all the
Actions of Life and Sense proceed; so renewing Grace is a Principle of
Universal Obedience. Herod did many things gladly, upon the preaching of John
the Baptist: but he would not part with Herodias, his charming Lust still had
dominion in his Heart. The young Man observed other Commands of the Law, but
when our Savior tried his Integrity, by commanding him to sell all, and to
give it to the Poor, and he should have Treasure in Heaven; it is said, he went
away sorrowful: Covetousness was his bosom-Sin, and blasted the sincerity of
his Obedience.

Uprightness is opposite to Guile. Our Savior gives this Testimony of
Nathanael, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile; a genuine Son
of Israel, whose Character was Sincerity. Guile implies a reserved Affection
for a particular Sin, under a pretense of religious observing the Divine Law.
The Scripture sets forth by Conjugal Love, the dearest resemblance of the
Mutual Love between Christ and his Church. If a Wife should take another
besides her Husband into her Embraces, she is an Adulteress, false to her
Husband; and all her amiable attractive society with him, is but the fine
Hypocrisy and pretense of Love. Thus when one bosom-Sin is retained, the Heart
is false to God, notwithstanding the most specious Devotion: the indulgent
practice of one Sin impeaches our Integrity.

To this I shall add select Examples of Uprightness recorded in Scripture. It Is
said of Noah, he was a just Man, and perfect in his Generations: for when the
whole World lay in wickedness, he preserved himself unspotted from their
Pollutions: this was a noble Testimony of his Uprightness in the esteem of God.
Joseph repelled the impure Solicitations of his Mistress with indignation; How
shall I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God? David when old, and his
Blood and Spirits so frozen, that no Clothes could warm him, that a fair young
Virgin lying in his Bosom was not blemished by him, was not from Divine Grace,
but wasted Nature: But that Joseph in the vigor of his Age, the sinning
Season, kept himself undefiled, was the sure symptom of Sincerity. Job has this
Testimony from God, that he was a perfect upright Man: and in the depth of his
Affliction, he tells his suspicious Friends, Till I die, I will not remove my
Integrity Job 31. 4, 5, 6, 7.
from me: my Heart shall not reproach me so long as I live; that is, of
reigning Hypocrisy of which they had accused him. His Uprightness he proves by
an Induction: He preserved himself from the Sin of his Age: In his Youth, when
sensual Lusts are impetuous, he made a Covenant with his Eyes not to look upon
a Maid: and for this Reason, because he was under the inspection and observance
of God. He kept himself from the Sins of his Calling: he was a Magistrate, and
in the exercise of his Office, his Foot never hasted to deceit, and no Blot
cleav'd to his Hand: Upon this he appeals to the enlightened Tribunal Above, Let
me be weighed in the Balance, that God may know my Integrity. He kept himself
from the Sins of his Condition; for tho high in Dignity, yet so humble, that he
despised not the Cause of his Manservant or Maidservant that contended with
him: tho in full Prosperity, yet so compassionate, that as a Father he fed the
Poor, and clothed the Naked. He was so sensible of his dependent mutable State
here, that Gold was not his Hope, nor the fine Gold his Confidence: and so
Heavenly and Spiritual in his Mind and Affections, that he did not rejoice
because his Wealth was great, and because his Hand had gotten much. This
Reflection upon the Temper of his Heart, and his Deportment in his prosperous
State, was the main assurance of his Integrity.

The APPLICATION.
1. Let us be excited to make a Judgment of our selves by this Rule. The true
Decision of our Spiritual State, results from the Testimony of Conscience
concerning our Uprightness or Insincerity. If our Hearts condemn us not of
predominant Hypocrisy, some indulged habitual Sin, then have we Confidence
toward God, that we are accepted of him. If Conscience be enlightened and
faithful in the Trial, a Man cannot deliberately deceive himself: he must know
whether his Resolutions and Endeavors be to obey all the Will of God; or,
whether, like an intermitting Pulse, that sometimes beats regularly and then
faulters, he is zealous in some Duties, and cold or careless in others? Saul
would offer Sacrifice, but not obey the Divine Command to destroy all the
Amalekites: for his Partiality and Hypocrisy he was rejected of God. But it is
the Character of David, he was a Man after God's own Heart, in that he did all
his Will. It Is not the Authority of the Lawgiver, but other Motives that sway
those who observe some Commands and are respectless of others. A Servant that
readily goes to a Fair or a Feast when sent by his Master, and neglects other
Duties, does not his Master's Command from Obedience, but his own Choice.
Sincere Obedience is to the Royalty of the Divine Law, and is commensurate to
its Purity and Extent.

There are two Requisites to make a certain Sign of a thing: 1. If the Sign be
never without the Thing signified. 2. If the Thing be never without the Sign.
The Redness of the Sky is but a Contingent Sign of fair Weather, because the
appearance of it in the Morning is often followed with Storms and Rain; and
sometimes a fair day is without that visible Sign. But Daylight is an
infallible sign of the Sun's being risen: for its ascending in the Horizon
always causes day, and without the presence of the Sun, all inferior Lights
can never cause Day. Thus the abstaining from the beloved Lust is a sure sign
of Uprightness: For it is inconsistent with Hypocrisy, and the inseparable
Effect of Sincerity. It Is inconsistent with Hypocrisy: till Divine Grace
cleanses the Heart, alters the Taste of our Appetites, and purifies our
Affections, we shall never detest and forsake our own Sins that are fleshed in
our Natures.

It Is true, there may be an abstaining from some Sins, when the Heart is not
sincere toward God: for some particular Sins are opposite to the respective
Tempers of Men, and the Averseness from them is not the Effect of Supernatural
Grace, but of natural Constitution. As that Meat that is delicious to one
Palate, to another is distasteful; so the Sins that have a Temperamental Relish
to some, are disagreeing to others.

It Is observed of those who are stung with a Tarantula, the sweetest Music
does not move them till those Notes are struck that are harmonious with their
Distemper, and then delightfully transported, they fall a dancing till their
Strength is spent. Thus Temptations are prevalent according to the Complexional
Lusts of Human Nature. But when there is no Harmony and Agreement between the
Objects without and the Affections within, the Tempter loses his design.
Avoluptuous Brute, whose Heart is always smothering or flaming with impure
Desires, may have no Inclination to Covetousness: a covetous Wretch, whose Soul
cleaves to the Earth, may feel no Temptation at the sight of an exquisite
Beauty. Some are made Captives by one Passion and some by another. In the
mysterious Fable, Perseus who encountered the Terrors of Medusa, was easily
overcome by the Beauty of Andromeda. Victorque Medusae victus in Andromeda.
Manil.
Virtue victorious over Fear is often corrupted by Pleasure.

Besides, some Lusts are of a repugnant Nature. This difference is observable
between Errors and Truth, Vices and Virtues. Errors are inconsistent and
irreconcilable, and at War among themselves: but Truth has an universal
Consent and mutual Dependence in all its parts: there is no Contrariety between
natural and supernatural Verities. Vices are sometimes so contrary in their
Ends and Exercise, that they fall foul upon one another, that none can be so
universally wicked, as to commit all Sins, but if he be addicted to one must
forsake the other. But there is a Connection between the Graces of the Holy
Spirit; tho different in their Objects and Natures, yet they have the same
Tendency, the Glory of God and our own Salvation, and are united in the
Subject. There is but one way to Heaven, as there can be but one straight way
to a place: but there are innumerable Deviations from it, as many crooked ways
to Hell as there are sinful Lusts that bring Men thither. The Prophet tells us,
All we like Sheep have gone astray, every one in his own way. There are many
Bypath that lead to Destruction.

We must also observe to prevent Mistakes, there may be a forsaking of a
particular Sin that has been delightful and predominant, without Sincerity
toward God: for another Lust may have got possession of the Heart and take the
Throne. There is an alternate Succession of Appetites in the corrupt Nature,
according to the Change of Men's Tempers or Interests in the World. As Seeds
sown in that order in a Garden, that it is always full of the Fruits in Season:
so original Sin that is sown in our Nature, is productive of diverse Lusts, some
in the Spring, others in the Summer of our Age, some in the Autumn, others in
the Winter. Sensual Lusts flourish in Youth, but when mature Age has cooled
these Desires, Worldly Lusts succeed; In old Age there is no relish of
Sensuality, but Covetousness reigns imperiously. And as the Conditions and
Interests of Men alter, so their Affections change; they are not constant to
their Bosom-Sins. Now he that expels one Sin, and entertains another, continues
in a State of Sin; it is but exchanging of one Familiar for another; or to
borrow the Prophet's Expression, It Is as if one should fly from a Lion and meet
with a Bear, that will as certainly devour him.

2. The forsaking our respective Sin is the inseparable Effect of Uprightness.
It has been proved before, that if the Heart be divided between Obedience to
the Divine Law, and Inclination to any Sin, it is false to God. Repenting
Ephraim said, What have I to do any more with Hosea 41.
Idols? an Expression of vehement detestation: Idolatry had been the reigning
Sin of that Tribe, and therefore the renouncing of Idols was a clear convincing
Sign of their sound Conversion. It is impossible that sincere Love to God, and
the habitual allowance of a known Sin should be in the same Heart, as for the
Ark of God and the Idol of the Philistines to be placed on the same Altar:
Uprightness is consistent with Frailties, but not with chosen Lusts. As Loyalty
to the Prince is consistent with some Actions contravening his Laws, that
proceed from Ignorance or Surprise: But Loyalty is inconsistent with Rebellion
that is open Treason, or with treasonable Designs that are secret Rebellion. So
any Sin that Men presumptuously live in, or consent to in their Hearts, is
absolutely inconsistent with Uprightness.

2. Let us be excited to keep our selves with all Diligence from our Iniquity.
This is the Masterpiece of Mortification, the noble effect of renewing Grace,
and very difficult to the corrupt Nature. To enforce this Duty, I will propound
those Motives and Means as are very conducing for our performance of it.

The Motives are,

1. Habitual indulged Lusts are irreconcilable with the state of Grace; they
render the Sinner, till forsaken, incapable of God's pardoning Mercy here, and
the heavenly Glory hereafter. The Gospel is a gracious Act of Oblivion for the
restoring of Rebellious Sinners to the Favor of God: but the Pardon is
obtained upon Conditions that are indespensable. Mercy is assured to penitent
Believers for all their Sins of Ignorance, and those Frailties that are the
Causes of their daily Sorrow and Watchfulness, and for all presumptuous Sins
retracted by Repentance: but the Savior of the World excludes the impenitent
and unreform'd from Mercy; unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Now
when Repentance is sound and solemn, the Spirit is deeply wounded for that Sin
whereby God has been most dishonored, and his Law violated: The remembrance of
it opens a full stream of Tears, and excits a holy Hatred: and according to the
degrees of Sorrow and Revenge, there will be care to preserve our selves from
that Sin. The Psalmist says, Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputes no
Iniquity, in whose Spirit there is no Guile; implying, that one reserved Lust
which is a certain Argument of Deceit in the fairest Professors of Religion, is
a Bar against the Pardon of our Sins. The Tenor of the unchangeable Covenant of
Grace is, I will write my Laws in their Hearts; and I will be merciful to their
Unrighteousness, and their Sins and Iniquities I will remember no more: God
promises to reconcile their Affections to his Commands. The Law may be written
in the Mind and Memory of an unsanctified Person, for the Ideas of the most
repugnant things are consistent in those Faculties; but the Heart is not
capable of contrary Objects: the Love of God's Law expels the predominant Love
of Sin. Now since the Promise of Pardon is in Conjunction with inward
Sanctification, which implies an universal Aversion from Sin, it is evident that
indulged habitual Lusts are not capable of Pardon: whatever quality the Sin be
of, whether of Omission or Commission, the allowance makes it destructive to
Sinners. As from what Corner soever a blasting Wind comes, whether from the
East or the North, it destroys the Fruits. If but one selected Sin remains in
the Affections and Practice, it contracts the Malignity of all the rest, and
will prove deadly to the Soul.

It Is not a presumptuous reliance on the Merits of Christ will save Men with
their Sins.

The Atonement made to Divine Justice by the precious Sacrifice of the Lamb of
God, was never designed for the reconciling God to those who with depraved
Obstinacy continue in their Sins: it is utterly inconsistent with the Divine
Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, and Truth, to appoint a Sacrifice for the Expiation
of final Impenitency: Such outsin the Death of Christ, I will not say as to its
infinite Merit, but as to the Application and intended Benefit of it. The Value
of his Death to abolish the Guilt, and the Virtue of it to mortify the Power of
Sin are inseparable. The precicious Balm has a fragrant Smell that revives the
Spirits, but without applying its Substance to the Wound the Scent will not
heal it. The Soul must feel the Power of Christ's Sufferings to kill our Sins,
otherwise the pleasing belief of his Righteousness will not justify us before
God. The Mercy-Seat sprinkled with his Blood affords Protection from the
Avenger to all relenting, returning Sinners; but Justice will tear the
presumptuous Sinner from the Horns of the Altar.

The most rigorous Penance will not avail without mortifying the Affection to
Sin: the most severe Discipline to the Body, is but like a Mountebanck's
applying the Salve to the Weapon without dressing the Wound, that cannot work a
found Cure.

The dispensing of the Treasure of Merits to penitent Pay-Masters, and giving
mercenary Bills of Exchange to receive Righteousness from others, is so
wretched and transparent a Fallacy, that were not the Minds of Men prodigiously
stupefied, it is impossible they should believe it will avail them before the
Judgment Seat of God.

Let our Prayers be never so frequent and earnest, they are of no prevalency
with God whilst the beloved Sin is retained. The Condition of our favorable
Audience is set down by Solomon in his Divine Prayer at the Dedication of the
Temple; What Prayer or Supplication 1 Kings 8. 38.
soever be made by any Man, or by all the People of Israel, which shall know
every Man the Plague of his own Heart, and spread forth his hand to Heaven;
then hear thou in Heaven, and hearing forgive. If they shall be sensible of the
Bosom-Sin, of its pestilential Malignity, and with repenting Sorrow acknowledge
and forsake it, they are prepared Objects of Mercy. David says, If I regard
Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer. God sees through all
the Disguises of Hypocrites, and has a bright prospect into the Heart, if any
insinuating Infirmity be cherished there, it will make him averse from our
Persons and Requests.

It Is not the performance of religious and charitable Duties, that will
purchase Indulgence for a beloved Sin. The most costly Sacrifices, the most
liberal Charities, are neither pleasing to God nor profitable to us without an
unfeigned renouncing of our Sins. It Is a carnal Shift that many use to excuse
the Practice of a chosen Sin, by the doing some good things: many strict
Observers of the Rituals of Religion, are dissolute Epicures: as if they might
compensate for their voluntary Defects in one Duty by their care in another.
But if Conscience be not so far stupefied that it can neither hear, nor see,
nor speak, it is impossible but the guilty Deceiver must be terrified with the
words of St. James, That whosoever shall keep the whole Law, yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all: The most strict Observance of one Precept will not
excuse Disobedience to another: the voluntary continued Transgression of any
Command involves a Man under the Guilt of breaking the entire Law, the Divine
Authority being despised that makes it binding. I will instance in one kind of
Sins. Many that have increased their Estates by Craft and Circumvention, Putant
se ^acere quod praeceptum est, dicunt enim rapereres alienas Mamona est
iniquitatis: erogare inde aliquid maxim egentibus sanctis hoc est, facere
amicos de Mammona Iniquitatis Intellectus iste corrigendus est, imo de tabulis
cordisdelendus est. Noli talem pingere Deum. Aug. Ser. 25. de Verb. Dom.
or by Violence and Rapine, will bequeath part to pious uses, presuming by a
kind of Composition with God to be discharged of their guilty Gains. St. Austin
observes that some in his time thought it to be Obedience to the Command of our
Savior, Make your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when
ye fail they may receive you into everlasting Habitations. This is to defile
and debase the Name of the Righteous and Holy God, it is to make him altogether
like to corrupt Men, as if he would be bribed to patronize their Wickedness.
And in other cases, thus monstrously Carnal Men bend the Rule of Rectitude to
the Obliquity of their Desires. They are willing to deceive themselves, and
imagine that only Ministers of a preciser strain will terrify them with eternal
Judgment for one retained Sin; they desire and are apt to believe such a Mercy,
as will bring them to Heaven with their Sins in their Bosoms. But the Apostle
warns us, Be not deceived, God is not mocked; as a Man sows, so shall he reap.

There are sure and tender Mercies for the Upright; but strict and certain
Justice for the Wicked. Sincerity is so amiable and pleasing in God's Eyes,
that he graciously passes by many Infirmities upon that account. It is said of
Asa, that his Heart was perfect all his 2* Chron. 15. 17.
days, and notwithstanding some gross Faults, God accepted him. But when the
Heart is corrupted by the love of some pleasant or profitable Sin, it renders a
Person with the most specious Services odious in God's sight. In short,
indulged known Sins that Men habitually commit in hopes of an easy Absolution,
are not the Spots of God's Children. It Is so directly contrary to the Divine
Nature, to that holy ingenuous Fear of offending our heavenly Father resulting
from it, that only the Wicked are capable of such a disposition. Presumptuous
Sins are a contumelious abuse of Divine Mercy, and exasperate that high and
tender attribute to the confusion of Sinners at the last. Do good, O Psalm. 125.
4.
Lord, unto those that be good, and to them that are upright in Heart. As for
such as turn aside to their crooked Ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with
the workers of Iniquity.

2. We may, by Divine Grace, subdue the strongest Lusts, that from our Nature
and Temper, or from Custom, and the Interests of the Carnal State have rule
over us. The New Covenant assures Believers, that Sin shall not have Dominion
over them, because they are not under the Law but under Grace. The Law strictly
forbids Sin, but the Gospel furnishes with strength to subdue it. It Is true,
inherent Corruption has so divested Men of spiritual Strength, that they cannot
free themselves from the Power and Infection of Sin: and when any Lust is
fomented by Temptations, and has been frequently gratified, it is more hard to
be subdued.

The Apostle speaks of some, whose Eyes were full of Adultery, that could not
cease from Sin: they were in a state of Carnality, and loved to be so: When
Lust is imperious, and the Will servile, Men cannot wean themselves from the
poisoned Breasts. This disability consists in the depraved obstinacy of the
Will, that aggravates their Sin and Judgment. Yet so foolish are Sinners, as to
use this Plea to make them excusable for their habitual Lusts: Conscience
checks them, and some faint Desires they have to avoid their Sins, but they
cannot change their Natures. They color Licentiousness with the pretense of
Necessity: they complain of their Chains, to let loose the Reins of their
exorbitant Desires in a course of Sin. But natural Corruption that involves us
under Guilt, cannot make us innocent. It Is true, if in our original Condition,
the humane Will had been stamped by Fate with an unalterable inclination to
Sin, we could not have been guilty: for if there be no Principles of Liberty,
all the Names of Good and Evil are cancelled, and all moral Nec bonus quisque
nec malus dici debeat, nec esse valeat, nisi volens.
Means, Instructions, Persuasions, Threatenings, are but lost labor. In Brutes
there are some natural Resemblances of Virtue and Vice, yet not worthy of
Reward or Punishment; only so far as by Imagination they are capable of
Instruction and Discipline, and by coming near to Reason, have a little
imitation of Liberty, they are rewarded or punished. But Man in the condition
wherein he was created, had perfect freedom, becoming the dignity of the
reasonable Creature, and was enriched with all the Graces of which Original
Righteousness was compounded: the harmonious Orders, and coherent Dispositions
of the Soul and Body qualified him for his Duty. But in the state wherein his
voluntary Sin has sunk him, the Body is often distempered by the annoyance of
the Mind, and the Soul pays an unnatural and injurious Tribute to the vicious
Appetites of the Body: And when Corruption is heightened by Custom, and the
natural Propensity inflamed by Temptations, any Lust becomes more irresistible:
So that without a new Nature inspired from Above, they cannot rescue themselves
from the Bondage of Sin.

Now the moral Impotence in Men to vanquish their Lusts, tho it will be no
Apology at the Day of Judgment, yet it will discourage them from making
resistance: for who will attempt an impossibility? Despair of Success relaxes
the active Powers, cuts the Nerves of our Endeavors, and blunts the edg of
Industry. It Is related of the West-Indians, that upon the first incursion of
the Spaniards into their Country, they tamely yielded to their Tyranny; for
seeing them clad in Armor which their Spears could not pierce, they fancied
them to be the Children of the Sun, invulnerable and immortal. But an Indian
carrying a Spaniard over a River, resolved to try whether he were mortal, and
plunged him under Water so long till he was drowned. From that Experiment they
took courage, and resolved to kill their Enemies who were capable of dying, and
recover their dear Liberty lost by so foolish a Conceit. Thus Men will languish
in a worse Servitude, if they fancy the Lusts of the Flesh, their intimate
Enemies to be insuperable. Fear congeals the Spirits, and disables from noble
Enterprises, which Hope persuades and Courage executes. Now we have an Army of
Conquerors to encourage us in the Spiritual War with the Flesh, the World, and
Satan, Enemies in combination against us: How many Saints have preserved
themselves unspotted from the most alluring Temptations? they were not Statues,
without sensible Faculties, but ordered them according to the Rule of Life;
they were not without a conflict of Carnal Passions, but by the Holy Spirit
subdued them: and though some obtained a clearer Victory than others, yet all
were victorious by Divine Grace. The Examples of so many Holy and Heavenly Men,
prove as clearly and convincingly, that the strongest Lusts may be subdued, as
the walking of Diogenes demonstrated there was progressive motion against the
Sophistical Arguments of Zeno. I can do all things, says the Apostle, through
Christ that strengthens me. To Omnipotent Grace all things are easy. Our
Savior speaking of the extreme difficulty of a Rich Man's Salvation; That it is
as easy for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, as for a Rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, presently mitigates the Difficulty; what is
impossible to Men, is possible to God. He can sanctify a Rich Man, that his
Humility shall be as low, as his Estate is raised above others; that his
Affection shall be Heavenly in the affluence of the World; that trust in God
shall be his dearest Treasure. Divine Grace is a sure Fountain of Assistance to
all that sincerely seek it. It Is the Promise of God, Ephraim shall say, What
have I to do any more with Idols? The Idols that charmed their Imaginations,
should be rejected with deep abhorrence. Our Savior cured the Paralitick
Person that for 38 Years had been in a desperate Case, incurable by natural
Remedies: an Emblem of the Efficacy of Divine Grace in curing the most
inveterate Habits of Sin. There are recorded some eminent Instances of the
Power of Grace in changing the Nature of Men. Nicodemus came to our Savior
concealed, at first by Night, as being ashamed or afraid of Observation in the
Day: But when he was born again by the renovation of the Spirit, what an
admirable change was wrought in him? with a holy heat of Affection he defended
our Savior when alive, in the presence of the Pharisees, his unrighteous and
implacable Enemies: he brought costly Preparations for his Funeral when dead:
And these two glorious effects of his Valor, are recorded by St. John with
this addition, This is that Nicodemus that came John 7. 19. John 19. 39.
to Jesus by Night. No Passion is more ungovernable than Fear, yet even the
Apostles did not express such fidelity and fervency for the Honor of their
Master. Another Instance is of the Jailer that kept the Apostles Prisoners: he
was of a harsh cruel Temper, a quality adherent to his Office; but Grace so
intenerated and softened his Heart, that he took them the same hour of the
Night, and washed their Stripes* Acts 16. 33. A visible and sudden effect of
the Spirit of Love and Power, and of a sound Mind. It Is recorded of many who
Act. 19. 19, 20.
used curious Arts, they brought their magical Books, though counted worth
fifty thousand pieces of Silver, and burnt them: so mightily grew the Word of
God, and prevailed. How insuperable soever Sin is to naked Nature, it may be
subdued by Grace. St. John gives an honorable Testimony of the Christians to
whom he wrote: My little Children, ye are of God, and have overcome the evil
One: for the Spirit that is in you is greater than that which is in the World.
The Holy Spirit is not only greater in himself than the Tempter, but as
fortifying weak Christians is superior to the Evil Spirit, with all his Train
of Artillery, the manifold Temptations which the World affords in his War
against our Souls. Satan takes advantage, not only from our Security, but our
Pusillanimity: we are therefore commanded to resist the Devil, and he will flee
from us. What is observed of the Crocodile, is applicable to the great Enemy of
our Salvation: He is terrible in his Assaults Terribilis contra sugaces haec
bestia, fugax contra sequentes. Plin.
upon the faint-hearted, but flies from those who are watchful to resist his
Temptations.

To excite Christians to make serious and hopeful Trials for the subduing the
strongest Corruptions, I will select two Examples of the virtuous Heathens, who
restrained Anger and Lust, that are the most rebellious Passions against the
Empire of the Mind. Socrates by natural Temper was Choleric, yet he had so far
reduced his Passions under the command of Reason, that upon any violent
Provocation, his Countenance was more placid and calm, his Voice more
temperate, and his Words more obliging: Thus by wise Counsel and
Circumspection, he obtained a happy Victory over himself.

The other is of young Scipio, the Roman General in Spain, who when a Virgin of
exquisite Beauty was presented to him among other Captives, religiously
abstained from touching her, and restored her to the Prince to whom she was
espoused. How do such Examples of the poor Pagans, who in the glimmerings of
Nature expressed such Virtues, upbraid Christians who are Servants to their
Corruptions in the Light of Divine Revelation? If by the practice of Philosophy
they kept themselves from the Dominion of their Carnal Appetites, shall not
Christians by a supernatural Aid obtain a clearer Victory over them? In vain do
Men pretend want of strength to vanquish their stubborn Lusts; for if they
sincerely seek for Divine Grace, and are faithful in the use of Means proper to
that End, they shall obtain a blessed freedom from the Power of Sin.

3. The subduing the ruling Lust, will make the Victory over other Sins more
easy. Our Commission against Sin, is like that of Saul against the Amalekites,
to destroy them all: if any one be spared, it will prove as fatal to us as the
Amalekite that dispatched Saul, who suffered him to live when the whole Lineage
was doomed to utter Excision. Now amongst the diverse Lusts that war against the
Soul, some are the Leaders that give vigor to the rest, that recall them when
withdrawn, rally them when scattered; and renew the Fight against us. As the
Virtues of the sanctified Mind, so the Passions of the carnal Appetite assist
one another: therefore when the corrupt Passion that was so dangerously
influential upon the rest, is subdued by Divine Grace, they necessarily
decline, and are easily mortified.

The Temperamental Lust is the Root from whence many others spring and are fed,
and the eradicating of that takes away the Strength and Life of other vicious
Affections. The King of Syria commanded his Captains not to fight against Small
or Great, but only against the King of Israel; and after he was slain, the
Victory over his Army was presently obtained. Let us direct our Zeal against
the leading Lust, for all the servile Lusts must fall and die with it. When
Mithridates the King of Pontus, a In uno Mithridate infinitos hosts periisse
rati. Flor.
fierce implacable Enemy of the Romans was killed, their Joy was exuberant in
Sacrifices and Feasts, esteeming that an Army of Enemies were extinguished in
his Death.

Besides, one Victory inspires Courage to atchieve another. When David was to
encounter with Goliath, he derived Confidence from his Experience* The Lord that
delivered me out of the Paw 1 Samuel 17. 37.
of the Lion, and out of the Paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the
Hand of this Philistine. The visible Expresses of the Divine Power in
conquering the former Enemies of the Church, were the support of their Faith:
Awake, awake, O Arm of the Isa. 51. 9*
Lord, and put on strength; art thou not it that has cut Rahab, and wounded
the Dragon? Pharaoh and the Egyptian Army. In our Spiritual Warfare, experience
of the Divine Assistance is a Cordial that fortifies the Spirits: If the
strongest and fiercest of our Corruptions lie bleeding ready to expire, we
shall not fear the rest. The same Grace that has subdued the reigning Lust,
will make an impression of Obedience upon other Affections that are less
powerful in us.

4. Consider how dearly our Sins cost our Savior, his Sacred Blood, to
reconcile us to God, and to set us free from their Dominion. This is an
Argument purely Evangelical, and most worthy the Breast of a Christian. He
dearly purchased a Title to our Love, and the serious contemplation of his
Passion, has an admirable efficacy to inspire the Flame, and consequently to
make Sin odious* that must be expiated and purged away by such bitter
Sufferings. Our Sins brought our Savior to the Cross, and can we entertain
them in our Hearts with the Crimson Guilt that cleaves to them? Can we live in
the practice of them, and crucify him afresh? He came to redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify us to himself, a peculiar People zealous of good Works.
How can we defeat the End, and disparage the efficacy of his Death? How can we
violate such dear Obligations? To cherish any Sin, is the most ungracious and
unkind return to his bleeding dying Love, who valued our Souls more than his
most precious Life. Were it not visible by daily Experience, that many are so
prodigiously wicked, it would raise our wonder how it is possible, that any
Christian to whom the Love of the Son of God in dying for our Sins is revealed,
should indulge himself in any Sin. If we did frequently, and with solemnity and
seriousness remember the Death of our Savior, and his blessed Intention in it,
we should find that change in our Hearts in regard of our Sins, as Amnon did in
his Affections to his Sister Tamar: His incestuous Love to her at first was a
secret Fire that consumed him; but after he had dishonored her, and polluted
himself, his Hatred of her was more extreme than his Love before: Thus the Sins
that have been as near to us as our Bosoms, as pleasant as our corrupt
Inclinations, as familiar and intimate as Custom, that have deeply defiled our
Souls, we should with stronger detestation reject them, than ever with delight
we committed them.

5. The blessed Reward of Uprightness is a powerful Motive to excite us to keep
our selves from our Sins. The Firmament is not sowed thicker with Stars, than
the Scripture with precious Promises to the Upright. They have a peculiar
Interest in the Love of God that is the Fountain of Felicity: The Prayer Prove.
15. 10.
of the Upright is his delight. He is most graciously ready to supply all their
Wants, satisfy their Desires, allay their Sorrows, overcome their Fears. The
Psalm. 84.
Lord is a Sun and a Shield: He will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing
will he withhold from those that walk uprightly. A comprehensive Promise of the
Blessings of Time and Eternity.

The highest Honor is the Reward of subduing our rebellious Lusts. He that
Prove. 16. 32.
is slow to Anger, is better than the Mighty: and he that rules his Spirit,
than he that takes a City. The Quality of the Enemy makes the Victory more
illustrious. Now the rebellious Passions that war against the Soul, are Enemies
infinitely more dangerous than those who destroy the Bodies and Estates of Men.
The Conquest of Armies and Cities is achieved by Boldness and Strength, that
are not the peculiar Excellencies of Man, for the Horse and the Lion are
superior to him in those respects: but the reducing his unruly Affections into
Holy Order, is the Effect of Divine Grace, wherein we resemble God. How many of
the famous Heroes, in the World's account, were worse than wild Beasts, Enemies
to Humanity, that unnaturally and barbarously spilt the Blood of thousands to
purple their usurped Royalty? But in subduing the tyrannous Passions of Lust
and Anger under the Sovereignty of the renewed Mind, there is the happy union
of Innocence and Victory.

There are degrees in the exaltation of the Saints, as the Passions their
inward Enemies which they subdued, were more stubborn, and hardly to be
overcome. In some there is such a concord of Humors, such a placid mild
Temper, that they enjoy a pacifick possession of themselves: But this is the
Benefit of Nature, Magis extra vitia quam cum virtutibus. Tacit. Lib. 1. de
Claudio.
not of victorious Grace. Where there is little Resistance, there is no Honor
to overcome; where there is no Matter of Triumph, there is no Glory in
triumphing. But when in the natural Temper there are Seeds of Incitation to
fierce Anger and inordinate Lust, and when those Propensities are inflamed by
Temptations, if we subdue those disorderly and violent Passions, it is the most
noble Effect of Divine Grace. On the contrary, the Sinner that yields himself
to the sway of the Carnal Appetites, is the Servant of Corruption: is defiled
and 1 Pet. 4.
debased in such a manner, that he is sunk below the Beasts that perish: For
what is baser than Corruption, except the Sinner that obeys it?

The Peace and Joy that is the Reward of Victory over our Sins, cannot be
understood but by Experience. What a savor of Life is the Death of a reigning
Sin? What an Angelical Comfort was it to Joseph and the blessed Mother of
Christ, when the Advice was brought from Heaven to them in Egypt; Arise, for
they are dead that sought the young Child's Life? What Consolation does it
afford, when the Holy Spirit witnesses with our Spirits, that the Enemy in our
Bosoms, that sought the Life of our Souls, is mortified by Repentance? The
Psalmist tells us, Light is Psalm. 97. 11.
sown for the Righteous, and Joy for the upright in Heart. The present sense of
God's Favor, and the future Hope of Glory, sheds abroad that bright serenity
in their Breasts, that is a reflection of Heaven.

In our Extremity, when a good and quiet Conscience will be more valuable than
Crowns and Scepters, and solid Comfort more worth than the World, how
refreshing will the inward Testimony be of our Uprightness? When Hezekiah was
under the Sentence of Death, and his Kingdom could afford him no Comfort, this
allayed his Sorrows, Remember, O Lord, that I have Isa. 38. 3.
walked before thee with an upright Heart. This Testimony of Conscience will
calm our Agonies, and expel the Terrors of that last Enemy: this when we are
ready to die, will assure us that our Redeemer lives. The two substantial Joys,
(how Divine!) the one from the reflection upon the past Life, the other from
the prospect of Eternal Life, are the blessed Reward of Uprightness. In short,
the sum of Felicity is expressly assured to them: The Upright shall dwell in thy
presence, where is fullness of Joy, and Rivers of Pleasure flow for ever.

6. Consider the woeful Effects of indulging the Lusts, that by Pleasure or
Profit bribe Men to give consent to their Commission. The naked Light of Reason
discovers Sin, and makes it uneasy to Conscience: but a strong Light armed with
Terrors, the Law of God, with the Doom annexed to the Precept against
rebellious Sinners, makes it fearful. The Command is peremptory and universal,
with respect to all Temptations and Allurements to Sin, be they as dear and
difficult to be parted with, as the right Eye, or right Hand, the most useful
and precious Instruments of Life, yet they must with abhorrence be cast from
us, or the whole Man will be cast into Mat. 5.
Hell Fire, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. This
terrible Mark 9.
Threatening is sadly repeated by our Savior three times, to make the more
powerful impression upon Sinners.

The guilty accusing Conscience begins the everlasting Hell here. Our Savior
says, That a Woman when she is in travail, has sorrow because her hour is
come; but as soon as she is delivered, she remembers no more the anguish, for
joy that a Man is born into the World: But a Sinner, after he has brought
forth his Sin with pleasure, is struck with horror at the monstrous Birth. When
Conscience is strongly awakened, it arraigns and condemns without partiality:
the Sinner is the Executioner of the Sentence upon himself. The Torment of the
Spirit is invisible to others, and in that the liker Hell, and unavoidable.
It Is as the cruel practice of the Tyrant, related by the Poet, who fastened a
dead Body and a Living together, that the putrefaction and stench of the one,
might cause a lingering death in the other: this is a little resemblance of the
Effect of the guilty Conscience charged with dead Works, and inseparable from
the Sinner. All the Pleasures of the World cannot stupify the Sense, or
mitigate the Torments of the wounded Spirit.

In the approaches of Death, the Sins Men have indulgently committed, return to
the Memory, and the ghastly Apparition strikes them into consternation: the
Thoughts are fearfully transferred from the sick Body to the guilty Soul, from
the consideration of the first Death to the second, that immediately attends
it. In vain they desire to live, for Time is irrevocably past, and the Season
of Mercy expired: in vain they desire to die entirely, and put an end to their
Misery, for Immortality is the inseparable but fatal Privilege of their Nature.
If they look upward, revenging Justice is ready to pass a heavy Doom; if
beneath, a fearful Depth is ready to swallow them up. Who can express the
Agonies and Throws of the guilty Conscience, the dismal Degrees of the
tormenting Passions in the Wicked, under the apprehensions of Eternal Judgment?
Yet the most fearful Apprehensions are not commensurate to the prepared Plagues
by vindictive Justice for impenitent Sinners. Who knows the Power of God's
Wrath? The chosen Expressions in Scripture to represent it, will be verified in
higher degrees, than can be inflicted from the most vehement and terrible
things in the World. Fire is so tormenting to Sense, that no Man can endure the
point of the Flame of a Candle upon his Flesh: Who then can dwell with
devouring Fire, and with everlasting burning?

Besides, the Damned are not only passive, but active in their wretched State:
there is a Hell of Rancor and Indignation within, and of Fire and Brimstone
without them: What furious Reflections will they make upon their votary
Madness, that for the seeming Pleasures of Sin that were but for a season, they
should continue their Rebellion against the Omnipotent Deity, and bring upon
themselves his fierce and unchangeable Displeasure. This infinitely aggravates
their Misery: after a Million of Years, the entire Sum remains that revenging
Justice will exact for ever. The Righteous Judge will never so far be reconciled
as to annihilate them. Perfection of Misery! Desperate Sorrow! A Life in
Torments that never dies, a Death that never ends.

Now it is impossible for Men that have reasonable Minds to choose the
Pleasures of Sin, that are like Bubbles on the Water that presently break and
vanish, when attended with Misery that admits no Ease or End? Is there any
possible Comparison between them? The serious belief of Hell cannot consist
with the knowledge and purpose of Sin, and the delightful Practice of it: Either
the belief of it will infuse and impress such efficacious Virtue into Men's
Minds that will restrain them from Sin, or the habitual course of Sin will
extinguish or eclipse the belief of the Punishment.

It Is recorded of Craesus, when pursued by the Army of the Persians, he filled
a straight Passage between the Mountains with Boughs of Trees and set fire to
them, and thereby secured his Retreat: If Men were so wise as to set the Fire
of Hell between the Temptations of Sin and their Affections, it would be a sure
defense from their Spiritual Enemies. But the Scene of Torments prepared for
unreform'd Sinners, is little understood and less believed by Men whilst they
are in Prosperity: tho the Savior of the World has in great Mercy revealed
them in such Expressions, as may terrify even secure Carnalists, that only live
to Sense. Infidelity lies at the bottom, and renders the most terrible Truths
ineffectual. There is such a Riddle in the Tempers of Men, they are not
sensible of Divine Mercies till deprived of them, nor of Divine Judgments till
they feel them. But if right Reason were attended to, they must be convinced of
unseen Rewards and Punishment to be dispensed in the next State. For the Light
of Nature discovers an essential Difference between Moral Good and Evil: From
hence proceeds the Reflections of Conscience either approving or condemning our
own Actions, and making a Judgment upon the Actions of others by that common
Rule, according to which all acknowledge that Men ought to live. This Truth is
so engraven in the Humane Nature, that even the most wicked Sinners, who
endeavor if it were possible to make Conscience so blind as not to see, and
stupid as not to feel, yet cannot totally exclude the Application of it to
themselves, and will acknowledge the Obligation of it in the general, and with
respect to others. Now the Law of God written in Man's Heart necessarily infers
a Judgment upon the Transgressors of it, and the Judgment includes a Punishment
becoming the Majesty of the Lawgiver that ordains it, and the extent of his
Power that executes it. Divine Revelation makes this Truth much more clear and
certain. The Apostle tells us, If we live after the Flesh, we shall die: and
will God cease to be holy, and just, and true, that impenitent Sinners may
escape Punishment?

But there are some poisonous Principles infused into the Hearts of Men, that
encourage them in their Sins, notwithstanding their Assent to the Doctrine of a
future Judgment.

Some cannot persuade themselves, that God will be so strict and severe, that
for a single forbidden Pleasure, when they respect other Commands of his Law,
he will condemn them for ever. The secret Presumption that one Transgression
will not provoke their Judge to extreme Wrath, hardens them in a sinful course.
But St. James declares, He that offends in one Point is guilty of all. One
known allowed Sin that a Man habitually commits, involves him in the Guilt of
Rebellion against the Divine Authority that made the Law. It was observed
before, Herod did somethings according to John's Divine Instructions, but he
would not part with Herodias, and that one Sin denominated him wicked. Many are
like him, they observe some Rules of Religion, perform some Duties, are zealous
against some Sins, but there is an Herodias, a Sin pleasant to the Taste of
their Temper, that they will not relinquish, and without any Promise, nay
against the Threatenings of God, they believe he will be merciful to them
notwithstanding their Wickedness. This Presumption is an unnatural abuse of
God's Mercy. This exasperates that high and tender Attribute: For what can be
more provoking than to imagine that the Divine Mercy should encourage Sin, and
protect unceform'd Sinners from the Arrests of Vindictive Justice?

The Blood that Ahab spared in Benhadad induced a deadly Guilt, as that he
spilt of Naboth; as God spoke by the Prophet to him, Because thou have spared
that Man, whom I appointed to Destruction, thy Life shall go for his Life: The
Application is easy, to spare the Life of Sin will cost the Life of the Sinner.
One Lust that adhering Custom, or the closer Nature, or any carnal Interest so
endears to Men, that they do not sincerely desire and endeavor to mortify and
forsake, will be fatal to them for ever.

Some habitual Sinners when terrified with the Apprehension of future Judgment,
(for God sometimes thunders in the Conscience as well as in the Air) endeavor
to quiet their Fears by presuming that the Death of Christ will reconcile
offended Justice, and his Blood cleanse them from all Sin. They will lean upon
the Cross to save them from falling into the bottomless Pit, but not crucify
one Lust on it. The Vanity of this has been showed before: I shall only add,
that it is most opprobrious to the Son of God, and most destructive to Sinners;
for it is to make him the Minister of Sin, as if he came into the World to
compose a Church of rotten and corrupt Members, and unite it to himself: Such a
Mystieal Body would be more monstrous than Nebuthadnezzar's Image, of which the
Head was Gold, and Feet were Miry Clay. And this will be most destructive to
their Souls; for by turning the remedy of Sin into an occasion of sinning, they
derive a woeful Guilt from the Death of Christ instead of the precious Benefits
purchased by it for true Believers. For an unreformed Sinner to oppose the
Blood of Christ to the Fears of Damnation, renders his Condition desperate.

The most who continue in a sinful course, strive to elude the Warnings of
Conscience, by resolving that after the Season of sinning is past, they will
reform, and apply themselves to seek the Favor and Grace of God. But how
hazardous, how incongruous is the delay of serious Repentance? How hazardous?
The Lives of Sinners are forfeited in Law, their time is a Reprieve depending
merely upon the Favor of the Judge, how can they have a Warrant for a day? But
they are young, and strong, and think the day of Death and their last Account
to be at a great distance. Vain Security! as if Death were not in every place;
and every hour, as near Rebellious Sinners as their Sins that deserve it: If
thou do Evil, says God to Cain, Sin is at the Door. Damnation is ready to
tread upon the Heels of Sinners, and if Divine Clemency and Patience did not
interpose, would immediately seize upon them. God sometimes shoots from the
Clouds, and breaks the strongest Buildings into Ruins: it is not the Error of
his Hand, but his Pity, that impenitent Sinners escape his visible Vengeance.
But who can assure them of future time?

Besides, suppose that Sinners who hate to be reformed whilst present
Temptations are so inviting, had a Lease of Time, can they command the Grace of
God? They now suppress the Motions of the Spirit, and in effect say to him, as
Felix to St. Paul, awakening his Conscience with a Sermon of Righteousness, and
Temperance, and Judgment to come: Go away for the present, when it is a
convenient season I will call for thee. But will the holy Spirit assist them at
Death who have always resisted him in their Lives? Without his powerful
quickening Grace, they will be unrelenting in their guilty polluted State: and
can they have any regular hope to obtain Repentance unto Life, when they have
so often quenched his warm Excitations? Delay proceeds from Hardness of Heart,
and merits final Desertion from God.

How incongruous is it to expect, that Divine Mercy will accept of a Deathbed
Repentance, that is merely by constraint of Fear, and a Resolution to live well
when they know they can live no longer? To continue in Sin upon this Conceit,
that God will easily be reconciled to Sinners at the last; that Confession with
the mixed Affections of Sorrow and Fear, for the sensible Effects of Sin in
Pains and Sickness, and worse that immediately attend it in the next State,
will obtain a total and final acquittance from our Judge, is an extreme
Dishonor to his ruling Wisdom, his unspotted Holiness, his incorruptible
Justice, and inviolable Truth. The Mercy of God that will justify all
unfeignedly repenting believing Sinners for Christ's sake, will justify God in
the condemning wilful obstinate Sinners, who render themselves eternally
unworthy of it.

To conclude the Motives; if we desire the Favor of God that is better than
Life, if we fear his Wrath that is worse than Death, if we would obtain Heaven,
or escape Hell, let us mortify our respective Sins.

I shall now propound the Means that are requisite for the preserving us from
our special Sins. If the following Rules seem harsh and distasteful to the
Carnal Mind, it is to be considered, that Medicines for the Recovery and
Preservation of Health, are not sweet Meats of a pleasant Relish.

1. In order to the keeping our selves pure and upright, we must be inquisitive
to understand intimately and distinctly what are the Sins to which we are most
liable: For he that does not know what he should fear, is careless, and secure,
easily disordered and vanquished by a Temptation. Some Lusts are open and
notorious in the gross Commission: others lie deep and are of a harder
Disclosure. Ignorance is the strong defense of Sin; it begins in inward
Darkness: the Captive is kept securely in the Dungeon. The Understanding
directs the Will, the Will commands the Practice: if the Sin be undiscovered,
we are not acquainted with our danger, and shall not avoid it. A principal part
of our Knowledge is terminated upon our selves: what is the weakest part with
respect to our Natures, Minds and Affections: otherwise not provided of
Defense, we shall be overcome without Resistance.

Now by applying the Rules that have been largely insisted on in explicating
the Doctrinal Point, we may understand our peculiar Sins. If we consider our
Constitution, we may know what Sins are suitable to our Tempers. Our frequent
Lapses are a sensible Discovery how the weight of Nature inclines us. The
reflecting upon the several Ages of Life and our Conditions in the World will
be an Indication what Sins endanger our Souls: The Young are strongly disposed
to Pleasures, the Old to Avarice, the Healthful and Prosperous to Intemperance
in the use of Worldly Things, the Sick and Afflicted to Impatience, the Rich to
Security, the Poor to Envy.

When the special Sin is found stripped off its flattering Colors, divest it of
its alluring Dress, that it may appear in its foul Deformity, and kindle an
Aversation in your Breasts against it. The correcting vicious Errors begins in
the enlightened Mind, that discovers them, and Et hoc ipsum argumentum est in
melius translati animi, quod vitia suaquam adhuc ignorabat videt. Senec. Epist.
6.
our proneness to them. And since we are so apt to disguise our darling Sins,
and to be partial to our selves, let us with the Psalmist, pray to the Father
of Lights, That he would search us, and try us, and see whether there be any
way of Wickedness in us, to discover it to us by the Light of his Word, and
cover it with his pardoning Mercy, and lead us in the way everlasting.

2. Diligent Watchfulness and Circumspection is an effectual Means to keep our
selves from the Sins that easily encompass us. This implies Prudence to
discover dangers, and the exercise of the Spiritual Powers to prevent and
resist them. Watchfulness is a universal Duty of constant Revolution: There are
respective Duties that belong to Persons according to their Relations, and
several Conditions: there are Duties of stated Times and Seasons: but the Duty
of Watchfulness to prevent Sin, extends to all in this frail State, according
to our Savior's Command to his Disciples, What I say unto you, I say unto all,
Watch: And at all times; for tho we are not always engaged in actual Fight, we
are always in the Field, liable to manifold Temptations, that are ready to
surprise us upon careless neglect of our Duty. Habitual Grace if it* be not
drawn forth into Exercise by constant Watchfulness, cannot fortify us against
Sin.

A Saint that is humble and watchful, preserves himself from the Power and
Infection of Sin, that another who in degrees of Grace excels him, but relaxes
his Watch, is sadly foiled by. Joseph, a young Man, by Vigilance, and avoiding
the Temptation, kept himself untainted from the impure Solicitations of his
Mistress: David, tho of great Experience in Religion, and of eminent Holiness,
yet when he intermitted his Watch, how suddenly was he surpised? From a
careless glance, Curiosity past into Complacence, Complacence into Lust, Lust
into Adultery, and is an eternal Example to excite our Fear and Caution. If
there be not a continued Diligence, the same holy Person that with Defiance and
Indignation has resisted the Tempter at some times, has been vanquished at
other times. Lot was Righteous in Sodom, but how foully and woefully he fell in
the Mountain?

Now our chief care must be directed to avoid our special Sins. It Is a
Fundamental Rule in the Christian Life, that our weakest part is to be guarded
with most Jealousy, and fortified with the strongest defense: for the most
frequent and dangerous Assaults are on the side that is most open to surprise.
The subtle Ea maxim quisque petitur, qua patet. Senec.
Tempter addresses his Insinuations in compliance to our Affections: he knew
the softness of Adam toward his Wife, and chose her to be the Instrument of
persuading him to eat the forbidden Fruit. Every one has a carnal part, that
like Eve the Mother of our Miseries, is prevalent to corrupt us, and
accordingly Numb. 31. 16.
he suits his Temptations. 'Twas the crafty Counsel of Balaam to Balac, not to
encounter the Israelites with armed Soldiers, but with the Allurements of
Women, by whom they were corrupted and seduced to Impurity and Idolatry; and
thereby provoked God's Wrath, and were divested of his Protection. When Ulisses
was employed to discover Achilles, who was concealed in the Habit of a Virgin
amongst the Maids of Honor, he carried a * pack of Toys, and a Lance: Arma ego
femineis animum motura virilem mercibus inservi. Ovid.
and whilst the Women were looking upon the Ribbons, and Lace, and Glasses,
Achilles takes up the Lance, that was suitable to his Martial Spirit, and so
was discovered, and drawn to the Trojan War, that proved fatal to him. Thus the
Tempter is observant of our Inclinations: he will interpret a Blush, a Glance,
a Smile, a discontented Gesture, any signs of our Affections, and by proper
Motives excites the desiring and angry Appetites, and is usually succesful. His
Advantage is chiefly from our Security. It Is easy to surprise a suspectless
Enemy. St. Peter straightly warns us, Be sober, be 1 Pet. 5. 8.
vigilant; because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about
seeking whom he may devour. His Diligence is equal to his Malice. If we are not
wise and watchful, we shall fall into his Snares. There is a fearful Instance
of it in Adam, who lost the Image and Favor of God in an Hour, that his
Posterity cannot recover to all Ages; yet there was no Corruption in his
Nature, he was furnished with sufficient Grace: he might easily have repelled
the Motion to the confusion of the Tempter; but through carelessness he
neglected his Duty to the Eternal Lawgiver, slighted the double Death, that of
the Soul and the Body, that was threatened to deter him from Sin, and Innocence
did not preserve him from seduction. What Reason is there to make us watchful,
both against our Spiritual Enemies, and our own drowsiness, lest security steal
upon us without observation? for our Hearts are as ready to sin as Satan is to
tempt: besides the impression from tempting Objects without us, there is
treacherous danger within: Our prime care must be to keep a severe Command over
our Minds and Hearts, to prevent the entrance of Sin. The Carnal Appetite
allures the Will to consent to the actual Commission* by the mediation of the
Mind that represents the Pleasures and Profits of Sin. Therefore Conscience
must be a vigilant Sentinel to prevent, as far as is possible, the first
springing Thoughts, the first risings of the sinful Affections. Sinful Thoughts
and Desires are possible Acts, and are more odious to God than the gross
Commission is to Men. The pernicious Inspirations of the Tempter are gradual:
as one that kindles a Fire with a small Breath, cherishes the faint Sparks till
raised into a Flame; so warm Desires are cherished by the Thoughts, till they
break forth into a wilder Flame. This is the most difficult part of our Duty;
we may more easily decline Temptations from without, than keep a constant Guard
within. But there is no Multa sunt observanda pugnantibus, si quidem nulla est
negligentiae venia, ubi de salute certatur. Veget.
excuse for the neglect of this Duty, the Consequence being of no less moment
than Salvation. We are commanded to keep the Heart with all diligence, for out
of it are the Issues of Life, and of Death also. As the elective Faculty is
inclined and determined, such will be the quality of our Actions, either Holy
and Good, or Vicious and Evil, and such will be the Reward in the next State.
It Is true, it is morally impossible for even the best Men to be so exact in
their Watch, but vain thoughts may suddenly spring into the Mind, and
indeliberate motions may rise in the Will, (which should be matter of Sorrow):
but we may suppress those beginnings of Sin, and prevent the morose Thoughts,
the musings of the Mind upon the Pleasure or Profit, that makes the Temptation
so strong as to overcome us. If a Watch be set at the Gates of a Town, to
prevent any Commerce with infected Places, tho it is not possible to exclude
Pestilential Vapors that mix with the Air, and fly imperceptably about, yet
the Persons and Goods that come from infected Places may be excluded. A Child
of God keeps himself, that the wicked One touches him not; that is, receives no
defiling Impressions, by yielding to his Suggestions.

Our next care must be to avoid the outward Temptations, that are apt to excite
those Lusts that are most natural to us. The Art of our Spiritual Enemy Eripiu^
omnes animo sine vulnere vires: Haec sunt jucumdi causacibusque mali. Ovid.
is to make use of Objects without, to entice the Affections within us. The
World affords variety of Temptations, that through the Senses pierce the Heart
and wound the Spirit. It Is therefore our Duty and Safety, with the strictest
Caution, to guard our Senses. The most make no other use of their Senses than
the Brutes; it were well they made no worse. The Acts of the Understanding are
immanent and invisible, the Affections mix with sensible Objects, and are
actuated with Heat and Motion from them. For this Reason Holy Men have been so
careful to lay a restraint upon the Senses. Job made a Covenant with his Eyes
not to look upon a Maid. David prays, Turn away mine Eyes from beholding
Vanity. When Solomon had so earnestly pressed the Divine Counsel to keep the
Heart with diligence, he annexes most fitly for that end; put away from thee a
froward Mouth, and perverse Lips put far from thee: Let thy Eyes look right on,
and let thy Eyelids look strait before thee. Ponder the Path of thy Feet, and
let all thy Ways be established: Turn not to the right Hand or the Left; remove
thy Foot from Evil. The sum of which Counsel is, that we should so exactly
guard our sensitive Faculties, so order our Words, our Looks, our Ways, as to
preserve our selves from every evil thing. Our great Security is in flying from
Temptations. Lot was strictly commanded not to look back on Sodom: His Wife, by
casting a lingering Eye toward it, was turned into a Pillar of Salt, to season
the World by her Example, to beware of the occasions of Sin.

It Is extreme Folly to enter into Temptation: for as near as the melting of
Waxis when it is near the Flame, so are the Carnal Affections of being enticed,
and the Will of consenting when near enflaming Objects. Our sad Experience may
instruct us, how prone our Hearts are to yield to inviting Occasions of Sin,
and how often we have been foiled by venturing into the Confines of Temptation.
Solomon observes, Surely in vain is the Net spread in sight of any Bird. If the
Toils be never so craftily Prove. 1. 17.
laid, and the Bait be very enticing, yet a silly Bird has that foresight and
caution, that it will not be tempted to run into the Net, but fly from the
present Danger. What unaccountable folly is it in Men, tho the Temptations of
Sin are never so alluring to the Carnal Appetites, not to make use of the Eye
and Wing, to fear and fly from the intanglements of Iniquity.

Besides, we forfeit the Divine Assistance, by entertaining the Temptations of
Sin. The Promise of preserving Grace is to us whilst we are faithful to God: He
will keep us in all our Ways, whilst we are constant in our Duty, otherwise we
cannot depend upon his gracious Presence and Assistance. If a Soldier be
commanded by a General to fight a Duel with an Enemy, he will arm him with
Armor of Proof, and secure him from Treachery: but if one from Vainglory,
from Rage or Revenge, against the Command of his Superior shall engage in a
Duel, he fights with great hazard, and if he conquers, is punished for his
Disobedience. Thus if in the regular Course of our Lives, the Divine Providence
so orders Things, that Temptations approach us, upon our earnest and constant
Prayer, we shall be furnished with the Armor of God, the Shield of Faith, the
Sword of the Spirit, the Helmet of Salvation. But if we run into Temptations,
we provoke him to desert us; and if we are not overcome by them, yet for our
transgressing his Holy Command, we are liable to his Displeasure.

Confirming Grace is a continual emanation from the Holy Spirit, without which
we shall fall every Hour. It Is therefore extremely hazardous to venture into
Temptations: for the corrupt Nature that with weight and violence inclines us
to sin is within, and supernatural Strength to control the combined Efficacy
of the Inclination and the Occasion is from Above, which is justly withdrawn
when we grieve the Holy Spirit, by conversing with the Temptations of Sin. The
Fear of the Lord is clean, effectively, as it induces an Holy Caution and
Circumspection to preserve our selves from the defiling captivating Snares of
Sin. It Is a Petition more necessary than that for our daily Bread; Lead us not
into Temptation: Considering our inseparable Frailty, and the Arts of our
Spiritual Enemies to take every advantage over us* we should with all possible
ardency of Affection pray, that we be not exposed to Temptations, or not
vanquished by them: but if we rashly expose our selves, our Prayers will be an
Indictment against us, and we shall fall under Condemnation.

3. Serious Resolutions, and solemn Engagements, are of excellent efficacy to
bind our deceitful Hearts from yielding to Sin. In the Christian Life a general
Resolution is absolutely necessary of being faithful to God, never to have
correspondence with his Enemies, but always to cleave to our Duty,
notwithstanding all the Allurements or Terrors of the World to supplant our
Integrity, and surprise our Constancy. David tells us, I have sworn and will
perform it, that I Psalm. 119. 106.
will keep thy righteous Judgments. The Divine Law binds us antecedently to our
consent, but having taken the Oath of Fidelity to God, there is superinduced a
new Obligation to fasten us to his Service. After this, to revolt from our
Duty, is Rebellion heightened with the Guilt of Perfidiousness. Besides, solemn
Engagements against particular Sins are necessary: Ephraim shall say, What have
I to do any more with Idols? He had been enchanted with the love of Idols,
which he renounces with Indignation. A practical Decree, a steadfast resolution
to forsake our Sin, will produce a diligent use of Means in order to that End.

In resolving against Sin, we must depend upon the present and perpetual
Assistance of the Divine Grace, without which our Resolutions will neither be
sincere nor effectual. Carnal Men under Judgments, do often relent and resolve
against their Sins: from the convinced Mind, transient Wishes, and floating
Purposes of Reformation arise: but till the Heart be renewed by Divine Grace,
the will is incomplete: There are secret and sometimes undiscerned Affections
to Sin, that by new Temptations are drawn forth and betray them to Satan. It Is
a charge against the Hypocrites in the Prophecy of Hosea, They were like a
deceitful Bow, that being ill made, or ill bent, never sent the Arrow directly
to the Mark: sometimes after the Carnal Faculties have been sated with the
gross fruition, Men renounce their Sins, and promise they will never return
more to folly: but those Resolutions are as insufficient to fortify them
against the new incursion of tempting Objects, as a Wall of Glass to resist the
Battery of Cannon: for there is no permanent overruling Principle in the
Heart, that makes the Resolution steadfast against Sin. But suppose the
Resolutions be sincere, and proceed from a full bent of the Heart against Sin,
yet if Divine Grace do not ratify them, a strong Temptation will break them, as
a gust of Wind breaks the Strings of a Cobweb. St. Peter consulting his
Affection, not his Strength, presumptuously engaged to his Master, Though all
Men forsake thee, I will not forsake thee: but in the time of Trial, surpised
with so strong a fear, that precluded serious recollection, and distracted his
Mind from the deliberare comparing of the evil of Sin with the instant Danger,
he most unworthily denied his Master, and is a sad Instance how weak and
wavering the best Men are, without the continual Influences of the Holy Spirit
to determine their Wills, and make them with unfainting Courage persevere in
their Duty.

There is a vast difference between the sight of a Storm at Sea, and a Ship in
violent agitation by the Winds and Waves, and the miserable Passengers with
pale affrighted Countenances, expecting present Death, in a lively Picture; and
being in a real Ship, in the midst of a real Tempest, and in real danger of
being swallowed up by the Ocean. The sight of such a Spectacle without fear, is
but painted Courage, as the Object is upon which it is exercised: if one should
presume that his Heart were impenetrable to Fear, because he sees the
representation of extreme Danger without Fear, it were egregious Folly, and
would be soon confuted if he were actually in extreme danger of perishing in
the raging Sea. Thus there is a great difference between Temptations
represented in our Thoughts, and when immediately and really before us: and
between religious Resolutions when Temptations are at a distance, and when
actually incumbent on us. There may be such Resolutions conceived in the Mind
in the absence of Temptations, that we may think our selves guarded safely
against our Sins; and yet at the first encounter of a strong Temptation, our
Resolutions may cool and faint, and our Vows of Obedience may vanish as the
morning Dew before the heart of the Sun: There is such a Ievity and
featheriness in our Minds, such a mutability and inconstancy in our Hearts.
Therefore the Scripture does so frequently inculcate the Duty of continual
Trust in God, to assist us by his Strength to overcome our Spiritual Enemies.
Divine Grace raises our Thoughts into steadfast Resolutions against Sin, turns
our Resolutions into holy Actions, our Actions into permanent Habits. God works
in us, to will and to do of his good Pleasure.

4. If upon intermitting our Watch, we fall into the Sin that we are prone to,
speedy and deep Repentance is necessary to recover the Favor of God, and to
preserve us for the future against it. Sins of Relapse more easily prevail then
in the first Temptation; because the tenderness and reluctance of Conscience is
lessened by the commission of Sin: they are more pernicious to the Soul, for
besides the inhancing of Guilt, the unclean Spirit returns with more
imperiousness from indignation that he was expelled. If we have been
effectually tempted to Sin, let us presently retract it by Repentance: There
will be a suspension of God's Favor, whilst we continue without a due sense of
our Sin; Let not the Sun go down upon God's Wrath, but with Prayers and Tears
sue out his pardoning Mercy. The neglect of present Repentance is a step to
final Impenitence, that is unpardonable. Who can tell the degrees of Danger in
continuing in Sin a day? How many have been cut off in their early Sins, and
lost their Time, and Hopes, and Souls for ever? But that which more specially
belongs to the present Matter, is this, by the neglect of speedy Repentance,
Sin is more difficultly retracted. By continuance in Omnia vitia penitus
insidunt, nisi dum surgunt oppressa sint: vehementius contra inveterata
pugnandum est: nam vulnerum sanitas facilior est dum a sanguine recentia sunt,
ubi corrupta in malum necus s^ verterunt difficilius curan tur. Senec. ad Marc.
Sin, the Heart is more unwilling and unable to mortify it. The Habits of the
Mind differ from the Habits of the Body: these wear out by continuance, the
others are more firm and powerful: they are second Inclinations, and as violent
as the first that are deeply set in corrupt Nature. The healing a fresh Wound
is much more easy than an inveterate Ulcer: the healing the Soul, and renewing
it by Repentance, is much more easy and safe, presently after the wounding it
by Sin, then after continuance under the power and infection of Sin.

A deep Heartbreaking Sorrow will prevent relapses into Sin. When Conscience
represents our Sin in its killing Circumstances, as committed against the
knowledge of the Divine Law, and our Vows of Obedience, against the tender
Mercies, and dreadful Justice of God: that for the low and despicable
satisfaction of the sensual part, we have made our selves unholy and unhappy:
from hence the Soul is struck with a Sorrow so pungent, that the love of
Pleasure is mortified, and the sweetest Sin is embittered. The remembrance of
that perplexing anguish will heighten the aversation and resolution against
Sin: The Soul will fly with horror the occasions of offending God, and recoil
at the first glance of that Sin that cost it so dear, and which if entertained,
will renew its Agonies. As one that narrowly escapes from being consumed by
Fire, retains so strong an impression of the Terror, that makes him always
circumspect to avoid the like danger. David's broken Bones made him understand
what a fearful Sin Adultery was, and cautious ever after. But a slight
Confession, a superficial Sorrow, a few sad Thoughts and Tears, are soon
forgot: when the Sinner presumes by a slight Repentance to obtain
Reconciliation with God, he is ready to answer the next Temptation, and return
to Folly.

5. Fervent and constant Prayer for the renewing Grace of God, is indispensably
necessary to preserve us from our Sins. It Is by the Spirit of Holiness that we
mortify the Deeds of the Body: that we put off the old Man, and put on the new.
Sanctifying Grace introduces a new Nature, the Prolifick and Productive
Principle of a new Life: it turns the current of the Affections from Sin to
Holiness. This is as astonishing as the miraculous motion of the Shadow upon
Ahaz Dial, that went ten degrees backward. Unregenerate Morality may lop the
Branches, restrain from the gross Acts, but sanctifying Grace strikes at the
root of Sin, the inward Affection. There are some Medicines that will stop the
fits of the Falling Sickness for a time, but not expelling the Cause, the
Disease invades Nature again: So moral Counsels, and Politic Respects, may
stop the breaking forth of the Lusts of the Flesh, but the inward Affection of
Sin remaining will make us apt to fall by the Commission of it. Sanctifying
Grace makes an inward universal Change in the Soul: he that was unclean in his
Thoughts and Desires, by the transforming Power of the Spirit, loves Pureness
of Heart, delights in it, and has a fixed Hatred against any thing that
defiles: the Soul that cleaves to the Dust, and pursues the acquisition of
Earthly Things as his Treasure, being refined and elevated by Grace, seeks the
things above, with vigorous Enedavours.

In this the Diseases of the Body differ from those of the Mind: the first,
notwithstanding Pars sanitatis velle sanari fuit. Ita est paucos servitus
plures Servitutem teneant. Senec. Epist. 21.
the most earnest desire of Cures, may be incurable: the other when the Desires
are sincere of spiritual Healing, are in the happy way of Cure, for vicious
Affections are the Diseases of the Soul. This Change of the Affections the
Effect of supernatural Grace, is obtained by fervent Prayer. Our Savior
assures us, that our Heavenly Father will freely and abundantly give the holy
Spirit to those who ask it with such ardent Affections, as flow from their
feeling sense of the want of his Influences. In humble Prayer we acknowledge our
Unworthiness, our Weakness, our absolute necessity of Divine Grace to mortify
our Lusts: in believing Prayer we glorify his Mercy, and his Omniporence, that
he is both willing and powerful to make us victorious over our worst Enemies.
The Prayer of Jehosaphat, when invaded by a vast Army, conspiring the
Destruction of his Kingdom, is a Copy to be transcribed by us: O our God, we
have no Might against this great Company that comes against us, neither know we
2 Chronicles. 20.
what to do, but our Eyes are upon thee. Thus Satan, the World, and the Flesh,
are combined in warring against the Soul, and we are utterly unable to resist
them, we must therefore address our selves to the God of all Grace, to
strengthen our inward Man. And since some Lusts have such strong Possession,
that like that stubborn sort of Spirits mentioned in the Gospel, they cannot be
expelled but by Fasting and Prayer, we must with the most zealous Devotion,
Prayer joined with Fasting, implore Grace to subdue them.

Prayer must be continual: if we intermit this recourse to Heaven we shall
presently find our selves like Sampson when his Hair was shaved, weak like
other Men. Grace in the Saints is not like Light in the Sun, that springs from
it self, but like the Light of a Lamp that is constantly fed with Supplies of
Oil, otherwise the weak Light will faint and dye. Inherent Grace is maintained
by the continual Emanations from the holy Spirit: Nay the Habits of Grace are
drawn forth into Act and vigorous Exercise, by supervenient exciting Grace
without which they would be ineffective and useless. As there cannot be actual
Sight, unless the Light in the Eye be irradiated by Light of the Air: So
without special assisting Grace we cannot do any Spiritual Good nor avoid Evil:
we shall be foiled by every Temptation, even the best will leave God, and
provoke God to leave them. Our Savior therefore enjoins his Disciples the
double Duty, Watch and pray, lest ye enter into Temptation. David with his
severe Resolutions to be circumspect, joined his fervent Requests to God: I
said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my Tongue, I will keep
my Mouth with a Bridle, Psalm. 143. 3.
while the wicked is before me. Set a Watch O Lord before my Mouth, and keep
the door of my Lips. His special Guidance is necessary to regulate our Tongues,
that we neither offend God, nor justly provoke Men.

Lastly: Faith in the Redeemer is a Sovereign effectual Means for the
mortifying Sin. The Son of God incarnate is the Fountain of inherent as well as
imputed Righteousness: Grace and Glory are conveyed to us by the Hands of the
Mediator. The Supernatual Power to do Good, and vanquish Evil is from him: Of
our selves we cannot conceive a good Thought, through Christ strengthening us
we can do all things. Spiritual Blessings he purchased for us by his
Humiliation, and confers in his Exaltation. He gave himself for his Church,
that he might sanctify Ephesians. 4. 8.
it, and cleanse it by the washing of Water Psalm. 68.
and the Word. Being risen and ascended, he received of his Father Divine
Gifts, and gives Grace unto Men. He gives Repentance, which principally
consists in the mortifying Sin: he blesses us in turning Acts 5.
us from our Iniquities.

The Mortification of Sin is peculiarly attributed to his Death. 1. With
respect to its meritorious Causality, that reconciled God to us, and obtained
of him the sanctifying Spirit that is the Seal of his Love, to communicate the
Divine Nature to us, by which we escape the Corruption that is in the World
through Lust. The Redemption of a Captive may illustrate the Redemption of
Sinners: for as in restoring a Captive to Liberty, there must be the payment of
the Ransom, and the breaking of his Chains, so in redeeming a Sinner there was
the price laid down, the unvaluable Blood of the Son of God, to procure our
spiritual Freedom: for the ignominious and cruel Bondage under Satan, was the
penal Effect of the first Transgression: and the invisible Chains, the Darkness
of Mind, the Hardness of Heart, the Rebellion of Will, the Disorder of
Affections, and all the vicious Habits that kept him in the Bondage of Satan,
are to be broken and removed. For this reason it is said, God sending his Son in
the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemning Sin in the Flesh: that is,
Christ dying as a Sacrifice for Sin, reconciled God, and the Fruit of that
Reconciliation, is the breaking the Tyrannous Empire of Sin under which we were
involved, that we may enjoy the Liberty of the Sons of God. Sin brought our
Savior to the Cross, and he brought Sin to the Cross: when he died naturally,
Sin dyed legally, that is, was condemned to lose its Power in the Hearts and
Lives of Believers. The excellent Ends of our Savior's Death are expressed by
the Apostle; He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity,
abolish the guilt of Sin, and purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of
good Works. 2. By way of Representation. As Christ died for Sin, we must die to
Sin: He expiated the guilt of all Sin for penitent Believers; and a universal
crucifixion of Sin is the imitation of his Death. The Apostle insists on this
as a Truth of the clearest Evidence to Christians, Know ye not that so many as
were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death? Therefore we are
buried with him in Baptism; that as Christ was raised up from the Dead, by the
Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of Life. For if we
have been planted together in the likeness of his Death, we shall be also in
the likeness of his Resurrection. Knowing this, that our Old Man is crucified
with him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve Sin. The sum of which Reasoning is, that our crucifying the corrupt
Nature, with all its various Affections and Lusts, is a lively resemblance of
the Death of Christ, which was designed both to be operative in us of the Death
of Sin, and to be significative of it. From whence it follows, it is the
indispensable Duty of all Christians to transcribe the Copy of his Death in
their Hearts and Lives. 3. The Death of Christ mortifies Sin by moral
Influence, as it is an Expression of God's transcendent Love to us, and his
Righteous and Holy severity against Sin; both which are such powerful Motives
to destroy Sin, that whoever does not feel their Efficacy, is dead as the
Grave, without the least vital Spark of grateful Love to Christ.

Now the unfeigned belief of the meritorious and efficacious Sufferings of
Christ, is the means by which the Value of his Death is applied, and the Virtue
of it derived to us for the killing of our Sins. It Is by Faith we are united to
him as our Head, the Fountain of Spiritual Sense and Active Power. He dwells in
our Hearts by Faith, and by the eminent Operations of his Spirit, strengthens
the inner Man. Faith excites us to mortify the inhabiting Corruption, by
arguing from the Love of Christ in dying for us: He left Heaven for us, shall
not we leave Earth for him? He denied his natural innocent Wills to submit to
the Death of the Cross for our Salvation; Shall not we deny our depraved
rebellious Wills for his Glory? And unless desperate Sinners, who are fallen as
low as Hell, who can resist such melting Persuasions? The Apostle speaks with
the most feeling Expressions; The Love of Christ constrains us; has an absolute
invincible Empire over us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then
were all dead, that henceforth we should live to him who died for us. And it is
the noble and sensible Effect of quickening Grace to mortify Sin. Faith as it
obliges, so it encourages to subdue our Sins, by reflecting upon the End of
Christ's Death, which shall certainly be accomplished. St. Paul in his conflict
with an uncessant Enemy, was fortified by an Assurance from God, My Grace is
sufficient for thee: The Temptation was not presently removed, but strength
conveyed by which he was superior to it. Our special Sins so easily encompass
us, that considering our imminent danger, we may fear the Issue of the Fight;
but the believing remembrance of our Savior's Death, inspires new Life and
Heat into us, knowing that he has not died in vain. Faith raises the drooping
Spirit, by reflecting upon the compassionate willingness of Christ to relieve
and strengthen us in the Holy War. When he was upon Earth, he prayed his Father
to keep us from the Evil of the World. This was the Copy of his continual
Intercession for us in Heaven; from whence we are infallibly assured, that he
is most tenderly inclined to assist us, and preserve us from the malignant
influence of the World. For these Reasons, Faith in Christ has a cleansing
Virtue, a victorious Efficacy attributed to it: Faith purifies the Heart, and
overcomes the World. A sincere Believer that makes use of the Divine
Ordinances, Prayer, hearing the Word, the confirming Sacrament, and other holy
Means for the subduing his Corruptions, shall certainly obtain a final Victory,
and the reward of it a triumphant Felicity.

FINIS.
Some* Divinity Books printed for, and fold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MR. Pool's Annotations on the whole Bible, in which the whole Sacred Text is
inserted; in two Volumes, in Folio. Useful for Families and Closets.

Dr. Thomas Goodwin's Works: In two Volumes, in Folio. Viz. on the Ephesians,
Revelations, The Kowledg of God the Father, Election, etc.

-- His Treatise of the Punishment of Sin in Hell: In 8o.

Dr. Thomas Manton's Works; In two Volumes, in Folio. Viz. On the 25th Chapter
of St. Matthew. The 17th of St. John. On the 6th and 8th Chapters of the
Epistle to the Romans. On the 5th Chapter of the 2d to the Corinthians: And on
the 11th to the Hebrews. With a Treatise of the Life of Faith, and Self-Denial.
With several other Sermons.

-- His Treatise on the Lord's Prayer: In 8o.

Dr. Bates's Works. Viz. The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the
Contrivance and Accomplishment of our Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. Or
Discourses, wherein is showed how the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power,
and Truth of God are glorified in that Great and Blessed Work.

-- His three Sermons, at the Funerals of Dr. Jacomb, Mr. Clarkson, and Mr.
Ashurst.

Mr. Pearse's Preparation for Death.

-- His Best Match: Or, the Soul's Espousal to Christ.

-- Last Legacy: Or Beam of Divine Glory, etc. 12o.

Catechism made Practical. The Christian Instructed.

I. In the Principles of the Christian Religion; Positively, in the Shorter
Catechism.

II. In what he is to Refuse, and what to Hold Fast in the Greatest Points of
Controversy; and how to Confute Errors, and to Defend the Truth.

III. In the practice of several Duties. Viz. 1. The Practical Improvement of
the Holy Trinity. 2. Baptism. 3. Prayer. And, 4. Preparation for the Lord's
Supper. 12o.

An Explanation of the Assembly's shorter Catechism. Price 6d.

Mr. Case's Treatise of Afflictions.

The Epitome of the Bible in English Verse, useful for Children; price 6 d.
Bound.

A Present for Children. Being a Brief, but faithful Account of many Remarkable
and Excellent Things uttered by three young Children, to the wonder of all that
heard them. To which is added, A Seasonable Exhortation to Parents for the
Education of their Children. Published by William Bidbanck, M. A. Price 6. d.
Bound.

The Sacred Diary: Or, Select Meditations for every Part of the Day, and the
Employments thereof. By William Gearing, Rector of Christ-Church in Surry.

The Barren Fig Tree: Or, The Doom and Downfall of the Fruitless Professor. By
John Bunyan.

A new System of the Apocalypse; or plain and methodical Illustrations of all
the Visions in the Revelation of St. John. Written by a French Minister, in the
Year 1685, and finished but two days before the Dragoons plundered him of all
except this Treatise.

Murmurers Reproved: In a Sermon lately preached by Mr. Hopkins.

England's Call to Thankfulness for Her great Deliverance from Popery and
Arbitrary Power, by the glorious Conduct of the Prince of Orange, (now King of
England) in the Year 1688. In a Sermon preached in the Parish Church of Almer
in Dorsetshire, Feb. 14. 1689. By John Olliffe.

The Easiness and Difficulty of the Christian Religion. In a Sermon preached
before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City of London, at their
Guildhall Chapel, on Sunday May 26. 1689. By Isaac Bringhurst, D. D. Rector of
Toddinton in Bedfordshire.


