A PROTESTANT LETTER TO THE Lords in the Tower.
My Lords;
NOw methinks you begin to smell a Parliament; it will not be long, I believe,
before they will have another lash at your Backs; your Impeachment is past, and
nothing remains but your Trial, how well you are prepared for it, the Pope and
your own Consciences can tell: You have seen the Success of your poor Brother
Stafford; no Proofs were sufficient to Convince him, nor no Arguments strong
enough to Persuade him from dying a supposed Martyr: the Pope may well boast of
his Fidelity, for he Sealed his Death with his precious Blood, and choked his
Conscience, its believed, with a Lie; no Art could work a Contrition in him;
the Advice of the Priests and Jesuits stuck to him like Bird-Lime, and hardened
him like the nether Millstone; He was Canon proof against all Protestant Advice,
and chose rather to give both Soul and Body, Reputation and Honor to the
Pope's Service, than one Grain of Confession to the World; He was certainly as
strong a Pillar as ever supported the Plot: though he reeled and revealed a
little to the Lords, yet he made you a sufficient Recompense at the Hour of
Death: With what Fire or with what Liquor you tempered this Steel so hardly, I
know not; but its most certain, the Devil himself could have done no more than
he did at his dying Hour; for which in Rome, France and Hell, he may well be
dignified with the Title of Saint Stafford: But ah! methinks he meets but with
a bad Requital for his Constancy to you, and his Infidelity to his own Soul; I
am afraid he is now heard to Curse his Nine-Pin Companions for his Zeal to the
Roman Sea; now he sees the Priests with other Eyes than he did before; since he
swallowed the forbidden Fruit his Eyes are open; and now, I doubt, he Roars and
Howles at the remembrance of that last lost Hour upon Tower Hill; its well if
he has not taken up his Lodging in Hell, where there is room enough for all
Impenitent Sinners, Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum; Happy may it be
for you, if you lay his Misery to Heart, I hope none of you will be so in love
with Hell (as cold Weather as now it is) as to take the same measures, to dye
the same Death, repeat the same Lies which he did; I hope God has not left you
all to the hardness of your own Hearts; it would be a hard case, if none of you
should have Sense, Honesty and Repentance; methinks some of you should have the
Fears of Death, the Terrors of Hell, and the Pangs of an evil Conscience upon
you; its strange to see so many hardened Villains part with their Lives and
their Souls upon such easy terms, as good Protestants believe Jack Ketch has
been an Eye Witness to. How can you think that God will be mocked with such a
seeming show of Repentance, with such a superficial Confession, as theirs have
been, who have left their Speeches as Witnesses of their Wickedness? Oh! do not
flatter your selves with such a good conceit of such Pernicious Footsteps; you
are yet on this side of the Grave, and Death and Hell are at some distance from
you; you have yet an opportunity to do good, and be good, to save your Lives,
and to save your Souls; Oh! do not trifle away such a blessed opportunity. All
the Mischief that has ensued, or may ensue upon Stafford's denial, will
certainly be placed upon his account; he will be severely dealt with for those
Lies at his last Breath. You may possibly blind the World, but you cannot draw
a deceitful Curtain between God's Eyes and your Sins; he sees your Hearts and
knows your Ways; How can you be sensible of it, and yet persist in your
Wickedness? Lend an Ear to Conscience, it will teach you better things then
ever you yet learned from any of your Ghostly Fathers; it will teach you to
unbowel your selves of all your burdensome Sins to God, in an Unfeigned
manner; it will make you disgorge your selves of your Plots, and engage you to
Plot for your Souls safety, and your Body's security: Do not imitate those who
rather choose to go to Hell with a Plot in their Hearts, than divulge it: Think
it not a shame to be eased of so shameful a Religion, as requires your Secrecy
to your Eternal Destruction: Let not the Priests Hoodwink you, or Blindfold
you, and then lead you to Hell; God has given you time and means to Work out
your Deliverance here, and your Salvation hereafter; Oh! Woe be to you if you
neglect so great Salvation: The dividing your Heads from your Bodies is an
easy Punishment, but the dividing your Souls from God is unsufferable; for who
can dwell with devouring Fire? Who can dwell with everlasting Burnings?

I beseech you, My Lords, spread Death and Hell before you; look a little
beyond the Grave; have some Serious Thoughts of the condition they are in, who,
we believe, were Brethren with you in Iniquity; and then I doubt not, but it
will work a Reformation in you.

J. B.
February, the 14th, 1680.
London, Printed in the Year, 1680.


