THE WAY TO THE Highest Honor. A FUNERAL SERMON, On JOHN xii. 26. Preached
upon the Decease of the Rnd THO. JACOMB, D.D. April 3. 1687.

By William Bates, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXXVII.

TO THE Right Honorable ELIZABETH Countess-Dowager OF EXCETER.
Madam,
I Present a Sermon to your view, that drew forth your Tears in the Hearing,
and is like to be a revival of your Sorrow in Reading; but I could not without
Indecence decline the inscribing it to your Name. It Is designed to the precious
Memory of one, whose Piety and Prudence had rendered most worthily and
affectionately respected by you: One who for Forty Years faithfully served you
in the Affairs of your Soul, and in that long space there was a continual
Circulation of Favors on your Part, and Observance on his. As his Presence and
Counsel, and Example in your Family was an excellent Blessing and dearly prized
by you, so in proportion your afflicting Grief rises for the loss of him. But
you are instructed to be content with the Divine Disposal: And our Gracious God
by withdrawing intermediate Comforts, calls you to more intimate and Heavenly
Communion with Himself.

I might here take a just occasion to speak of your eminent Virtues, and of
your serious Religion that crowns the rest: For then Praiseworthy Excellencies
may be duly and safely represented, when he that Commends is not in danger of
falling into Flattery, and the Person Commended is not in danger of being
swelled with Pride: And such is your excellent and conspicuous Goodness, that
it reflects a Luster upon your Nobility, and is above Verbal Encomiums; and
your rare Humility is most relucent amongst your other shining Graces. But it is
needless to illustrate that Worth that is so visible to all.

I shall only observe, that as you have been so happy as to find Wisdom, the
true Spiritual Wisdom that directs us to our Last and Blessed End, the Wisdom
that excells Rubies, and by an incomparable Comparison all the admired Things
in the World: So the promised Reward of Wisdom has been your Portion: Length of
Days are in her right Hand, and in her left Hand Wisdom and Honor. You are now
come to Old Age, and are apt to complain (such is your zealous Piety) that,
your Strength being spent, you are useless, and with Impatience desire a
Dismission from hence. But as a Servant that stands and waits upon his Master's
Pleasure, as truly serves him, as he that is most industrious in his Business;
so by an humble patient waiting upon your Heavenly Lord, till he shall call you
to the Blessed State Above, you as truly please and glorify him, as when your
active powers were fresh and lively, and you went about doing good.

Be encouraged, Good Madam, with unfainting Perseverance to expect the final
Reward: For your Salvation is nearer than when you first believed. Let the Love
of Christ always reign in your Heart, and the Crown of Glory be always in your
Eye, that you may finish your course with joy. These are the most unfeigned
Desires of him who is,

Madam, Your very humble and faithful Servant, William Bates.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Short Description of the Blessed Place and State of the Saints Above. In a
Discourse on the Words of our Savior, Joh. 14.2. Preached on occasion of the
Death of Mr. David Clarkson. By W. Bates, D. D.

A Plain Representation of Transubstantiation, as it is received in the Church
of Rome, with the Sandy Foundations it is built upon, and the Arguments that
clearly evert and overturn it.

ERRATA.
Page 29. in the Margent, for (...) r. (...). P. 102. l. 6. for ruins r.
ruined. P. 104. l. 11. dele our selves.

St. JOHN xii. 26. If any Man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am,
there shall also my Servant be: If any Man serve me, him will my Father honor.


IF it so pleased the wise and sovereign Disposer of all Things, how much
rather would I be an attentive Hearer of that blessed Servant of God who is now
above, than preach his Funeral Sermon at this Time. That my sad Voice should be
reserved for this mournful Service, is both contrary to my Desire and
Expectation. O frail and faithless Life of Man! Who would have thought that Dr.
Jacomb, whose natural vigor and firm Complexion promised a longer continuance
here, should have a period put to his Days, and that I should survive, whose
Life has been preserved for many Years like the weak light of a Lamp in the
open Air? But he has finished his Work, and was more fit for Heaven: The last
Lord's Day he entered into everlasting Rest: And I with you are still upon the
Earth, that we may make a better Preparation for the Divine Presence in Heaven,
and that Holy Assembly that serves him who sits upon the Throne without
Imperfection or Intermission for ever. In order to this end, I have chosen the
present Subject of my Discourse.

In the Verse our Savior gives a most important Command and indispensably
obligatory to all Christians; If any Man serves me, let him follow me: If he
assumes the Title, and enters into the sacred Engagement of being my Servant,
let his Carriage be answerable to his Condition, let him follow the Divine
Example I have set before him. And since the way is narrow and be-set with
Thorns, our Celestial Leader who by the Cross ascended to the Throne, assures
us of a blessed Retribution that shall infinitely outweigh all the numerous
and heavy Troubles to which we are exposed in his Service; all our grievous
Sufferings shall end in Eternal Joys: Where I am, there shall my Servant be:
And he is at God's right Hand, where there is fullness of Joy, and Rivers of
Pleasure for ever. And all the Clouds of Disgrace and Contempt that darken our
present State, shall be dispelled and overcome by unfading Glory: If any Man
serve me, him will my Father honor.

Joy and Glory are the bright Sum of Heaven: The complete Felicity that a
steadfast Faith in our Savior's Promises, opposes to the greatest Evils, all
the Ignominy and Reproaches, all the Pains and Miseries that can afflict Life,
or imbitter Death: The lively hope of it inspires his Servants with an
invincible Courage and Patience to sustain what ever Evils for his Sake.

I shall confine my Discourse to the last part of the Verse; If any Man serve
me, him will my Father honor: Having upon the like occasion treated of the Joy
that shall recompense all the Sorrows and Labors of the Saints.

The Proposition I shall insist on is this: God will crown the Fidelity and
Constancy of Christ's Servants with the highest Honor.

In the managing of the Point, I will consider,

First, What the Service of Christ implies.

Secondly, Upon what accounts it is due to him.

Thirdly, The final Reward that shall certainly attend it.

Lastly, Bring it home to our own Bosoms by Application.

First, What the Service of Christ implies. In the general Notion, to serve
Christ, implies Obedience to his Will as the Rule of our Actions, with aims at
his Glory as the End of them. His Will revealed in the Scriptures is a Rule
eminently and exclusively. Eminently, for it has all the Perfections of a Rule:
It Is clear and complete, sufficient to make us wise to Salvation, and to direct
us in the Way everlasting. It Is called the holy, acceptable, and perfect Will
of God. It Is a Rule Exclusively. To speak strictly, no Creature can be a Rule
to another; for they are all in an equal Line of Subjection to the Creator: One
may be a Guide or Governor to another according to the Rule of God's Word. The
Laws of Men cannot reach and bind the Conscience immediately, but by virtue of
God's Command; nor unlimitedly, but as they are consonant with his Laws. Now a
universal respect to the Will of Christ, as the Rule of our Lives, is truly to
serve him. And the aiming at his Glory in all our Desires and Endeavors,
either actually or habitually, is an essential Ingredient in his Service. The
actual Intention in every performance is not absolutely necessary: Many good
Actions may proceed from the Influence of the habitual Intention: An Arrow that
is directed by aim may hit the Mark, tho in its flight the Eye be turned off
from it. But the ultimate scope of our Life, which ought to be often renewed in
our Minds, must be to please and glorify Christ; according to the Apostle's
Expression, To me to live is Christ. I will more distinctly open these Things
under the following Heads;

1. The Church is a distinct Society from the World, of which Christ is the
Head; and the State of Christianity is a high and holy Calling; and all who are
brought into it by the outward Ministry of the Word, or in Conjunction with it,
by the internal Grace of the Spirit, are obliged to the Faith and Obedience of
the Gospel; the same Duties and the same Rewards are common to all: And living
according to that Spiritual State in Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety, is
to serve Christ. Thus the Adoration, the Honor, the Homage we render to God,
the making him the sole Object of our highest Love, an entire relyance on the
Mediator for our Salvation, an earnest desire to please him in all Things, and
an equal fear to displease him, the exercise of compassionate beneficent
Charity toward Men; briefly, a Holy and Heavenly Conversation, is the
universal Duty of Christ's Servants. And that our Service be accepted, it must
be performed with Humility, Zeal and Constancy.

With Humility and Dependence upon the Mediator for Divine Grace and
Acceptance. Every spiritual Act requires a Supernatural Power: Not a holy
Thought or Word springs from naked Nature. Our Savior tells his Disciples,
Without me you can do nothing. As the Branches derive Life and active Sap from
the Root that makes them flourishing and fruitful; so from his sanctifying
Spirit, (that was purchased by his meritorious Sufferings, and is conferred by
him in his Glory,) we are made fruitful in every good Work: And in the beloved
Son we are only accepted.

This general Service due to Christ, must be done with Zeal. We are commanded
to be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord; to work out our own Salvation, Romans
12.11.
as the Apostle with most lively Emphasis enforces the Duty. Our most ardent
Affections and active Powers are to be employed in this work, remembering that
our Lives are short and uncertain: Time flies upon the swiftest Wings: That the
Work is of infinite and everlasting Consequence, in comparison of which our
fervent Diligence in worldly Affairs, is like the throwing of Straws and
Feathers with our utmost strength: remembering, that we are always under the
pure Eye of our Divine Master, that will call us to an exact Account. To be
cold and careless in his Service, disparages his Excellency, and will defeat
our hopes: The Kingdom of Heaven is taken by violence.

Luke 1.74, 75.
With Constancy. He delivered us from the Hands of our Enemies, that we might
serve him without Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the Days
of our Lives. The travail of Faith continues till heavenly Vision be brought
forth, and the Labor of Love till the Reward be obtained. I will not insist on
this, being to resume the consideration of it afterward.

2. In the various Conditions of Life in this World, we are to serve Christ.
The entire Man is the Object of God's tender Care and Providence, and
accordingly he has wisely ordered diverse Conditions, and special Callings of
Men, wherein they are engaged, and employed for the Support and Comfort of
themselves, and the public Good. And as in a Circle, from every Point of it, a
straight Line may be drawn to the Center: so in the vast Sphere of this World,
from every lawful Calling there may be a direct prosecution of our last and
blessed End, the Glory of God in conjunction with our Salvation.

There is no state of Life so low and mean, but a Christian may so manage it,
as to excel in Holiness, Et si adhuc viliorum materiarum obtulisses, fecisset
quod ex illa fieri optimum possit. Sic sapiens virtutem si licebit, in divitiis
explicabit, si minus, in exilio. Quamcunque fortunam acceperit, aliquid ex illa
memorabile efficiet. Senec. Ep. 78.
and consequently Honor Christ: As Phidias that famous Sculptor expres'd his
Art to Admiration, not only in Gold, and Marble, and Ivory, but in mean
Materials, in Wood or ordinary Stone. The Apostle often inculcates this Lesson
upon Servants, to obey their Masters with Fidelity and Cheerfulness, for ye
serve the Lord Christ; Col. 3.24. Ephesians. 6.7. It was to a mortal Man, and if it
might be of a perverse humor, their Service was immediately addres'd; but if
from Conscience of their Duty to Christ, and a direct intention to please him,
they performed it, that Respect sweetened and ennobled the Service. It Is the
Spirit and Perfection of Christianity to transform and elevate the lowest
Actions: it makes the Service of a Slave to be Divine Obedience, which is the
most free and noble Act of the reasonable Creature. From hence the same Apostle
enforces the Duties of Servants, that they may adorn the Gospel of God our
Savior: Tit. 2.
The faithful Discharge of their Service redoubles the Luster of the glorious
Gospel, and recommended it to their Pagan Masters. And it is equally true, that
in every lawful Condition of Life, when Men are conversant in the Duties proper
to it, with a respect to the Command of Christ, when their civil Actions are
ultimately resolved into his Glory, they perform Religious Obedience. This is
enjoined in that comprehensive Precept, Whatsoever you do in word or deed, do
it in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ: that is, with a respect to his Will,
and for his Honor. I shall only add that Diligence in our civil Callings, must
always be in Subserviency to the great End of our general Calling, the
Salvation of our Souls; to which we are primarily and indispensably obliged.
The Life of a Christian is a walking with God, and the way is in the
performance of holy and civil Duties. And as Companions in a Journey are
together all day, but have set times of refreshing themselves; so a Christian
in his celestial Journey, is to walk always before God uprightly, in all
temporal Affairs to regard his Presence, and every day at set times to draw
near to him by Prayer and Thanksgiving, and to represent his Greatness and
Glory in so solemn a manner, that there may be a serious habitual Constitution
of Spirit respecting him in all his Actions. If there be a neglect of heavenly
Communion with him, and of our spiritual State, and a perpetual Consumption of
our Thoughts, Time, and Strength for secular Advantages and Interests, Men are
Slaves of the World, not Servants of Christ.

3. The Service of Christ is more eminently performed in some special Offices
ordained for the Glory of God and the public Good. And such are the civil
Magistracy, and the spiritual Ministry.

1. Magistrates the highest and subordinate in the Scale of Government, are by
designation to their Office to serve him, They are called the Ministers of God,
for the good of the People. Romans 13.
Princes may be considered in a double Capacity, as Christians, and as Princes,
and in both they are obliged to serve Christ. As Christians, by an inflexible
necessity, without Privilege or Dispensation they are bound to obey his holy
Laws as strictly as every private Person; as Princes, they are subject to him
not only upon the account of his Deity simply considered, but his Office as
Mediator. In his mortal State he did not exercise Regal Power, nor appeared
with conspicuous marks of Royalty, for it was incongruous to his End: The
Redemption of the lost World was to be obtained by Sufferings: But his
Supremacy over the World, is a Prerogative annexed to his being Head of the
Church, a Title that infinitely transcends all Angelical, much more Human
Principalities. He is styled the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. Princes are
commanded to kiss the Son, a Token of the Adoration, and Homage they owe to
him. As Princes, they are to exercise their Power and Authority to repress
Wickedness, and preserve the public Tranquillity: For without the restraints
of Fear, the most savage fierce Beasts would be less dangerous than Men to Men.
They are to encourage Moral Goodness, and not only to promote the civil
Prosperity, but eternal Felicity of their Subjects. Accordingly the Apostle
exhorts Christians to offer up Prayers and Supplications for Kings, and all in
in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and
Honesty. When Princes are inspired with Sentiments and Resolutions, becoming
their Lieutenancy to the Lord Christ, when they govern their Greatness, and
employ their Power in subserviency to his Interest, when they protect and
encourage all that seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof,
as the clear direct way that leads to it, they shall obtain the brightest
richest Crowns in the State of Glory: But those who are a Terror to the Good,
and encourage evil Doers, their mighty aggravated Sins will sink them into the
deepest Damnation.

2. Those who are consecrated to the Spiritual Function of teaching, and
governing the Church, are in a peculiar manner the Servants of Christ, not as
he is the Lord of the Earth, but of Heaven; considering the Quality of their
work and the End of it: For it is wholly conversant about the Souls of Men, to
open their Eyes, Acts 26.18.
and turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, that
they may receive forgiveness of Sins, and inheritance amongst them which are
sanctified by Faith that is in Christ: And as it is expressed in other Words of
Scripture, to translate them from the Kingdom of Darkness, Col. 1.12.
into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

This Relation extends it self from the highest Apostle to the lowest in the
sacred Office: St. Paul frequently styles himself the Servant of Christ: Romans
1. Phil. 1.
and by that Title he expresses any that are by office employed for the saving
of Souls: The Servant of the Lord must not strive, 2 Timothy 2.14.
but be gentle to all Men, apt to teach. As Christ is called the Servant of God
by way of Eminency, and was anointed to to preach the Gospel; so those who are
dedicated to that Work, are his Servants in the most proper sense, and are to
follow him, the most excellent Example, and highest Master in that Divine Work.
This I will more particularly insist upon, being suitable to the present
occasion, and lay down some Rules directing how the Ministers of Christ may
serve him acceptably, so as to be rewarded in the Heavenly Glory.

1. They must by serious study furnish themselves with Divine Knowledge, and
substantial Learning, for the Discharge of all the parts of their Office: To
instruct the Ignorant, to refute the Erroneous, to reform the Unholy, and to
comfort the Humble and Disconsolate. Our Savior compares the Ministers of the
Gospel unto a Man that is an Householder, Mat. 13.52.
which brings forth out of his Treasure, things new and old; It Is his Duty to
give to the Flock Meat in due season, Mat. 24.45.
for which not only Fidedelity but Wisdom is requisite. It Is the Apostle's
charge to Timothy; Give attendance to Reading, 1 Timothy 4.14, 15.
to Exhortation, to Doctrine; meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to
them, that thy profiting may appear before all. If Timothy who had supernatural
Gifts by Inspiration, was obliged to be intent and diligent in the application
of his mind to the Mysteries of Godliness; how much more should those who must
acquire Knowledge by search and Industry, and the Divine Blessing upon it. As
Fountains by secret Passages derive from the Sea the Waters that flow in their
Streams; so Ministers by reading and Contemplation, and Prayer in their
Retirements, obtain the Knowledge of Divine Things, which they convey in their
Sermons to the People.

With the Notional, an Experimental Knowledge of Divine Truths, is absolutely
necessary to a Minister to save himself, and most useful to save others.

It Is not a perfect Systeme of Divinity in the Head, not an universal knowledge
of spiritual Things confined to the Brain, that has a saving Efficacy: It Is not
composing a Sermon with exquisite Art, and the delivering of it like an Orator,
that makes him accepted with God. For without a cordial Sense of Divine Truths,
he only lends his Tongue in that holy Service; like a Reciter in a Scene, all
he does is but external Appearance. God sees and requires the Heart: without it
neither the Head nor the Tongue of a Minister, tho his Speculations are
sublime, and his Words Drops of Gold, are of any value. And usually the Sermons
of such are without profit to the Hearers. The sound of words only reaches the
Ear, it is the Mind convinces the Mind, and the Heart persuades the Heart. He
that is strongly convinced of the Truth of eternal Things, he will speak of
them with assurance, as an Eye witness, and in a lively manner: He that is
burning in his own Breast, will inflame others; but if there be no Spark of
Celestial Fire in the Minister's Breast, if he does not value the Consequence of
Divine Truths, he speaks of them without a deep concernment; and a cold
Preacher makes a careless Hearer: and the Sermon is lost in the Air between the
Lips of the one and the Ears of the other.

2. The Matter of their Sermons must be the Doctrine of the Gospel revealed
from Heaven to reduce Men to their Duty, and restore them to Felicity. This is
the Tenor of the Commission given by our Savior to his Apostles, Go teach all
Nations, to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. The preaching
unrevealed or trivial things, impertinent to the Salvation and Perfection of
Souls, is directly contrary to the end of their Office. The wisest Method of
recovering lost Sinners is to unfold the two Covenants, and represent the two
Worlds to them. The first Covenant was with Man created in natural
Righteousness and Holiness, but was of a short continuance: For by his
rebellious Sin he made a deadly forfeiture of the Image and Favor of God, of
Communion with him the Fountain of our Felicity. He is cut off from that
blessed Life, and must remain in the state of Corruption and Death for ever
without redeeming Mercy. It Is a necessary preparative for the Conversion and
Recovery of Sinners, to convince them of the guilt, pollution, and dominion of
Sin, and the everlasting Hell that follows it, that they may be roused out of
their Security to fly from the Wrath to come. The Terrors of the Lord make the
first Breach into the Hearts of Men, and Grace victoriously enters, and subdues
the reluctant Will. After the Conviction of Sin, it is seasonable to convince
them of the all-sufficient Righteousness of Christ; that he is the Tree of
Life, for the reviving dead Sinners, that he is Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, a universal Remedy for all the Evils that lie
upon Man in his fallen State. And it is requisite to open the Terms upon which
God offers his Mercy, the Law of Faith in the Gospel, that consists of Commands
and Promises, both to check Presumption that flatters so many into Hell, and to
prevent Despair that works as dangerously, though not so frequently, to the
Ruin of Souls. That men may not from corrupt minds and carnal Affections
misinterpret the Gospel, to live at ease in their Sins, a faithful Minister
must show them, that the Promises of Pardon and Salvation are made only to a
certain order of Sinners, the repenting and reforming Sinners, that rely upon
Christ alone for their acceptance; that he is a King as well as a Priest, and
none can regularly depend upon his Sacrifice without Subjection to his Scepter:
In short the sovereign Balm of his Blood is to be applied only to those whose
Hearts are broken for their Sins, and from them. And to raise and encourage
drooping Spirits that feel the intolerable Burden of Sin, and both from their
Guilt and Unworthiness, and their Impotency to perform the Conditions of the
Gospel, are apt to be hopeless of obtaining Salvation, the Gospel assures us
that God is rich in Mercy, ready to receive humble contrite Suppliants: That
although Sins are of different degrees of Guilt, and accordingly Conscience
should be affected, and the Springs of Godly Sorrow be opened, yet God can as
easily forgive ten thousand Talents as a few pence: that the Blood of Christ
cleanses from all Sins, those that are of a Crimson die, as well as from those
of a lighter Tincture: That the Promise of Pardon is without limitation to all
penitent Believers. And although in the fallen State Man is destitute of
Spiritual Strength, no Man can come to Christ except the Father draw him;
though Carnal Lusts have fettered Nature, and captivated the Will, that Men
cannot rescue themselves from the Bondage of Sin, yet Divine Grace is offered
in the Gospel, to enable us to do what is impossible without it; and the Holy
Spirit is promised to all that sincerely ask it, who is styled the Spirit of
Love, and Power, and a sound Mind, with respect to his Heavenly Operations in
the Hearts of Men. Therefore as it would be Folly in a Scholar that is invited
to the School of a learned Master, to discourage himself from going, because he
wants Learning: For that is to be obtained there, and only his Desire and
Capacity of Instruction is requisite for his Admission: so it is unreasonable
for those who have a humble sense of their Sins and Misery, to be discouraged
from coming to our Savior; for he is most willing to reconcile God to them by
his prevailing Mediation, and to communicate Divine Grace that they may perform
that Obedience which God will graciously accept. This is to imitate the
Apostles, of whom it is said, We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord.

It Is of excellent use also for Preachers often to represent to Men the two
Worlds, so vastly different in the Qualities, the Degrees and Duration of the
Good and Evil Things that are enjoyed or suffered in them, that they may
discover the Errors of their Ways before they come to their End, and Death
opens their Eyes to see and lament what is lost and never to be recovered. All
the admired Things in the sensible World, are perishing Vanities; like an
enchanted Feast that feeds the Eye, without real Nourishment: But in the
Celestial World all is substantial, satisfying, and eternal. All the Evils,
the Calamities, the Injuries, and Troubles suffered here, are no more to the
Plagues prepared by revenging Justice for impenitent Sinners, than the slight
razing of the Skin is to a deadly Wound in the Heart. Now the fundamental
Delusion of Men is in valuing the present state of Things above what is Future,
and infinitely better or worse. They think and call them only Happy, Cui ideo
reor veteres pagani tam speciosae appellationis titulum dederunt, ut quia in eo
non erat numen, vel nomen esset. Et quia non habebat aliquam ex potestate
virtutem haberet saltem ex vocabulo divinitatem. Salv. de Provid. l. 8. (...).
Hippoc. Aphor. Lib. 6.
who live in Pomp, and flow in Riches and Pleasures; but as vainly as the
Heathens dignified their Idols, with the Titles of Celestial Deities: They
count them only miserable that are in Poverty, Sickness, and Afflictions here.
And as it is observed, by the great Physician, that if a delirous Person
proposes his incohoerent Fancies, seriously as the Product of Consideration,
his Case is more dangerous and hardly curable: So the solemn Folly of Men that
think it reasonable to esteem what is present and sensible, above what is
future and spiritual; and accordingly to choose the present as the real
substantial Good, and neglect the future as a matter of Fancy and Conceit, is
hardly cured. Their Minds and Affections, their Aims and Desires center in the
Earth: their Fears, Anxieties, Sorrows terminate there. And it is one necessary
part of the Minister's Work to divest the World of its Masquing Habit, that
appears so rich and glittering in the Night by Torch-light, to strip it naked
as it shall burn in the consuming Fire at the last Day: And to unvail the Glory
of Heaven, and represent it to the Eyes of Christians so as to ravish their
Hearts: In short, to make such a convincing Discovery of Things unseen, that
Men may judge, that only the Saints above are truly and perfectly Happy, and
only the Reprobates in Hell are really and finally miserable, and accordingly
regulate their Lives.

I shall add to this, that the Language of Sermons should be suitable to the
quality of the Matter, and the end of that Divine Ordinance. A Minister must
speak as becoming the Oracles of God: With solemn Expressions according to the
Sanctity and Importance of the great Mystery of Godliness. The Apostle tells us
his Speech was not with the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom. A Luxuriant
flourish of Words, a vain Ostentation of Wit, debases the Majesty, enervates
the Vigor, and corrupts the pure taste of the Gospel. True Eloquence is always
suitable to the Subject, and springs from it; as the native Beauty of the
Countenance that springs from a sound Complexion of Body, and is not varnished
with the Paint of Art. When the Truth of Eternal Things is planted in the
Heart, and the vital Sense of them is shed in the Will and Affections, it will
furnish us with fit and powerful Words to express them. Besides, in the
managing of a sacred Argument, salus populi suprema lex esto: The Salvation of
Souls is the Rule to which the Language of Sermons must be parallel. Divine
Truths must be represented with those clear and solemn Expressions, as may
powerfully affect the Conscience, and excite the practick Faculties of the
Soul, with such weighty and serious Words, as may awaken Sinners to fear the
powerful and terrible Judge of the World, and to hate Sin that provokes his
Displeasure. The curious Contexture of Words of pleasant Sound without
Substance, is an elaborate Folly: It Is the framing a Net only fit to catch
Flys, the vain Applauses of the injudicious, not to take Souls, the Divine Work
of a Minister. And the Account must be woeful for those Ministers to the
Redeemer of Souls, whose Study, Thoughts, and Time are wasted for so guilty and
base an end.

3. The Motives of their Affections and Endeavors in this Holy Service must be
the Love of Christ and precious Immortal Souls. Our Savior with repeated
Earnestness recommends this to St. Peter, Love thou me, feed my Lambs, feed
my Sheep. The Salvation of Souls is his dearest Glory, and satisfying Pleasure:
As it was prophesied, that he shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and be
satisfied: And our zealous Endeavors to save them from Death, is the natural
and necessary Effect of our Love to him. A true Minister of Christ has a
diviner Principle, a sublimer Soul, than to aim at carnal Fruitions, at
temporal and terrestrial Rewards. The blessed End of his Office must be the End
of all his studious Thoughts and Labors, the Honor of his Master in the
Conversion and Salvation of Sinners.

If the World be in their Eye and Heart as the Scope of their Ministry, they
are guilty of the most unnatural Disorder by employing the most excellent means
for low and sordid Ends, they use God to enjoy the World: this corrupts and
stains their Service. Such Mercenaries are empty Vines, that only bring forth
Fruit unto themselves: They have their Reward here. But the Love of Christ and
Souls reigns in the Heart of a faithful Minister: this regulates his Work in
order to their spiritual and everlasting Good.

This will make him descend to the Capacity of the meanest, and plainly to
instruct them in things concerning their Salvation. As Elisha put his Mouth
upon the Mouth, and his Eyes upon the Eyes, and his Hands upon the Hands of the
dead Child, and thereby conveyed a living Heat into him; so a Minister should
apply himself suitably to their Capacity, who are but Children in Knowledge.
It Is his Duty to raise the low Understandings, as well as to humble the high
and swelling Passions of Men.

This Love to Souls will inspire him with tender melting Affections: without
which, unless God renews the Miracle of Aaron's dry Rod blooming and bearing
Almonds, our Discourses will be barren, without Fruit in the Hearers. A plain
Sermon dictated from the Heart with a holy Heat of Affections, makes a solid
Impression upon the Hearers: When an elaborate Discourse, not animated with the
Affections, is of little Efficacy. As a blunter Iron, if burning hot, pierces
more easily and deeply into a Piece of churlish Wood, then a sharper that is
cold.

The Love of Christ and Souls inspires with Joy and Alacrity in his Service. No
Element is heavy in its own Sphere.

A mercenary Spirit performs the Work as an irksom Task; but Love sweetens all
the Duties of the sacred Calling, even such as are most distastful to the
Carnal. This entitles to the blessed Reward. The Apostle says, If I preach the
Gospel willingly, I have a Reward: Otherwise his abundant Labors would be of
no comfortable account at last.

3. The Ministers of Christ must with most faithful Diligence attend his
Service. The Subject and End of their Work challenges this of them, The
Conversion and Salvation of Souls. What earnest and repeated Calls are
necessary to awaken those who are involved in carnal Security, to persuade them
to love what they hate, and to hate what they love? and when the Foundation is
laid in serious Repentance, and the Work of Grace begun, what Diligence is
requisite to raise it to Perfection? How does the malicious incessant Enemy of
our Salvation strive by a thousand Temptations to blast our Endeavors?

The Work of a Minister is not like the Work of an Artificer: A Statuary with
long Labor cuts the Marble to form it into a noble Image, but he leaves his
work at his Pleasure; and when he resumes it, the Matter being durable, it is in
the same state toward finishing as when he left it. But the Heart of Man is of
a strange Nature, hard as Marble and fluid as Water; Heavenly Impressions are
with difficulty made in it, and easily defaced. When by many Prayers and Tears,
many tender Addresses of Ministers the Heart is softened, and the Image of
Christ, the Lineaments of his Divine Graces and Virtues are first drawn in it,
without a continual Eye and Attendance upon the Work, how soon are those
blessed Beginnings spoiled, and the carnal Lusts regain the Heart? How hard is
it to prevail with Men to enter into the narrow Way, and to preserve them from
defiling Lapses in it, or woeful Excursions into the pleasant ways of Sin, and
to bring them safely to Heaven? The solemn Adjuration of the Apostle to Timothy
should excite Ministers with the most watchful Care and useful Diligence to
attend their Work: I charge thee before the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom: Preach
the Word, be instant, in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with
all long suffering and Doctrine. What Opiate can stupify the Conscience of idle
Ministers so as not to be awakened by these ardent Expressions? How can they
appear before the most High, and Everlasting Judge? What will be a sufficient
Defense before his enlightened Tribunal? What Apologies will skreen them from
his fiery Displeasure? Will their Ignorance, or Abundance, or Slothfulness
excuse the neglect of their Duty? They may deceive themselves with vain
Allegations to palliate their Negligence, but God will not be mocked. If in the
last Judgment those who neglected to feed the Poor with material Bread to
support their Bodies, shall be placed with the Reprobates at the Left Hand of
Christ, how can those whose Office it is to dispense the Bread of Life to
Souls, and neglect to feed them, escape Condemnation?

The useful Diligence I have been urging upon Ministers, is not only necessary
in public solemn preaching the Word, but in seasonable applying it to
particular Persons within their Compass and Care. Of this we have an excellent
Pattern in St. Paul, who gives this Account of his Spiritual Work: We preach
Christ, warning every Man, Col. 1.28.
and teaching every Man in all Wisdom; that we may present every Man perfect in
Christ Jesus. A Minister should with watchful Diligence take all Opportunities
for the saving of precious Souls; and sometimes one short Lesson seriously
applied to a Person in private, more powerfully, affects the Conscience, and
moves the Affections, than a long and well studied Sermon.

4. The Servants of Christ must with Resolution and Constancy despise the
Allurements and the Terrors of the World in performing the Duties of their
Office. The Apostle declares his fixed Mind, Acts 20.24.
I count not my Life dear to me, so that I may finish my Course with Joy, and
the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus: Tho amongst the pikes of
a thousand Dangers he was never faint-hearted, much less false-hearted, in the
Cause of Christ. The two principal parts of the Minister's Duty are to preserve
the Truths of the Gospel inviolate, and to open and enforce the Commands of it
in their spiritual Purity and Extent: They are styled the Lights of the World,
and the Salt of the Earth.

All the Truths of the Gospel are of precious value, but not of equal clearness
and moment: And Christian Charity should moderate between Dissenters in smaller
Matters, who agree in the main Points of Religion. But those Truths of the
Gospel that are primary and radical, and those that by necessary Consequence
are deduced from them, require our most vigilant Care and Zeal to preserve them
entire and untainted. It Is a universal Duty respecting Christians, to search
out the Truth as it is in Jesus, to understand the Reasons of the Religion they
profess, and to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints.
But the Ministers of Christ who by virtue of their Office are Depositaries of
the Truth, are chiefly obliged to assert and defend it: Especially when there
are many Snares spread abroad to entangle ignorant and unstable Souls with
dangerous Errors. Our Savior has set us a pattern of our Duty, who declared,
For this end was I born, and came into the World to bear witness to the Truth.
They are false to the sacred Trust reposed in them, when, by Silence the Truth
is in danger of being oppressed. It Is their Duty and Glory to be valiant for the
Truth, when false Doctrines boldly oppose it, and poisoned Arrows are shot into
the Eyes of Men by erroneous Teachers. It Is said of John the Baptist, He was
not the Light, but as next in Dignity, he came to bear witness of the Light.
But if they withdraw their Testimony when the Truth challenges it, they will be
covered with Confusion at the last Day; according to that fearful Threatening,
Whosoever denies me before Men, him will I deny before my Father which is in
Heaven. The ignorance of Saving-Truths will not excuse the People; and Silence
will condemn their Guides who should illustrate and defend the Truth even in
the Face of Danger.

Besides they are guilty of Unfaithfulness to Christ, who by colorable
temperaments adulterate the Purity of the Truth, and by milder modifications
qualify and lessen Errors; who would join the Word of God with the Traditions
of Men, which are incompatible as Midnight and Midday. None are more
artificial than fearful Spirits: They have many Turns and Expedients to
compound necessary Controversies, and to make it seem indifferent which Opinion
is chosen. They transform their fearful Apprehensions, into Counsels of
Prudence, and disguise the baseness of their Cowardice under the Reputation of
being Discreet. The wisest of Men who understood the incomparable value of
Truth, advises, Buy the Truth, and sell it not: And we are told by St. James,
The Wisdom, that is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable: But the
Worldly-wise, with Art and Industry endeavor to secure their outward Peace
with the violation of Truth. How contrary is the Judgment of God to the vain
Opinions of Men? He is jealous of the Simplicity of his Truth, and the Chastity
of his Worship, and will at last convince such of their extreme Folly who would
reconcile Religions that can never flow into one another.

It Is therefore an indispensable Obligation of the Servants of Christ to adhere
to the eternal Truth in Scriptures, tho vilified by some as an insufficient
Rule, or impertinent and not absolutely necessary: And to preserve the pure
Doctrine and transmit it to succeeding Ages. And this divine Encouragement
should sustain them with unfainting Resolution to do their Duty, that if they
cannot save the Truth from being overborn at present, yet the Truth will save
them, and that it will pierce through all Opposition, and be victorious in the
Issue. The Church of Christ is of a supernatural Original and Order, and
contrary to the custom of Human Things, is enlarged and established by the
means used to destroy it. When the Heathen Powers with the utmost Rage and
Cruelty attempted its final Ruin it prosper'd the more: The patient Deaths of
the Martyrs, as well as conspicuous Miracles, gave credit and conveyance to the
Gospel.

And the Ministers of Christ must with Faithfulness and Courage enforce the
Commands of the Gospel upon all. Carnal Men would fain relax the strictness of
the Gospel; and endeavor to make their Principles correspondent to their
Practices: They try to bend the Rule to their disordered and licentious
Appetites, and will not regulate their Hearts and Lives according to the
Sanctity of the Rule: And those who are high in the World, very uneasily bear
the Conviction and Reproof of their Sin: But a Minister must be faithful to
Christ and their Souls, and press upon them the Commands of our Judge, to pluck
out the right Eye, and cut off the right Hand, upon the heavy Penalty of being
made entire Victims to revenging Justice for ever.

5. They must with a prudent temperament of Zeal and Meekness, insinuate and
open a Passage for sanctifying and saving Doctrine into the Hearts of Men. This
is the successful Method to convince those who are seduced with Errors, and to
reclaim the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just. The Defense of the Truth
must be managed in a calm peaceable manner; as the Sun scatters and overcomes
the darkness of the Night and Clouds without noise. It Is the Apostle's Counsel,
In Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves: Without Contumelies and
Revilings; for Injuries convince no Man. The Human Spirit is naturally proud
and stiff, and will resist such Arms: Fierceness and Scorn irritate the
Passions, and hinder impartial and serious Deliberation, that opens the Mind
for receiving the Truth. To persuade the Soul, the mild and placid manner of
conveying the Truth is as effectual as the Irradiation and Evidence of it. And
to reclaim the disobedient there is nothing more powerful than Gentleness and
the constraint of Love. The most fervent Reprehensions of Sinners must be mixed
with tenderness to their Souls. Under the Law there was a severe Prohibition of
offering Sacrifices with the common Fire: But only with that Fire that came
from Heaven, and was preserved Day and Night in the Temple: The Allusion is
easy and fit: The Reprehension of Sinners in the Pulpit must be always from
Zeal for the Honor of God and the Eternal Salvation of Souls, not from natural
fiery Passions. If a Minister denounces the Judgments of God with Compassion to
Souls, if he thunder and lightens in his Sermons, a Shower of repenting Tears
will follow in convinced Sinners.

6. A Minister of the Gospel must join a holy Life with found Doctrine,
according to our Savior's Description of him: He that shall do and teach my
Commands, shall be great in the Kingdom of Heaven. He must not only be free
from Pollutions, but excel in Virtues; nothing in his Conversation should be
worthy of Reproach, nothing but what is worthy of Imitation. He must lead a
Life answerable to the Excellence and End of his Calling. He is to preach a
Doctrine so holy divine and venerable, that it would become the unspotted
Angels to be ministering Spirits in revealing it to Men. He is therefore
strictly obliged to show forth the Power of Godliness, and the Beauty of
Holiness in all his ways. He must imitate and honor his Master, who
inseparably united saying and doing in himself: He must adorn the Gospel by
expressing the Efficacy of divine Truths in his Actions. Under the Law he that
had touched a dead Body, was forbidden to approach the Sanctuary: and what a
Violation is it of all the Rules of Decency and Reason, for one who is employed
in the holy Service of the Gospel, Miser ego semper aeger caloribus
impatientiae. Confiteor ad Dominum Deum, satis temere me, si non etiam
impudenter de patientia componere ausum, cui praestandae idoneus omnino non sim.
to be polluted with dead Works? Tertullian writing of the Excellency of
Patience, and reflecting upon himself, how opposite his fiery Nature was to
that Virtue, was deeply affected with Grief and Shame, and drew up his own
Arraignment and Process for his Impatience: How much juster Cause has an unholy
Minister to be surprised with Horror and Confusion, considering the
irreconcilable opposition between his Doctrine and his Life? How just and
stinging is the upbraiding Speech of God to such? how peremptory the Rejection?
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, and to take my Covenant into thy
Mouth, since thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my Words behind thee?
The End of the sacred Ministry requires Holiness in those who perform it: That
is to convert Men to the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel. Now the Practice of
a Minister gives Weight and Efficacy to his Doctrine, the exemplifying of it in
his Actions is the most powerful persuasive to draw Men to their Duty.
Therefore the Apostle commands Titus in all Things to show himself a Pattern of
good Works. As the Plants that are productive of Balm, and Myrrh, and Incense,
have a Fragrancy not only in the precious Liquor that distills from them, but
all their Branches, and Leaves, and Bark, are Aromatic. Thus a Minister of the
Gospel, must be Holy not only in his Doctrine, but in all manner of
Conversation. Be thou an Example of the Believers in Word, in Conversation, in
Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity, is the solemn Charge to Timothy. He
that is holy in his Profession, and unholy in his Life, both discredits the
Gospel, and hardens Men in their Sins. Though his Tongue may direct to Heaven,
if his Life leads to Hell, the Authority of his Actions will be more prevalent
than of his Instructions. The Vices of a Minister are more conspicuous and
infamous than of private Persons: As a Blemish in the Eye is more conspicuous
and disfiguring than in a concealed Part of the Body; and they have the most
corrupting destructive Influence upon others. For there is nothing more natural
than for Men to think that Ministers do not believe what they preach, when
there is a visible Contradiction between their Lives and their Words: That
their most zealous Sermons are rather Pageantry than serious Piety, and
accordingly to slight them. This is a principal Reason that the Conversion of
Sinners is so rare: It Is not from any defect in the word, for that is not like
some medicinal Drugs, that lose their Virtue by Age, it has the same Divine
Power to revive dead Souls, to transform the carnal into spiritual Persons, to
clarify the Mind that it may see things invisible, to reconcile the Will to the
Sanctity of God's Law, to calm the stormy Affections, and leave an Impression
of its Purity in the Hearts of Men: but the admirable and secret Grace of the
holy Spirit is not usually concomitant with the Ministry of those who grieve
him, and quench him in themselves; and they render the holy Doctrine
ineffectual by their discordant Conversations. It was the Character of the
wicked Pharisees from the Mouth of Christ: They say, and do not: and to them,
and all that are involved in the same Guilt, the Savior of the World threatens
the most heavy Damnation.

7. Humble, fervent, and continual Prayer to the Father of Mercies, and the
Father of Spirits, that he would bless the outward Ministry, is requisite to
make it effectual. The Conversion of Man is not wrought by Man, but by the
Energy of the holy Spirit. God instructs us what he does in the more secret
Operations of Grace, by what he does in the more visible Operations of Nature.
This is expressed by the Apostle; Paul plants, and Apollos waters, but God
gives the Increase. A Man plants a green Stick, and waters it; but the God of
Nature forms the Tree in all its Parts, the Root, the Sap, the Trunk, the
Branches, and the Fruits: The planting by the Hand of Man is necessary for the
Growth of a Tree, but what is that to the Divine Blessing? Thus according to
the ordinary Method of Divine Grace, God unites his mavelous Power with the
weak Ministry of Men for the Salvation of Souls, and according to the Apostle's
arguing, it is an impossible Event that Men should believe without hearing the
Gospel, and hear without a Preacher: But the converting and saving of Souls is
to be ascribed to God. And thus in the Spiritual Husbandry, the Occasions of
Pride and Slothfulness are equally removed. As the same Apostle says, He that
plants is nothing, and he that waters, is nothing, but God that gives the
Increase. This Consideration should be an Incentive in our Breasts, to petition
the God of all Grace that he will please to give Life and Efficacy to his Word.
In Jacob's Vision of the mysterious Ladder that reached from Heaven to Earth,
the Angels were ascending and descending: An Emblem of a Minister's Duty, they
must first ascend in Prayer and Contemplation, and then descend in preaching to
the People. It Is observable that sometimes Men of excellent Accomplishments are
blasted in their Ministry; and others of meaner Abilities, but of more holy
Affections, are very instrumental to save Souls: The Reason is plain; those who
are most frequent and fervent in Prayer, obtain the richest Abundance of the
Spirit, and are usually most blessed with Success. When the Apostles were filled
with the Holy Ghost, descending in the significant Emblem of fiery Tongues;
what an admirable Influence had their Preaching upon the obdurate Jews? The
first Sermon presently convinced and converted three thousand, that were
Murderers of our Savior, with the Stains of his Blood fresh upon them. Tongues
of Flesh are without vigor, make no lasting Impression upon the Hearers:
Tongues of Fire have a divine Force and Operation, to dispel the Ignorance and
Errors of Men's Minds, to quicken the dull Earth of their Affections, to refine
and purify their Conversations.

Lastly, To sum up all in one general Consideration; He serves Christ, that
employs all his Abilities, and uses all Opportunities in the Circle of his
Calling, as was before spoken of, for the Honor of our Savior. This is
represented in the Parable of the Talents, which the Master committed to his
Servants; different in their Number, but to be faithfully improved for the
Master's Interest. Under the Talents are comprised all that we have and are;
whether in the Order of Nature, and with respect to our civil State in the
World, all our intellectual and sensitive Faculties, all our innate and
acquired Endowments, our Time, our Health, our Dignities and Power, our
Estates; or Spiritual Blessings, all the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, the
Light of the Gospel, all the Advantages we have of doing or receiving Good for
our more excellent and immortal part, the Salvation of our Souls. Every one
according to the Character wherewith he is invested in this World, and
according to his Capacity of doing Good, must be diligent in the service of
Christ. In what Relations soever Men are, as Fathers, Masters, or Magistrates
in a superior Rank, or as Friends and Associates in an equal Line, and as they
stand related to all Men, they are either by Authority and Command, or by
Counsel and compassionate Care and Encouragements to promote with Diligence,
their Temporal and Eternal Welfare. The Apostle's Advice with respect to Acts
of Beneficence for relieving the Poor, Let us do good unto all as we have
opportunity, is by just Analogy binding to all other Expressions of Love, to
direct, to persuade Men to their Duty, to comfort them in their Sorrows, to
assist them in all their Wants and Exigencies. Briefly, the Wisdom and Goodness
of Christ's Servants consists in their faithful improving all their Talents for
his Glory, as our Savior declares, Who is that wise and faithful Servant; and,
Well done good and faithful Servant.

2. We are to show upon what accounts our Service is due to Christ. If we
seriously consider things, it will be evident that by all the Titles of Justice
and Gratitude, by all Divine and Rational Rights we are obliged to serve him
entirely and for ever.

In the present State there are four ways whereby Men become Servants: Some are
born Servants; some are by ransom and purchase; some by victorious rescue and
deliverance; others are Servants by Covenant and Agreement. Now all these
Titles concur in obliging us to serve Christ.

1. We are his Servants by Nature, he has an original and unalianeble Right in
us as our Creator. God to satisfy the Inquiry of Moses defines himself, I am:
All the intimate and eternal Attributes of the Deity are employed in that short
Title: He is the only necessary Being by his Nature, and consequently has all
Perfections in himself, and is the Fountain of all Being. His Hands made us and
fashioned us, he breathed into us a living Soul. All our Faculties and their
Efficacy are from him. He produces this evidence of his Right in us, Remember O
Jacob thou art my Servant, I have formed thee: Esa. 44.12.
The Psalmist declares, Know ye that the Lord he is God; it is he that made us,
and not we our Selves; we are his People and Sheep of his Pasture: We owe to
him an Obedience as ready and unconstrained as the meekest Creatures pay to
those that feed and conduct them. His Perfections qualify him to be our
absolute Master, for his Will is always directed by infinite Wisdom, it is the
Rule of Goodness, and his Benefits in making and preserving us, acquire to him
a supreme Right in us. Now if there be a Spark of Reason in our Minds, it is
impossible to have the least Shadow of doubt, that a derivative Being has a
dependent Working, and is to employ his active Powers according to the Will of
his Maker, as the Rule, and his Glory as the ultimate End of all.

The Connection is indissolvable, for of him, and through him, and to him are
all things. The Psalmist ardently calls the whole World; Bless the Lord all ye
his Works, Psalm. 103.
in all Places of his Dominion. The Angels who by Nobility of Nature are
superior to all his other Works, yet are not sui juris, at their own
disposals, but his Ministers that do his Pleasure: They employ their excellent
Strength in humble Obedience to his Commands: they fly with incredible
Swiftness to perform his Orders. And in the visible World, Dan. 9.
the Heavens in their Motion, the Earth in its Seasons, with an invariable
Tenor observe the Law impressed upon them in their Creation: As the Psalmist
speaks, they continue this day according to thy Ordinance, Psalm. 118.181.
for all are thy Servants. And if the Creatures without Reason and Sense are
perfectly subject to his Will, much more should Man who understands his
Obligations to the Creator. Now the Son of God made us, and maintains our
Beings by his powerful Providence; from whence it follows, we are under an
eternal Obligation to serve and glorify him to the utmost of our Capacities.
His unexcited and most free Goodness decreed our Beings from everlasting, and
in time brought us into the World, whereas he might have created innumerable
other Persons, for Omnipotence is without Bounds, and left us in the pure
Possibility of Being, without the giving actual Being to us. The natural Law
that shines in the Minds of Men, in the Knowledge of what is just and good, and
in the Conscience of what is evil, binds them with the deepest Humility to
acknowledge the Greatness and Goodness of our Creator, and in the sense of this
first and fundamental Benefit to consecrate our selves for ever to his Service.

2. We are his Servants not only upon the general Title of Creation, but in a
more peculiar manner by Redemption. Man by his Disobedience was fallen into a
woeful Bondage, his Guilt subjected him to the threatening, that contained two
Deaths in one Sentence, the temporal and present of the Body, and the eternal
of the Soul. The righteous Judge of the the World, whose Law was broken,
required an honorable Reparation of it: the most costly Sacrifices of Beasts,
a Sea of Blood could never atone his Displeasure: Nay, the Obedience and
Sufferings of Men and Angels were of no value to satisfy his injured Justice:
Thus Mankind was desperately lost, our Ruins (if I may so speak) were sowed
with Salt, we were concluded under his most righteous and fearful Wrath: If the
Love and Wisdom of God had not accorded to find out that astonishing expedient
of uniting the eternal Son of God with the human Nature in one Person, that as
Man he might voluntarily submit to bloody Sufferings, and as God give an
infinite Merit and Value to them, and thereby purchase our Redemption. This is
accomplished by Jesus Christ; The Lord laid on him the Iniquity of us all; he
gave his Life a ransom for us: From hence a new Right springs of his Dominion
over us; as the Apostle invincibly argues, Ye are not your own, for ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your Bodies, and in your Spirit,
which are God's. The naked representing of this to the serious Mind must awaken
a dear Sense of our Obligations to our Savior: but if we solemnly and
deliberately contemplate this amazing Benefit, out of what Rock is the Heart
framed, that is not softened and melted in Love and Obedience to our Blessed
Redeemer. To heighten the Sense of our Obligations, Consider,

1. A more excellent Goodness is visible in the redeeming Man than in creating
the Angels, upon the account of the distance of the Terms and the Difficulty of
the way to effect it. In the Creation of Angels, Goodness was rich indeed,
there being no Possibility of desert in pure nothing, but it was simply free;
whereas in our Salvation it is merciful beyond all Imagination, for by our
Rebellion we were justly fallen under the Wrath of God: Their Creation was
without the least strain of his Power; He spoke, and it was done: But there was
a legal Bar against our Restitution: To remove it, his Son endured the Curse of
the Law for us, and bore our Sins in his own Body on the Tree. Divine Love in
our Redemption not only exceeds what was showed in the Creation of Angels, but
is admirably illustrated by a higher comparison: For the Father seemed to love
us above his only begotten Son, whom he spared not, but delivered him up for us
all; and the Son loved us above his Life, which he laid down for us.

2. By the way of our Redemption he has infinitely honored our Nature that was
so vilified by the Fall. Man, whose Soul was an immortal Spirit, stamped with
the lively Image of God, capable of everlasting Communion with him in Glory,
was sold for naught. Be astonished O ye Heavens at this, and be very desolate:
That Man, who had the two great Lights of Natural Reason and Divine Faith,
should prefer the pleasing an irregular Appetite before the Favor of God, and
for a vain Fancy lose the most substantial Happiness. Thus Man being in Honor,
and understood not, became like the Beasts that perish, nay viler than the
Earth. And all the Children of Adam sin according to the Similitude of his
first Transgression. O the cheap Damnation of Sinners! For transient Pleasures,
and mean Profits they venture upon eternal Death. This guilty and woeful Folly
not only defiles, but debases Men to Hell. Now the Lord of Life and Glory by
suffering an ignominious Death for us, has with the clearest evidence
discovered the true Worth of Souls: That they are precious beyond comparison,
since the whole World is not a valuable Compensation for them: We are not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, Idoneus sui operis
aestimator, magno pretio nos redemit. Arnob.
but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without spot and blemish:
That sacred Treasure of Heaven that was laid down for us, exceedingly increases
our Obligations to the Blessed Redeemer.

3. By giving himself for us, he has not only freed us from the Wrath of God,
but restored us to his dearest Favor: We are translated from the fearful State
of being God's Enemies into the amiable joyful State of his Children: And
consequently our Redeemer has purchased for us not only Salvation from Hell,
but eternal Glory, a Life more divine and durable than the natural Life in
Paradise. How can we seriously think of this transcendent Benefit without a
rapture of Affection? He infinitely deserves our Love and Service who has
bought us with so dear a price, and purchased for us a glorious and
incorruptible Inheritance.

3. We are his Servants by his Deliverance of us from our Spiritual Enemies,
Satan, Sin, and Death. Since the Devil obtained a woeful Victory over us in the
Fall of Adam, great was the Triumph of Hell: And though he be an Usurper of
God's Right, which could never be extinguished, yet by our Overthrow he has a
kind of a Title to us, and keeps us as the Spoils of his Victory: And having
revolted from God, we are justly though miserably under the Powers of Darkness.
We are chained in the lowest and the vilest Bondage: The Soul and Body are
under his tyrannous Dominion, and suffer the deepest Wounds of Infamy and
Cruelty. He fetters our Minds with dangerous Delusions, our Wills with diverse
Lusts and Passions, and leads Men Captives in the ways of Sin, till they fall
into Hell the Center of Misery. Now as in redeeming a Captive, there must be
the paying the Ransom, and the breaking his Chains, that he may be restored to
Liberty: So, besides the Price that was paid to God the Supreme Judge, for our
Discharge, our Savior has broken our Chains; he by the sanctifying Spirit
dispels the Darkness of our Minds, softens the Hardness of our Hearts, subdues
the Rebellion of our Wills, rectifies the Disorder of our Affections, that we
may be freed from the Domion of Sin, as well as from the Obligation and Terrors
of the Law. He has broken the Powers of Darkness that conspired to keep us fast
in the Intanglements of our Iniquities, he has freed us from the spiritual
Pharaoh, Luke 11.21.
and his cruel Taskmasters, the imperious violent Lusts that are seated in the
Heart, and restores us to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; By dying he
destroyed him that had the Power of Death, and triumphed over Principalities
and Powers on the Cross. We have Freedom of Pardon and of Grace, and the
natural and necessary Consequence is, that we cheerfully serve him that set us
free. This is expressed by Zacharias in his divine Thansgiving, that being
delivered from the Hands of our Enemies, we might serve him withour Fear in
Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of our Lives. In what a holy Ecstasy
does the Psalmist break forth, O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy
Servant, and the Son of thy Handmaid, thou have broken my Bonds: Yet this was
but the rescuing of him from some temporal imminent Danger: How much dearer and
stronger Engagements bind us to serve our Redeemer, who has freed us from the
Power as well as Punishment of Sin? Love should correspond with Love: As Love
descends in Favors and Benefits, it should ascend in Thankfulness and Duty.
St. Paul had such a lively apprehension of our Savior's Love, that it had an
absolute Empire in his Heart and Life; he expresses it in the most significant
manner: The Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one
dyed for all, then were all dead; and that he dyed for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him which dyed for
them and rose again. The Word constrains, signifies properly to be entirely
under the Power of another: As the Prophets inspired by the Spirit of God, Acts
18.5.
only spoke and acted according to his extraordinary Motions in them.

Thus the Love of Christ had such an absolute Empire in his Heart, that his
whole Life was spent as a vowed Oblation to his Service and Glory. And whoever
does not live a spiritual Life, as the Servant of Christ, never yet felt the
Misery of this Bondage of Sin, nor the sweetness of that Liberty which the Son
of God has purchased for his People.

Lastly; We are the Servants of Christ by solemn Covenant, and the most sacred
Engagement. In the Covenant of Grace God and Man are the Parties: And such was
his condescending Love, that he came down from Heaven and assumed our Nature,
on purpose to seal his part in his own Blood, the Promise of his pardoning
Mercy, of his sanctifying Spirit, and his rewarding Goodness, to all that with
unfeigned Consent and firm Resolution will seal the Counterpart of their Duty
and Obedience to him. We are entered into his Family and the Relation of his
Servants in Baptism; and vowed universal Obedience to our new Master, in
defiance of all Temptations whether inviting or terrifying in the World: For
this reason Baptism is called the Answer of a good Conscience 1 Pet. 3.12.
toward God. We wear his Colors, are distinguished from the Heathens by the
Title of Christians: We ratify in a most solemn manner our Covenant by the Seal
of the Lord's Supper, wherein we sacramentally eat and drink the Body and Blood
of our Savior. Now from hence arises a new Obligation to serve Christ: He had
a Sovereign Right in us antecedently to our dedicating our selves to his
Service, but from our voluntary Consent accrues another Title, whereby he
claims our perpetual Service. The Law of God binds us without our Consent, but
our Consent increases the Obligation; and if we are careless of our Duty, and
desert his Service, we break double Bonds, and are guilty not only of
Disobedience to the Law, but of perfidious Violation of our Covenant. It Is
observable in the Parable of the Talents, they were committed to Servants, from
whence a double Obligation springs, to employ them with entire Fidelity for the
Master's Profit. A Merchant sends Goods to his Correspondent, who is bound to
make faithful returns upon the account of commutative Justice that reaches all:
but a Servant is under a special Obligation, and if he wastes or neglects the
improving his Master's Goods, he does not only break this Trust reposed in him,
but violates the Duty of a Servant, that obliges him to manage them according
to his Master's Will, and for his Profit. The Account will be particular and
exact for all our Talents at the last: None so high that shall be excused, none
so mean that shall escape that strict Inquiry: For he that knows all things,
shall be our Judge. The Servant that had but one Talent was called to account
for it, and condemned for neglecting to improve it: He pretended that he hid it
out of caution lest it should be lost, knowing his Master's Severity; but his
vain excuse was retorted upon him, to aggravate his Sin and Sentence: Cast the
unprofitable Servant into outer Darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing
of Teeth: A Judgment as righteous as terrible: For the Guilt of his Rebellion,
in not using his Talent according to his Master's Order; and Unthankfulness, in
despising his Gifts, and an unrighteous depriving of others of that Benefit,
that was by the Master's Will due to them.

3. We are to consider the final Reward of Christ's Servants under two Heads.

1. The Order of the Reward. 2. The Excellency of it.
1. The Order, in giving it after the Service of Christ faithfully and
constantly performed. It Is the revealed Will of God, that all Men should honor
the Son as they honor the Father: The Son is the Heir of his Love and Glory,
and in serving him the Father is honored and obeyed. And as our Savior reigns
eternally in Heaven, after the finishing his Work enjoined him by the Father,
so according to his Example, we receive the Crown of Life after the course of
our Obedience. This is the Tenor of the Promise: To him that overcomes will I
grant to sit with me in my Throne, Rev. 3.21.
even as I also overcame and am sat down with my Father in his Throne.

The Order in dispensing the blessed Reward, does not in the least eclipse the
Honor of God's Grace, or afford the least shadow of presuming upon any Merit
in our best Services. The Wages of Sin is Death, it is the just Desert of it;
but the Gift of God is eternal Life in Jesus Christ our Lord. The eternal
Election of Persons to Life, the preparing of them by sanctifying Grace for
Glory, and the actual possession of it, is from the most free Favor of God.
Election is the first Fountain of Water springing up to eternal Life: For what
could induce God when all Mankind was equally involved in Guilt and Misery, to
choose some to be Vessels of Grace and of Glory, but his sovereign Pleasure and
pure Grace? The Elect were in the Eye and Heart of God from Eternity, appointed
to supernatural Happiness, but that free and insuperable Decree is accomplished
according to the Law of Faith, the unchangeable Order of the Gospel; and that
is, that Heaven shall be the Reward of the faithful Servants of Christ; not for
the true Desert of their Service, but the most gracious and rich Bounty of God.
The Angels of Glory cannot from a Plea of Justice claim any Reward from God:
For the Rights of Justice suppose some Equality between those who respectively
are obliged by them, tho not in all regards, yet so far as a certain common
Rule makes them equal: But there is such an immense distance between the Divine
Majesty and the highest Creatures, that there is no Foundation for such a Plea
between them.

Besides, the Duty of Obedience is absolute: For all our natural Powers and
supernatural Strength are his Gifts, and were there no Reward assured to us,
are to be faithfully employed in his Service. Now the Payment of a Debt cannot
deserve a Reward. Our best Services are blemished with many Imperfections, and
without the Mercy of the Gospel that mollifies the strictness of the Law, would
make us liable to Punishments; God spares us, as a Father spares his Son that
serves him: Now Pardon and Merit are utterly inconsistent. And what Proportion
can there be between our mean and short Services, and the eternal weight of
Glory? Even Martyrdom, which is the most signal Act of Love and Obedience to
our Redeemer, the highest Advancing of his Glory, the most noble Testimony of
his Truth; when our Example works upon others, and engages them to Christ, and
entitles us to a kind of Interest in all they do and suffer for his Name, yet
even the laying down our Lives is by infinite degrees below the Glory of
Heaven, that is the promised Reward to it. This St. Paul testifies from his
deliberate Judgment, I reckon that the Sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in us. From hence
in Scripture the Reward is often expres'd by Mercy: The Apostle prays for
Onesiphorus, whose valiant Love in visiting and supplying him in the time of
his Imprisonment, was set off illustriously by the Discouragements and
Inconstancy of others who neglected him; The Lord grant to him that he may find
Mercy of the Lord in that day. And we are exhorted to keep our selves in the
Love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal Life.
But although there is no Merit in our Service of the Reward, yet God has wisely
established an Order and Consequence between them, as the most conducing for
his Glory and our Good. For not only the superabundant Mercy, but the
Righteousness and Truth of God appear with an eminency of Glory in this way of
making us happy. The Promise of the Reward was from excellent Goodness, but the
performing it to his faithful Servants is from his Justice and Fidelity. He was
unlimitedly free, but having pleased with such condescending Favor to make a
Covenant with us, up-our sincere Compliance with the Terms of it, he is obliged
for the Honor of his Truth and Righteousness to accomplish it: though in
strictness he can owe nothing to us, yet he is a Debtor to his Promise. From
hence the Apostle says, I have fought the good Fight, I have finished my
Course; from henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
God the righteous Judge shall give unto me. The Honor of his Truth is sacred
and inviolable: Thus he is proclaimed in a style expressing how glorious his
Truth is, and how dear to him, The Lord thy God, he is God; Deuteronomy. 7.8.
and the only Attribute that is annexed is, the Faithful God, keeping Covenant
and Mercy. At the last day he will be glorified not only as the free and
magnificent Donor of all the Treasures of Heaven, but as the God of Truth, who
has fulfilled all the exceeding great and precious Promises made to his
Servants.

And the Connection between our Duty and the Reward, has a powerful influence to
excite our sincere and earnest Endeavors to please God: It Is the strongest
Engagement to Universal Sanctity and Obedience. For the Gospel is an
everlasting Covenant, and Condition of it is unalterable: Heaven is not
promised as an absolute irrespective Gift, but as a Reward consequent of
Services. There can be no lively regular hope of future Happiness, but
according to the Revelation of God's Will, who gives it: The Accomplishment of
his Promise has a dependence upon our Duty. The Crown of Life is promised to
those that love God; and Love is the fulfilling of the Law: If any one aspires
to that Dignity, he must from Love, which is the internal Character and
Disposition of a Saint, obey and serve God. To presume of obtaining our last
and blessed End, without a diligent use of the means prescribed in the Gospel,
is such idle preposterous Folly that Men would be ashamed of with respect to
the gaining of temporal things. Can he that sows no Seed, expect a Harvest? or
that plants no Vineyard, expect a Vintage? Can a Merchant hope for rich Returns
from a foreign Country, without trading thither? And it is as vain to hope for
the eternal Reward, without following Holiness. The Presumption is heightened
and more fatal, when any shall think, if they are predestined to Glory, they
shall obtain it without their best Diligence in making their Calling and
Election sure. This is to make a diametrical Opposition between the Decrees of
God, and the Record of his Will in the Gospel. Election is a Chain that reaches
from Heaven to Earth, to draw Men from Earth to Heaven: It has intermediate
Links that must not be left out. Between Election and Glorification the Faith
and Obedience of the Gospel intervenes: The Apostle informs us, that we are
chosen to Salvation, through the Sanctification of the Spirit and the Belief of
the Truth. The Decrees of God are a secret we cannot dive into. We can discover
what is secret only by what is revealed; our Election by our effectual Calling,
which is the infallible and sensible Effect of it. To lie down securely in the
secret Decree, neglecting to work out our own Salvation, is such pernicious
Sophistry, as can only be inspired from the Father of Lies. If ever such a
Thought is suggested, That if I am elected, I shall be happy though careless of
my Duty, chain it up, there is Folly and Frenzy in it. Heaven is bestowed as a
Gift of his infinite Grace and Power, but according to the wise and immutable
Order set down in the Gospel; which is so far from lessening and obscuring the
Glory of his Mercy, that it makes it more conspicuous: For Holiness, to which
we are so strictly obliged as preparatory for Heaven, is our most Divine
Perfection, and qualifies us for the Enjoyment of God.

2. The Excellence of the Reward is to be considered: He that serves me, him
will my Father honor. Such is the Wisdom and Equity of God in his moral
Government, that he has by a graceful Order annexed Honor as the Reward to
Virtue. The general Rule is, Those that honor me, I will honor; and those
that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. There is such a Majestic Beauty in
Holiness as commands the Esteem and Affections of Men, unless they are
prodigiously degenerate and corrupted by their Lusts. The Heathens were
convinced that Honor is the extrinsick Tribute always due to Virtue; and some
were so strict and had such Divine Thoughts as to maintain that Virtue is the
only true Nobility. It Is foretold in Scripture, The righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance: They leave an honorable Evidence of their Graces and
Virtues in their Works, and are of precious memory, when the Name of the Wicked
shall rot. But the Reward our Savior promises, is the Honor that comes from
God only: And as his Majesty infinitely transcends all Earthly Principalities;
so in proportion, the Honor that he confers upon his Servants is above all the
Titles of Honor, all the swelling Praises of Men. This Reward is given in the
next World. Here the Servants of Christ are sometimes darkened with many
Afflictions, and buried in sad Obscurity before they are dead; They are the
Objects of Scorn and Contempt: St. Paul who was an incarnate Seraphim, whose
Zeal in the Service of his Divine Master exceeded all the Apostles, yet was, as
he declares, vilified as the offscouring of the World. Now such is the
excellent Goodness of God, that he will certainly in the next Life reward with
the highest Honor all who have advanced his Honor.

The Honor and Glory of the future state is concealed at present, it is wrapped
up in a Cloud; only some glimmerings of it glance upon our Eyes: Light is sowed
for the Righteous, the plenary Revelation is hereafter. It Is true the Apostle
tells us, that Life and Immortality are brought to Light through the Gospel:
But that is only to be understood of a Comparative Revelation, to what was
under the Law: It Is brought to the Light of Faith, which is like to Break of
Day, when the Shadows of the Earth and the Light of Heaven are mixed. There is a
Veil between us and the Glory of Heaven, partly to try our Faith, whether we
will believe the Promise of God without sensible Discoveries of it; and to try
the sincerity of our Love, whether we love God for Himself, without the
distinct unfolding of that excellent Glory: and to comply with the weakness
whilst we are in such tempered Tabernacles of Flesh. If the Beams of his Glory
were displayed before our Eyes, we should be struck with blindness, as Saul was
at the brightness of Christ's appearing to him: The Flood of Light would
swallow us up in Ecstasy and Amazement. Our faint Faculties cannot sustain his
Glorious Presence. As God told Moses, No Man can see my Face and live. St. John
tells Believers, Now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we
shall be: Now our Names are written in the Book of Life, in the Rolls of
Eternity; now we are Adopted into the Line of Heaven; now we are clothed with
the Righteousness of Christ, the Royal Purple Robe dyed in his Blood; we have
the Privileges of the justified State; we have a Right to the Eternal Kingdom
by our Savior's Purchase, and the firm Covenant of Grace; we have the Holy
Spirit of Promise, who is the earnest of our Inheritance, and the Seal of God's
Love to us: But the full partaking of that Glory is reserved till we leave this
visible World.

I will briefly glance at the several Degrees of the Reward that shall be
conferred upon all whom the King of Glory delights to honor in the next World.

1. The Scripture reveals, that the Souls of just Men first come to the
perfection of Glory. If Adam had continued in his holy State after a short
Immortality upon Earth, he had been translated Alive, and entire in Soul and
Body, to Heaven: The everlasting Doors had been opened wide for his Reception:
But since our Disobedience, tho our Guilt be pardoned, the Gate is so strait
that the gross Spoils of our Flesh must be left behind us. Now immediately upon
the dissolution of the Saints, God sends a Guard of Angels, his most noble
Creatures, to convoy their Souls into the Courts of his Honor, into the
Chamber of his glorious Presence. Divine Dignity! This is the privilege of his
chosen Friends and Favorites, of the most illustrious and blessed Creatures.
In Heaven the Divine Majesty is seen in its Glory: And if one Ray of it,
reflecting upon Suffering Stephen, adorned him with Angelical Glory, how much
more will the Face of God most radiant and resplendent transform the Soul into
an admirable Similitude of his Perfections? When we shall see him as he is, we
shall be like him, by his everliving Spirit, the principle of the Divine Life
and Beauty in the Soul, as the Soul is of the natural Life and Beauty in the
Body. There will remain no shadow of Error in the Mind, no mixture of Evil in
the Will, no Pollution in the Affections, but the full Likeness of God in
Holiness and Joy. This is the highest Honor an immortal Spirit is capable of.
The State of Innocence wherein Man was created is called a State of Honor: The
Angels are dignified with the Title of Saints: And God is glorious in Holiness:
It follows therefore, when the Spirits of just Men are made perfect they
partake of the Heavenly and Divine Honor. If the Joy that springs from
believing whilst we are in this Vale of Tears be unspeakable and full of Glory,
how glorious is the Joy that springs from the clearest Sight and the most
intimate Fruition of the blessed God, the Joy that is without defect or end? as
the Psalmist expresses, In thy Presence is fullness of Joy, at thy right Hand
are Pleasures for evermore.

2. At the last day their Bodies shall be raised and refined to a Spiritual
Excellency, and transformed into the Likeness of Christ's glorious Body. The
Apostle declares, That the Consummation of the Saints Glory shall be at
Christ's Appearance. Col. 3.
Then their Souls shall be reinvested with shining Robes of Immortality: They
shall be placed at the right Hand of the everlasting King, which implies the
highest Honor; as God's being at our right Hand, implies Protection and
Defense: They shall then receive a most glorious Testimony of his Acceptance,
Well done, good and faithful Servants, enter into your Master's Joy: After they
are approved, they shall sit upon Thrones, and judge the the World, even the
Prince of Darkness with all his Apostate Trains; they shall give their solemn
Suffrages to the Judgment pronounced by our Savior, saying, Hallelujah,
Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God; for true and
righteous are his Judgments. And after the last Act of his Regal Office, our
Savior will lead them into the Kingdom of his Glory to reign with him for ever
and ever. Who is able to unfold this excellent Glory? all Humane Words are
unworthy and too narrow to express it; only the lively and ravishing Experience
of that Glory can fully reveal it to us. The meanest Saint in that Kingdom
shines in Glory that infinitely exceeds all the most solemn and magnificent
Representations of Earthly Majesty, all the Trophies and Triumphs of the most
famous Conquerors. To raise our Thoughts by a distinct Comparison of them,
consider,

The Glory of Saints is substantial and solid, it is inherent in them. The
Apostle says, It Is a Glory that shall be revealed in us: A plenary Infusion of
all glorious Endowments both in Soul and Body shall conform us to the Son of
God. The Glory of this World is but an aerie Opinion, a verbal Sound without
Substance, empty Titles, external Appearance, and confers no real Dignity to
the Person that receives it. There is no Greatness in worldly Honor: It Is
Fancy heightens some by comparison with those that are below them. But Heaven
is the Kingdom of true Glory, and every Saint there is truly glorious. The
Psalmist declares God's Judgment of all the Honor and Prosperity of the World:
As a Dream when one awakes, so O Lord, when thou awakest thou will destroy
their Image. They are painted Shadows, splendid Toys. What difference there is
between the clear and sound Judgment of a Person thoroughly awake, and the vain
fugitive Fancies of one that dreams, there is, and much more between the
swelling Images of Worldly Honor, and the real Heavenly Honor of the Saints.

The Heavenly Glory brings entire Satisfaction. As for me, says David, I will
behold thy Face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
Likeness. When the Morning of Glory arises, and the Soul awakes from the heavy
Eyelids of Flesh, and sees the King of Spirits in his Beauty, and the
Impression of the Divine Excellencies conspicuous in it self, what a joyful
Satisfaction, as sweet as Life, is diffused through all its Powers? What a
Heavenly Sabbath composes all its vast and restless Desires? The Glorified
Saint sings with the Psalmist, Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has
dealt bountifully with thee. But how unsatisfactory is all secular Greatness
and Honor? Of this we have the fullest Testimony from some who ascended to the
top of Worldly Glory: Solomon whose calm and flourishing State was scarce ever
paralleled, yet declares that all was Vanity: And the Roman Triumphs, wherein
the World was represented in its highest Glory, was but an empty Show:
Vespasian the Emperor in his triumphant way often reflected upon his Folly in
being induced to suffer such a tedious Vanity, It Is true the dreaming Minds of
Men are deceived with vain complacence in it for a while, and this makes them
unwilling to be convinced of their foolish prizing it; Nam ut men's per diem
veris visionibus avocatur ne dormiat, ita falsis nocte ne excitetur. Lactant.
de Opific. Dei. c. 18.
yet they cannot find any solid true Satisfaction: They are charmed with a
superficial Pleasure, that cannot reach to the Center of the Soul.

To sum up all, The Honor of the Servants of Christ is Eternal: They will
shine like the Stars, that never faint in their Watches and Influences, with a
durable Glory. But the Glory of this World, like a blaze in Straw, presently
vanishes: Not one Ray of secular Glory shall enlighten the highest Monarchs, in
the shady Valley of Death, nor in the Regions of Darkness beyond it.

The proper and main use of what has been spoken, is,

1. To direct our Ambitious Desires and Endeavors to seek Heavenly Honor.
Nature has instilled the Desire of Praise and Glory: And this is like some
Plants that in their native Soil have a poisonous Quality, but transplanted
into another Soil and Climate, are not only innocent, but healthful. Pride
ruins both Worlds: The Angels were expelled from Heaven, and Adam from
Paradise for their Pride. And ever since it is a seminal Sin productive of
innumerable Evils and Mischiefs: Pride of Life is one of the great Corrupters
in the World: It Is the cause of Envy and Emulation: Of Envy that would degrade
those that are above; of Emulation that urges those who are below by any guilty
means to ascend higher: It Is one of the great Destroyers of Men here and
hereafter. The Affectation of the Praise of Men makes so many ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, of owning its Truths, or subjecting themselves to its pure
Rules. This Account is given of the Infidelity of some in our Savior's time,
they sought the Honor of Men, and not the Honor that comes from God only. But
let the Desire of Glory be consecrated, let our Aspirings be transported to a
new and heavenly Object, to the Incorruptible Crown, and it is a Saintly
Ambition becoming the Breast of a Christian. The changing of the Object will be
an excellent means to rectify our inordinate Desire of Honor, of what is
pompous and specious in this World. There is some Resemblance in curing the
Diseases of the Mind, and those of the Body. A Disease is not only cured by
what is manifestly contrary, but sometimes by what seems like to it, yet has a
secret Contrariety. The feverish Heat is not only spent by cooling Julips, but
by Cordials that fortify the natural Heat that consumes those Humors that are
the inflamable Matter which foments the Fever. Thus the sensual Desire of
worldly Honor is extinguished by a pure Ethereal Affection, the Desire of
that Honor that comes from the God of Glory, who is the absolute and eternal
Fountain of Honor.

2. Let us be effectually excited our selves to choose Christ for our Master,
and devote our selves to his Service for ever. Tho his Dominion is Supreme, and
his Right in us unalienable, yet he will be glorified by our free Obedience.
Our Resolution and Consent to serve him, that it may be acceptable, must be
deliberate, entire, and everlasting.

1. Deliberate from the Conviction and Sense of our Duty and Interest: For the
Ignorance and Deception of the Mind, the sudden Surprisal of the Will is
contrary to that clear Consent that is requisite to establish a Covenant.

There is a Competition between the Son of God, and the God of this World, who
shall reign over us: One we must serve: it is therefore our highest Wisdom to
choose a gracious Master, and most just to serve him who by full Right may
claim due Service. If with free Judgment we ponder things, if our carnal Senses
and Passions have not the decisive Vote, we shall readily yield our selves to
Christ, who by so many dear Titles has a Right in us: For to this end Christ
dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the
living. He is the true Vine that left his Sweetness, the good Olive that left
his Fatness to reign over us; and shall we choose the Bramble to domineer? He
requires our Service not for his Profit, but that his Love and Bounty may take
a rise to reward us: But Satan will torment them most who are most obsequious
to him: And what Charm, what Impression upon the human mind can induce us to
prefer a Murderer before our Savior?

2. Our Consent must be entire, without exception against any of his Laws, or
his Providential Will, and any Reservation of our own Lusts and Appetites. He
has told us, No Man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one, and
love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. The
Commands of Christ and Satan are absolutely inconsistent: Obedience to the one
is direct Rebellion against the other. We may not capitulate with him, and
think by some good Works to compound for our Exorbitancies, and that strictness
in some Duties will excuse our Indulgence of some Sins: He will not accept of
bankrupt Obedience, but strictly requires the payment of sincere Obedience to
all his Commands.

The Apostle expresses our universal Duty in active and passive Obedience to
Christ; None of us lives to himself, no Man dies to himself; for whether we
live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord, whether
therefore we live or dye, we are the Lords: That is, our Lives must be employed
in his Service, and our Deaths be at his Order and Disposal. Is the external
acknowledging of him, and a specious Homage worthy his most precious
Sufferings? Can his Death excuse our Disobedience? Can his Sufferings that
purchased his Dominion to Rule us, procure a License for us to rebel against
his Commands? Such a Thought is Blasphemy.

And our Consent must be entire; that is, we must serve him with all the
freedom and force of our internal Faculties, with all the diligence of our
outward Members, with all possible industry to advance his Glory. It Is not the
empty Title of Lord, nor the performing some slight Observances that will
please Christ. The Commands of the Gospel frequently urge us to be fervent in
our Heavenly Calling, First seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness
thereof: Strive to enter in at the strait Gate: Take the Kingdom of Heaven by
Violence: Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling: Abound in the
Work of the Lord: Be rich in good Works: Add to Faith Virtue, to Virtue
Knowledge, and every Grace in degrees of Eminence: Give all Diligence to make
your Calling and Election sure: We must walk circumspectly and exactly becoming
the Dignity and Purity of our high and holy Calling. We have many Duties to
perform, many Sins to subdue and mortify, many Graces to perfect, and the most
intent application of Mind, the most zealous industry is requisite for such
great Ends. By Diligence and Culture our Souls will be as fruitful Gardens
abounding in the Fruits of Righteousness; but if we are remiss and careless,
they will be barren as the Sands of Africa. We should with as much Zeal and
Vigor serve Christ as ever we served our Lusts, those imperious Exactors of
our Time, and Strength, and Affections. It Is the Proportion St. Paul enforces,
As you have yielded your Members Servants and Weapons to Uncleanness, so yield
your Members Weapons and Servants of Righteousness.

But how many that have made a Trade of Sin, are as careless in Religion as if
it were a slight Recreation? How many please themselves with a Mediocrity in
Religion, and pretend if they be but saved, they are content: They do not
aspire to excellent degrees of Glory, nor to higher degrees in the favor of
God, and are lukewarm and remiss in his Service, presuming what they do will
be sufficient to secure their Souls: But was ever any Person so deserted of
Reason, that in Worldly Trade when he might gain a hundred Pounds he is
contented with ten? Besides this Disposition and Language is of one that
principally desires Heaven, to escape Hell: and all that he does Religiously is
the effect of servile Fear, which is no Saving Grace: For were it not for the
terrible Punishment, such a Person would securely commit the Sin. Briefly, as
the Lord Christ has saved us to the uttermost, we should serve him to the
uttermost: We should with such Alacrity and Diligence, with such willing Hearts
and Earnestness serve him on Earth as he is served in Heaven: If we had the
Powers of the Angels, yet our Service would be short of our Obligations.

3. Our Service of Christ must be upon firm Principles and permanent Reasons to
our Lives end. Sometimes there are Desires and Resolutions kindled in the
Breast, and the Carnal Passions blow so violently as to quench them. Like some
Cursed Women, that by violent Potions destroy the living Conception in their
Bowels. Quae in ipsis visceribus, medicaments epotis Originem futuri hominis
extinguunt and paricidium faciant antequam pariant. Minus. Fell.
Others in the Sunshine of Prosperity will adhere in Profession to Christ, but
when Storms arise, they withdraw themselves. Others begin in the Spirit, run
well for a time, but end in the Flesh. Our Savior has spoke the doom of all
such, No Man having put his Hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for
the Kingdom of God: He is not worthy the Honor of being Christ's Servant, and
he will quickly find the fearful Consequences of Christ's Rejection in the next
World. We read of Shimei, that upon Solomon's confining him to Jerusalem, with
the threatening of Death if he went forth: And Shimei said to the King, The
Saying is good: 1 King. 2.38.
As my Lord the King has said, thy Servant will do. What an easy Confinement
was it to remain in the Holy City, where all the Tribes came twice a Year, and
when they returned left their Hearts behind them: It seems to be a Privilege
and Favor rather than a Punishment. Yet a petty Interest drew him out, and for
the Violation of his Promise he lost his Life. This is a representation of
those who for Temporal Respects desert the Service of Christ, violate their
Promises to him, and leave the New Jerusalem, the City of the Living God. Our
Savior will accept of none into his Service but upon his own Terms; Whoever
will be my Disciple, let him take up his Cross and follow me. Who would not be
ambitious to be the Copy of such a Divine Original? We should rejoice if called
forth to sharp Trials for his Name, as having an occasion to give the clearest
Testimony of our Superlative Love and entire Fidelity to our Blessed Lord.

To conclude the Argument, Let us be persuaded to dedicate our selves wholly to
the Service of Christ, and to live according to our Dedication. This should be
the early act of the reasonable Creature; for is it equal to put him off with
the Relics of the World to whom the First Fruits, the best of all we are and
have is due? But if we have been careless of our Duty, let us not any longer
defer to make a voluntary Consecration of our Lives to his Glory: Remember that
Life is but a Spans breadth, our opportunity of serving Christ is short, and
the omission of it is irreparable. What is there to recommend a Service to us,
but is to be found in the Service of Christ? It Is the most honorable Service,
whether we consider the Divine Majesty of our Master, who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords: The Quality of our Fellow Servants, the Angels of Light, and the
Glorified Saints, who are the Princes of his Court, and the Heavenly Nobility:
And the nature of the Work that is sublime and excellent, becoming an
Intellectual Soul, that is Spiritual by Nature, and Divine by Grace.

It Is the most sweet and easy Service: This will seem incredible to those who
judge of the Delights of the Spirit by the Principles of the Flesh. In this
Sense also, the Carnal Man understands not the things of the Spirit: Who can
discover the Pleasure of Music to one that was born Deaf? or describe the
Light of the Sun to one that was ever Blind? who can see a Taste? The Truth is,
the Life of Carnal Men has the appearance of Joy, but not the reality: And the
Life of the Saints has a gloomy Melancholy appearance, but has an inward
cordial Joy incomparably above all the vain flashy Delights of the World. A
Carnal Man that serves diverse Lusts and Pleasures, Jussisti Domino sic and est,
ut poena sit sibi omnis inordinatus animus. Aug.
is sometimes racked and vexed betwixt contrary Passions. Every Lust has a
secret Sting with its Honey. And as the corrupt Heart is its own Tempter, so
the guilty Conscience is its own Tormenter. Besides the fearful apprehension of
what shall follow in the next World, when the revenging Justice of God, and the
cruel Malice of Satan shall concur to make the Sinner miserable, is sufficient
to poison the sweetest Pleasures of Sin. But the Life of a Saint is regulated
by a Law that is always at Union in its Precepts. He has Divine Assistance to
enable him to perform it. His gracious Master will pardon his Infirmities. The
Content of Conscience, the Joy of the Holy Ghost, that rewards our Duty here,
far exceeds all the Severity and Difficulty that the Carnal Nature complains of
in obeying the Divine Law. The Yoke of Christ is truly easy, and his Burden
truly light.

His Service is the most profitable: He will protect, maintain, and
everlastingly reward his Servants. Is there any Master so rich, so liberal, so
faithful as Christ? How often do the Slaves of the World complain that they
have spent themselves in vain? As Jacob reproached Laban, Thou have deceived
me, and changed my Wages ten times; so may the Worldlings say, whose Hopes have
been often charmed with the specious Promises of the World, and deluded in the
end. Dear bought Experience at last convinces them of their woeful Folly, in
seeking for Happiness where it was not to be found, and neglecting to seek it
where it was. But the Servants of Christ have at the present their Fruit unto
Holiness, and in the end everlasting Life. The Service of Christ here, is
Freedom, Victory, Empire, and hereafter a triumphant Felicity.

I shall now address my self to the present Occasion, which is to pay our last
solemn Respects to the Memory of the Reverend Dr. Thomas Jacomb: who was so
universally known, esteemed, and beloved in this City, that his Name is a noble
and lasting Elogy. I shall not give an account of the time he spent in
Cambridg, where he was Fellow of Trinity College, and worthily esteemed in that
flourishing Society: But confine my Discourse to his Ministry in London. Here
the Divine Providence disposed him into the Family of a Right Honorable
Person, to whom he was deservedly very acceptable, and whose real and most
noble Favors conferred upon him, were only to be equalled by his grateful and
high Respects, and his constant Care to promote serious Religion in her Family.

He was a Servant of Christ in the most peculiar and sacred Relation: And he
was true to his Title, both in his Doctrine and in his Life. He was an
excellent Preacher of the Gospel, and had a happy Art of conveying
Saving-Truths into the Minds and Hearts of Men.

He did not entertain his Hearers with Curiosities, but with Spiritual Food: He
dispensed the Bread of Life, whose vital Sweetness and nourishing Virtue is
both productive and preservative of the Life of Souls. He preached Christ
Crucified, our only Wisdom and Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.
His great design was to convince Sinners of their absolute want of Christ, that
with flaming Affections they might come to him, and from his Fullness receive
Divine Grace. This is to water the Tree at the Root, whereby it becomes
flourishing and fruitful; whereas the laying down of Moral Rules for the
exercise of Virtue, and subduing vicious Affections, without directing Men to
derive Spiritual Strength, by Prayer, and in the use of Divine Ordinances, from
the Mediator the Fountain of all Grace, and without representing his Love as
the most powerful motive and Obligation to Obedience, is but pure Philosophy,
and the highest effect of it is but unregenerate Morality. In short, his
Sermons were clear, and solid, and affectionate. He dipped his Words in his
Soul, in warm Affections, and breathed a Holy Fire into the Breasts of his
Hearers: Of this many serious and judicious Persons can give Testimony who so
long attended upon his Ministry with delight and profit.

His constant Diligence in the Service of Christ, was becoming his Zeal for the
Glory of his Master, and his Love to the Souls of Men. He preached thrice a
Week whilst he had Opportunity and Strength. He esteemed his labor in his
sacred Office both his highest Honor and his Pleasure.

At the first appearance of an Ulcer in his Mouth, which he was told to be
Cancerous, he was observed to be not much concerned about it, than as it was
likely to hinder his Preaching that was his delightful Work: and when he
enjoyed Ease, and after wasting Sickness, was restored to some degrees of
Strength, he joyfully returned to his Duty. Nay, when his Pains were tolerable,
Preaching was his best Anodyne when others failed: And after his Preaching, the
reflection upon the Divine Goodness that enabled him for the discharge of the
Service, was a great relief of his Pains.

His Life was suitable to his Holy Profession. His Sermons were Printed in a
fair and lively Character in his Conversation. He was an Example to Believers,
in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity.

He was of a staid Mind, and temperate Passions, and moderate in Counsels. In
the managing of Affairs of Concernment, he was not vehement and confident, not
imposing and over-bearing, but was receptive of Advice and yielding to Reason.

His compassionate Charity and Beneficence was very conspicuous amongst his
other Graces. His Heart was given to God, and his relieving beneficent Hand to
the living Images of God, whose pressing wants he resented with tender
Affections, and was very instrumental for their Supplies.

And as his Life so his Death adorned the Gospel, which was so exemplary to
others, and so gracious and comfortable to himself. The Words of Men leaving
the World make usually the deepest Impressions, being spoken most feelingly,
and with least Affectation. Death reveals the Secrets of Men's Hearts: And the
Testimony that dying Saints give, how gracious a Master they have served, how
sweet his Service has been to their Souls, has a mighty Influence upon those
about them. Now the Deportment and Expressions of this Servant of Christ in his
long languishing Condition, were so holy and heavenly, that though his Life has
been very useful, yet he more glorified God dying than living.

When he was summoned by painful Sickness, his first Work was to yield himself
with resigned Submission to the Will of God. When a dear Friend of his first
visited him; he said, I am in the use of Means, but I think my appointed time
is come, that I must dye: If my Life might be serviceable to convert or build
up one Soul, I should be content to live, but if God has no work for me to do,
here I am, let him do with me as he pleases: But to be with Christ is best of
all. Another time he told the same Person, That now it was visible it was a
determined case, God would not hear the Prayer, to bless the means of his
Recovery, therefore desired his Friend to be willing to resign him to God,
saying, It will not be long before we meet in Heaven, never to part more, and
there we shall be perfectly happy, there neither your Doubts and Fears, nor my
Pains and Sorrows shall follow us, nor our Sins, which is best of all. After a
long continuance in his languishing Condition without any sensible Alteration,
being asked how he did, he replied, I lie here, but get no ground for Heaven or
Earth: Upon which one said, Yes in your Preparations for Heaven, O yes said he,
there I sensibly get ground I bless God.

An humble Submission to the Divine Pleasure was the habitual Frame of his
Soul: Like a Dye that thrown high or low, always falls upon its Square: thus
whethe hope of his Recovery were raised or sunk, he was content in every
Dispensation of Providence.

His Patience under sharp and continuing Pains was admirable. The most
difficult part of a Christian's Duty, the sublimest degree of Holiness upon
Earth, is to bear tormenting Pains with a meek and quiet Spirit. Then Faith is
made perfect in Works: and this was eminently verified in his long Trial. His
Pains were very severe, proceeding from a cancerous Humor, that spread it self
in his Joints, and preyed upon the tenderest Membranes, the most sensible
Parts, yet his Patience was invincible. How many restless Nights did he pass
through without the least murmuring or Reluctance of Spirit.

He patiently suffered very grievous things through Christ that strengthened
him; and in his most afflicted Condition was thankful.

But what Disease or Death could disturb the blessed Composure of his Soul,
which was kept by the Peace of God that passes all Understanding. Such was the
Divine Mercy, he had no Anxieties about his future State, but a comfortable
Assurance of the favor of God, and his Title to the Eternal Inheritance.

He had a substantial double Joy, in the reflection upon his Life spent in the
faithful Service of Christ, and the Prospect of a blessed Eternity ready to
receive him. This made him long to be above. He said with some Regret, Death
flies from me, I make no haste to my Father's House. But the wise and gracious
God, having tried his faithful Servant, gave him the Crown of Life, which he
has promised to those that love him. His Body, that poor Relick of Frailty, is
committed in trust to the Grave, His Soul sees the Face of God in
Righteousness, and is satisfied with his Likeness.

The Hope of this should allay the Sorrows of his dearest Friends. When the
Persons we love and have lived with, are to be absent a few Months, it is
grievous, but at the last lamenting Separation, all the Springs of our tender
Affections are opened, and Sorrows are ready to overwhelm us. But the steadfast
Belief of the Divine World, and that our Friends are safely arrived thither, is
able to support our fainting Spirits, and refresh all our Sorrows. The truth
is, we have reason to lay to heart the Displeasure of God, and our own Loss,
when his faithful Ministers are taken away. When the Holy Lights of Heaven are
Eclipsed, it portends sad Things: When the Saints are removed from Earth to
Heaven, their Souls freed from the interposition of their dark Bodies, they
truly live, but we that remain, dye, being deprived of their Holy Lives, their
Examples, that are a preservative from the Contagion of the World. A due Sense
of God's afflicting Providence is becoming us: But always allayed with hope of
our being shortly reunited with our dearest Friends for ever in the better
World. O that our serious Preparations, our lively Hopes, and the Presence of
the great Comforter in our Souls, may encourage us most willingly to leave this
lower World, so full of Temptations and Trouble, to ascend into the World
Above, where perfect Peace, full Joy, and the most excellent Glory are in
Conjunction for ever.

FINIS.

