Catholic Communion Defended against both Extremes: AND UNNECESSARY DIVISION
Confuted, by Reasons against both the Active and Passive ways of SEPARATION:
Occasioned by the Racks and Reproaches of One sort, and the Impatience and
Censoriousness of the other; and the Erroneous, tho Confident Writings of Both.
And written in Compassion of a Distracted, Self-tearing People, tho with little
hope of any great success. In FIVE PARTS: I. The Dangerous Schismatic; on the
Three Cases about Church Communion. II. Animadversions on part of Mr. RAPHSON's
Book. III. A Survey of the Unreasonable Defender of Dr. STILLINGFLEET, for
Separation, pretending to oppose it. IV. Reasons of the Authors censured
Communion with the Parish-Churches. V. The Reasons why Dr. I. O's. Twelve
Arguments change not his Judgment.
By RICHARD BAXTER, a Lover of Love and Peace; and by defending them,
displeasing those that labor to destroy them.

Romans 15. 7. Receive ye one another as Christ also received us, to the glory of
God.

Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all men.

Psalm. 18. 26, 27. With the froward thou will show thy self froward (or
wrestle): For thou will save the afflicted people, but wilt bring down high
looks.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1684.

TO THE READER.
IT IS known that Christ suffered between Two Malefactors, reputed by his
Persecutors the greatest of the Three: One of them was penitent, and justified
Christ, and reproved the other, who reproached, even dying, him that should
have been taken for his only Hope. Ignatius compared the Teeth of the Lions, to
the Milstones, which must grind him to be Bread for his Fathers use. The two
Extremes have been at this unhappy Dividing-work, since the Christian Church
began to prosper: Diotrephes, and the Jewish Imposers on the one side, and the
Self-conceited separating Sects on the other, were used by Satan to fight
against Saving Truth and Love. They were foretold by Paul, Acts 20. both that
grievous Wolves should enter, and devour the Flocks; and that of their own
selves should men arise, to speak perverse things, and draw away Disciples
after them. But when Christian Power had lent one Party the Sword, or made it
the Executioner of Clergy-wrath, the Church has ever since between two
Milstones, been ground to Meal. There has indeed be^n much Differences in
their dividing ways. The upper Millstone has still been violently active: The
nether Millstone thought it self innocent, because it was passive. Even before
the Church-Tympanites, many score several Sects rose up, that had their several
Societies, separating from the rest, on pretense of greater Orthodoxness and
Piety. No two of the Contraries could be in the Right; much less all: Therefore
all, or all save one, did separate for Error. But as Luther says (De
Conciliis) these Divisions were but a Play (as at Football) in comparison of
the Strages, or bloody destructive Divisions which were made by Patriarchs and
Councils of advanced Prelates. If under Heathens, the Novations sprung up from
a Strife, to have their Captain the great Bishop of Rome; and the Donanists
from a Strife, to have their Captain the great Bishop of Carthage, and so many
other Sects; What wonder, if the Strife of Patriarchs, Metropolitans and
Councils, when they were like great Secular Princes, did cut all the Churches
into those Shred^ or Schisms, which have continued it is Diseases and Reproach
these 1200, if not 1300. years, to this day, unhealed, and unlikely to be
healed; four of these Patriarchs condemning Rome, and the Roman Fifth
condemning them: As it was said ^f Saul and David, The Under sects and Schisms
have killed their thousands, and the Uppermost Patriarchal, Conciliary,
Tyrannical Schisms, their ten thousands.

Alas, to what a horrid degree of Pravity is Humane Nature fallen! What a
scandalous Temptation give Men to the Bruitists, who prefer the Bruits, yea,
the wildest before M^n? When even the Learned sort, who think themselves so fit
to guide all the rest, that none is worthy to Preach Christ's Gospel, who
dissent from their prescribed Opinions and Ceremonies, are yet unable after
1200. years experience of the Churches, to understand that the terms and ways
which have hitherto distracted and torn them, and to this day made them the
scorn of the Infidels, and like the Sherds of a broken Pot, are not the only
ways and terms of Catholic Union and Communion; which, if any deny, he is
unworthy to live in Christian Society. Lord! is there no hope, that the World,
at least the Learned part, may be healed of this self-laceration and
distraction. If there be no Love and Peace but in Heaven, and with the few that
the World abhors, O cause us all that are fervent Lovers of Love and Peace,
to be more weaned from this earthly Nest of Wasps, and to love and long for the
World where Love and Peace are perfected.

I have seen Canons which have ipso facto excommunicated Men (how wise, how
holy, how useful, and how many soever) that do but affirm any things in their
Church-Offices, Liturgies, Words and Ceremonies, to be at all repugnant to the
Word of God; and at once oblige Men to subscribe to an Article, That not only
they, but General Councils are fallible. So that I stand amazed to think what
Spirit made such Canons, and what such Men thought of themselves, and of Humane
Nature, and of the History of all former Ages of the Churches. If they must be
acknowledged fallible, and yet all cut off from Christ or from the Church, who
say they have any Error, so much as in the said Offices, Forms, Words or
Ceremonies, sure they suppose that some miraculouus Power so wonderfully
overruled fallible Men, and therefore should show us miracles to convince us.
For my part, I am far from believing, that I am so secured from Error; and
therefore only say, Tho I be an unfit Judge of my Superiors Acts, I would not
for all the Riches on Earth, be charged at Gods judgment with the guilt of
making and justifying such Canons; much less, with all the Consequents of their
Executions.

And because I am unwilling to be guilty of any dividing-errors on the other
side, I have here impartially confuted them; telling those that would not have
the Authors, or their former Actions so much remembered and blamed as I have
done, That God is against their carnal Policies; and that it neither has
prospered, nor will do: And that when Men justify Sin, or lay it upon God, he
will with disdain cast it back upon them. As I thank God, who kept the main
Body of the Religious Persons innocent, from the crimes of a few tumified
Sectarian Soldiers, who by advantage subdued all the rest, (tho Malignity would
ruin them by a false Accusation of such a Guilt), so I will not so much as by
Silence, encourage that false Malignant Accusation, nor leave the sober godly
People of the Land, under the intimated Suppositions, That they Consented to
the Subversion of Civil or Ecclesiastical Order and Governmenment, when they
were trod down, and suffered for their Dissent.

But in all Ages and Nations, the Churches that were under the grinding
Dividers, have laid more of the blame on the upper Millstone than on the lower;
Action and Violence making their Part more notable; bearing more easily the
censures and words of such as think Losers may have leave to talk, than the
Stings, Swords and Flames of the elder Sons of Abaddon Apollyon. And indeed, in
all Ages, the lower Party have been less averse to Peace and Reconciliation;
but whoever have got uppermost into uncontrollable Clergy-Domination, have
usually disdained and abhorred the Peacemakers. It was King James his wisdom
to make Beati Pacifici, his Motto; and the Disposition and Counsels that are
contrary to it, will prove pernicious folly at last. But we have a greater
Doctor and Exemplar, even our Savior and final Judge, who (while some repraoch
such, and talk and write to bring men from Love, to hate each other), has
said, what in despite of malice he will make good [Blessed are the
Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God, Matthew. 5.9].

The Contents of the First Part.
WHether the Resolver truly define the Church. Page 1. Whether there be not
many particular Churches. 3. Whether these Churches must be Members of one
another. 5. Whether the Universal Church and Particulars be not distinct, as
Whole and Part. 6. Whether the Church has all things Common, and this be
essential to it. 6, 7. Whether God only Constitutes the Church, and no Humane
Contract. 9, 10. Their Charge against the Independents Church Covenant,
examined. 11, 12. Whether Church Communion consist in no particular Acts. 15.
His Self-contradiction, p. 16. More of his Contradictions and Errors. 17. His
first Case, Whether Communion with some Church be necessary? 18. His second
Case of Occasional Communion, examined. 19. His third Case, Whether we may
Communicate with distinct and separate Churches? 20. His confused use of the
words [Church-Union, Communion, Separation and Schism] opposed by a large
Explication of Union, Communion and Separation, in which is fully showed what
Separation is Schism, and what not, from p. 21, to p. 41. He seems to damn
all Christians on Earth, as Schismatics. 41. His condemning the Church of
England and many other, largely manifested. p. 42 to 53. What it is, for which
he calls Men Schismatics. 53. It is absurd to be Members of opposite
Churches, because Christ has but one Body. 55. Whether all are Shismaticks who
are guilty of Schism? (or Traitors that break any Law): e. g. If the Church of
England have any guilt of Schism, etc. 56.
The Contents of the Second Part.
WHether Mr. Ralphson prove, 1. That Kneeling at the Sacrament, and use of the
Liturgy are unlawful, false Worship, or Idolatry, and the places are Idols
Temples, and to join in them, is to join in Idolatry. p. 1. Whether the
Argument prove it, because they are Worship not Instituted. 1. The word
[Worship] explained, and Worship distinguished. 2, 3. Twenty unquestionable
Instances of Lawful Acts in Worship, not particularly Instituted by God, which
are Modes or Accidents of his own Instituted Worship, and may be called Worship
in a subordinate sense. 4, etc. Whether the use of any such be a defection to
Idolatry. 8, 9. Of Kneeling before the Bread and Wine. 12, 13. Another Instance
of a Lawful Accident of Man's appointment. 13. The Face of his Doctrine of
Separation unmasked in twenty Particulars. 14, etc.
The Contents of the Third Part. Dr. Stillingfleet's Defender tried.
THe general Character of his Book. p. 1, etc. He places not Communion in any
transient Acts, but a fixed permanent State. 4. Whether Communion and the
Church be the same? 5. Have all the Churches the same Right and Obligation to
Communicate with each other? 5. His Supposition of the World being one Family,
etc. p. 7. His Accusation of Confusion, Mistaking, etc. examined. 8, 9. Whether
Union and Communion be all one, and this be in no transient Acts? 9, 10. To his
Question, What makes the Church One? 10, 11, 12. Whether that which makes it a
Church, make it not One? 13. His Philosophy opened (for his Pupils) p. 14. when
he dare not confute the Boys common Notions of Physics, he stands wondering
at them, p. 14. As that the Soul is principium motus to the Body. That Union is
to Soul and Body, like the Copula in a Proposition. 15. Whether Christ cannot
be to the Church a constitutive Form, as the Soul is to the Body, because he is
it is Head? and whether Scripture ascribe not to him such Soul-Relations, as
well as to be Head? 15. His putid intimation that I write for another Head of
the Chvrch, than Christ. 17. Whether the Organized Body be not the constitutive
matter of Man, and matter be no part? 17. More of his fumblings about the term
[Organized]. The Dr. cannot understand that forma Corporis and forma Hominis
are two things. 18. A Story of a Leveller, showing how such Doctors writings
have success. 19. How the Doctors Tutor should in his Youth have taught him to
understand what the Churches Union is, wherein it consists, and by what it is
caused. 21, to 27. His professed incapacity of applying the similitude of a
Copula, pitied. 27. His palpable untrue Accusation, in the dark. 28. His
confused Communion. 30. His Schism plainly confuted, That Churches or Persons
of separate and opposite Communion, cannot be united to Christ: By three
distinctions, 1. Between Communion and Subjection. 2. Between mental and local
Separation. 3. Between mental Separation from Essentials, and from mere
Accidents or Integral parts. Instances of the famousest Fathers and Churches
that have so far separated from each other. 32. His Whimsey of Two Universal
Visible Churches. 33. What excommunicate persons are cut off from Christ. 35.
Six begged Suppositions which these false Accusers of Schism must have. 36. His
kind Concessions, That Rebels and Schismatics may have the power of Orders,
and Officers rightly constituted, Sacraments, and all Essentials of a true
Church, except Peace, and Unity, and Catholic Communion (as if Essentials
united not). 36. What Schism is damning, briefly opened. 37. His Doctrine,
[Thas those that believe in Christ, repent of their sins, and lead an holy life
in all godliness and honesty -- may yet be excluded from all the ordinary means
of salvation, proved false, subverting the Gospel. 37, 38. His odd Doctrine,
That the Divine Spirit is the Principle of Immortality in us, which first
gives life to our Souls, and will at last raise our Bodies; modestly examined,
and Reasons given for the Immortality of all men's Souls, as well as those that
have the Spirit; and that the rest are not annihilated, but have a future life;
aad that there is a Resurrection of the just and unjust, and an Hell. 39. His
Notion, That all Bishops are but one Bishop, because Episcopatus unus est. 42.
Of Independency of Churches. 43. The word [Unus] equivocal. 44. Whether we may
call all those Bishops, who causelessly break Unity, No Catholic Bishops. 44.
More of Catholic Unity of Bishops. His Opinion of the Original of
Archbishops. 46. His charge of Knavery and blind Fury, managed by more and
more confusion. 47. He denies the Church to have any one constitutive Regent
Head, when it is essential to Christ to be such, and the Church to have such.
He confesses that the Church is no Politi^al Society, as headed by men. 48.
Whether Civil and Church Policy be not the same in genere? 49. What Principles
of Politics the Dr. should have learnt in his Youth: Nine Points which he
should have been taught. p. 51, 52. Dr. Parker's Doctrine. The Defenders
d^shonouring Dr. Stillingfleet, as if he denied Christ to be a constitutive
Regent Head of the Church Visible as such. p. 53. How far Christ is such a
Visible Head. 52. Whether all causeless Separation from any part of the Church,
on account of Accidents, or by Opinions, cut off men from the whole Church
(with more of his errors confuted) to p. 56.
The Contents of the Fourth Part. The Reasons of my own Communion with
Parish-Churches.
QU. 1. Whether men should be compelled to Communion with any Church by
corporal Penalties? plainly answered. p. 1, 2. Qu. 2. Whether they who consent
to communicate with some Church, may choose their own Pastor or Company; or may
by force be confined to their Parish Priest and Church? 3. Qu. 3. For what
Reasons I, and such others, do hear in, and communicate with the
Parish-Churches? And whether so to do, be a sin or a duty, or a thing
indifferent? 6. The true case and extent of my Judgment herein. 8, 11. Twenty
Four Reasons of my Judgment and Practice, which have still seemed unresistible
to my conscience. 12. The Judgment both of the old Nonconformists and the old
Separatists for it, in their own words. 18, 19. Many Objections answered. 24.
Why I yielded to men's importunity to publish these Reasons at this time. 26.
The Contents of the Fifth Part; being an Account why the Twelve Arguments,
said to be Dr. I. O's, do not change my Judgment.
MY Position, and premised History of the matter of Fact. p. 1. Dr. O's
Premises considered, p. 6. Many mistakes therein manifested. 11. His First
Argument, from the want of Institution, examined. 12. His Second Argument. 18.
His Third Argument, p. 30. And so to the Twelfth. Forty Errors proved in them
at least.
His laying the stress of his condemnation, not of ours only, but of all
Liturgick Forms, on the ill effects of them, constrained me in faithfulness to
the present endangered minds of Readers, and also to my own conscience, to say
so much of the ill effects of Separation on the other side, as I know will be
censured by many: But as I have often done it before (in my Treatise of Baptism,
my Gildas Salvianus, my Key for Catholics, Admonition to Mr. Bagshaw, etc.) I
judge it made necessary on this occasion, to repeat so much as have done.

THE PREFACE.
DID not the Thoughts of a better promised World, afford me Comfort and Relief,
the Thoughts of the Case of this so much forsaken Earth, would break my Heart,
my Faith and Hope: To see so much of Earth yet Unchristian, and so few of the
Christian Nations either in Knowledge, Love or Holiness, answering their Holy
Profession, but damning one another, and more themselves: And to see how great
a hand the Clergy of almost all Churches, have in this, by notorious,
implacable Contention; and to see how little hope there is of a Remedy. If
Princes and Patrons choose Wise, Holy, Peaceable Men in England, will they do so
in France, Flanders, Spain, and other Popish Lands? And either there they will
expect the same Royal Power; make the Pope and his Agents the Electors, which
is worse. And with such, the Love of Money, Vainglory, and Self-opinion,
Worldliness, Pride, and Ignorant Error, will keep up Envy, Strife and
Persecution, Confusion, and every Evil Work.

O how sad is the Case of the Laity, that must hear Men pretending to great
Learning and Authority, with raging Confidence damning the Opinions and Persons
of each others, and calling to Princes to destroy those that they cannot
convince, and that will not take them for their Masters; pretending that
subjection to them and all their ensnaring Laws, is necessary Communion. And
with such Confidence do they Write and Talk, that it must be very expert and
settled Christians, that can tell who is in the Right; but the Crowd believe
them that have most Interest in them, or that speak the last word, or that have
greatest Power.

There is but one way possible to cure all this (besides wise and godly
Princes) which all Peacemakers have still agreed on, Even to Unite in the
Divine Authority and Primitive Simplicity, of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline,
and to bear with others in smaller Matters. (Supposing the Determination of
such mutable Circumstances which belong to each Minister his Place). Christ
has promised Salvation to all that practically so agree. He has commanded
them all to Love one another, even as themselves; and to receive one another,
as Christ received us. Baptism devoting us to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
then made men Christians and Catholics. The Creed, the Lords Prayer, Ten
Commandments, were thought a sufficient Test, as to the Orthodox Exposition of
the Baptismal Covenant. Upon these Terms the Church Formed into Pastors and
Flocks, lived in Loving Communion, in the Lords Supper, and in holy Doctrine,
Prayers, Praises, and doing good to all they could. The Kingdom, (that is, the
Church) of God, and Christ's Reign therein, consists not in Ceremonies and
lesser things, but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost: The
Unity necessary hereunto, was that described, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5. One Body, One
Spirit, One Hope, One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father of all:
And the keeping of this Unity was in the Bond of Peace, with all lowliness and
meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in Love, v. 2, 3.

These Terms were made for our Love and Communion, by Christ, the Maker of the
Church, the Author and Perfecter of our Faiih. These Terms are few, sure,
plain, possible; as Christ's Yoke is easy, and his burden light, and his
Commands not grievous: These Terms all Christians are actually agreed and
united in. He knows not Mankind, that does not know, That the ignorance,
weakness, and badness of Man is such, as that it is impossible, that all good
Christians should unite otherwise, upon things hard, dark, doubtful, and
numerous. The Primitive Simplicity, Purity and Love, are the only Terms of
Universal Concord in the Church on Earth.

But now by Preachers with wordy confidence, these only healing terms are
accused as the way of the most damning Schism. O the subtilty of the Serpent
that beguiled Eve! O the folly of Men that will be thus drawn away from the
simplicity of Christ, by takeng the only Remedy against Schism, to be the
chiefest cause. They have made Associations and Confederacies of Men, to set up
New Forms of Churches, Church Government or Communion, by multitudes of
Clergy-Laws or Canons of their own, to be necessary to Ministry and Communion,
and consequently to avoid Schsm, and consequently to Salvation: By which
Arrogance, and Impositions, and Arbitrary Laws, and Censures thereupon, the
Christian World is now almost all broken into Sects, condemning and censuring
one another; into Greeks, Muscovites, Armenians, Georgians, Nestorians,
Jacobites, Abassines, Maronites, Papists, Protestants, etc. And of all these,
the Papists pretend to a Power of Government by Legislation and Judgment over
all the Christians on Earth; some placing it in the Pope as chief, some in a
Council, or the College of Bishops, as chief; of which, the Pope is the prime
Member; most in Pope and Council agreeing. This Sect unchurcheth all
Christians, save themselves, and have made so many Canon-Laws, as none can
understand and keep.

Some that yet do not own the Pope, tell us, That yet the Church on Earth is
one Political Body, not unified by its Relation to Christ, the Head and Form
(He is not Visible enough, say the Papists, to Head a Church that may be called
Visible): But it is unified by a certain Confederacy of Communion among
themselves, which sometime they call an Universal Government, and say, they
have power to make Universal Laws; and sometime say, It is not One Unifying
Government, but One Communion, and yet make Laws which all must hold Communion
with: They say and unsay, and know not what to say: They cannot tell us what
are the necessary terms of that Communion, nor how to know with what Nations
and Churches we must hold it: But this they agree in, That Christ, the Finisher
of our Faith, has left Faith, Worship and Government so unfinished, that
Bishops of all the World, or many Nations (they know not who), must make us
more Laws (and when they will have done, and completed Religion, no man
knows): And that all that will be Christians, must on the Terms of these
Canons, have Communion with them, and refuse not one thing that they command:
And therefore must all be learned enough to know, that all that they command is
lawful: And if any withdraw for an Oath, or Covenant, or Ceremony, tho he
mentally own them as true Churches; or if for dissent he be excomunicated by
them, he must worship God in no other Assembly, but live like an Atheist till
he be convinced of the Lawfulness of their Impositions: else all that so
worship God are damnable Schismatics, and so are all that communicate with
them. So that I know but few on Earth that they damn not for breaking their
Canons, tho they would keep all the Laws of Christ: And every where they that
have strength and possession, presume that it is they that must thus be the
Standers and Rulers of all others about them. It is an utter Maze which they
make the Terms of catholic communion, and consequently of Salvation, instead
of the few plain, certain things which Christ made necessary. We can get but
few of the vulgar to understand the sense of Baptism, the Creed, Lords Prayer,
and Ten Commandments; And our churches are much made up of such, and our
Parishes have too many Sadduces, Infidels and Hobbists; yet all must be
supposed to know, 1. That all the Bishops and Priests are truly called and
authorized (when few know what makes them Pastors indeed). 2. And that all
their words, ceremonies and impositions, are not repugnant to God's Word. 3.
And that all are to be avoided whom their Canons and Lay-civilians
excommunicate. 4. That it is a company of true Bishops and Churches in other
Nations, whose communion they own. 5. That all are Schismatics that they so
judge, and their churches no true churches of (...)

The English Schismatic, detected and confuted: Occasioned by a Resolver of
Cases about Church Communion.
CHAP. I. SAYS THE RESOLVER,
. 1. THE Church is a Body or society of men separated from the rest of the
World, and united to God and to themselves by a Divine Covenant.

A. He says this is the plainest description he can give: That is not the
fault of his Auditors or Readers. 1. As to the Genus, a Community of equals
without Rulers is a body: but I suppose he means not such. 2. Is it enough
that it be of Men? sure now they should be Christians? 3. Many are separated
from the rest of the World, secundum quid, that are no Christians; some in one
respect and some in another, and none in all respects. 4. United to God, is an
ambiguous word, no Creature is United to him perfectly so as to be thereby what
he is, God, in the created Nature. Only Christ is united to him Hypostatically
in his created Nature. All are so far united to him in natural being, as that
in him they live and move and have their being: And the Nature of man is one
sort of his Image: All things are united to him as effects to their constant
efficient. The Church should not be defined without any mention of Christ: The
Churches Union with God is by Christ. 5. Christ himself as Head is an essential
part of the Church, and should not be left out of a Definition, tho the mere
Body may in common speech be called the Church, as the People may be called a
Kingdom. 6. Will any Divine Covenant serve? or must it not be only the
Baptismal Covenant? 7. Is it called Divine only as made by God, or as commanded
by God and made by Man, or as mutual? Certainly Gods Law and offered or
Conditional Promise is most frequently called His Covenant in Scripture; and
this uniteth not men to God, till they consent and Covenant with him. Their own
Covenant Act is necessary hereto: And that is a Divine Covenant, only as
commanded, and accepted and done by Gods assisting Grace. 8. The form of a
Church is Relative, and the Terminus is essential to a Relation. It is no
definition that has not the End of the Association: Therefore this is none at
all; and so the beginning tells us what to expect.

This description has nothing in it but what may agree to diverse forms of
Society, and so has not the form of a Church: And if he intended not a
Definition, but a loose description, I would a defining Doctor had had the
Chair, during this controversy.

Let us try this description upon a Mohammedan Kingdom, Army, or Navy, or
suppose them mere Deists.

1. Such a Kingdom, Army, or Navy may be a Society. 2. Of Men. 3. Separated
from the rest of the World secundum quid and ad hoc (and none are separated
from it simpliciter and ad omnia: e. g. No man is separated from the common
humanity; No Deist from any but Atheists, and no Christian in believing a God
and the Law of Nature and Nations.) 4. They are United to God so far as owning
a God and Worshipping him amounts to, besides the Union of the Creature with
the Creator in whom he lives, etc. And no unregenerate ungodly Christian is
united to him savingly. 5. They are united among themselves. 6. This is by a
Covenant: 7. And by a Covenant Divine, as to command, approbation and object.
It is God that they Covenant to own and obey: The common Profession of the
Mahometans, is, There is one God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. It is Divine in
tantum as commanded. For God Commands all men to Own him; to believe that God
is, and that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him: And God so
far approves it: St. James says, ( Thou do well) to him that believes
there is a God, much more that is professedly devoted to him.

Let us by this examine the Jewish Church: Jews now may be 1. A Body, 2. Of
Men, 3. Separated from the rest of the World, even in Religion and Church
pretensions. 4. United to God as Creatures, as Men, as the corporal seed of
Abraham, and as professing Belief, Love and Obedience to God, as their God. 5.
Strictly united among themselves: 6. By a Covenant, 7. Which God once
commanded, and still approves so far as they own God.

Let us consider whether this description take not in, those in every Nation
that fear God and work Righteousness, that never heard of Christ, (being thus
combined.) And whether the Kingdom of God, be not larger than his Church: Join
the Head and Tail of this man's book together, and by the Head (the description)
for ought I see, Jews, Mahometans, if not almost all Heathens, are the Church:
But at the End, I think none on Earth is the Church: At least none that
separate from a pair of Organs, or an ignorant Curate; Nor can any man know who.

Page 2.. 2. He explaineth his Word [ Body] as opposed to a confused Multitude.

A. But a Community of Equals, that have no Governors, may have order, and ^e
no confused Multitude. And he himself after pleads over much for a necessity of
Rulers.

P. 3.. 3. And in many places, his Confusion and grand error is repeated, that
the Christian Church is but one: p. 7. We know no Church but what all
Christians are members of by Baptsme, which is the Universal Church: p. 8.
There is but one Church, of which all Christians are members, as there is but
one Covenant; p. 19. If there be but one Church and one Communion, of which all
true Christians are members, etc. p. 23. I am no otherwise a member of any
particular Church, than I am of the Universal: p. 40. It Is a schismatical
Notion of membership that divides the Christian Church into distinct
memberships, and therefore into the distinct Bodies: And p. 19. and often he
says, those Churches which are not members of each other, are separate
Churches and Schismatics.

A. I had hoped that no man but Mr. Cheny had talked at this rate.

I. It Is agreed on, that there is but one Universal Church: The contrary is a
Contradiction. 2. It is agreed, that there is no lawful particular Church which
is not a part of the Universal. 3. That whoever has just Union and Communion
with a true particular Church, has Union and Communion with the Universal: 4.
That all men in their Worship of God, should accordingly perform it (and do all
that they do) as Men in that Relation to the Universal Church: None of this is
controverted.

II. But I had hoped never to have heard any but Seekers say, that there are
not many lawful particular Churches, distinct from the whole and from one
another, though not disjunct in the Common Essentials. For the proof of the
contrary,

1. I begin with that which I expect should be most powerful; The man's own
after-Confessions, to which he is often brought. Page 8. Distance of Place and
the necessities and conveniences of Worship and Discipline, has divided the
Church into several parts and members, and Particular Churches, etc. So page
14. page 19. All Christian Churches ought to be members of one. More fully p.
20, 21. This is ad hominem, Yea and Nay is his Resolution.

2. But I Will bring other Arguments that prevail more with me. The Sacred
Scriptures often tell us of many Churches, therefore there are many. Act. 9.31.
The Churches had rest; and 15.4. Confirming the Churches; 16.5. So were the
Churches established in the Faith; Romans 16.4. All the Churches of the Gentiles:
So ver. 16. 1 Cor. 7.17. So ordain I in all Churches; 11.16. Neither the
Churches of God (have such Custom;) 14.33. As in all the Churches of the
Saints; 34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches. So 16.1.19. and 2 Cor.
8.1. The Grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia: 18. Whose Praise
is in the Gospel through all the Churches. So 19.23, 24. and 11.8.28. The care
of all the Churches; 12.13. Inferior to the other Churches. Gal. 1.2, 22. 1
These. 2.14. 2 These. 1.4. Rev. 1.4. To the seven Churches, ver. 11.20. Angels
and Candlesticks of the seven Churches. And 2.7, 11, 17, 29. and 3.6, 13, 22,
23. and 22.16. His Concordance might have showed him all these in order, Phil.
4.15. No Church communicated with me (concerning giving and receiving) but ye
only. The dispute now must be, whether the Apostles or this Resolver be to be
believed: They say, there are many Churches, parts of One; he says, There is
but one, and it is Schismatical to divide it into distinct memberships or
Bodies, etc. It Is no Schism here to say, I am for Paul and the Holy Scripture:
Let who will believe the contradictor.

3. My next Argument is this: Where there are many Political Societies,
consisting of Christian Pastors and People, professedly associated for the
ordinary Exercise of those Relations as such, in holy Communion, in Christian
Doctrine, Worship, Order and Conversation, for Edification in true Faith, Hope,
Love and Obedience, and the Glorifying of God therein. There are many distinct
true Churches, parts of the Church Universal; But on Earth there are many such
Societyes, etc. Ergo, etc.

Either the controversy is De re or de nomine (for we called Separatists use
to separate these.) 1. If de re; Let the existence of the thing defined be
tried by Scripture, Reason and common Experience: 2. If de nomine; Forma quae
dat esse dat Nomen: Here is the true specific form which is found in many
single Churches, ergo the Name of such single (or individual) Churches is due
to them.

4. Again ad hominem, from the consequences: 1. If there be not many single
Churches in the Universal, then there are not many Patriarchal, National,
Provincial, Metropolitical, Diocesan, or Parochial Churches: For non entium non
datur numerus: Many nothings is a contradiction. Multae sunt ergo sunt; Abest
tertij adjecti ad est secundi valet argumentum.

But if there be not many, then 1. All the Parish Churches in England being but
one, and not many, a Patron can have right to present to no one as a Church,
more than to another. 2. Then the Parson, Vicar or Curate is no more the Parson
of one Church than of another; nor bound to no more Care and Duty; for there is
but one. 3. Then no one is bound to go to one Parish Church more than another;
for there is but one. 4. Then the Temple and Tithes belong no more to one than
another. 5. Then no Bishop is the proper Bishop of one Diocesan Church, more
than of another. 6. Then all the revenues of the Bishop of London, are no more
appropriate to one Church than to another. 7. Then you owe no more Obedience to
the Bishops of one Diocesan Church than another: 8. Then you make the King no
more Head or Governor of the Church of England, than of another. 9. Then a
Diocesan owes no Reverence to a Metropolitan Church (if there be none such.)
10. Then many Churches cannot have Communion nor send Bishops to Councils; (if
there be not many.) 11. And the charge of Separation from a Church that is no
Church, is a contradiction.

5. I add, from Parity of Reason, if many distinct subordinate Societies may
make one Civil Body Politic, so they may one Universal Church: But the
Antecedent is undoubted. If it be Learnedly said with Mr. Cheny, that one whole
cannot be Part of another whole; One may attain the perfection by that time he
has worn the Breeches but a few years, to know that a whole Family may be part
of a whole Village, and a whole Vicinage be part of a whole City, and a whole
College be part of a whole University; and a whole City part of a whole
Kingdom; and a whole Kingdom part of the whole Earth.

And if it be objected, that the Names of the whole and parts are here diverse;
but a Church and a Church are the same Name. I Answer, at the same age one may
learn that the same Name proves not the sameness of the things Named; and that
ex penuria nominum the Genus and Species, the Totum and Parts have often
equivocally the same Name, with the Addition of just Notes of distinction.
Sometimes an Academy of many Schools is called Schola, and so are the single
Schools therein: The City of London is a Society; and so are the Societies of
Merchant-Taylors, Drapers, Mercers, etc. therein.

. 4. But these Churches must be members of one another, or they are
Schismatics.

A. 1. How can that be, if they be all but one. 2. This is also above or below
the ferula age. They are no members of one another, but all members of the
whole: Yet how often have we this with the sting of Schism (as Damning as Murder
or Adultery) in the Tail of it. The hand is not a member or part of the Foot,
or the Foot of the Hand, or the Liver a member of the Lungs, etc. but each one
of the Man: If ever I were a Schoolmaster again, I would persuade my Boys,
that A is not a member of B, nor B of C, etc. but each of the Alphabet; And
that one leaf of their Book is not a member of another, but both of the Book;
And if they were ripe for the University, I would persuade them that Exeter
College is not a member of Corpus Christi, nor that of Lincoln, etc. but all
of the Universitie of Oxford. And I think that Bristol is not a member of
Exeter or Gloucester, etc. but all of England; and that the Company of
Stationers are not part of the Society of Merchants or Drapers, etc. but all of
London.

What a Privilege is it, that a Man may believe this about any such thing
without Schism and Damnation! And how dreadful to fall into such Churchmens
hands that in their Case make it Schism, Separation and Damnation. But there
is a Remedy.

. 5. But he has reason for what he says: p. 3, 4. [ Indeed it is extremely
absurd and unreasonable, to say, that the Christian Church, which is built on
the same Foundation, etc. who enjoy all Privileges in Common, should be
divided into as distinct and separate Bodies, tho of the same kind and nature,
as Peter, James and John are distinct Persons -- It Is absurd to say, That where
every thing is common there is not one Community.

Ans. Let us not swallow this without Chewing: 1. Whether all be extremely
absurd and unreasonable which such Doctors call so; I am grown to doubt as much
as whether all be Schism which Schismatics call so* Ipse dixit is no Proof.

2. What the meaning of this great, Decantate Word [ Separate] is, must anon be
enquired: But, may not Churches be distinct and not culpably separate? He
confesses afterward both local distinction and separation.

3. How far are the Universal Church and Particular Churches distinct? As Whole
and Parts? Must the World at last learn that Whole and Parts are not distinct?
If you take it for absurd to distinguish a Man from a Body, or from a Liver,
Hand or Foot, Dissenters do not; nor to distinguish a College from an
University, a House from a Street, a Street from a City, etc.

But how are the Particular Churches distinguished one from another? Reader, so
constantly do such men fight with themselves, that it is meet to ask, whether
they that thus say there are not many distinct Churches, do not assert a far
wider difference between many, than those they dissent from. We affirm that
there are many, and that they differ not in specie, but numero, as Colleges,
Cities do among themselves; but these men, after all this, hold not only a
numerical, but a specific difference, even as Parochial, Diocesan, Provincial,
Patriarchal, National; at least Presbyters and Diocesans differing Ordine vel
Specie with them, the Church denominated from them must do so too.

6. But he confirms it. [Peter, James and John, tho they partake of the same
common nature, yet each of them have a distinct Essence and Subsistence of
their own, and this makes them distinct Persons; but where the very Nature and
Essence of a Body or Society consists in ^aving all things common, there can be
but one Body.

Ans. I hope its no culpable Separation to distinguish things as differing
specie and numero; and this is the Doctors meaning, if his words are
significant: and the common way of expressing it would have been, [Peter and
John differ numerically but not in specie; but two Churches differ neither
specie nor numero.]

And 1. Reader,, whereas he said before, that the Church is not divided into
distinct Bodies, as James and John, etc.] did you think till now, that James
and John, and the Doctor, and the several Bishops had not been distinct parts
of the Church in their distinct natural bodies?

2. And why may there not be distinct Politic Bodies, or Compound in one whole
as well as natural? certainly, all things corporeal save Attomes are Compounds:
A Muscle, a Hand, a Foot, parts similar and dissimilar in man are all
compounded of lesser Parts. If many Students may make one College, why may not
many Colleges make one University? It Is strange if a Doctor deny this.

3. But let us consider of his Reason, and enquire 1. Whether the Church have
all things Common. 2. Whether the very Essence of it consist in this.

I. It is granted that the whole Essence of the Genus and Species is found in
every individual of that Species, Natural or Politic; but did we ever hear,
till Mr. Cheny and this Doctor said it, that Politic Bodies differ not numero
as well as Natural? The Kingdom of England and of France are two; the Church of
Rome and Constantinople long strove which should be uppermost, but who ever
said that they were not two?

II. Have they all things common? Dissenters would have excepted Wives and
Husbands, (the the Canons called Apostolical do not;) Why should the Essence of
a Church lie in this, and not the Essence of a City or Kingdom? Tories in
Ireland would have all common; Merchants and Tradesmen, Knights, Lords and
Princes here would not. But it is no Schism here also to distinguish simpliciter
and secundum quid, Propriety and the use of Propriety: There is no Community
without Propriety: Men have first a Propriety in themselves, their members,
their food, the acquests of their Labors, their Wives and Children, and Goods.
And they consent to Community to preserve this Propriety, because every man
loves himself: And yet they must use their Propriety, (even of Life) for
common good, because all are better than one: But if they had no Propriety they
could not so use it for the Commonwealth.

And I never conformed to the Doctrine that denies Propriety in Church Members
and Particular Churches, and thought all simply common. I Will tell you what
Particular Churches have to individuate them, not common to all.

1. They consist of individual natural Persons, many of which as much differ
from many other Persons, (those in England from those in Spain) as one man does
from another.

2. Their Graces and gifts are numerically distinct (Faith, Hope, Love, etc.)
from those of other Churches tho ejusdem speciei. 3. England and France, London
and Oxford, have Churches of different place and Situation: 4. But the formal
individuating difference is their nearest Relation to their several Pastors; as
several Kingdoms, Cities, Schools are numerically distinct by their distinct
Kings, Majors, Schoolmasters, so are several Churches ejusdem speciei. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13: Know those that are among you and over you in the Lord, and
esteem them highly in love for their Works sake. As every man's Wife, Children
and Servants must be used for the common good, and yet are not common, one man's
Wife and Children are not another; So the Bishop of London, of Oxford etc.
must govern his Church for the good of the Universal; but he is not the Bishop
of Gloucester, Norwich, Paris, Rome.

These are differences enough to constitute a numerical difference of Churches:
Paul distinguishes the Bishops of Philippi, Ephesus, etc. from others.

Do you yet see no Privileges that one has Proper, and not common to all?
none that make a difference in specie, but both numerical and gradual. 1. All
Churches have not Bishop Jewel, Bishop Andrews, Doctor Stillingfleet, Doctor
Sherlock to be their Teachers: All Churches be not taught all that is in this
Resolver. 2. All Churches have not men of the same soundness nor excellency of
Parts: It was once taken for lawful to account them specially worthy of double
honor who labored in the Word and Doctrine, and to esteem men for their works
sake. Paul says of Timothy, I have no man like minded. If those that heard not
a Sermon in many years differed not from your Congregation, why do you preach?

I am reproached in Print for telling the world this notorious truth; That I
lived till ten years old, where four men, four years hired successively were
Readers and Schoolmasters; two Preached (as it was called) once a Month, the
other two never: Two drank themselves to beggary. After I lived where many
Parishes about us had no Preachers: The Parish that I lived in, had a Church
with a Vicar that never preached, and a Chapel with a Parson eighty years old,
that had two Livings twenty Miles distant, and never preached: His Son a Reader
and Stage Player was sometime his Curate: His Grandson, my Schoolmaster, his
Curate next that, never preached in his life, but drunk himself to beggary. One
year a Tailor read the Scripture, and the old man (the best of them all) said
the Commmon-Prayer without book (for want of sight.) The next year a poor
Thresher read the Scripture. After that a Neighbors Son (my Master) was
Curate, who never preached but once, and that when he was drunk, (in my hearing)
on Mat. 25. Come ye Blessed, and go ye Cursed;] the saddest Sermon that ever I
heard. These things were no rarities: Now my assertion is, That the Church that
had such as Austin, Chrysostom, Jewel, Andrews, and such worthy men as London
now has many, had Privileges distinct from these, (and many the like) that I
was in.

If you say that every Bishop and Preacher is as much the Bishop and Preacher
to all other single Churches, as to that which is his Title; then 1. He must be
condemned for not teaching them all. 2. Then he may claim maintenance from them
all. 3. Then he may intrude into any man's Charge* 4. Then no Church is
unchurcht for want of a Bishop, for any one Bishop is Bishop to every Church in
the World; and so ubi Episcopus ibi Ecclesia, signifies but that Church and
Bishop are on the same Earth; and Ecclesia est Plebs Episcopo adunata may be
verified if there be but one in the World. 5. And so Mr. Dodwell and such are
self-confuted before you are aware: Geneva, Holland, and all Presbyterians are
true Churches, for they have all Bishops; e. g. The Bishop of London is Bishop
to them all: For if one man be no more a Member of one single Church than of
another, and so no more a Subject to one Bishop than to another, then one
Bishop is no more Pastor of one Church than of another.

7. And how can you magnify the Church of England for a Wise, Learned, Pious
Clergy above other Churches, if all Privileges be common, and they have no
proper Pastors of their own.

8. Do you think that the Church, e. g. Of Hippo, that was in Austins days,
was the same numerical single Church with that which is there now, (were there
any) or with the Diocesan Church of London? if not, then at least distance of
time, and change of Persons makes diverse Particular Churches; and it is no more
against the unity of the Church Universal to have diverse particular Churches in
it in the same Age, than in diverse Ages.

In short, Diversity of matter and form makes a numerical Diversity (as of
Natural, so) of Politic Bodies of the same species: But the Churches of
Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatira, Philadelphia, etc. were of diverse matter and form
numerically; Ergo they were diverse Political Churches.

Sure God does not commend Laodicea for Philadelphia's Church Virtues, nor
condemn the Church of Philadelphia for the other Churches Sins.

And if the Angels be Bishops, why are some Bishops praised as the Bishops of
such Churches, and the Bishops of other Churches threatened.

But I confess this is a ready way to end the Controversies between the Bishops
of several Churches which shall be greatest, if they be all but one.

But I hope that when the Bishop of Rome and his Church was corrupted, it is
not true that every Bishop and Church fell with him, (or with any that has
turned to Mahumetanism.)

To be no longer on this, (which I thought no Prelatist would ever have put me
on) if these men speak not notoriously against Scripture, against the constant
Language of Canons and Fathers, Historians and Lawyers, and all Antiquity, and
all Christian Countries and Divines, (yea, even those that at Trent would have
had only the Pope to be of immediate Divine Right) then I know not any thing by
Reading. And if poor Nonconformists must be put to defend themselves against
such singularities, and be Schismatics unless they will differ from all the
Christian World of all Ages, there is no Remedy.

. 7. But p. 5, 6. he tells us, [that a Church is made by a Divine Covenant --
God only can constitute a Church: Such Persons, if there be any so absurd, are
not worth disputing with, who dare affirm the Church to be an humane Creature,
or the invention of men. -- And no Church can depend on humane Contracts; for
then a Church would be a humane Creature and Constitution, whereas a Church can
be founded only on a Divine Covenant --

1. Who would think but this man were a Nonconformist, that talks so like them
( e. g. Amesius in Medul. Theol.) against humane Church Forms? But what then
will Bishop Bilson, and almost all other Bishops and Christians be thought of,
who affirm Patriarchal and Metropolitical Churches (and many of the Diocesane)
to be but humane Constitutions and Inventions. And if these be not worth the
disputing with, it seems, that you differ from them more than Separatists do:
and then were not all these Schismatics? and then, are not you a Schismatic
if you communicate with them? yea, your Mr. Dodwel himself makes Diocesan
Churches to be a humane Creature; and A. Bishop Bromhall much pleads for man's
power to make Patriarchal Churches; and so do such others.

2. But is it true that humane Contracts make not a Church? Ans. No^ alone: But
I think that all Churches are made by mutual Contracts, and humane is one part
of that which is mutual.

I. As to the Universal Church, 1. God as Legislator and Donor, instituteth the
species of Covenanting by Baptism, and therein he commands man's consent to
his offered Covenant; and conditionally promises to be our God: But,
Conditionale nihil ponit in esse: This much makes no Christian, nor Church. To
command a man to be a Christian, and conditionally to promise him life if he
will be one, proves him not to be one; else all were Christians that reject an
offered Christ.

2. But when man consents and covenanteth with God, then Gods conditional
gift becomes actual and efficacious, the man being a capable Recipient, and not
before: and in this it is the Contract that is the Fundamentum Relationis; but
a single Promise is not a mutual Covenant or Contract.

So that it is no wiser Divinity to say, Gods Covenant and not man's consent,
Covenant or Contract with God, does make Christians, and the universal Church;
than it is sober Reason to say, That Gods Institution of Marriage or
Magistracy only does make the Relation of Husband and Wife, without their
covenanting consent, or does make Commonwealths, without the consent or
Covenant of Sovereign and Subjects. Did this Doctor think that Voluntariness is
not as necessary to the Relation of Christianity as to the Relation of Prince
and Subjects; yea, or of Husband and Wife? if he do, he is shamefully mistaken.
Baptism delivers men possession of Pardon, Grace and right to Glory; and can
men have this against their wills? One would think by the Doctrine and course
of some men, that they could force men to Pardon and Salvation! if I believed
that their force could accomplish this, I would never call it Persecution. If
they can force men to be true Christians, they may force them to be justified
and saved; and then they are very uncharitable if they do not: Let them then
cease preaching and disputing us to their Opinion, but bring us all to Heaven
whether we will or not.

Yea the self-contradictor, playing fast and loose, confesses p. 6. That no
man at age can be admitted to Baptism, till he profess his faith in Christ, and
voluntarily undertake the Baptismal Vow: And is not that humane Covenanting?

Yea, he knows that the Liturgy makes even Neighbors or Strangers, vow and
covenant, both in the name of the Child and for the Child. And so necessary
does the Episcopal Church think humane Covenanting, that without this no Child
must be Baptized publicly though the Parents would covenant, and that they can
neither for Love nor Money (for many poor men hire Godfathers) get any one
(much less three) who examined, will seriously purpose to perform the Covenant
for the Child's holy Education which they make

II. But is not humane Covenanting a cause of single Church Relation as well as
of universal? I see no cause to doubt it; and I am sure that the Church for a
thousand years (before and since Popery came in) have declared him no Bishop
that comes in without consent of Clergy and People; which Consent is their
covenanting act.

To make a single Church, manifold consent goes to the Fundamentum Relationis.
1. God commands single Church Officers, order and consent, and promises them
his blessing where they are met: The Lord and his Angels are among them: No
command is vain, and without a virtual Promise. 2. To this a threefold humane
consent is needful, Ordinarily: 1. the Persons called. 2. The Ordainers (when
it may be had.) 3. The Peoples. He that formerly, from the Apostles days, for
a thousand years, should have said, that neither the covenanting, that is the
consent of the Pastor, or People, or Ordainers, is necessary to the Fundamentum
of a single Church Relation or Form, would have been taken for a wild-brain'd
Schismatic at least.

. 8. But says this Doctor (and another of them) [ p. 6. But the Independent
Church Covenant between Pastor and people, is of a very different nature from
this: Unless any man will say, that the voluntary Contract and Covenant which
the Independents exact from their Members, and wherein they place a Church
state, be part of the Baptismal vow; if it be not, then they found the Church
upon a humane Covenant; for Christ has made but one Covenant with Mankind
which is contained in the Vow of Baptism; if it be, then no man is a Christian
but an Independent.

Ans. Alas for the Church that is taught at this rate!

1. I never saw what Independents do in this case; but I think none of them
that are Sober own any other sort of Church but the universal, and single
Churches as members of it, and therefore require no Contract but 1. To the
Covenant of Baptism or Christianity. 2. To the Duties of their particular
Church-relation.

2. And nothing is here of necessity but manifested Consent (which is a real
Contract) but a clearer or a darker, an explicit or implicit consent differ
only ad melius esse.

3. Is not God the Author of Magistracy, Marriage, etc. And is it any violation
of Gods part, if Rulers and People, Husband and Wife be Covenanters by his
command?

4. Is it any renuntiation of Baptism to promise at Ordination to obey the
Archbishop and Bishop, and to take the Oath of Canonical Obedience? Is it not
still exacted? Are not the Takers of it obliged? are not Covenants imposed on
all that will be Ministers in the act of Uniformity? are not multitudes kept
out and cast out for not making these Covenants? Quo teneam nodo, etc. How
should one deal with such slippery men? Good Mr. Zachary Cawdry that wrote to
have all men to covenant Submission to Bishops and Parish Ministers, did not
dream that it was any violation of Baptism.

5. Do not men owe duty to their Pastors which they owe to no others? If not,
put them not on it: Why are you angry with them for going from you? Why does
the Canon suspend those that receive them to Communion from another Parish that
has no Preacher? Why are we ruined for not covenanting as aforesaid? if yea,
then is it against Baptism to promise to do our duty?

6. But has God commanded or instituted no Covenant but Baptism? Yes sure, the
Matrimonial at least; and I think Ordination is covenanting for the Ministry:
Did not the Apostle Acts 14.23. ordain Elders in every Church? if you would
have [by Suffrage] left out of the Translation, no sober man can doubt but it
was by the Peoples consent; and was it without their consent that Titus was to
ordain Elders in every City? Could any then come otherwise in? Did not all
Churches hold and practice this after, and was it none of Gods Institution? If
so, God requires us not to take any of you for our Bishops or Pastors: Who
then requires it? What means Paul when he says, they gave up themselves to
the Lord and to us, by the Will of God.

7. Can the wit of man imagine how it is possible without consent, for a man to
be made the Pastor of any Flock? Who ever ordained a man against his will? or
for any man to have Title against his will, to the proper oversight and
pastoral care of any one Pastor, or the privileges of any Church? If any think
they may be crammed and drencht with the Sacrament, or that an unwilling man
may have a sealed pardon and gift of Salvation delivered him, he will make a
new Gospel. And how any particular Pastor is bound to give that man the
Sacrament ordinarily, that consents not ordinarily to receive it of him, I know
not. No man is a member of any City, or any Company of Freemen in the City,
but by mutual consent; and the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy to the King
makes not the Oath of a Citizen as such or of a Member of a Company as such,
unlawful.

8. Does this Doctor think that he ever yet proved to sober men, that the
Covenant aforesaid, of Godfathers and Godmothers, to make Christians, and
members of the universal Church, is more (or so much) of Gods Institution, than
the Contract or Consent between Bishops or Pastors and People to make a single
Political Church?

9. If it follow not, that no man is the Kings Subject that swears not to the
City; It will not follow, that none is a Christian, but an Independent, or
Church-consenter.

10. How are your Parish or Diocesan Church members known to your selves or any
others? Are all that dwell in the Parish or Diocese your Church members? Then
Atheists, Sadducees, Hobbists, and all vicious men and thousands that never
communicate are such: Yea those that you call Separatists. If it be every
transient Communicant, have you a proper Pastoral care of every Travelers Soul
that so communicates with you? You after plead that his very ordinary Communion
makes him not a member, if he be unwilling to be one. And is not his consent
then necessary? Or if ordinary Communion be the test (how few then of great
Parishes are of the Church) yet that is because such Communion signifies their
Consent to your oversight of them.

. 9. But it is much to be approved which p. 5. and often he says, that to be
taken into Covenant with God, and to be received into the Church is the very
same thing, as to the Universal Church. By which all his gross Schismatical
Accusations afterward are confuted. No man then is out of the Church that is
not out of the Baptismal Covenant, either by not taking it, or by renouncing
some Essential part of it? And when will he prove, that to take him, rather
than Dr. Bates that was cast out, to be a Teacher or Pastor at Dunstans, or to
take this man and not another to be the Lawful Bishop or Priest, and to obey
him in every Oath and Ceremony, is an Essential part of the Baptismal Covenant,
or of Christianity? But such a rope of Sand, as Mr. Dodwell and this man tie
together, to bind men to their Sect, will serve turn with some that know not
who speaks Truth, by any surer way than prejudice.

. 10. His Doctrine of Separation and gathering Churches out of Churches is anon
to be considered: But whereas he adds, p. 7. [ These men convert Christians
from common Christianity, and the Communion of the Universal Church to
Independency.]

Ans. My acquaintance with them is small, save by reading their Books: And
there are few Men of any Common Denomination (Episcopal, or other) that are not
in many things disagreed. But I must in Charity to them say, that as far as I
can judge by their Writings or Speech, he palpably slandereth them; and that
none that are grave and sober among them do separate their Churches from the
common Christianity or the Universal Church, any more than the Company of
Stationers, Ironmongers, etc. are separated from the City of London, or London
from England, or Trinity College from the University of Cambridge or Oxford. I
never met with man, and I am confident never shall do, that does not take his
Independent Church to be part of the Universal, and Dependent as a part on the
whole. If belying others stopped at words, the wrong were small: But when it is
made but the stairs to hatred and destroying, it is his way to cure Schism that
is commonly painted with Horns and Cloven feet. If a man come from a Country
Village and be made by Covenant a Citizen of London, how prove you that he
renounceth King or Kingdom?

But he says, p. 9. Those who wilfully separate from the Corporation to which
the Charter was granted, forfeit their Interest in the Charter.

Ans. What Reader does this man presume upon that will not ask him, how he
proves 1. That Gods Law or Charter to his Church does not require them to
congregate in distinct single Churches (as London Charter does to erect several
Companies, and the Universities several Colleges?) 2. And that God has not in
his Word given order or command for such single Churches: But that the Apostles
and Titus by fixing Elders to their several Churches and Cities, separated from
the Universal Church? 3. And that their subordinate Churches have not need of
distinct subordinate consent and duty: And that our Diocesan Churches all
separate from the Universal? Did he think these things need no proof at all?

It may be he will say that the Diocesan depend on the Universal, but the
Presbyterian or Independent do not.

I Answer, Dependence is either that of Subjects on Sovereign or Magistrates
for Government, or that of a Community of Equals for Communion. In the former
respect they depend on none but Christ as Universal Sovereign, Nor on any
Foriegners for Governments: In the latter, they depend on all true Churches for
Communion: And Doctor Hammond and most Diocesans hitherto have said that
Diocesan Churches are thus far Independent or National at most.

And if any be for a Foreign Jurisdiction, in Charity before they persuade
England to it, they should procure them a Dispensation from all the Oaths, that
have sworn all this Kingdom against endeavoring any change of Government, and
against a Foreign Jurisdiction: For some Fanatics now Dream that PER is the
Mark of the Beast, and that (...) (which is the number of his Name, is nominal
as well as numeral, and refers to [ CH-urch (...) (and) STate] (For as for them
that find a man's name in them, I abhor their Exposition more.)

. 11. P. 9. [ God (says he) has not made any Covenant in particular with the
Church of Geneva, France or England, etc.

A. 1. God has made one General Law, for Christians congregating with their
fixed Elders or Bishops in particular Churches all the World over: And his
Command is not without Promise of being with them to the End of the World; and
that Promise becomes a Promise to every Church so congregate. God has not
made distinct Laws or Promises to every Christian: But the Promise to Justify
all Believers justifies each single Person when he believes. If the King
should make one common Law to command all his Subjects that are Freeholders to
live in Corporations or Hundreds, described with their privileges, those
privileges would be all theirs that are so incorporated: As one Charter may
Privilege every London Company, diversified by subordinate Agreements.

2. And that God who will have them thus incorporated and distributed into
several single Churches, does Covenant (or Promise) according to their demerits
to each. Do I need to recite the peculiar Promises and threats to the seven
Asian Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. which are Covenants to them?

. 12. Next Page 10. He will tell us what Communion is, and in many words, it is
to tell us that Communion is nothing but Union: I know that quoad notationem
nominis, Communion may signify, Union with others: But they that write
Politics have hitherto distinguished Union and Communion, taking Communion for
Actual Communication, or exercise of the duties of men in Union? But to speak
cross to other Writers on the same Subjects and give no reason for it, and to
confound Union and Communion, is one part of this edifying Resolution.

. 13. Page 11. [ Our Communion with the Church consists in being members of the
Church, which we are made by Baptism,] (says he.)

Then the Baptized are still in Communion with the Church, till their baptism
be nullified: And has he proved us Apostates?

. 14. Page 12. Should any man who is no member of the Church, nor owns himself
to be so, intrude into the Church and Communicate in all Holy Offices, it is no
Act of Communion, etc.

A. I thought communicating ordinarily in Holy Offices, had gone for an owning
of Communion: If it do not, would you would tell us how to know who are of your
Church.

. 15. P. 13. Says he ( Church Communion does not consist in particular Acts of
Communion, which can be performed among those who are present and Neighbors,
but in membership: Now as a member is a member of the whole Body (not merely of
any part of it, etc.) All the Subjects of England who never saw nor converst
with each other, are members of the same Kingdom.]

A. 1. That word [ meerly] has more Craft than Justice or Honesty: Merely
signifies Only I suppose; and if he would make his Reader think that they that
are for single Church peculiar membership and consent, do take themselves to be
[ merely or only] members of those single Churches, and not of the Universal,
it is shameless injury.

2. Will he ever draw men to conformity by making them believe, that because
they owe Common Communion to all Christians, therefore we owe no special duty
to the Bishops, Priests, Churches or Neighbors where we are settled? Do the Men
of one College, School, Corporation, owe no more duty to that than to all
others? Do the Freeholders of Bedford-shire choose Knights for Middlesex; or
the Citizens of Oxford choose Officers in London? These seem strange
Resolutions to us.

3. But does he remember that [ if Communion consist not in Acts of Communion
to such, but in membership even with the distant,] then he that is baptized,
and no Apostate, and performs no other Acts of Communion to the Bishops,
Parson or People where he lives, than he is bound to perform to them a hundred
or thousand miles off, is no Separatist. Methinks this favors Separation too
much.

. 16. Page 14. When he denied any Divine Covenant to make us members of
particular Churches distinguished from the Universal (as all National, Diocesan
and Parochial are, as parts from the whole) he presently* confuteth all again,
saying [ The exercise of Church Communion as to most of the particular duties
and Offices of it must be confined to a particular Church and Congregation (for
we cannot actually join in the Communion of Prayers and Sacraments, etc. but
with some particular Church.]

A. Oportuit fuisse memorem, -- 1. Reader, does not this man here confess that
there are particular Churches? 2. If these be not distinct from the whole, then
each particular is the whole. 3. If the Exercise must be in particular
Churches, must not men Consent to their Relations and Duties? Is it a sin to
Promise Duty? 4. Sure it is not mere Place, but a mutual Relation of Pastors
and People that distinguishes these Churches. The Presbyterians preached once
in the same Places that you do, and yet you take them not for the same Church
Pastors. If one from York or Cornwall come into your Pulpit without consent, do
People stand as much related to him as to you? Some men are of extraordinary
sufficiency to resist and conquer the clearest evidence of Truth.

But he adds [ every Act of Communion tho performed to some particular Church,
is and must be an Act of Communion with the whole Catholic Church.]

A. And who denies this? No sober Independent or Presbyterian that ever I met
with. It Is a weighty Truth.

. 17. P. 14. Says he [ Praying, and Hearing and Receiving the Lords Supper
together does not make us more in Communion with the Church of England than
with any other true and Orthodox part of the Church, tho in the remotest part
of the World.]

A. I think that is not true: With the remotest parts you have only Catholic
Communion with the Church Universal: In England and London you have that and
more; even special subordinate Communion with your own King, Bishop and Flock.

2. And has not the Church of England such Communion in obedience to its own
Laws; (as the Act of Uniformity,) Convocation and Canons, which you have not
with all abroad? Do your Bishops in Convocation make Canon Laws for all the
World? Do you Swear Canonical obedience as much to the Bishop of Paris, or
Haffnia, etc. as to your Ordinary? Do the Canons of all Churches impose our
Liturgy, or ipso facto excommunicate all that affirm any thing in it, or our
Ceremonies or Church Government, to be against Gods word? Sure this is a
peculiar kind of Communion.

3. If not, why are all the Nonconformists cast out that offer to officiate and
Communicate on such terms as are common to all sound Churches?

Page 15. Says he [ There is nothing in all these Acts of Communion which does
more peculiarly unite us to such a particular Church than to the whole
Christian Church.]

A. What, neither in these Acts nor any other! Then we are no more bound to
hear you, or maintain you as our Pastor, than to hear and maintain the whole
Christian Church.

. 18. P. 20. Says he [ There is no other Rule of Catholic Communion for
private Christians, but to communicate in all Religious Offices and all Acts of
Government and Discipline with Christians those with whom they live.

A. 1. Elsewhere you added [ sound and Orthodox:] Else they that live with
Arians, Socinians, Papists (in Spain, France, Italy, etc.) are bound to
communicate with them in all Religious Offices and obey them. 2. This
concludes, that where Presbytery or Independency is the way of the place where
we live, all must thus communicate and obey. The King and Custom then may make
any way to become our Duty. 3. If you tell us that it is only with the Sound and
Orthodox, you were as good say nothing, unless you tell us who must judge that,
whether the People themselves, or who for them. 4. But if this be the only rule
for private Christians, what shall they do, e. g. in Aethiopa, Egypt, Syria,
and many other Countries where the Churches are such as General Councils and
other Churches judge Heretics or Schismatics? And what shall they do, when at
Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople, etc. one party is uppermost (by the
Judgment of Councils and Prince) one Year, and another contrary party the next.
And what shall they do where the Prince equally tolerateth both, and it is hard
to know which is the more numerous? as in Zeno's and Anastasius Reign, etc. And
what shall they do when many Churches in one City are of diverse Tongues, as
well as Customs? Have the Greeks, French and Dutch in London no rule of
Catholic Communion but communicating in all Offices with the English, and
obeying all your Bishops Courts?

. 19. P. 21. Says he [ Distinct and particular Churches which are in Communion
with each other, must have their distinct bounds and limits, as every member
has it is natural and proper place, and Situation in the Body.]

A. Why may not the Greeks, Dutch and French live in Communion with the
Churches London though they live dispersedly among them! In Brandenburg,
Hassia, and many free Cities, and Belgia, where Lutherans and Calvinists (as
called) live together, and own each other as Brethren, why may not both be
Churches of Christ?

. 20. P. 21, 22. A great deal more he has of the like, making Schismatics at
his Pleasure. [ This is plain in the Case of the Presbyterian and Independent
Churches and those other Conventicles -- They are Churches in a Church, --
Nothing can justify the Distinction of Christians into several Churches, but
only such a distance of place as makes it necessary, etc. p. 22. Distinct
Churches in the same place can never be under the same Communion.

A. These things are repeated so often, and the word [ separate] so deceitfully
rolled over and over, that I will answer all together under his third Case at
the End.

. 21. P. 27. See how openly he recanteth most aforesaid: There is a sense
indeed wherein we may be said to be members of one particular Church considered
as distinct from all other particular Churches: But that principally consists
in Government and Discipline. Every Christian is a member of the Whole
Christian Church, and in Communion with it, but he is under the immediate
instruction and Government of his own Bishop and Presbyters, and is bound to
personal Communion with them; and this constitutes a particular Church, in
which all Acts of Worship and all Acts of Discipline and Government are under
the Direction and conduct of a particular Bishop.]

A. Omitting that he seems to make the Parochial Churches no Churches, but
parts of one, here he says all that he seemed to write against, and that those
that he reproacheth hold, allowing the difference of the extent of Churches.
And is it Edifying to read such a discourse, that says and unsaith by
self-contradiction? And he adjoyns 28. p. how by agreement Patriarchal and
National Churches are made! And is not Agreement a humane Contract?

CHAP. II. Of his first Case.
. 1. PAge 31. His first Case, Whether Communion with some Church or other be a
necessary Duty incumbent on Christians:] And he thinks the Resolution of this
is as plain, as whether it be necessary for every man to be a Christian: For
every Christian is baptized into the Communion of the Church.

A. In this I know no Christian adversary to him: But it being the Universal
Church that he gives his proof of necessary Communion with, it is odd to say,
We must have Communion with some Church or other: As if there were more than
one Universal Church. 2. But we grant more, that all that can well, should be
also members of some single Church.

. 2. P. 32. He says [External and Actual Communion is an Essential duty of a
Churchmember ( meaning a Christian.)]

A. 1. And yet before he denied that Communion lay essentially in this
Exercise, but only in Union: Yea and Nay is his Custom. 2. Some few Christians
(as those that live where such Communion cannot be had without sin, etc.) are
not bound to it; therefore it is not true that it is Essential to Universal
Church Membership. And I think sickness ends not the essentials, that
disableth men.

3. Note Reader, that by this man's Doctrine we are all unchristened and damned
if we do not gather into disallowed Churches, if we be unjustly cast out of the
allowed ones: For all must be Church members that will be Christians, and an
unjust Excommunication cannot disoblige us from Christianity, nor bind us to
consent to be damned. Now read the 5th 6th 7th 8th, etc. Canons of the Church
of England, which ipso facto Excommunicate all that affirm any thing in their
Liturgy, Articles, Ceremonies or Government sinful, and answer Spalatensis
arguments against Excommunicating ipso facto, and prove all this just, and you
may prove what you will just. But you see where he lays the Controversy: If
any be Excommunicated without sufficient cause, or by Lay Civilians to whom God
never gave that power, or by such Bishops or Pastors as have no just Authority
for want of a true call or Consent; or if any unlawful thing be made necessary
to Communion, all such persons must by his own confessions hold
Church Communion whether these imposers will or not; for all Christians are
bound to be of some Church.

. 3. p. 33, 34. He says that [ None but public Prayers are the Prayers of the
Church properly, and acts of Communion, that is, such as are offered by the
hands of men authorized and set apart for that purpose, etc.]

Ans. Who would have thought that we are more for the Liturgy than he? I
undertake to prove, that all the Responsal Prayers, and all the Litany Prayers,
in which the Minister names but the matter to them, and the People make it a
Prayer by speaking the petitioning parts, are all the public Prayers of the
Church, and so are all the petitioning Psalms spoke or sung by the People, and
not only that which is offered by the Priest: I do not think that he believes
what he carelessly says here, himself.

But the Independents are stiffer for his first Thesis (of the necessity of
Church Communion) than he is, his unfit words I pass by.

CHAP. III. Of his second Case.
. 1. THE next question of Occasional Communion as distinct from fixed, he turns
out of doors, as if there could be no such thing, and it is very true as to the
Church universal; but as to visible, actual Communion with this or that
particular Church, it is not true.

1. A Traveller of another Country, who on his journey communicates with every
Church where he passes, is not a fixed Member of that Church: for, 1. The
Pastor or Bishop has not that peculiar Charge of him as of fixed members. 2.
He is not bound where he passes to take such notice of the lives of
Communicants or Pastors, and to admonish the Offenders, and tell the Church, as
fixed members are. 3. He has not the right in chooseing Pastors or Deacons as
the fixed Members have. 4. An itinerant Bishop in transitu is not their fixed
Bishop; ergo an Iterant Layman is not a fixed Member.

The same I may say of one that is a fixed member of another Church in the same
City, and comes to that only to signify universal Communion, or neighbourly;
which, though he deny to be lawful, I shall further prove anon.

And the same I may say of those that dwell where there is no fixed single
Church at all, for want of a Pastor, but they congregate only when some strange
Minister passes through the Town.

CHAP. IV. His third Case.
. 1. PAge 48, 49. He resolves his third Case: [ Whether it be lawful to
Communicate with two distinct and separate Churches] negatively, and says, [
It is contrary to all the Principles of Church Communion, as any thing can
possibly be; it is to be contrary to our selves, it is Communicating with
Schism: That the Presbyterian and Independent Churches have made an actual
separation from the Church of England he has evidently proved; -- and they are
Schismatics, and to communicate with them is to partake in their Schism; and
if Schism be a great sin, and that which will damn us as soon as Adultery and
Murder, then it must needs be a dangerous thing to communicate with
Schismatics. And p. 42. There cannot be two distinct Churches in one place,
one for occasional, and another for constant Communion, without Schism.]

Ans. To save those that are willing from the Poison of these Schismatical
Doctrines, lapt up in confusion by men that abhor distinction, or understand
not what they say; I will first lay down that truth that he fights against,
with convincing evidence, and then show you the mischief of his false Doctrine
and Application.

. 2. The confusion of these words [ Church, Communion, Separation and Schism]
which every one signify diverse things, is the chief means to blind and deceive
his Reader; whether it do so by himself I know not.

I. The Word Church signifies sometime the universal Church; sometime a single
Organized Church as part of it, and sometime humane combinations of such single
Churches; and that into Diocesan, Classical, Provincial, Patriarchal, National,
and Papal.

II. The Specification and Nomination of Churches is from the formal cause, and
the proper Government is that form: And the Individuation is from matter and
form, but principally from the form.

III. The Union of Pastor and Flock in Relation makes that which is a form
aptitudinal (as the Soul to the Body) to be the form in act (as the Union of
Soul and Body) and Gods command and consent with the consent of the necessary
relate and correlate cause that union.

IV. Union is in order to Communion, which is primary by the exercise of the
formal powers on the matter, and secondary by the action of all the parts
according to their several capacities and Offices.

V. The Union of the Church is of diverse degrees. 1. The formal Union of the
Head and Body, which makes it essentially the [ Christian Church.] 2. The
Union of the parts among themselves as Christian, which makes them a Body
capable of Union with the Head. 3. The Union of the parts as unequal Organized,
the Official with the rest, which makes it an Organized Body, fit for its
special use and welfare. 4. Union in integrity of parts, which makes it an
entire Body. 5. Union in due temperament and Qualities, which makes it a
healthful Body. 6. Unity in Common Accidents, which make it a Comely Beautiful
Body joined with the rest. But, 7. Union in mutable Accidents is unnecessary
and impossible.

VI. These several degrees of Union are found in Bodies natural and Politic.
1. The Union of Soul and Body makes a man, and an Embryo before it be
organized. 2. The Union of the Body makes it capable of the Souls further
Operation. 3. The Union of the Organical, chief parts, (as Heart, Lungs, etc.)
to the rest make it a true humane Body completed to the nutriment and action
of Life* 4. That it have Hands and Fingers, Feet and Toes, and all integral
parts, makes it an entire Body. 5. The due site, temperament and qualities of
each part make it a sound Body. 6. Comely color, hair, action, going, speech,
etc. make it a comely Body. 7. To have all parts of equal quantity and office,
would make it uncomely: And to have the same hair, color, etc. is unnecessary
at all.

1. The Union of King and Subjects as such makes a Kingdom. 2. That the People
be agreed; for one conjunct interest and Government makes them a Community
capable of Polity or Government. 3. That there be Judges, Majors and Justices,
and subordinate Cities or Societies, makes it an Organized Body, in which
Kingly Government may be exercised to its end, the common good. 4. That no
profitable part be wanting, (Judge, Justice, Sheriff, etc.) makes it an entire
Kingdom. 5. That all know their place, and be duly qualified with Wisdom, Love,
Justice, Conscience, Obedience to God first, to the Sovereign Power next, to
Officers next, etc. makes it a sound and safe Kingdom. 6. That it be well
situate, fertile, rich, eminent in Learning, Skill, etc. makes it an adorned
beautiful Kingdom. 7. That all be equal in Power and wealth is destructive; and
that all be of one Age, complexion, calling, temper, degree of knowledge, etc.
is impossible: And that all have the same language, clothing, utensils, etc.
is needless at least.

VII. Jesus Christ is the only Universal Sovereign of the Church, both of vital
influence and Government; nor has he set up any under him, either Monarchical,
Aristocratical, Democratical, or mixed, Pope, Council, or diffused Clergy, that
has the Power of Legislation and Judgment as governing the whole Chorch; but
only Officers that per parts govern it among them, each in his Province, as
Justices do the Kingdom, and Kings and States the World; nor is any capable of
more.

VIII. To set up any universal Legislators and Judge, (Pope or Council) is to
set up an Usurper of Christ's Prerogative, called by many a Vice-Christ or an
Antichrist; and as bad as making one man or Senate the Sovereign of all the
Earth; and to attempt the setting up of such or any foreign Jurisdiction in
this Land, is to endeavor to perjure the whole Kingdom that is sworn against
it in the Oath of Supremacy, and sworn never to endeavor any alteration of
Government in Church or State in the Corporation Oath, the Vestry Oath, the
Militia Oath, the Oxford Oath, with the Uniformity Covenants: And if any should
endeavor to introduce such a foreign Jurisdiction who themselves have had a
hand in driving all the Kingdom to all these Oaths against it, I doubt whether
all the Powers of Hell can devise a much greater crime against Clergy, Cities,
and all the Land. Good reason therefore had Doctor Isaac Barrow to write
against it as he has done, and to confute Mr. Thorndike, and all such as of
late go that pernicious way, by the pretense of Church Union and Communion. As
if one universal Sovereign and Legislator and Judge, were not enough to unite
Christ's Kingdom, or man could mend his universal Laws, and could not stay for
his final judgment; and Churches and Kingdoms might not till then be ruled
without one humane universal Sovereign by necessary and voluntary agreement
among themselves.

XI. To be a true Believer or Christian, (or the Infant seed of such) devoted
to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, according to the sense of the Baptismal
Covenant, uniteth each Member first to Christ himself directly, and
consequently to his Body or Church; and this coram Deo, as soon as it is done
by heart consent; and coram Ecclesia, regularly, as soon as he is invested by
Baptism; which Baptism, when it may be had so, is regularly to be administered
by none but an authorized Minister or Deacon; but if through necessity or
mistake it be done by a Layman, the Ancient Christians took it not for a
nullity, much less if the Baptizer was taken for a Minister by mistake, being
in his place; and if no Baptism can be had, open covenanting is vallid.

X. The Papists (and their truckling Agents here) have here hampered themselves
in a fatal contradiction: To make themselves masters of the World, they would
persuade us, that Sacraments only regenerate and sanctify, and that God saves
none (by any known way and grant) but by his Covenant Sealed by the Sacraments;
and that he authorizeth none to administer this Covenant but Prelates and their
Priests, and none can validly have it from other hands: And so if you will but
abate them the proof of many things that stand in the way, Heaven and Hell,
Salvation and Damnation are at the will and mercy of such Prelates and Priests.
But unhappily they cannot retrieve their old Opinion, but maintain that Laymen
and Women may baptize in necessity validly, and that Baptism puts one into a
State of Salvation.

XI. As he that swears and keeps his Allegiance to the King is a Subject and
Member of the Kingdom, though he be no Member of any Corporation; so, though he
disown a thousand fellow Subjects; yea, though he deny the Authority of
Constable, Justice, Judge; so he that is devoted to Christ truly in the
Baptismal Covenant, is a Christian, and a Member of the Universal Church,
though he were of no particular Church, or did disown a thousand Members, or
any particular Officer of the Church.

XII. All faults or crimes are not Treason: A man that breaks any Law, is in
that measure Culpable or punishable: but every breach of Law, or wrong to
fellow Subjects or Justices, as it is not Treason, so it does not prove a man
no Subject; though some may be so great as to deserve death and make him
intolerable: And so it is in the case of our Subjection in the Church to Christ.

XIII. To own Christ's Instituted species of Church Officers is needful to the
just Order, Safety and Edification of the Church (as to own the Courts of
Judicature, Justices, etc. in the Kingdom) but to own this or that numerical
Officer as truly commissioned, is needful only to the right administration of
his own Province.

XIV. As Christ did his own work of universal Legislation by himself and his
Spirit eminently in the Apostles and Evangelists, who have recorded all in
Scripture, so he settled Churches to continue to the end associated for
Personal Communion in his holy Doctrine, Worship, Order and Conversation with
authorized Ministers, subordinate to his administration in his Prophetical,
Priestly, Kingly and Friendly Relations. And tho these may not always or often
meet in the same place, their neighborhood makes them capable of Personal
presential Communion, as men that may know and admonish each other and meet by
turns, and in presence manage their concerns; which differenceth single
Churches of the lowest order from associated Churches of men, that have
Communion only by others at distance.

XV. As Logicians say of other Relations, the matter must be capable of the
end, or it is not capable of the name and form; so is it here* e. g. It is no
Ship that is made of mere Sponge or Paper, or that is no bigger than a Spoon;
it is no Spoon that is as big as a Ship: One House is not a Village, nor one
Village a City, nor a City a mere House. So twenty or an hundred or a thousand
Parishes associate, cannot be a single Church of the first or lowest Order,
being not capable of mutual Knowledge, Converse or personal present Communion:
Nor are two or three Laymen capable to be such a Church, for want of due
matter. But supposing them capable, tho a full and rich Church have advantage
for Honor and Strength, yet a small and poor one is ejusdem ordinis as truly
a Church; and so is their Pastor, as Hierom says of Rome and Eugubium; so
Alexandria and Majuma, etc. Gregory Neocaesar was equally Bishop of nineteen at
first, as after of all save nineteen in the City.

XVI. If the Apostles have Successors in their care and Superiority over many
Churches, it will prove that there should yet be men of eminent worth to take
care of many Churches, and to instruct and admonish the younger Ministers: But
it will neither prove 1. That they succeed the Apostles in the extraordinary
parts of their Office. 2. Nor that they have any forcing power by the Sword. 3.
Nor that one Church has power over others by Divine right; for the Apostles
fixed not their power to any particular Churches, but were general Visitors or
Overseers of many: Yet if the same Man who is fixed in a particular Church,
have also the visiting admonishing oversight of many as far as was an Ordinary
part of the Apostles Office, and be called an Archbishop, I know no Reason to
be against him.

XVII. There be essential and Integral Acts of the Sacred Ministry instituted
by Christ: These none may take the Power of from any Ministers, nor alter the
species or integrity of the Office, by setting up any such Superious as shall
deprive them of that which Christ has instituted, or arrogating the like
uncalled. But as in worship, so in Order and Church Government, there are
undetermined accidents: As to choose the time and place of Synods, to preside
and moderate and such like: And these the Churches by agreement, or the
Magistrate may assign to some above the rest: And if the Magistrate affix
Baronies, Honors, Revenues, or his own due Civil forcing Power, and make the
same Men Magistrates and Ministers, whether we think it prudent and well done
or not, we must honor and obey them.

XVIII. Some call these humane Accidental Orders, forms of Church Government,
and affirm (as Bishop Reignolds did, and Dr. Stillingfleet in his Irenicon and
many excellent men by him cited) that no form of Church Government is of Divine
Command. Which is true of all this second sort of Government which is but
Accidental and humane; but not at all of the first sort which is Divine and
Essential to Christ himself first, and to Pastors as such by his appointment;
so that the essential Government of the Universal Church, by Christ, and of
each particular Church by Pastors specified by him (if not of Supervisors of
many as succeeding Apostles and Evangelists in their Ordinary work) are of
unalterable Divine right. But the humane forms are alterable: Such I account 1.
The Presidency and Moderatorship and accidental Government of one Bishop in a
single Church over the other Presbyters, Deacons, etc. 2. The accidental
Government of a Diocesan as an Archbishop over these lowest Bishops and
Churches. 3. And the Superiority of Metropolitans and Patriarchs over them, so
it be but in such Accidentals and within the same Empire, not imposing a
foreign Jurisdiction. These tota specie differ from the Divine Offices.

XIX. All these single Church being parts of the Universal are less noble than
the whole, and are to do all that they do as members in Union with the Whole,
and to do all as Acts of Communion with them.

XX. The General precepts of doing all to Edification, Concord, Peace, Order,
etc. oblige all the Churches to hold such correspondencies as are needful to
these Ends: And Synods are one special means, which should be used as far and
often as the Ends require: And if National Metropolitans and Patriarchs order
such Synods, I am not one that will disobey them. But if on these pretenses any
would make Synods more necessary than they are, and use them as Governors, by
Legislation and Judgment over the Particular Bishops by the use of the Church
Keys, and will affixe to them or Metropolitans, besides an Agreeing Power and
the said Government in Accidentals, a proper Church Government by making and
unmaking Ministers or Christians, excommunicating and absolving as Rulers by
the said Keys, it may be a duty to disown such usurpations. As the King would
disown an Assembly of Princes any where met that would claim a Proper
Government of him and his Kingdom; Tho it were much to be wished that all
Christian Princes would hold such Assemblies for the Concord and Peace of
Christendom.

XXI. The Essentials of Faith, Hope and Loving Prac^^ce, essentiate the Church
objectively: And these are all summarily contained in the Baptismal Covenant,
explained in the Creed, Lords Prayer and Decalouge; and all with much more,
even Integrals and needful Accidentals in the Sacred Scriptures, which taking
in the Law of Nature, are Gods Universal Law.

XXII. There is no Church on Earth so sound and Orthodox as to want no Integral
part of Christian Religion: Proved: There is no man on Earth, much less any
multitude, so sound as to want no Integral part: But all Churches consist only
of Men; And therefore if all the Men be so far defective, all the Churches are
so.

It is not their Objective Religion Generally and implicitly received that I
mean, but their Subjective Religion, and their explicit reception of the
Objective. The Scripture is our perfect Objective Religion in it self, and as
an Object proposed, and in general and implicitly we all receive it. But as a
man may say, I believe all that is in the Scripture, and yet be ignorant of the
very Essentials in it; so a man may explicitly know and believe all the
Essentials and more, and yet be ignorant of many Integrals.

All things in Scripture proposed to our Faith, Hope and Practice, are the
Integrals of our Religion: But no Christian understands all these proposals
or words of Scripture: Therefore no Christian explicitly believes them all,
or practiceth all. To hold the contrary, is to hold that some Church is perfect
in Understanding, Faith, Hope and Practice, without Ignorance, Error or Sin:
that is, not to know what a man or a Christian on Earth is.

XXIII. Much less do all Churches agree in unnecessary indifferent accidents,
nor ever did, nor ever will or can do.

XXIV. The measuring out Churches by limits of Ground, Parochial or Diocesan,
is a mere humane ordering of a mutable accident, and no Divine Determination:
And if all were taken for Church members-because they dwell in those precincts,
it were wicked: But if it be but all in those precincts that are qualified
Consenters, it is usually a convenient measure: But such as in many Cases must
be broken.

XXV. If a Church with Faithful Pastors be well settled in a place first where
there are not more than should make up that one Church, it is not meet for any
there to gather a distinct Church (tho of the same Faith) without such weighty
reason as will prove it necessary, or like to do more good than hurt: 1.
Because Love inclines to the greatest Union; 2. Because a Great Church is more
strong and honorable than a small, if the number be not so great as to hinder
the Ends. 3. And the Ancient Churches kept this Union.

XXVI. If Magistrates make such Laws about Church Accidents as tend to further
the Churches welfare, or are so pretended, and not against it, we must obey
them. But if they will either invade Christ's Authority or cross it, by making
Laws against his, or such as are proper to his Prerogative to make, or invade
the Pastors Office, and the Churches proper right given by Christ, or determine
Accidents to the Destruction of the Substance (the Church, Doctrine, Worship or
Ends) these bind the Consciences of none to Obedience; but Christ must be
obeyed, and we must patiently suffer.

XXVII. Self-interest, Self-Government and Family-Government are all antecedent
to Public Government, which Rules them for the Common good, but has no
Authority to destroy them: No King or Prelate can bind a man to do that which
would damn his Soul, nor to omit that which is needful to his Salvation: All
power is for Edification: They are Gods Ministers for Good.

XXVIII. As it belongs to self-government to choose our own Diet, and Clothes,
and Wives, and Physicians, (tho we may be restrained from doing public hurt on
such pretenses;) And it belongs to Family Government to educate our own
Children, and choose their Tutors, Callings, Wives, etc. so it more nearly
belongs to self-government to choose the most safe and profitable means of our
own Salvation, which no man may forbid us; and to avoid that which is
pernicious or hurtful; and to Family-Government to do the like for our Children.

XXIX. It is false Doctrine of those late Writers who tell us, that only
Sacraments sanctify or give right to Salvation: The whole Tenor of the Gospel
tells us that men are brought to Faith and Repentance, and to be Christians,
and Godly men, and by Faith to be justified, by the Preaching of the Gospel:
and that Gods word is his appointed means of Salvation, which his Ministers
must preach skilfully, instantly, in season and out of season, to that End: And
if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

XXX. The Gospel saves not like a Charm, by the bare sound or saying of the
words; nor the Sacrament like an Amulet; But as a Moral means (specially blessed
by him that instituted it) to work on man as M^n, by informing his Mind,
persuading his Will and exciting his Affections, as Men are wrought on in other
Cases; (which methinks those called Arminians should least deny, who are said
to lay more of the Spirits operation on Moral suasion than their Adversaries;
yea and those that account it Fanaticism to expect any other gift of Prayer
from the Spirit but what is given morally by use.) And the contrary Doctrine
feigneth God to Work even constantly by Miracle: And as the Papists make every
Mass-Priest a Miracle Worker in Transubstantiation, so do they that make the
bare saying over the Words and doing the outward Acts in the Sacrament, to save
us ex opere operato, and the Pastoral teaching and oversight of an ignorant
drunken Lad or Reader to be (near) as great a help to Salvation, as the
Ministry of a wise skilful, Holy and exemplary Pastor, and the clear
affectionate Preaching of Gods word: And that tell us (as Mr. Dodwell) how
sufficient a man is to administer the Sacramental Covenant that understands
what a Covenant is in matters of Common Conversation.

XXXI. If a Wise and Skilful and Conscionable Ministry be as needless to
Edification and Salvation as some Men pretend, it is as needless that they
should study to be such, and vain to Glory that they are such, and that the
Church of England has such a Ministry, and vain to expect that men should pay
them any more respect than I owed my Master that never preached but once, and
that drunken; (and diverse very like him.) Or that they should use this as an
argument to draw men to hear them.

XXXII. If the King or Law should settle a Physician of his (or a Patrons)
choice in every Parish, it were well done if it be but to have help at hand for
Volunteers: But if he command all to use them and to use no other before them
or against them, where unskilful or untrusty men are placed, no man is bound to
obey this command: No men's Law can dissolve the Law of Nature, nor disoblige a
man from a due care of his Life, nor bind him to cast it away upon Obedience to
ignorant or bad and treacherous Men. And a man's Soul is more precious than his
Health or Life; and he is bound to greater care of it; and is no more to trust
it on the will of his Superiors How vast is the difference between an ignorant
rash Physician or Pastor, and one that is wise, experienced and trusty? They
that scorn Men for going for greater edification from one to another, do not so
if a man prefer a skilful Physician to one that kills more than he cures; or a
skilful and careful Tutor for his Son, yea or a Farrier for his Horse.

XXXIII. If one Preacher be not for Edification to be great^^ preferred before
another, then One Book is not: And so it is no matter what Book they read or
value; and what a Student will this make? And what a Trade for the Booksellers?
And why then should their own Books be so valued? And why then do they silence
hundreds or thousands and forbid them to preach on pain of ruin, (tho no false
Doctrine be proved against them) if they think not that the difference is very
great.

XXXIV. When Councils hereticated and condemned Thousands or Hundreds of
Priests and Bishops, whom Christian Emperors and Princes owned as Orthodox,
they did not then think every Patron, Prince or Prelate a competent Judge with
what Pastor Men should trust the conduct of their Souls: Nor did they think so
that forbad men hearing fornicators; Nor Cyprian that required the People to
forsake Basilides and Martial (and Peccatorem Praepositum.)

XXXV. So full was the proof given in the Book called, The first Plea for
Peace, that the Church from the beginning denied Princes and Magistrates to be
entrusted with the choice of Bishops, or Pastors to whom the Churches were
bound to trust the conduct of their Souls, that he who denies it, is not
worthy to be therein disputed with. And yet we doubt not but they may force
Infidel Subjects and Catechumens to hear sound and settled Preachers and
Catechists; And may dispose of the Tithes, Temples and many other Accidents of
the Church; and may drive on Pastors and People to their Duty.

XXXVI. It is false Doctrine that two distinct Churches may not be in the same
Precincts or City; This being a mere Accident which abundance of Cases make
unnecessary and unlawful: Which I shall prove.

That which is no where commanded by God, is no duty: But that there shall be
but one Church (or Bishop) in the same Precincts, is not commanded of God,
Ergo, etc. (Divine of Gods making.)

They own the Major in the case of Indifferent thing. If they deny the Minor
let the affirmers prove any such command. We grant a command of Love and
Concord, and a prohibition of all that is against them. But in many instances,
to have several Churches in the same precincts, is not against them.

If they fly to the Canons of foreign Councils, the reason of them we shall
weigh and duly regard; But they were National, and had their Legislative Power
only from their own Princes and their Counselling Power only from Christ: And
we disown all foreign Jurisdiction.

XXXVII. In all these Cases following (and more) two Churches may be in the
same precincts (yea and a City.)

1. In Case that several Bishops are called justly to dwell in the same City,
or Diocese, and many of their Flock be with them, e. g. Many Bishops of England
dwell long, yea mostly in London or in London Diocese: e. g. The Bishop of Eli
dwells in the Parish of St. Andrews Holbourn: Qu. Whether there he be a Subject
to Dr. Stillingfleet as his Pastor, and bound to obey him? or whether many out
of his Diocese (thousands) may not as Lawfully dwell half the Year in London as
he? And whether when he preaches to them, he do it not as their Bishop (in
London Diocese.) And so of many other Bishops that here reside.

XXXVIII. 2. Either our Parish Churches are true Churches, or not. If not, the
Separatists are so far in the right; And separate not from true Churches eo
nomine because they separate from them. If yea, then many Churches are in the
same City and Diocese. (Of their agreement and dependence on the same Bishop I
shall speak anon.)

XXXIX. 3. In case that in one City there be resident Stranges, that are sent
on Embassies, or live for Merchandise, or flee from Miseries, and are the
Subject of other Princes, whose Laws and Customs they are under, e. g. At
Frankford, Hamburgh, Middleburgh, Dantzick, Constantinople, there have been
English distinct lawful Churches: And in London there are Dutch and French
Churches: And if the King allowed a Swedish Church, a Danish Church, a Saxon
Church, etc. with their several Bishops, who is so weak as to need proof that
this is lawful, and they true Churches?

XL. 4. In case men of different Language are not capable of mutual converse by
personal communion or help: As Dutch, French, Italian, Greeks, Germans, etc.
Grotius and Dr. Hammond (often in Dissert. and Annot.) do maintain that Peter at
Rome had a Church of Jews, and Paul a Church of Gentiles: And that the like
distribution of Churches of Jews and Gentiles, there was at Antioch, Alexandria
and other places: And by this they Salve the Contradictions in Church History
about the Succession of Linus, Cletus and Clemens: And the Apostles settled not
a sinful Church way.

XLI. 5. Yea Grotius maintains that the Apostles settled the Churches at first
not like the Jewish Priesthood, but in the order of their Synagogues; ( de
Imper. sum. Patest. and in Annot.) And that as there were diverse Synagogues in
a great City with their Archisynagogus and Elders, so there were diverse
Churches in a City with Bishops and Presbyters.

XLII. 6. When there are a greater number of Persons in one City or precinct
than can have any just personal Knowledge and Communion, and more than any one
Bishop with his Presbytery can perform the needful Pastoral oversight to, it is
lawful and a duty, to gather another Church in that City or Precinct: But this
is truly the Case of many great Cities, though worldly Wisdom have at Rome, and
other places often denied notorious evidence and experience. He that will gather
up all the duties that Dr. Hammond says were charged on the Bishops (in his
Annotations on all the Texts that name Elders and Bishops) if he can believe
that any Bishop can perform the tenth part of them to all in the Diocese of
London, York, Lincoln, Norwich, etc. I will not dispute against him if he
maintain a Bishops Ubiquity, or that at once he can be in twenty places. But if
they say, that what then was commanded them to do personally, they may do by
others, I say, that if they may change the Work, they may change the Power,
that specifieth the Office; and so it is not the same Office in specie
instituted in Scripture: And then Laymen may have Power to preach and
administer Sacraments, and do the Office of Priests, and yet be no Priest (as
Civilians do of Bishops) which is a Contradiction. Certainly if there be more
Scholars in the City than one Master can Teach and Rule, it is no Schism to set
up more Schools and Schoolmasters, but a duty. And if the Lord Mayor on
pretense of City Government should put down but as great a part of Family
Government, as those Diocesans do of Parochial Church Government, who allow
none under them to be truly Episcopi Gregis, and have the power of their Church
Keys, I think that it were no Schism to restore Families so that the City
might have more than one (entirely.)

XLIII. 7. If the Sovereign Power upon Politic or Religious Reasons should
determine, that e. g. Dr. A, and Dr. B, and Dr. C. shall all be Bishops in
London, to such Volunteers of Clergy and Laity as shall choose each of them to
be their Bishop, and this without altering their dwellings, no man can prove it
sinful; And of his reasons the King is judge.

XLIV. 8. If the Bishop or Clergy of a City, Diocese or Nation, do agree by Law
or Canon to admit none to the Ministry or Communion that will not commit a
known sin deliberately as the Condition of his Communion, it is a duty to
congregate under other Pastors in those precincts. This is confessed: If they
should not only hold any error, or practice sin, but require men to subscribe
and approve it, and say it is no sin, no man ought to do this; nor yet to live
like an Atheist, and forsake all Worship because men forbid him, if it were but
to subscribe one untruth: But alas, this is no rare Case: In one Emperors
Reign all were Anathematized that subscribed not to the Council of Chalcedon,
and quickly after all that did, or that would not renounce it: The same
division and changes were made by the Councils against and for the
Monothelites, de tribus Capitulis, Images, etc. And when all Men living have
many Errors, and the Church of England disclaimeth her Infallibility, and yet
will receive no Minister that will not subscribe that there is nothing in her
Books contrary to the word of God, the Case is hard. But when all the things
mentioned in the Plea for Peace are proved lawful, we shall be more yielding in
this Case.

XLV. 9. If true and sound Christians mistakingly think one or many things to
be heinous sins, (as Perjury, Lying, Renouncing Obedience to God, and
Repentance, etc.) which are things indifferent, but of so great difficulty that
most Learned and Godly and Willing Men cannot discern the Lawfulness and agree,
and yet are not necessary nor just conditions of Ministry or Communion, and so
it is the Imposer that entangleth them by difficulty in their dissent, it is
not lawful for these men therefore to forbear all Church Worship, but must use
it as they can.

XLVI. 10. If any Church unjustly excommunicate such men; or others, they must
not forbear all Church order and worship because men so excommunicate them. No
man must Sin to escape Excommunication; and every man in the World is a sinner;
And therefore all the World must be excommunicated, if all Sinners must be so.
As I before said, the times often were when almost all the Bishops in the Empire
were excommunicated by one another: Councils and Popes have often excommunicated
some for trifles and some for Truth end Duty. And such must not therefore
renounce all Church Worship and Communion.

The Church of England do by their standing Law ipso facto excommunicate all
(as aforesaid) that affirm any thing to be repugnant to Gods Word or sinful, in
their whole Church Government, Articles, Liturgy and Ceremonies, and so to
stand till they Publicly revoke this as a wicked Error. Now many Lords and
Commoners in Parliaments, have spoken against some of these particulars; and
some out of Parliament: Many Ministers have done the like when the King
Commissioned them to treat for Alterations; And many when the Accusations or
demands of others have called them to give a Reason of their Actions. Some have
maintained that it is repugnant to Gods word that Lay Civilians should have the
decretive Power of the Keys, and that the Parish Minister must cast out of
Communnion all that the Lay Doctors or Chancellors excommunicate, and all that
dare not receive kneeling, and that they should deny Christendom to all that
scruple the English sort of Godfathers Covenants, and the transient Symbolical
Image of the Cross, with abundance such things: Now all these are ipso sacto
excommunicate. And tho they be not bound to avoid the Church till this be
applicatorily declared, yet actually excommunicate they are, and that by a
higher authority th^n the Bishops; and they know the Churches decree; and the
Priests are sworn to Canonical Obedience; And he that will not tempt them to be
forsworn, nor come into a Church that has excommunicated him, seems therein
excuseable: But must he therefore renounce the Church of God?

XLVII. 11. If the People are so set against one Bishop for another, as that
half being for one and half for the other, and both Orthodox, they cannot be
persuaded to unite in one. A Council at Rome determined in the Case of Paulinus
and Flavian at Antioch, that both of them should hold their distinct Churches,
and so live in love and peace. And though one or both parties in this were
mistaken Sinners, so are all morral men, who yet must not live like Atheists.

XLVIII. 12. An undetermined accident must be so determined as most serves to
do the greatest good and avoid the greatest Evil: But whether diverse Churches
shall promiscuously live in the same City or Diocese or Parish, is an Accident
not determined by God, and either way may be for the greatest good, as
circumstances vary. e. g. When in a Church half cannot consent to condemn the
words of Theodoret, Theodore Mopsuest, and Ibas, and half will condemn them
with the Council; if these can serve God quietly in Love and Peace in different
Congregations, but cannot endure one another in the same, it is most for the
Churches Peace that they be permitted to join with those of their own Mind.

When one Pope declared that it is sound Doctrine to say [ One of the Trinity
was Crucified,] when another had declared that it is not sound Doctrine, they
that held with one Pope, and they that held with the other might both be true
Churches in different Assemblies: When Justinian raised the bloody controversy
between the Corrupticolae and the Phantasiastae, wise men thought both sides
were true Churches: Yea and so did many wise men think of the Orthodox and
Nestorians and many Eutychians.

XLIX. 13. It Is a common case under Turks and Heathens, that they give liberty
of Conscience for Christians of all parties: Now suppose that in A^^ppo, in
Constantinople or elsewhere, there be (partly for Country sake, and partly for
Language, but most for different Judgments) one Church of Armenians, one of
Greeks, one of Englishmen, etc. what Law of God makes only one of these to be
a true Church, and which is it?

L. 14. Suppose that the settled Church e. g. in Holland, Sweden, Saxony, is for
Presbytery, or for an Episcopacy that arose from Presbyters ordination, or that
had none or a short Liturgy, and the Prince would tolerate English men (as
Frankford did) to set up a Church of the English Form and Liturgy, I think few
Prelatists would deny it to be lawful.

LI. I omit other instances, and come to the matter of Separation, which word
serves this man and such other in so general and undistinguished a sense, as
would make one think he were of Mr. Dodwell's mind, That words in dispute have
but one signification, which all are bound to know that use them. Even a Bell
by the same sound sometime signifies a call to Church, and sometime a Funeral,
and sometime Joy; but [ Separate, Separate] is rung over and over with these
men, as if it signified but one thing.

1. He that hears half the Sermon and Service, and goes out of Church, does
Separate at that time from the rest.

When a Protestant Heretic was doing Penitence with his Faggot at St. Mary's
in Oxford, and the Friar was Preaching, a mistaken Voice in the street made
them think the Heretics had set the Church on fire, and they separated from
the Preacher, one Friar stuck by the belly that was going out at the window;
the door being wedged with the crowd, a Boy that saw it open above their heads,
got up on their shoulders, and went on 'till he slipped into a Monks Cowl, and
there lay still 'till the Monk was got out, and felt something on his back, and
thinking it was an heretical Devil, began to conjure him in the Name of Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, to tell him what he was, and the Boy cried, O good Master I
am the Bakers boy, etc. Quaere, Whether this was Schismatics separation.

At Walsall in Staffordshire, Mr. Lapthorne (known to me in his lusty age) who
had been a Nonconformist, but thought it an honor to be converted by a King,
and gloried that King James in conference changed him; but being as rustic a
thunderer as Father Latimer and more, he was wont to let fly without much fear;
one Mr. Martin in the Parish accounted the greatest enemy to Puritans, when he
heard what he liked not, would go out of Church; one day (in a path way where
Mr. Lane had rode a little before) pelting Crabs with a pole, the ground opened
and swallowed him and his pole, that they could never be found (being a
Cole-mine long on fire:) ever after that, when any one would go out of Church
at a blustering passage, Mr. Lapthorne would call to him, Remember Martin;
Quere, Whether all these were separating Schismatics?

But this is too far off: In Dunstans West, where Dr. Sherlock Preaches, when
I was licensed twenty years ago, at Christmas, as I was Preaching, some Lime or
Stone fell down in the Steeple with the crowd, the Church being old and under
suspicion, they all thought it was falling, and most ran out in tumult, and
some cast themselves headlong from the Gallery for have; when they were quieted
and came in again, the Boys in the Chancel broke a Wainscot Skreen with
climbing on it, and the noise made them run out again; one old woman going out,
cried, It Is just with God because I took not the first warning, Lord forgive
me, and I Will never come again: Quere, Whether these, or at least this resolving
Woman was a Schismatic, and separated from the Catholic Church?

If not, there is some separation that is not so bad as Murder; and methinks
the Doctor should forgive it for the success; for the Parish hereupon resolved
to pull down the Church and build it new, a far better Fabric where the Dr.
now Preaches; and it drove me away that I preached there no more; Whether this
new Church built where the old one had possession before, be not a Schismatical
Separatist, I leave to him.

LII. 2. Local Separation without Mental can make no culpable Schism; for Nil
nisi Voluntarium est morale; if a man be imprisoned or be sick and cannot come
to the Church, it is innocent Separation; I have been at no Church this half
year, much against my will, O that God would heal me of this Separation!

LIII. 3. If it must be mental Separation that must be culpable, then it is
diversified according to the mental degree and kind; and no man separateth from
the universal Church who separateth not from somewhat essential to it; to
separate from its Integrals or Accidents may be culpable, but it is no
Separation from the Church, no more than every breach of the Law is a
Separation from the Kingdom.

LIVE. 4. Some separate as to place, locally and not mentally, some mentally and
not locally, and some both: He that daily observes the outward Communion of
the Church, and yet takes it for no Church, or denies its Faith, Hope or
essential Duty, separateth indeed. All those men that live unbelievingly,
atheistically, wickedly, that in their converse prate against the Scripture and
immortality of the Soul, and that hate and persecute serious Godliness, are
damnably separated from Christ, and therefore from the Catholic Church, and
are so to be esteemed so far as this is known, tho when it is unknown, the
Church can take no notice of it.

LV. 5. It being only Humane Laws and Circumstantial Conveniences that make it
unmeet to have diverse Churches and Bishops living promiscuously in the same
Parishes, Cities, Dioceses or Nations; where Laws and circumstances allow it,
it is no unlawful separation.

LVI. 6. He that lives in foreign Lands (Christian, Mohammedan or Heathen)
where various Churches live promiscuously ( Greeks, Armenians, Protestants,
Papists, etc.) is no Schismatic, if he choose which he thinks best, and be
absent locally from the rest, condemning them no further than they deserve.

LVII. 7. He that removes into another Diocese or Parish for his worldly
interest, separateth without fault from the Church he was in.

LVIII. 8. It is a lawful separation to remove ones dwelling, because the
Minister is ignorant, unskilful, or otherwise bad, and this for the better
edification of his Soul, and the use and help of a more able faithful Minister,
even Law and Custom and reason do allow it.

LIX. 9. Tho the Canon 57. and 28. forbid Ministers often to give the Sacrament
to Strangers that come out of other Parishes, even where no Preaching is, yet
those many sober People that use this in London, are not taken to be
Schismatics, as bad as Murderers: Many that are esteemed the most sober
religious Conformists do ordinarily go from their own Parish Churches, some
(in Martins and St. Giles's Parish, etc.) for want of room, and some for more
Edification, to Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Burnet, Dr. Fowler, Mr.
Gifford, Mr. Durham, Mr. Horneck and such others, and communicate with them;
and tho these are called by the late Catholics by the Name of Dangerous
Trimmers, I think even Dr. Sherlock will think it more pardonable than Murder,
if they come to him.

LX. 10. If the King and Law should restore the ancient order that every City,
that is, every great incorporate Town in England should have a Bishop, (yea or
every great Parish) and that the Diocesans should be their Archbishops, and
our new Catholics should tell the King and Parliament that they are hereby
unchristened Schismatics, as dangerous as Adulterers or Murderers, for
gathering Churches within a Church, I would not believe them.

LXI. 11. If ( e. g. at Frankford, Zurick, Lubeck, Hamburgh, etc.) a Church is
settled in the Lutheran way, and another in the Bohemian way, described by
Lasitius and Commenius, (which is a conjunction of Episcopacy, Presbytery and
Independency) or a Church that had no Liturgy, or none but that which the
French Protestants and Dutch have, would it be damning Schism, for such as Cox
and Horn at Frankford to set up an Episcopal Church in the English mode, and
with their Liturgy, and so far to separate from the rest?

LXII. 12. If it be true that John Mayor, Fordon, and others say that
Presbytery was the Government of the Church of Scotland before Episcopacy was
brought in, was the introduction of Episcopacy by Palladius a damning Schism by
separating from the former, or a Reformation; is just Reformation Schism?

LXIII. 13. When the Church first set up Patriarchs, Metropolitans, General
Councils, Monasteries, Parish Churches distinct from Cathedrals, Organs, New
Liturgies, and multitudes of Ceremonies, this was a departing or separating
from the contrary Church way which was there before, was it therefore Schism?

LXIV. 14. When Socrates tells us of some Countries that had Bishops in the
Country Villages (like our Parishes) was it a damning Schism to separate from
this custom, by decreeing that even small Cities should have no Bishops, Ne
vilescat nomen Episcopi? or when the Chorepiscopi were put down, where they had
been?

LXV. 15. If a man separate not from any thing essential to the Church of
England, he separateth not from that Church, though he refuse that which is its
Accidents, or some Integral parts: We are charged with separating from the
Church of England, as if it were a matter of fact beyond dispute, and scorned
for denying it, even by them that will not tell us what they mean by the Church
of England, or by Separation. By the Church of England we mean the Christian
Kingdom of England, or all the Christians in England, as living in one land,
under one Christian King who Governs them by the Sword, which includes their
Concord among themselves in true Christianity; we are Christians, we profess
agreement in Christianity with all Christians we are under the same King as
they are, and profess subjection, and take; the same Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy; yea, we are not charged with differing in any thing called Doctrinal
from their Thirty Nine Articles; but we disown certain late Covenants and Oaths
which are not Twenty three Years old, and the Subscription to one Canon about
the Innocence of all in their Liturgy; now either these new Oaths, Covenants
and Canon, Liturgy and Ceremonies are essential to the Church of England, or
not; If yea, then, 1. It Is a poor humane Church, made by them that made these
Oaths, Liturgy and Ceremonies. 2. And then it is a new upstart Church, and no
man can answer the Papists where it was before Luther, or before Henry 8. yea,
if its essentials were made by this King and Parliament, 1662. then the present
Church is no older: But if these things be indifferent, or not essential to the
Church, then to separate only from these, is not to separate from the Church.

If it be said, That for the sake of these we separate from the Church it self,
and therefore from its essence; we abhor the accusation, and challenge them to
prove it: If we separate from the Church essentially, it is either Locally or
Mentally; not Locally, for we are yet in England, nor is Local distance only a
sin; not Mentally, for we own it for a true Christian Kingdom, called a
National Church, bound to serve Christ in Love and Concord to their Power: We
deny not the King to be the Governor, nor Christians to be Christians, no nor
the particular Churches and Ministers to be true (tho culpable) Churches and
Ministers, nor their Sacraments to be true Sacraments; we profess to hold with
them one Catholic Body, one Spirit, one God, one Christ, one Faith, one
Baptism (in the essentials) and one Hope, and are ready to promise to live in
Concord with them in all other things, as far as will stand with our Obedience
to God; so that we separate not from the Church of England as such, but from
some of its Accidents, which we dare not be guilty of.

LXVI. 16. The same I say of a Parish Church; he that locally removes, e. g.
from a Church that has Organs, to one that has none, separateth from a pair
of Organs, but not Mentally from the Church, unless the Organs be its essence.

LXVII. 17. They that are for the true ancient Episcopacy, ( e. g. as much as
Archbishop Usher's Reduction which we offered did contain) but dislike the Lay
Civilians power of the Keys, and Officials, Surrogates, Archdeacons
Government, etc. do not separate from the Church as Episcopal, but from the
humane Novelties which they disown.

LXVIII. 18. If a Parishioner fall out with his Priest, and they go to Law
about Tithes, Glebes, Words, etc. and the Suit be long, and the man dare not
Communicate with him believing that he hates him, tho the animosity should be
culpable, being but personal, his going from him to another Church is not
separating from Christ; (for I hope that even Mr. Dodwell himself will not say
that every Priest is Christ.)

LXIX. 19. Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, surely there is some
qualification essential to the Ministry; if a man want that qualification, it
is a Duty to separate from him as no Minister, e. g. When I came to
Kederminster, (after my subjection to six or seven worse) I found the Vicar,
one reputed ignorant of the Fundamentals, (he was brought in by Sir Henry Blunt
a Papist) who Preached but once a quarter, which most thought he might better
have forborne, and his Curate Mr. Turner at Mitton Preached once a day, whom I
found ignorant of the Catechism Principles by Conference, and he confessed he had
but one Book, Musculus common places in English, and he said some of that to
the People, and they took it for a Sermon; he lived by unlawful Marrying,
infamous for Drinking and Quarrelling; he that had taken these for no
Ministers, and separated from them, had not thereby separated from Christ or
his Church Catholic.

LXX. 20. If it prove as hard to know who is the true Pastor in a competition
of Pretenders, as it was to know which was the true Pope, when there were two
or three, (above twenty times) or whether, e. g. Optandus was true Bishop of
Geneva that knew not Letters, or whether Duke Heriberts Son consecrated in
Infancy was Archbishop of Rhemes, or any other Infant consecrated be a Bishop,
(officiating per alios, Surrogates, Chancellours, Officials, etc.) it is not
here a Separation from Christ to separate from either of the Pretenders: He
that mistaketh not, is not liable to the Charge, he that mistakes, does not
err in an Article of Faith, but in a difficult point of humane title, and the
qualification and right of a single man; and my Opinion is, that if such a
title were tried before our Judges or King, and they should mistake and give
Judgment against him that had right, this were no separating from Christ, nor
proof that they are Infidels.

LXXI. 21. If the Case of two contending Bishops or Presbyters come before a
General or Provincial Council, and they mistake and give it to the wrong, and
so separate from the right, I do not think that thereby they separate from
Christ or the Church Catholic, e. g. The Constantinopolitan Council first gave
the Church of Constantinople to Nazianzene, and after judged him out as having
no right; if by this they separated from Christ, they that take them for the
Catholic Church representative, must say that the Catholic Church separated
from Christ and it self.

When another Council wrongfully deposed Chrysostom, and separated from him,
and Cyril Alexandr. persuaded the continuance of it, did the universal Church
separate from it self and Christ? If a General Council which should be wisest,
be excusable from damning Schism, whenever it misjudgeth and separateth from a
rightful Bishop, sure every Layman and woman that does the same, does not
separate from Christ.

If it prove that a General Council deposed Nestorius as unjustly as David
Derodon thought, or Dioscorus as unjustly as others thought, or Flavian as
unjustly as the Orthodox think, this proves them Guilty of some Schism, but
not of separating from the universal Church.

When Menna of Constantinople, and the Pope excommunicated each other, when a
Synod in Italy renounced Vigilius, and all his Successors were an hundred years
deposed from their Primacy, and a Patriarch at Aquileia set up in his stead for
a great part of Italy, because Vigilius subscribed to a General Council, de
tribus Capitulis, this was Schism (somewhere) but not separating from Christ.

LXXII. 22. If a man in England should think that all the old Councils were
obligatory, which decree that he shall be taken for no Bishop that comes in by
the choice (yea or Mediation) of Courtiers, Princes or great men, or any that
have not the true Consent of Clergy and People, and thereupon should conclude
that Bishops, Deans, Prebends, etc. so chosen and imposed are Laymen and no
true Bishops and Pastors, this were a separating from those Persons, but not
from Christ and the Universal Church, when as Mr. Thorndike says, that till
the right of Electing Bishops by the Clergy and People be restored, we need
look no further for the reason of the Contempt of Episcopacy here.

So if a man think that God never trusted every Ignorant Wicked man that can
but get Money and buy an Advowson, to choose those Pastors to whose conduct all
the People are bound to trust their Souls, (and the Bishop to admit them for
fear of a Quare impedit, if they have but a Certificate and can speak Latin)
This is not damning Separation.

LXXIII. 23. If a Bishop set up a seeming Convert, really a Papist ( e. g. Mr.
Hutchinson alias Berry, or one of them that lately Confessed themselves
Papists,) the People that find by experience what the man is, are not damned
Schismatics for not taking him for their Pastor, or for going from him.

If Godfrey Goodman Bishop of Gloucester was a Papist, did he separate from
Christ that separated from the Diocesan Church of Gloucester, while he was an
Essential part? Or that did not implicitly trust all the Priests that he
ordained?

LXXIV. 24. If in a Cathedral Church one withdraw from their Service, because
of their difference in singing, Ceremonies, etc. from the Parish Churches, tho
it be the Bishops Church that he separateth from, it is not as a Church, nor
from any thing essential to it, e. g. Miles Smyth Bishop of Gloucester (the
famous Hebric^^n, and chief in our Bibles Translation) declared and performed
i^, that he would never come more to his Cathedral, because the Dean (in Laud
time) kept up the Altar. Qu. Whether he separated from himself or his Church?
Vbi Episcopus ibi Ecclesia: Who were the Separatists? They that followed the
Bishop, or they that separated from him and kept to the Cathedral? The same I
^ay of Williams Bishop of Lincoln that wrote against Altars.

LXXV. 25. If faithful Pastors and People are settled in concord, and the higher
Powers make a Law to depose and eject them without just cause (as Multitudes
were in many Emperors days, and Multitudes by the Interim in Germany in
Charles the fifths time; and Multitudes in the Palatinate by Ludovicus, and in
too many other Countries) those that leave the Temples and Tithes to the
Magistrate, but cleave to their old Pastors in forbidden meetings (called
Conventicles) supposing the Pastoral Relation not dissolved (as the Ioannites
clave to Chrysostom) do not thereby separate from the Catholic Church: Had the
Power been lawful that set up another way, when Dr. Gunning kept up his
Meetings at Exeter House, it had not been a Separation from Christ that he then
made.

LXXVI. 26. If the Law command all to take one man for his Pastor, and a Parent
command his Child, or a Husband his Wife to take another and not that, and the
Child or Wife know not which should be obeyed, and whether the choice belong
more to the Domestic, or the Public Government, it is not a separating from
Christ, which way ever such an one shall go.

LXXVII. 27. Yea if I should think that self-Interest and self-Government bind
me rather to choose a Pastor for my self, than to stand to such a choice by
Prince, Patron or Prelate, which I think intolerable, as well as (against their
will) I may choose a Wife, or a Physician, or a Tutor, or a Book, or my daily
food, this is not separating from the Universal Church.

LXXVIII. 28. If owning the same Diocesan make them of one Church who differ
more than Nonconformists and Conformists do, then owning the same Christ,
Faith, Scripture, etc. makes them of one Catholic Church who differ less.
But, etc. Jesuits, Dominicans, Iansenists, and all the Sects of Papists are
taken for one Church, because they own the Pope and Councils. In England the
Diocesan Conformists are taken for one Church, tho some of them are as much for
a Foreign Jurisdiction, as Archbishop Laud, Archbishop Bromhall, Bishop
Gunnings Chaplain, Dr. Saywell, Mr. Thorndike, Dr. Heylin, and many more, have
manifested in their words and writings. And some that subscribe the Articles of
General Councils erring in Faith and against Heathens Salvation, and against
free will, and for Justification by Faith only, etc. do show that they differ
in the Doctrines of Religion, (unless the sound or syllables be its Religion)
while one and another take the words in contrary senses. Some are for Diocesans
being a distinct Order from Presbyters, some (as Usher and many such) deny it:
Some hold them to be of Divine Right, and some but of humane; some think the
King must choose them, some rather the Clergy and People; some hold them
Independent, others rather subject to the Archbishops and Convocation; some
think all that bear Office in their Church Government are lawful, others think
Lay-Civilians Government by the Keys unlawful (and so are ipso facto
excommunicate by their own Canons;) some that promise Canonical Obedience to
their Ordinary, take the Judges of the Ecclesiastical Courts for their
Ordinaries; and others only the Bishops; some think they are sworn to obey
their Ordinaries, if they rule according to the Canons (and so to pronounce all
Excommunicate that the Canon excommunicates, if commanded;) Others think
otherwise, that they are judges themselves whether the Canons command licita
and honesta; some take the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome no
true Church; others think otherwise. Many more (Armmian and other) such
differences there are, and yet all of one Church, both Catholic, National,
Diocesan and Parochial (often:) Much more are those Nonconformists that differ
from the Church in nothing but what the Imposers call Indifferent.

LXXIX. 29. If one that prays in the Litany against false Doctrine and
Schism, and reads the Conformists telling him of the danger of it, should
verily think that Dr. S. printeth and preaches false Doctrine, and such as
plainly tends to serve Satan against Christian Love and Peace, and to the
most Schismatical dividing and damning of Christ^ans, should hereupon separate
from him for fear of Schism and false Doctrine, and go to a safer Pastor, I
think it were not to separate from Christ.

LXXX. 30. If a Bishop in any Diocese in London should openly write or plead
for a Foreign Jurisdiction, and we are told that none are true Ministers that
depend not obediently on the Bishop, he that for fear of the Law, or of
Personal or common perjury, should separate from that Bishop and his numerical
Diocesan Church, does thereby neither separate from the Catholic Church, nor
from the Church of England. As if the Kings Army should have a Colonel that
declared himself an obliged Subject to the King of France and bound to obey
him, the Regiment may forsake that Colonel. Yea if the General of the Kings
Army should give up himself in subjection to the Enemy or a Foreign Power, and
say, I will take a Commission from the Turk, and my Officers shall only obey
me, and the Soldiers obey them, were not this an Army of Traitors or Rebels,
though none but the General took a Commission from the Enemy? So if the Bishops
should all take Commissions from the Pope, or declare themselves Subjects to a
Foreign Jurisdiction, it were no separating from Christ, to separate from them
all, in Loyalty to Christ, and to avoid National perjury and Schism.

LXXXI. 31. If a man think that he is bound to use all Christ's instituted means
of Salvation, and live in a Church that wilfully omitteth any one of them, e.
g. either Infant baptism, or singing Psalms, or Praying, or Preaching, or the
Lords Supper, or all Personal care, and discipline to exclude the grossly
intolerable, to resolve the doubting, etc. He that in Obedience to Christ goes
to a Church and Pastor (in the same Diocese or City) that omitteth none of
these, is no damned Schismatic.

LXXXII. 32. He that is unjustly cast out of the Church, and by its very Laws
excommunicated ipso facto, is no damned or Sinful Schismatic for Worshipping
God in a Church that will receive him: Nor any one that is denied Communion
unless he will sin; Much more if they should prove half as many and great Sins
as the Nonconformists have said they fear (in the first Plea for Peace, etc.)

LXXXIII. 33. If a Foreigner that does but half understand our language,
withdraw to a Church and Pastor whose tongue he understands, obeying God and
Nature is no damning Schism.

LXXXIV. 34. If one that is erroneously conceited of the obligation of General
Councils, should think it a sin to kneel at the Sacrament on any Lords day in
the year, or any Week day between Easter and Whitsuntide, because Tradition and
the twentieth Canon of the first Council, and that at Trull, etc. do forbid
then to adore kneeling, this separating on that account to another Congregation
is not damning.

If it be said, that Mr. Thorndike and others tell us that it is not necessary
that we do the same things which the Supreme Catholic Power commanded, but
that we subject our selves to the same Power which may change their own Laws. I
answer, 1. The asserting of that Universal Sovereignty is the greatest Crime
and Heresy of all. 2. By this it seems that our Religion is very mutable, and
very uncertain, and a man has need to take heed of obeying any old Canons,
till he know the mind of the present Church; (and who those be* and how to know
it.) 3. But what if the same man read Dr. Heylin (of Sab.) telling him that
this custom against Adoration-kneeling continued a thousand years, and was
never revok't by any true General Council, but changed by little and little by
men's practice: And what if he question who those Changers were, and whether
their practice was Rebellion at first, and whether they had power to repeal the
Canons of the greatest Councils without a Council. Sure they that are for such
Councils universal sovereignty, when they have cast men into these snares,
should scarce tell them that they are damnable Schismatics, for joining with
such Churches as obey these Councils, rather than with those that ruin men for
not disobeying them.

LXXXIV. And now Reader if thou art one that think of these things with
Christian Sobriety and impartiality, I appeal to thee whether if I should be of
the mind of Mr. Dodwell, and such self-conceited Resolvers, I should not write
my own Condemnation, and be one of the grossest Schismatics that any History
has mentioned, unless ever there were any man so mad as to hold himself to be
all the Church: Yea, when he no more distinguishes of Separation and Schism,
but involves almost all Christians in his Condemnation, and tells us that
Schism will damn us as soon as Adultery and Murder, is it not obvious for all
men to infer that we are as odious as Adulterers and Murderers? and does he not
Preach Christians into the hatred of each other? and can any wonder if Rulers
should think the Punishment of Murderers is not worse than we deserve? It is
not Newgate only, but Tyburn that these healing men do seem to assign us; it
would be too tedious to look over all these again, and show you how great the
number is that these men damn, and how few on Earth in any Age they excuse from
being so far like Murderers.

LXXXV. 1. It seems to me that he virtually damneth all Christians on Earth as
such Schismatics; for it is most certain that all men have sin, and culpable
imperfection in Knowledge, Will and Practice; and if any say, That he has no
sin, he is a Liar, says St. John; and it is certain that all two persons on
Earth have many errors, and many differences from one another; it is certain
that the Love and Duty of Christians toward each other is culpably defective
in all men: It is certain that no man living is so perfect in knowledge as to
know all the indifferent things in the world, which may be imposed, to be
Indifferent! And long and sad experience has told the Church, that both gross
errors and sins, and things called Truths or indifferent, which few can be
sure of, may be imposed. What follows from all this, but that all men on Earth
may easily fall under the imputation of disobedience to Prelates, and so be
Excommunicate, and then they have their choice (when no man is perfect, and
they cannot change their minds) 1. Whether they will be damned as
Excommunicate and practical Atheists that give over all Church Worship; 2. Or
as damnable Schismatics, for worshipping God in Churches when they are
excommunicate; 3. Or as perfidious Liars, that will make false Confessions,
Profession and promises, to get off an Excommunication. When Mr. Dodwel numbers
those with Schismatics that [ suffer themselves to be excommunicate,] if they
have no other means in their Power to hinder it, it seems these great Enemies
to absolute reprobation, do think all Christians being unavoidably born to
imperfection of Knowledge, are as unavoidably born to damnation whenever
Prelates or Priests please thus to precipitate them.

LXXXVI. 2. Particularly, 1. The first and second Canons ipso facto
excommunicate all that say [ that any manner of Obedience and Subjection within
his Majesty's Realms and Dominions is due to any usurped and foreign Power:] By
this all Papists and all pretended Protestants (such as Dr. Barrow confuteth)
who hold any manner of Obedience and Subjection due to Pope or Foreign
Councils, are Excommunicate.

2. Those that say that the Book of Common Prayer contains any thing in it
repugnant to the Scriptures, are ipso facto excommunicate. Which now by the new
Laws are interpreted of the present Books.

3. In this all are excommunicate who say, the Mis-translations (in Psalms,
Epistles or Gospels, of which many instances have been given) to be any thing
repugnant in the Scripture.

4. And all that say, It is against the Scripture to deny Christendom to all
Infants that have not such Vowers in their Names and for their Education as we
call Godfathers, and Godmothers, tho the Parent (who is forbidden it) offer his
Child by Sponsion.

5. And all that say it is against Scripture to deny Christendom to all that
refuse the Covenanting transient Images of a Cross.

6. And all that say that it is against Scripture for all Ministers to profess
[ that it is certain by Gods Word that baptized Infants (without exception) so
dying are undoubtedly saved] when no word of God is cited that says it, and
adding to Gods word is dreadfully threatened, and when it is certain that all
Ministers are not certain of any such thing (and I think no one.)

7. All are ipso facto excommunicate that say, It is against Gods Word to deny
Church Communion in the Sacrament to all that dare not take it kneeling, for
fear (tho mistaken) of breaking the second Commandment by Symbolizing with
Idolaters, that are seeking to reduce the Nation to their Sin, and that live
round about us.

8. All are excommunicate that say it is against Scripture to pronounce all
saved that are buried, except the unbaptized, self-murderers and the
excommunicate, while thousands of Sadducees, Hobbists, Infidels, Papists,
Perjured, Adulterers, Drunkards, etc. dwell among us.

9. By the fifth Canon all are ipso facto excommunicate that say, [ Any of the
Articles are in any part erroneous, or such as they (perhaps as doubters) may
not with a good Conscience subscribe to,] and consequently all the aforesaid
Conformists that think the sense erroneous while they subscribe those words and
shall affirm, e. g. that Canons are made necessary to Salvation; tho the matter
cannot be proved by Scripture, contrary to Art. 6.

Those that contrary to Art. 8. say, any thing in Athanasius Creed may not be
subscribed.

Such as Bishop Taylour that against Art. 9. deny Original Sin.

Those that say contrary to Art. 10. that the Word [ no Power] excludes Common
natural Power, or makes Nature to be Grace.

Those that write against our being accounted righteous, only for Christ's
merits, and say that another subordinate Righteousness is named many hundred
times in Scripture, contrary to Art. 11.

Those that contrary to Art. 13. say, that works done before the Inspiration of
the Spirit may make men meet to receive Grace.

Those that with Dr. Hammond write for works that are not commanded but
counseled, and Free-will-offerings, contrary to Art. 14.

All they that take Infants and new baptized Persons to have no sin, contrary
to Art. 15.

All that say, that after we have received the H. Ghost, we cannot depart from
Grace given, contrary to Art. 16.

Those that deny the Doctrine of Election, in Art. 17.

Those that say, any on Earth may be saved by diligent living according to the
light of Nature, without knowing the name of Christ, contrary to Art. 18.

Those that contrary to Art. 19. reject that Description of a visible Church,
which reaches to such as our Resolver damneth.

All that contrary to Art. 20. say, that the Church [ may not enforce any thing
to be believed for necessity to Salvation, besides the Scripture] even those
that say, it is necessary to Salvation, by avoiding Schism to believe that all
imposed Tyths, Covenants Practices, and Ceremonies are not sin.

All that contrary to Art. 21. say, that General or other Councils may be
gathered without the command and will of Princes, and deny they may err, and
things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation have neither Strength nor
Authority, unless it may be declared that they are taken out of Holy Scripture.

Those that deny Art. 23. that those are lawfully called and sent into the
Ministry, who have public Authority given them in the Congregation, to call
and send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard, are chosen and called hereto, (for
want of Canonical Succession.)

Those that contrary to Art. 24. would have Gods Worship performed to them that
understand not the language, to avoid the Schism of having many Churches in a
City.

Those that take Confirmation or Penance, or the other three for Sacraments of
the Gospel contrary to Art 25.

Those that contrary to Art. 26. would not have it believed to be the Peoples
duty, who know the Offenses of Bad Ministers, to accuse them.

All that contrary to Art. 27. are against Infant Baptism, as agreeable to
Christ's Institution.

All that contrary to Art. 28. say, the Body of Christ is given and taken and
eaten in the Sacrament otherwise than in a Spiritual manner by Faith.

All that say, that in some wise the wicked are Partakers of Christ in the
Sacrament, contrary to Art. 29.

All that contrary to Art. 30. say, There is other satisfaction for Sin besides
Christ's Blood.

All that say, that Men justly Excommunicate may be reconciled and received by
the multitude without open penance (which is ordinary) contrary to Art. 33.

All that contrary to Art. 34. think that a General Council may ordain such
Traditions or Ceremonies as shall in all places be one or the like: and that
every Particular or National Church may not abolish those Ceremonies or Rites
which the General Council or College ordained.

Many things in the Book of Homilies [especially against peril of Idolatry] are
blamed by many Conformists, contrary to Art. 35.

All that contrary to Art. 36. say, that the Book of Ordination wants some
things necessary.

All that contrary to Art. 37. think that Pope or foreign Bishops have any
Jurisdiction by right in this Land: And all that (by mistake) say, the King
has not chief Power in all his Dominions, meaning in France, of which he
professes to be King, and we so call him even in our Prayers to God.

All that say, contrary to Art. 38. that it is not their Duty liberally to give
Alms, according to their ability.

All that contrary to Art. 39 think men in conforming may swear upon trust of
their Superiors words, without judgment, and true understanding of Justice and
Truth.

A^l these are already ipso facto Excommunicated by this one Canon, and if they
elsewhere worship God, are called Separatists and Schismatics, in danger of
Damnation, as Adulterers and Murderers are: And how great a number are these?

10. All are ipso facto Excommunicate by the sixth Canon, who affirm, that the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, by Law established, are
superstitious, or such as (now commanded) men who are zealously and godly
affected, may not with a good Conscience APPROVE, use and subscribe as occasion
requires. That is, all that thus mistake kneeling at the Sacrament, on the
reasons aforenamed, to be against the second Commandment, or that judge so of
the Surplice, or that think the Cross, as described by the Canon and Liturgy,
has all the Essentials of a humane unlawful Sacrament of the Covenant of
Grace. And all that are against the Rites of Godfathers that never owned the
Child as theirs, to be the only Sponsors in its Name, and to Vow its Christian
Education (when I never knew one living that so much as made the Parents
believe that he intended it:) And all that think the words of the Liturgy
(making Imposition of hands an assuring sign of Gods Gracious acceptance) make
Confirmation a humane unlawful Sacrament, and say so. All these are cut off.

11. By Canon seventh all are ipso facto excommunicate that affirm, that the
Government of the Church of England, under his Majesty, by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and THE REST THAT BEAR OFFICE in the same, is
repugnant to Gods word; that is, all Bishops, Ministers, Noblemen, Gentlemen or
People, that say that it is against Gods word for Lay Civilians or Chancellours
to govern by the Church Keys, excommunicate or absolve: And all that think it
unlawful for Surrogates that are not Bishops but Presbyters, either as a Crier
pro forma to pronounce all excommunicate or absolved who are so decreed by the
Lay Chancellor, or else for them (or a Priest-Chancellour) to govern a Diocese
by the Keys of Excommunication and Absolution being no Bishops; and all that
think it sinful for Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, etc. who are no
Bishops, to exercise the same Government by the Keys over so many Pastors or
Churches, or for a Bishop to do his Office by others that are no Bishops, any
more than a Priest by those that are no Priests; or for a Diocesan with his Lay
Court, to Govern many score or hundred Churches under him, without any
subordinate Bishop in those Churches, that is, to set up the Name and show, and
make Christ's Discipline impossible: Or for Lay Chancellors or Surrogates to
publish Excommunications in the Bishops Name, which he never knew of, nor tried
the cause: Or for such Chancellours to oblige all Parish Ministers to publish
all their Excommunications which are agreeable to these Canons. What quality
and number they are of that call any of this sinful, I pretend not to know: But
they are all now excommunicate men.

12. The eight Canon ipso facto excommunicateth all that affirm that the form
and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons has any
thing repugnant to Gods Word, etc:] That is, all those that hold Bishops and
Presbyters to be the same Order (contrary to the words of that Book.) Which yet
even the Church of England while Papists declared in King Aelfriks Canons (see
Spelman:) And all such as Thorndike, who say the People and Clergy should
choose their Bishops; or that say the Peoples consent is necessary to the
Pastoral Relation to them, and that the old Canons for this are in force.

13. The ninth Canon ipso facto excommunicateth the Separatists.

14. The tenth Canon excommunicateth all that affirm [that Ministers that
refuse to subscribe to the Liturgy, etc. and their Adherents may truly take to
themselves the Name of another Church, not established, by Law and dare publish
that this their pretended Church has long groaned under the burden of imposed
grievances, by the Church of England, and the Orders and Constitutions therein
by Law established.] (Ipso facto is not here.) This reaches to all that
confine not Gods Church in England to the Party that subscribe and their
Adherents: If any say, that if such as Blondel, Rivet, Amesius, or any other
the most Learned, holy, peaceable men that dare not subscribe as aforesaid,
should with any Christians worship God together, and that these are a true
Church (though he judge them faulty) and that these Canons are grievances, such
are to be excommunicated: (Though it be gross Schism in others to confine not
only the Purity but the Verity of a Church to their own Party:) For such to
feel and groan loud here is Excommunication.

15. The eleventh Canon much to the same purpose requires the Excommunication
of all that affirm that any Subjects in England may rightly challenge the Name
of true and lawful Churches besides those allowed by Law, though the King
should License them.

16. The twelfth Canon ipso facto excommunicateth all, that make Rules and
Orders in Causes Ecclesiastical without the Kings Authority, and submit to
them, e. g. All that without the Kings authority agree to turn the Table
Altarwise, to require People to kneel at the Rails, or to bow toward the Alter
or East, or to set up Organs, etc. All these are now excommunicate by an
Authority above the Bishops, which no Bishop or Priest can dispense with (but
only forbear to publish and execute it, but not nullify it) no nor absolve any
that publicly repent not of it as a wicked Error.

16. By Canon fourteenth if any Minister shall diminish any part of the Orders,
Rites, Ceremonies, Prayers, etc. in regard of Preaching or ANY OTHER RESPECT,
or shall add any thing in matter or form, (e. g. If he let the Parent express
the dedication of his Child to God, or lay any charge on any Parent) he
breaks the Church Law, and so far separateth from it.

17. By Canon fifteenth when twenty or thirty thousand are commanded to come to
a Church that cannot receive six thousand, and the Alleys and Pewes are wedged
so that they cannot all kneel, yet all that kneel not at the Prayers, and all
that say not audibly the Confession, Lords Prayer, Creed and Responses, disobey
the Laws of the Church, and so far separate from it.

18. When twenty thousand Persons are commanded to come in more than can, if
ten thousand of them (or any number) should come to the Churchyard or Porch,
to show that they are not presentable, but would get in if they could, the
nineteenth Canon commands to drive them away.

19. The Liturgy and Canon 22. etc. bind all under the penalty of the Law to
receive the Sacrament thrice every year: If a secret Infidel, Sadducee,
Hobbist, Socinian, or any Heretic say, I am not able to change my Judgment,
which is inconsistent with the Sacrament, or if one whose Conscience tells him
of the guilt of Adultery, and that he is not resolved to confess and forsake it
yet; or one that by Melancholy causelessly fears unworthy receiving to
damnation; I say, if any of these will avoid the charge of Schism, they must
run upon worse, till grace recover them, which is not at their command. And yet
all notorious Offenders are prohibited it Canon 26. and particularly the
Perjured: And if the tenth part so many be perjured in England in City and
Country, as many fear, it is a very great number that are incapable of
Communion with the Church.

20. By Canon twenty seventh on pain of Suspension no Minister must wittingly
administer the Communion to any but such as Kneel, or to any that refuse to be
present at public Prayers, etc. So that all that Kneel not in receiving are
rejected, and if they worship God elsewhere, must be taken for Schismatics, as
dangerous as adulterers or murderers.

21. The twenty eighth Canon forbids admitting strangers to Communion, and
commands sending them home to their Parish Churches: It Is disobedience to
violate this.

22. The twenty ninth Canon forbids urging Parents to be Present when their
Children are baptized, and admitting them to Answer as Godfathers for their own
Children; and any Godfather to make any other Answer or speech than the
prescribed.

23. The thirtieth Canon describes the Cross as a Sacrament, as seems to us.

34. By the thirty sixth Canon no man must be a Minister that subscribeth not
that the Book of Common Prayer and Ordination contains nothing in it contrary
to the Word of God, and that he himself will use no other form in public
Prayer and administration of the Sacraments: By which all that refuse this, or
that use the forms made and imposed by the Bishops on occasions of public
Fasts and Thanksgivings, seem all to be under disobedience to the Church.

35. By Canon forty ninth no Person not Licensed as a Preacher, may in his
Cure or elsewhere, expound any Scripture, or Matter or Doctrine, but only
shall study to read plainly the Homilies: So that all Ministers before License
to preach, all Schoolmasters, all Parents, or Masters, that do expound to
their Scholars, Children or Servants, the meaning of Baptism, or of any
Article of the Creed, any Petition of the Lords Prayer, any one of the Ten
Commandments (to fit them for Confirmation, or Salvation) otherwise than by
plain reading the Homilies or Church Catechism, does disobey the Law of the
Church: And so do all Tutors in the Universities that expound any Scripture,
matter or Doctrine to their Pupils, before they are examined or approved by the
Bishop; or any Judge on the Bench or Justice that presumes to do it to the
hearers, or any Friend or Neighbor in discourse: For it is [ No Person
whatsoever not examined and approved by the Bishop of the Diocese.] How few in
England separate not from the Church as far as this disobedience amounts to? If
by [no Persons] be meant only [ no Ministers] it is hard enough, that Ministers
may not be allowed out of the Church what Laymen are allowed.

36. All those that deny not the validity of Baptism or the Lords Supper when
they are done by an unpreaching Minister, but yet think that a man utterly
unable to Teach otherwise than by Reading, may not lawfully be encouraged in so
high a function, (any more than a man in Physic or Schoolteaching that has
not necessary skill, or is utterly illiterate,) and thinks it a sin to consent
to take such an Ignorant fellow for the Pastor of his Soul if he can have
better; If this man, I say, go to the next Parish Church for Sacraments, he is
to be suspended first and next excommunicate: Specially if he should judge that
Ignorant Reader, no true Minister for want of necessary capacity.

37. Surplices, Hoods and Tippets are made the matter of Obedience, Canon fifty
eighth.

38. By Canon thirty eighth no Minister must refuse or delay to Christen any
Child (without exception) according to the form of the Common Prayer, that is
brought to Church to him on Sundaies or Holy Days, though the Parents be both
Jews or Heathens or Atheists or Sadducees: The Minister must be suspended that
refuses it.

39. The seventy first Canon suspendeth all Ministers that Preach in any
private house (except to the sick or impotent in time of necessity.) By which
had Paul here preached publicly and from house to house, or Timothy in season
and out of season as dreadfully adjured, or Christ preached as he often did, they
must be suspended: And every Minister that preaches to his Family: And no
doubt, repeating his Sermon, is preaching the same again.

40. All Ministers must be suspended and then excommunicate, that without the
Bishops License appoint or keep any solemn Fasts publicly or in private
houses, other than by Law appointed, or be wittingly present at any: Though it
were in time of Plague, or when diverse of his Neighbors are sick or troubled
in Conscience, or in preparation to a Sacrament, or on some great occasion in
Noble-mens Houses and Chapels: He is not to be trusted to fast and pray with
his own Flock or Friends, or come among them, lest being excommunicate he be a
damned Schismatic.

The same prohibition is for holding meetings for Sermons called Exercises:
Which Archbishop Grindall was zealous to set up, ( Q. Was he then a
Schismatic? or is the damning dangerous Engine made since?)

41. By Canon seventy third if any Ministers meet in any private house (as many
did by consent in 1660. and 1661.) to do any thing that any way tends to
impeach the Common (...) or any part of the Government and Discipline (e. g. to
Petition King or Parliament for the least Reformation of it) he is
excommunicate ipso facto.

42. Canon seventy fourth brings all Ministers apparel under Church Laws, for
the Shape.

43. Canon seventy sixth Excommunicateth all that voluntarily relinquish their
Ministry, and use themselves as a Laymen. And man having free will, that is
done voluntarily, which is done in Obedience to men's command: And yet we are
ruined in the World, if we will not leave our Ministry, at their Command.

44. It Is tedious to go over all the rest: I end at the end of them. Canon 139.
excommunicateth all them that affirm that the Synod is not the true Church of
England by Representation: that is, 1. All that take it for the Church real and
not Representative, lest they make the diffused Church (People and all) to be
Chief Church Governors, while Convocations govern but as their
Representatives. 2. All that say, that it is only the Bishops and not the
Presbyters in Convocation that are the Governing Canon-making Church. 3. All
that say that the Clergy represent not King, Nobles, Parliaments, Laiety, and
that these are true parts of the Church of England. All these are ipso facto
excommunicate.

45. The 140. Canon Excommunicateth them that deny the Canons obligation of
absent Dissenters, which yet even many Papists deny of Councils Canons.

46. The last Canon Excommunicateth all that contemn these Canons, as taking
them to be the work of a Company of Persons that conspired against Religious
Godly men. All this huge Catalogue are here excommunicate.

47. If any part of all this be Schism, Mr. Dodwell and this man seem to teach
Separation from the Church of England: Or if the late silencing, hunting and
ruining of two thousand Ministers were Schism, and as bad as Bishop Tailor in
Duct. Dubit. Mr. Hales of Eaton, Chillingworth, etc. say of the like, then
these men make all the Church of England to be in as damnable a State as
Adulterers and Murderers. Yea they make all damnable Schismatics that hold
Communion with the Church of England; for that is their Sentence on them that
communicate with Schismatics; viz. that they are guilty of their Schism.

48. They unchurch and damn the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Laodicea,
Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. in the Apostles days: For the Scripture tells us of many
guilty of Schism in all these, and yet the rest communicated with them; for the
Scripture speaks more of Schism in a Church, than of Schism or Separation from
a Church, Romans 16.17. 1 Cor. 1.10. and 3.3. and 11.18. Mat. 12, 25. Luke 12.
52, 53. 1 Cor. 12.25. Iam. 3.15, 16. And yet no one was commanded to separate
from those Churches; no not from those that had Heresies among them, such as
denied the Resurrection, and taught Fornication, and eating things offered to
Idols, that were drunk at the Sacrament or Love Feasts, nor those that had
Jewish Schismatics, who talked like ours, Act. 15. Except ye be circumcised and
keep the Law of Moses, ye cannot be saved: The Churches were not all unchurcht
and damned that communicated with such. Yea Peter was guilty of encouraging
them in Schism, that would not eat with the Christian Gentiles, but he was not
unchristened by this.

49. They separate from or unchurch almost all the Ancient Churches in the
days of the most famous Emperors and Councils: For I have manifested past
doubt that they almost all did Hereticate or separate from one another. It was
Schism either in Victor to Excommunicate the Asian Bishops, or in them to
deserve it and be excommunicate. The owning or disowning several Councils,
specially that of Calcedon and that at Constable. de tribus Capitulis, etc. was the
Schism of almost all the Imperial Churches; one part condemning the other. And
if either were in the Right, it salves not the Case with them: For most of the
same men that went that way called the Right in one Princes Reign, went
contrary in the next, and so condemned each other round; especially about
Images adoration.

50. Hereby they cut off that Succession of that sort of Ordination, which they
say must be uninterrupted, while it came down from Churches excommunicated by
one another, or make the Proof of it impossible.

51. They separate from all the Greek Church at this day, as guilty of Schism,
both in their Succession from Schismatic Bishops, at Constant Alexand.
Antioch, Jerusalem, etc. and in their excommunicating not only the Church of
Rome for a wrong cause (the filioque) but other Churches, and for diverse Acts
of Schism.

52. They must by their Principles Separate from the Abassines, Egyptians,
Syrians, and all the Eastern and Southern Churches that are called Iacobites,
and N^storians: For Councils and other Churches condemn them: And they condemn
the Councils of Ephesus, and Calcedon, and all since: And they must separate
from and condemn the Churches of Armenia, Georgia, Circassia, etc. because they
separate from others, and are separated from.

53. Their Principles utterly unchurch the Church of Rome, 1. Especially
because it is guilty of the greatest Schism on earth, by setting up a false
Church form and head: 2. And because they Schismatically condemn and Unchurch
three parts of the Church on earth, even all save their Sect: 3. And for their
many other Schismatical Doctrines and Practices. 4. And as being condemned by
the Greek Protestants and most Churches, and separated from by the Church of
England which they own.

54. They separate in Principles from all or near all General Councils (save
the first) as having separated from other Councils and condemned them, and
being again condemned by them.

55. Some of them condemn and separate from all the Protestant Churches that
have Bishops, in Sweden, Denmark, Germany, Transylvania, etc. because they had
not their Ordination Successively from Bishops but Presbyters at the
Reformation: And because they have been guilty of Schism against others.

56. The Principles of Mr. Dodwel and his Associates condemn the Church of
England as Schismatical, 1. Those that claim Succession from Rome, whose own
Succession has been often and long interrupted, by incapacities and Schisms. 2.
For holding Communion with those Protestant Churches which these men call
Schismatics.

57. They condemn and separate from all the Churches called Presbyterian in
France, Holland, Geneva, Scotland formerly, and those in Helvetia that have no
Bishops; Tho some would threat kindness on them by saying that they would have
them and cannot? And why cannot they?

58. Their Principles make the Bishop of Oxford, Bristol, etc. Schismatics:
For their Dioceses are Churches taken out of Churches, being lately parts of
other Dioceses.

59. And they condemn all the Parish Churches in England as Churches distinct
from Cathedrals: For they are all Churches gathered out of Churches: At first
the Cathedrals were the only single Churches: Next Monasteries were gathered;
and next our Parish Churches. And the Parish Church of Covent Garden, is a
Church taken out of a Church.

60. Their Principles damn St. Martin that separated to the death from all the
Bishops Synods and them that were near him (save one Man) because they
persuaded Maximus to use the Sword against Priscillian Gnostics, and brought
men of strict Religion under Suspicion of Priscillianism: And sure the ruined
persecuted Protestants here, are more Orthodox than the Priscillians. And they
damn Gildas that told the English Clergy, that he was not eximius Christianus,
that would call them Ministers; (Do they not disgrace the many Churches
dedicated to the Memory of St. Martin, if he be a damned man?) I doubt they
damn Paul and Barnabas for local angry separating from each other: Whatever
they do by Peter and Barnabas for the Separation blamed Gal. 2.

61. If all are Schismatics that here conform not, all those called
Conformists are such, that conform to the words in a false sense.

62. They separate from all that obey the twentieth Canon of the Nicene
Council: And from all that obey the Councils that forbid communicating with a
Fornicating Priest: And from all that obey the Councils which nullify the
Episcopacy of such as are obtruded by Magistrates, or not consented to by the
Clergy and People. And many more such.

Abundance more instances of their Separation, and Damnation, I might add: In
a word, I think their Principles are, as I first said, for damning and
separating from all men living; for all men living are gulity of some sort and
degree of Schism, that is, of Errors, Principles or Practices in which they
culpably Violate that Union and Concord that should be among Christians and
Churches: Every defect of Christian Love, and every sinful Error, is some
degree of such a violation. All Christians differ in as great matters as things
indifferent: And no man living knows all things Indifferent to be such: And
these men distinguish not of Schism, nor will take notice of the necessary
distinctions given (in the third Part of the Treatise of Church Concord,) And
solutio continui causes pain: nor do they at all make us understand what sort
of Separation it is that they fasten on, but talk of Separation in general, as
aforesaid.

LXXXVII. They seem to be themselves deceived by the Papists in exposition of
Cyprians words de Unit. Eccles. Vnus est Episcopatus, etc. But they themselves
seem to separate from Cyprian as a Schismatic, and consequently from all the
Church that has professed Communion with him, and with all the Councils and
Churches that joined with him: For Cyprian and his Council erred by going too
far from the Schism and Heresy of others, nullifying all their Baptisms,
Ordinations and Communions: And for this error they declared against the
Judgment of the Bishop of Rome and other Churches; and they were for it
condemned as Schismatics by the said Bishop: And here is a far wider
Separation than we can be charged with. 2. And Cyprians words came from the
Mind that was possessed with these opinions, and are expressive of his
Inclination. 3. Yet they are true and good, understood as he himself often
expounds them; the Bishop of Oxford cites some instances, many more are
obvious, in which he opposes the Bishop of Rome, saying, that none of them
pretends to be a Bishop of Bishops; and limiting every man to his own
Province, and saying that they were to give account to none but God, with much
the like.

But in what sense is Episcopacie one? 1. Undoubtedly not as numerically in the
personal Subjectum Relationis: One Bishop is not another; if you should say
Paternity is One, none believe that one man's Relation of Paternity is another.
The Relation is an accident of its own Subject, as well as Quantity, Quality,
etc. 2. Nor does any man believe that many Bishops go to make up one Bishop in
Naturals. 3. Nor did ever Cyprian hold or say that all Bishops go to make up
one Politic Governing Aristocracie, as many go to make one Senate or
Parliament, that has a power of Legislation and Judgment by Vote as one
Persona politica. He never owned such a humane Sovereignty.

But Episcopatus unus est, 1. In specie, all Bishops have one Office; 2.
Objective: As the Catholic Church is one, whose welfare all Bishops ought to
seek: 3. And so finaliter as to the remote End; and are bound to endeavor
Concord. 4. And as effects, all are from one efficient institutor. As it may be
said that all official Magistracy in England is one: 1. As from one King or
summa potestas: 2. As described by one Law, and as Justices of one Species: 3.
As all their Cities and Counties and Hundreds are but part of one Kingdom,
whose welfare all are for: 4. And as they are all bound to keep as much common
Concord as they can; if any mean more, they should tell us what: If any mean
that all Bishops make one numerical Universal Government, they are heinous
Schismatics, and the Kingdom is Sworn against their Judgment: And these Men
damn them in damning Schismatics.

The truth is, Cyprian de Vnitate Ecclesiae (leaving out the Papists additions)
is a good Book, and worthy to be read of all; and take Cyprian's Description of
the Episcopacy of the Church which we must unite with, and the nature of that
Union, and we would rejoice in such. But if Cyprian had lived to see either
Arians or Donatists the greater number, or any Sect after call themselves the
Church because that Princes set them up, and had seen them depose Chrysostom
and such other, doubtless he would never have pleaded the Unity of Episcopacy
for this, but have judged as he did in the Case of Martial and Basilides; nor
did he ever plead for an universal humane Sovereignty.

LXXXVIII. If we are damned Schismatics, I can imagine no pretended manner of
Separation in which our Schism consists, but first, either Local as such. 2. Or
Mental, as such. 3. Or Local, caused by Mental.

If Local, as such be it: All Christians are Schismatics, for being locally
separated from others, and absent from all Churches and places save one.

If Mental Separation be it, either all Mental Division is such, or but some
only; if all, then all mortal men are Schismatics, as differing in a multitude
of things from others; If it be not all, what is it? is it all difference in
the Essentials of Christianity? we grant it; and we are charged with no such
thing. Is it all difference in the Integrals or Accidents? so do all differ
that are not perfect. Is it all want of Love, or all Incharitableness to one
another? all on earth have some degree of it; and those are likest to have
most, that do as the Bishops did against the Priscillianists, bring godly
people under reproach, on pretense of opposing Heresy; or that seek the
Silencing, Imprisonment, Banishment or Ruin of men as faithful as themselves:
For our parts, we profess it our great Duty, to love all men as men, all
Christians as Christians, all godly men as godly, all Magistrates as
Magistrates, etc. Is it for our separating in mind from any Principles in
specie necessary to Communion in the Church Universal, or single Churches? let
it be opened what those Principles be: We own all Christianity, and all
Ministry of Gods Institution, and all his Church Ordinances: We own Bishops
over their Flocks, let them be never so large, so they be capable of the Work
and End, and alter not the true species; and we submit to any that shall by the
Word admonish Pastors of many Churches of their Duty, or Sin, or seek their
good. Nor do we refuse Obedience to any humane Officers set up by Princes, to
do nothing against Christ's Laws, nor nothing but what is in Princes power in
the Accidents circa Sacra.

Is it because we disown any Numerical Rulers? we own the King and his
Magistrates; we own all that we can understand to be true Pastors; and if we
are in doubt of their Calling, we resist them not, unless obeying Christ before
them be resistance: But our Accusers loudly profess, that Usurpers are not to
be owned; and if they go on the ground, that he has right that the Prince is
for, we would know, whether that hold in Turkey, in Italy, Spain, France, or
only in England, or where? If it be where Princes are Orthodox, do they make
all the People Judges of their Princes Orthodoxness? And we would know, whether
EVERY BISHOPS and PRIESTS right, (...) a true Minister, called of God, and set
over us, be necessary to Salvation, to be believed or known by all the People?
if it be, woe to us, that ever such men were set over us, whose right we cannot
know: What abundance of things go to make a Bishops or Priests right known! 1.
That he has capable sufficiency. 2. That he is a just Bishop, that is chosen by
the King, the Dean and Chapter obediently consenting, and that the Clergy's and
Peoples consent is unnecessary. 3. That the Diocesan species (over multitudes
of Churches without any subordinate Bishop) is of Christ, or lawful. 4. That
their work, according to the Canon, is lawful. 5. That all our Patrons have
right to choose Pastors for all the People. 6. That they are true Pastors over
them that consent not. 7. That if they prove worse far than Martial and
Basilides, and be owned by the Bishops as they were, the people may not forsake
them ( pl^bs obsequens divinis pr^ceptis,) which says Cyprian have most power
to choose or refuse.

Is every Christian bound on pain of Damnation to know all these, and then to
examine and judge Bishops and Priests accordingly? or if they mistake one or
more men's Commission, do they therefore separate from the Catholic Church? If
so, what a case was the East in by the difference between Chrysostom and his
Competitors? Photius and Ignatius and hundreds others? and France, about the
Archbishops of Rhemes, when he was put out that deposed Ludovicus 4. and when
an Infant was put in, and often besides?

What if the Alexandrians, when Athanasius was banished by Constantine himself,
were half for him, and half against him? Or Basil at Caesarea was put down, and
hundreds more; or when Theodosius first and second and Martian, and
Valentinian, and Zeno, and Anastasius and abundance more, set up and pulled
down, and set up again against each other? What, I say, if the People now
mistook who had the best Title? Is this separating from the Catholic Church?
When the Interim cast out hundreds in Germany; When Ludovicus cast out
Multitudes in the Palatinate, and half the People stuck to the ejected,
persecuted Pastor, and the rest to the Magistrates choice, which of them
separated from the Universal Church? Is every Priest the Universal Church, or
an essential part of it? then it dies when he dies, and Apostatizeth when he
does. How many Ages in above 23 Duplicates or Schisms, was the World uncertain
which was the true Pope? suppose, e. g. Arthur Iackson, Edmund Calamy, and many
such were placed in their Incumbency, by the Bishops, Patrons and Parish
consent, according to the Law of Christ and the Land, and by a new Act of
Uniformity they be all turned out, the Flock not consenting, nor any Bishop
accusing, trying or deposing them (save in Legislation,) and some of the Parish
think this dissolveth not their Relation to him, and they cleave to him as
before, without any change save of Place and Tithes, and others forsake such a
one, and follow the Magistrates choice, may not both these be still of the
Catholic Church? If not, I know where the old Canons laid the charge and
danger. It Is wonderful selfishness in those men, that if they can but get into
the Seat, take it for granted, that all must own their right on pain of
Damnation.

And what if in any such Land, the Prince change his mind, or the next differ,
and put down all these same men, and set up such as differ from them more than
we do, is it damning Schism for any of their People still to adhere to them?

LXXXIX. Do you find that Mr. Dodwel, Dr. Saywel, Dr. Sherlock, or any of these
men, do, in Pulpit and Press, ingenuously tell the People the truth of the
Case, when they liken men as Schismatics to Murderers for danger? Did you ever
hear them say, [ The Canon, which is the Churches Voice and Law, does
Excommunicate you all that do own your Opinions against Conformity, and
commands us not to admit you to the Sacrament, and yet to pronounce your
Excommunication for not taking it: We confess they have been holy and Learned
Men that have thought many things imposed unlawful; and therefore we wonder not
if it be not in your power to change your judgment, no more than to be perfect
in knowledge; and we confess if you are unjustly Excommunicated, or any of the
things made necessary to Communion be against Gods Word, then it is the Church
that is guilty of Schism, but because this is not so, we accuse you of Schism,
even of separating from the Universal Church, and from Salvation.

XC. I do admire, that never any one of them would be prevailed with to prove
the Canons Excommunications ipso facto lawful, when even Papists have scorned
all such doings; and when the learned of all their own admired men, that were
for comprimising matters with Rome, even Mar. Ant. de Dom. Spalatensis de Rep.
Eccl. has so confidently, copiously and strenuously damned it: Christ would
have none Excommunicate, whatever the Crime be, without Impenitency after due
admonition for Repentance, but these Canons ipso facto Condemn and
Excommunicate Godly men, without ever admonishing them, or calling them to
repent, or hearing or seeing them: Nothing is necessary but the proof of the
fact, and then the Law is instead of a Judge; and to oblige the People to avoid
them, it must be published.

If this and all things named in the first Plea for Peace, be sinless, studying
and disputing is not the way to know what is sinful.

XCI. But, says the Resolver, [ Christ has but one Body, and to be a Member
of two separate and Opposite Churches, is to be contrary to ourselves.]

Ans. But I had hoped your Catechized Boys had known, 1. That one Body has
many parts. 2. That particular Churches are parts of this Body, as Corporations
are of the Kingdom. 3. That all the parts are imperfect, and made up of none
but sinners. 4. That every good man is partly bad, and so contrary to himself.
5. That Churches may be so far separate as to be distinct, and yet not so far
as to be contrary or opposite. 6. That they may be opposite in Accidents and
Integrals, that are one in specie in Essentials. 7. That a man may own several
Churches, and Communicate with them for that which they agree in, and yet not
own both, (or either perhaps) in that which they are opposite in. 8. That there
being somewhat opposite in all men and Churches on Earth, you damn your selves
for Communicating with them. 9. That a man may have more Communion with the
Church which he Locally separateth from, even for sin, than with that which he
is present with.

E. g. A Congregation or Nation of men of eminent Sanctity and Order, ^ound
Doctrine and Worship, may, by humane frailty take some one falsehood or
uncertain thing to be necessary to Ministry or Communion (as they say some
Churches unhappily of late reject all that own not the Antiquity of the Hebrew
Points) I cannot have local Communion with that Church, for they will not
receive me, unless I subscribe either a falsehood, (or that which I judge
false;) but yet I highly honor and love them, and have mental Catholic
Communion with them, when perhaps necessity may make me Locally join with a
Church of far worse men and Order, that will impose no sin on me. 10. And I
would advise these men, did they not despise my advice, for the Church of
Englands sake, and their own, to retract their Errors, and not lay such a
Snare before the People. Should you say in the Pulpit, [ If the Church be
guilty of any Schism by her Impositions, (oftnamed) Excommunications and
silencing of Christ's Ministers, and afflicting good people without just Cause,
then I, and all that communicate with it and me, communicate in the guilt of
Schism, and are all in as much danger of Damnation by it as Adulterers and
Murderers] tell not your hearers this, for if you do, some will think you bid
them separate or be damned, and only make a doubt whether most men have Noses
or not.

XCII. Qu. But is not the Inference true?

Ans. No, it is false: There are twenty cases in which 1. One may be guilty of
Schism and not be a Schismatic, as denominated from what predominateth: 2. And
as many in which he is not at all guilty that communicates with the guilty.

And let the world (that is sober and awake) judge now whether these men or we
be the greater Schismatics, and which more condemns or separateth from the
Church of England. We say that all Churches have some degree of Schism, and so
has the Church of England, as it has imperfection, Error and Sin; but that
it is not therefore no Church, nor is it unlawful to communicate with it; All
Christians and Churches must not be separated from that are guilty of some
degree of Schism.

If any will turn these Serious matters into Jest, and say, as Dr. Say^^ll,
that they will receive Greeks, Lutherans, etc. that come to their Communion,
his Serious Readers will tell him, that so will most Sects receive those that
approve of their Communion and come to them: Joining with you signifies that
they are of your way therein; But will you go to their Churches and Communicate
with them? You will receive the damned Schismatics if they come to you, when
yet you make it damnable to join in their meetings with them. This quibbling
beseems not grave men in great matters.

To conclude, Reader, God having allowed more Legislative Power to men in
things Secular than in Religion, I may say this case is like ours in debate.

I. Some Judges and Lawyers say, that the Oath of Allegiance makes a Subject in
this Kingdom; that the Renouncing or Violating it by Treason, or Rebellion, or
deserting the Kingdom, overthrows the Relation. But that other particular
faults or quarrels against Neighbors, Justices, Judges, yea the King himself,
are punishable according to the Laws, but are not all Rebellion, nor dissolve
Subjection, nor oblige the Subjects to renounce civil converse with each other;
though some contempt and obstinacy may outlaw them. Such is our Judgment of
Church Relation and Communion, which I need not rehearse.

II. Suppose a sect of Lawyers and Judges arise, that say, no men are the Kings
Subjects, but are Rebels, that break any of his Laws, that Shoot not in long
Bows, that Bury not their dead in Woollen, that swear profanely, that eat
flesh in Lent unlicensed, that have any unjust Lawsuit, that wrong any
Neighbor, that oppress any Poor man, all these are Rebels; yea all that plead
opposite Causes at the Bar, and all Judges that judge contrary to one another,
and all that misunderstand any point of Law and Practice accordingly, and all
that besides the Oath of Allegiance do constitute Marriages, Families, Schools,
Societyes by any other Covenants of their own, and all that are of different
Cities and Companies, parts of the Kingdom, or all whose Justices, Mayors,
Sheriffs, etc. differ from one another in any point of Law and practice: Or all
that obey not every Constable and Justice; or that go to diverse Justices in the
same Precincts, or that go from one Justice to another to avoid unrighteous
Judgment, or that go from the Physician of the Place for Health, and from the
Schoolmaster of the Town for greater edification, or that Travel beyond Sea for
Knowledge, yea all that understand not every word in the Law, that may concern
them: If any say, none of these are the Kings Subjects, but Rebels, opposite to
him and one another, and deserve to be all hanged as Murderers, and so are all
that have Communion with them; Quaere, 1. Whether these men are for the Unity
of England? 2. And are Friends to the King that deprive him of all his
Subjects; as much as those that would have him have no Subjects, that be not of
the same Age, Stature, Complexion and Wit. 3. And whether they are Friends to
Mankind? 4. And whether they condemn not themselves if they live not as
Anchorets, out of humane Society. 5. And whether that Nation be not by
infatuation prepared for Destruction that would believe them, and would hate,
scorn and ruin them that are of the first mentioned opinion, according to the
saying, Quos perdere vult Jupiter, hos dementat.

As to the more dangerous Doctrine now threatening this Land, that would subject
England to a Foreign Jurisdiction, on pretense of a Necessity of either an
Universal Church Monarch, or Church-Parliament Senate or Council, or of all the
Church on Earth represented by Patriarchs or Metropolitans, or that plead for
Subjection to them, under the Name of Communion, they require a distinct
Answer. But Dr. Is. Barrow, and Mr. Beverley's Catholic Catechism, have
effectually done it.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART AGAINST SCHISM: BEING ANIMADVERSIONS On a Book famed to be Mr.
Raphson's.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1684.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
WHEN I had Written the first of these Discourses, I came after to know more of
the Authors Judgment, by another Book against me; which I also Answered, but it
lies by unprinted. I also wrote, for the use of some private Friends, my
Reasons for Communion with those Parish-Churches who have Capable Ministers,
which many Importuned me to Print; but that also is yet undone: But a Book
famed to be Mr. Raphsons coming out, I thought it my duty to Animadvert on
that, and to bear my Testimony against Schism on both Extremes, lest I be
guilty of Partiality, and of the Sin and suffering of many that may be deceived
by them. If these Two be not overmuch discouraged, the other Two against both
the Extremes may come hereafter.

THE SECOND PART AGAINST SCHISM, etc.
The Reasons of Mr. Raphson, and such others, against going to the
Parish-Churches, considered.
THE Matter of his Book, as against Persecution, is very considerable; the
Style is very close and pungent: His Doctrine against Communion with the
Churches that use the Liturgy, is that which I examine.

The sum of it is, 1. That kneeling at the reception of the Sacrament, and the
use of the Liturgy, are unlawful.

2. That they are false Worship, and Idolatry.

3. That the places where they are used, are Idol-Temples.

4. That to join there in them, is to partake in Idolatry.

5. The proof of all this is by this Argument; Worship not institute, is not
lawful; but kneeling in receipt of Bread and Wine, is Worship not instituted by
Christ: therefore not lawful; therefore not pleasing, p. 160, 161. To which, by
way of Motive, he adds, p. 275. How many once in the separation, are returned
back to the Vomit they once cast up, and wallow in the mire of a worldly
worship? etc. Is compliance in Idol-Temples, going to Dan and Bethel, bowing to
Baal, sitting, or drinking with the supers^itious in acts of religious
adoration, a witness for, or against defection? Are you turned as silly sheep
(that once were called shepherds), to bleat after other shepherds, that Christ
never sent, nor bid you go after them, etc. Looks it not like a declining of
the Camp of Christ, the work of the Gospel, and setting your face toward
Babel, etc.? Is scandal of no weight with you, etc.? How dare you venture your
souls to sit under Means that he says shall not profit you; and which is worse,
lies under his curse? Ier. 23.32. Mal. 1.14. with more such. Either this Writer
knows how ill he deals with his Reader, or not: If he do, it is a double
fault: if not (which I think), it is a doleful case, that every well-meaning
man, that can but be confident in his ignorance and error, and father it on
God, should become such a snare to them that cannot see through his Pretenses,
and should himself suffer for sinning, and call it the Cause of God, and
condemn all that sin not as confidently as he; and hereby harden his
afflicters, by showing them his weakness, and impenitently justifying his sin.

If he would not have ensnared his Reader, he should first have opened the
meaning of the words of his Question, that they might know how much of the
Dispute is material, and how much only about words. 2. And then he should have
so proved his assertion and accusation, as might satisfy a good Conscience in
a matter wherein God, the Church, and Souls, are so much concerned; and not
have poured out Accusations by way of Motives, upon unproved and false
suppositions.

I find but one Argument, which I shall now answer plainly:

His Major is, [ Worship not instituted, is not lawful]. Ans. 1. The word [
Worship] in general, signifies, 1. Any thing done in honor to another; and so
all our obedience to God is Worship: It is to his glory that we must do all. I
suppose that this he means not. 2. Any immediate act or expression of the
honor and reverence of the heart. If this be not it that he means by
Worship, I know not what he means.

This Worship, as within, is the secret act of the soul; as expressed, it is the
act of the body.

Of such Worship there are two sorts: One sort is made necessary, statedly, by
God's commanding it in particular. To this no man must add the like, or from it
diminish any thing so commanded, either pretending God's authority, or his own.
The other sort is but the subordinate ordering of the former, and is but the
manner of doing it. This God does not institute in particular, but only give
man a general Rule, how to choose it himself; which is, That all be done in
love, and to edification, decently and in order.

Either this latter sort is to be called Worship, or not: If it be, then it
falls under his opposition: If not, then, 1. He must give us a definition of
Worship, which shall exclude it; and so Worship must be somewhat else than the
direct or immediate acting or expressing honor to God: And then who knows what
he means by it? 2. And then when we plead for men's making none but this, he
should to avoid deceit, confess that the Controversy is only of the Name
(whether Modes and Circumstances of God's instituted Worship, may be called
Worship), and not at all of the Thing (whether it be lawful or not): This had
been like a Christian Teacher.

Now I answer, 1. to his first Proposition: 1. Worship which is neither
instituted particularly, nor in the general, appointing man how to choose it,
is unlawful. 2. And to invent worship without God's allowance, contrary, or of
the same kind, as if he had not done his part, is unlawful. 3. But for man to
choose and use such worship as is but the right ordering of God's Institutions,
is commanded by him, and a Duty; and therefore not unlawful.

2. As to his Minor, or Second Proposition, I answer, Kneeling at the
Sacrament, and communicating with Parish Churches that have tolerable
Ministers, are not instituted of God in particular, but the Genus of them is
instituted, and we commanded to choose our selves, according to God's general
Rules, to the best of our understanding: and so they are our Duty, and not
unlawful.

I give the Instances of these two sorts of worship:

First, God has Instituted, that our Minds Worship him, in believing, and
receiving all his Gospel Revelations, and trusting them; and in desiring all
things Petitioned in the Lords Prayer, and in consenting to all commanded in
the Scriptures; and in Dedicating our selves to him cordially in Baptism, and
renewing it in the Lords Supper, in commemoration of Christ's Death, till he
comes. He has Instituted the Corporal Expresions of all these; That we confess
Christ in all the necessary Articles of Faith; That we ask the Petitions of the
Lords Prayer; That we perform the Commands of the Decalogue toward God, and
all others in the Scripture. These are the Instituted Worship which none must
alter.

Secondly, The Manner and Ordering, which is the Second sort (which I leave
every one to call Worship, or not, when they have defined Worship) which man
may, and must choose himself, without any Particular Institution of God, contain
such Acts as these.

1. Undetermined gestures of Reverence and Honor in time of Public Worship.
As to be uncovered, or put off the Hat at Prayer, or the Lord's Supper. This we
do directly in honor and reverence to God, whom we there Worship; and
therefore it is it self a subordinate act of Worship.

So to stand, or kneel at Prayer, and not to sit. Though in Scripture we read
of sitting, standing, kneeling, and prostration: yet no one of these is made
necessary by Institution: yet are they subordinate Acts of Worship, expressing
our inward Worship of God: And the reason why being uncovered, or kneeling, are
now chosen, is not a particular Institution, but because the Custom of the
Country has made them the most congruous Expression of our inward Worship:
when as Paul tells us, That then and there it was a shame for a man to be
covered: and the whole Church for many hundred years forbad all kneeling, in
Adoration, on the Lord's Days. And more,

To these I add, the gesture of the Adult in Baptism, whether they shall be
Baptized kneeling, to signify Humble Reception, or not, is left to choice.

So is the Gesture in singing Psalms: If any think, that speaking to God by
prayer, praise, or thanksgiving in Psalms, should in honor to God be done
Standing, or Kneeling, rather than Sitting, it is no addition to God's
Institution. And that we commonly use sitting in Psalmody, and not when we Pray
in Prose, is merely because Custom makes one more offensive than the other.

The same I say of the Gesture of Preaching, which some do sitting with their
Hats on, and others stand to avoid a seeming dishonor of Gods Name and
Service. Also, some holy Nonconformists I have known, that would rarely name
God but with their Hats put off, or bowing their Heads; or with Hands and Eyes
lift up toward Heaven. (Old Mr. Atkins at Tipton near Dudley, did thus use to
show such Reverence, when he named God, that would strike Reverence into those
that saw and heard him: and has often Affected me more than a Sermon.) This was
External Worship, not Instituted in the particulars, but in general of
Reverence to God.

2. Another instance is in Vows to God, which are acts of Worship: But for the
Matter of them, several things may be Vowed which are not particularly
commanded, but only in the General. And for the Form or Words, I do not think
that Mr. Raphson can show me all that Vow called the Covenant, in any
particular Institution; and yet I conjecture, that he takes it not to be
Idolatry, nor Unlawful.

3. Another Instance is, in things devoted and offered to God The Scripture in
general says, Honor God with thy substance, and with the first Fruits of thy
increase. And that Christians at first sold all, and laid at the Apostles Feet;
which yet Peter tells Ananias he might have chosen not to do. And for many
hundred years after, they brought their Weekly Donations for the Ministers,
Sacraments, and Poor, to the Altar, and Offered it first to God: And so Paul
would have the Corinthians give their Collections as to God, for the Saints.
But no Institution told them how much they should give, but the General Rule.

4. Another Instance is, the length or degree of outward Worship: If I pray two
hours rather than one, it is an act of Honor or Worship, not particularly
commanded.

So whether men shall in Public read one Chapter, or two; sing one Psalm or
two, or more, is undetermined by God

5. Another is about set Days and Hours for Worship; as to keep a yearly
Thanksgiving for Deliverance from the Powder Plot; the Spanish Invasion; for
the Reformation, etc. So also Fasts, and what days Lectures shall be kept, and
what hour: And what day and hour the Lord's Supper shall be Administered; which
are Circumstantial Acts of Worship.

6. Another Instance is in the choice of Psalms and Hymns: the use of David's
are Lawful, and so are others: but no Institution tyeth us to One, but leaves
us to choose.

7. Another Instance is in the Tunes and Meter of Psalms, which we use as
Subordinate Acts of Worship. It is but lately that the Churches used Meter and
Melody of Tune; but Prose read with a loud Voice: yet I hope we are not
Idolaters for our Meter and Melody: which I may say also of Church Music,
which David used, and we may do, where it is Edifying; but it is no Institution
now. Yea, when Paul directs the Church to use Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs; which is for singing with grace in our hearts to the Lord, and therefore
it is Worship, which some men must indite and make.

8. Another Instance is, in the versions of the Psalms of David; where among
many we may choose which seems best.

9. Another Instance is, in the public and private Reading of the Scriptures
Translated: where every word is the work of man: God wrote it not in English,
but in Hebrew and Greek; but man Translates it, some well, and some
defectively; yet I hope, an English Bible is not an Idol.

10. So also the dividing the Scriptures into Chapters, and Verses, which are
the Works of man, is no Idolatry.

11. And another Instance is, the Method and Words of Sermons and Prayers:
whether a Minister shall Preach by way of Doctrine, Reason, and Use; or
otherwise: and Expound by way of Paraphrase, or otherwise; what words he shall
use, God has not instituted in particular; but men's invention makes these,
some suddenly, and some beforehand.

12. Another Instance is, the use of helps, or written Words; Whether one shall
use Notes in Preaching, and read them, or not? Whether the words of a Prayer
shall be written, and read, or not; God has not determined. And so Books of
Catechism, Public Confessions, Prayers, Meditations as formed, are all the
works of man, and no Idolatry. And if Parents impose words of Prayer on their
Children, it is no Sin; as Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. show.

13. Another Instance is in the form of Ordination, when the Words and many
Circumstances are undetermined. Imposition of Hands is a lawful Sign: and so is
doing it by a Writing, or by mere Words, without that Imposition; some receive
it Kneeling, some Standing; some by one Form of Words, some by another, etc.
some from one Ordainer, some from many, etc. And none of these determined by
Institution.

14. The same is true of Discipline; The Form of Words for Admonition, for
Absolution, for Excommunication, for the Penitents Confession and Request, are
left to Humane Wisdom, so the matter and manner be regulated by the general
Law. And they that say, that God has Instituted, that the Church shall be
Governed Necessarily by fixed Classes, with Appeals to National Synods, and
that here a Major Vote has Governing Power over the lesser part; yea, and that
these must be made up of Two sorts of Elders, of which one sort are
un-ordained, or are not Authorized to Administer the Word and Sacraments, do
but add to the Word of God, if they say these National Assemblies are the
Supreme Church Power; what Law of God did ever Institute, That a Minister, or
Classis, e. g. in Geneva, Breme, Scotland, is not as much subject to the
Decrees of a larger Council of many Nations; and that the Synod at Dort had not
as much Power as a lesser at Hague: or a Synod of many Nations as much as one
in Scotland? But if (as by parity of Reason they must) they say, that General
or large Councils are the Governors of National Assemblies, as they are of
Classis and Presbyteries: then they bring us under a Foreign Jurisdiction,
which the Kingdom is sworn against; and I think they are Papists, but of the
French sort, who make General Councils Superior Governors of the Universal
Church.

And if they determine the bounds of Church Power, by the Magistrates Laws, and
yet damn Erastians, they seem in ignorance to deal too hardly with themselves.

15. Another Instance is, in the Place of Public Worship: God has not
determined where the Assembly shall meet: where the Pulpit, Font, Table, etc.
shall stand. And if great and lofty Structures, called Temples, be Built,
purely to show how we honor God, and Religion: as Constantine, and others
after him, did at Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, over the Grave of
Christ, and all over the Empire: this Actual Expression of Honor to God, is
Cultus modalis and secundarius, a subservient sort of Worship, and no Idolatry,
but Lawful.

16. The same I say of Church Utensils: If for the Honor of God and Religion,
the Pulpits, and Tables have Ornaments of Silk, Cups, and Trenchers, and
Flaggons of Silver; the Font and Seats have some special Neatness, etc. this is
left to Man's Determination, without any particular Institution, and is no
Idolatry.

17. And if as Judges and Lawyers have distinguishing Habits* the Ministers
have so, (officiating, and at other times) to no worse end (or manner) than the
said Utensils are put; I know no Institution that is crossed by it, nor that
forbids it.

18. Another Instance may be of Speaking in the Assembly, whether it shall be
One Minister, or Two, or Three. Whether Laymen may not be Interlocutors by
Questions, yea, and sometime Preach and Pray, etc. God has not particularly
determined, but left to Human Choice.

19. Many good Christians knowing the Lord's Day to be an Instituted Day of
Thanksgiving for the greatest Mercies, do as an Act of Honor wear their best
Clothes, and Feast themselves and the Poor accordingly that day: This is
Lawful, by the General Law; but not particularly Instituted by God.

20. Professing Signs in our Covenantings with God, and Confessing of our
Religion, are left to be chosen only by the General Laws of Edification, and
Order. When a Nation, or Church, or Person renew their Covenant with God, and
their Confession of Faith, it may be done (when the Ruler demands their
consent) either by word, or by subscribing* or by lifting up the hand, or by
standing up, or by bowing the Head; for these are all, or most found in
Scripture instances; yea, sometimes they fell by Prostration to the Ground:
yea, and so they often did in receiving a Charge or Message from God, by his
Ministers.

I will add no more Instances; These are enough. If yet it be said, That none
of these be acts of Worship: I again Answer, 1. Then do not by Slander call
them so, and say still, that Man's inventing or using these, is using false
Worship. If they be no Worship, they are no false Worship. Confess then, that
it is but a bare name that you charged with Idolatry: for its only such things
as these that we would add. 2. But de nomine, If an Action done directly to
honor God be to be called Worship; some of these at least may be called
Secondary subordinate Worship: But if you appropriate the Name to Gods stated
Ordinances, these must not be called Worship; but the manner, order,
circumstances, or accidents of Worship. But call them what you will, they are
but what God allows, and the General of them he commands.

I need not say much to his Applicatory Words. 1. To return from Separation, to
Love and Union, is as fitly called, a Returning to their Vomit, as returning
from Drunkenness and Fornication, to Sobriety and Chastity may be so called.
Repentance is casting up our Sin.

2. The Names of bowing to Baal, Dan and Bethel, Babylon, Idols, etc. are as
easily used by Quakers, Ranters, Familists* etc. against all God's Church and
Worship: And they were worn so threadbare by the railing Separatists (then
called Brownists), against the Old Learned Godly Nonconformists, that they
turned to the Speakers reproach. And I suppose he knows that the Scots were
called as bad, and worse, by the Army that conquered them in 1650, etc.

3. That sitting or drinking with the superstitious in acts of religious
adoration, is a sign of defection. This would make all Backsliders who so sit
and drink with him, and such as he, who is so superstitious, as to turn sin
into duty, and duty into sin, and falsely father Laws on God: Yea, that is worse
than superstitious, as is after manifested. 2. Superstition is an offering
somewhat as pleasing to God, which is not pleasing to him. All Christians have
some degree of this in Matter or Manner; for we know but in part, and prophecy
in part, etc. And so no Christians must join with others. But must they not
give over all Religious Duty themselves, seeing their own defects more defile
them than other men's? 3. Christ does not disown all imperfect worship that has
some Superstition: And we must receive one another as Christ receives us. 4.
It was Superstitious persons that Paul commands Christians to receive to
Communion, Romans 14. 5. Thus he condemns the Apostles, and the Churches then,
and the Scripture it self. 6. It is dreadful revolting to choose rather
forbearance of all Church Communion, than to Communicate with our Parish
Churches, when better cannot be had, and men are not forced to any sin
themselves. And he that will communicate with none that sin in Preaching,
Prayer, Sacraments, shall communicate with none 7. It is a gross Service of
Satan and Popery, to fight against Love and Unity, and bring all the Public
Assemblies under disgrace, as unlawful, that Popery may take possession
unresisted.

4. His words of [ silly Sheep bleating after any Shepherd, etc.] are but a Net
to catch silly Souls. It Is the common Trap of the Papists, to put ignorant
people to prove the Calling of the Ministers, or forsake them. They that preach
the Gospel, and do the Office (tho faultily), and are in possession, have a
Calling sufficient to justify the Hearers, when it may not be enough to
justify themselves: A better Call than the High Priests that Christ did send
men to.

5. As to the Argument of Scandal; It is of dreadful weight to deter a tender
Conscience (as from conforming to sin, so) from his groundless Separation, and
war against Unity and Love.

6. That God says such Means shall not profit; yea, curses it, is a slander
against God and Scripture, and all the Church on Earth that is known; by
perverting and misapplying the Text.

I shall now better prove the lawfulness of using such things as these, than he
has proved it unlawful.

1. That which no Law of God, or valid Law of Man, forbids, is not unlawful:
but the use of the things forementioned, no Law of God, or valid Law of Man
forbids: Therefore the use of the things forementioned, is not unlawful.

He that will say that there is any such Law, must show that Law, and prove his
Affirmative: But let him take heed of adding to God's Law: A false Prophet that
fathered a false Message from God, was an heinous sinner. Is it not worse
falsely to father a Law on him?

Perhaps they will say, that God forbids adding or diminishing: I answer, He
does so: Therefore let them take heeed of it, who say his Law forbids that
which it never forbad, but in general commands. If we must not add to the
Laws of the Land, yet the Bookbinder that covers them, and the Lawyers and
Judges that expound them, do not add thereby to the Law. When the Hearers
bowed, and prostrated themselves in reverence to God, they did not by this add
to the Law; nor yet when they made a Vow uncommanded, or a Free Will Offering:
And I think it was no sinful addition to the Law, for the Publican to smite his
Breast, and look downward; and when Jeremy said, No man smites on his thigh,
and says, what evil have I done? The meaning is not, No man idolatrously
gives God false worship. And I think, that they that rent their clothes to
express their repentance, did not add to God's Word, nor yet do it as necessary
worship, tho Joel says, Rent your hearts, and not your garments.

Some Object, That Christ's sitting at the Sacramental Supper, is a Law to us,
forbidding any other gesture. But this Author professes, that all the actions
of Christ, or his Apostles, are not Laws binding us to do the like: If they be,
we break many such Laws; as when we do not eat a full Meal before the
Sacrament, when we do it not without women, only to a Family, or to Twelve,
only to Teachers, in an upper Reom, in an Inn, or Private House, and that we do
not lie along, leaning, as they did; especially when we take it not at
Supper-time, and turn the Lord's Supper to a Breakfast or Dinner. The Apostles
brake no Law when they differed from any of these, which were but occasional
Circumstances.

It Is said by some, That Christ's Example binds us to a Table Gesture: But 1.
That may be convenient, and yet not necessary: The bare Example binds us not to
it. 2. If it did, that were but like the general Law; Let all be done to
edification, and in order; and binds to no one sort of gesture at all: For then
when they eat standing, it would bind us to stand; and if they eat kneeling (as
Laborers often do at Harvest-work in the Fields), it would bind us to kneel; if
they eat lying, as the Jews did, it would bind us to that: and so this would
but tie us to the Custom of the Country. But in feasting with God, we may
sometimes do it more lowly than in a common Table Gesture, and break no Law.
When Mary was, it is like, on her knees, washing Christ's feet with her Tears,
if he had offered her Bread or Wine, it is like it had been no Idolatry so to
take it.

But the grand Objection is, that we worship Bread and Wine; which can be no
better than a slander, when the very Liturgy and Doctrine of the Church, not
only renounce Transubstantiation, but the very real Presence of Christ's Body,
which yet many thousand Protestants believe.

Object. But you kneel before the Bread and Wine, and make it a mediate Object
of adoration, contrary to the Second Commandment.

Answ. 1. We neither make any Image, nor invent this Medium, nor yet symbolize
with Idolaters, while we renounce the very Object (Transubstantiate Bread)
which they adore, and therefore break not the Second Commandment, no more than
we do in kneeling in lawful Prayer, because they kneel in praying before
Images, or to Angels.

2. An Object of worship is either a mere motive exciting Object, or else a
terminative mediate worshipped Object. The first is more than lawful: For we
should be moved and stirred up by the works of God, even by our Meat and Drink,
by Sun and Moon, and all that we see, to worship God: And this is properly but
the Object of our thoughts, and the motive of our outward acts: And the
Sacrament is no more. But if we did direct our worship terminatively to the
Bread and Wine, as a mediate Object, by which it should pass to God, this were
to break the Second Commandment, like Image Worship.

There are many Instances in Scripture, of people that have bowed to God before
the Prophet, moved by his word and presence, who yet break not the Second
Commandment, nor idolized the Words or Prophets: So Joshua fell down to the
Angel, Josh. 4. We give thanks for the Meat that stands before us on the Table,
as a Motive-Object; and we may do it on our knees: Is this an idolatrous
worshipping of our Meat? I have many a time seen a miserable Beggar, when one
has given him Money or Meat, fall down on his knees, and take it, saying, I
thank God and you; Did this make the giver his Idol? How sad is the case of
ignorant young Christians, whose Consciences must be racked or cheated by such
Sophistry, because their wits be not ripe enough to find out the deceit?

II. Another Argument: That is not unlawful which God commands us in general
to choose and do, and so allows in the Particulars: But such are the Twenty
Things before mentioned, etc.

God commands us to do all things in Love, and Concord, and Order, to
edification. This must needs reach to the undetermined circumstances. We cannot
worship God publicly at all, but it must be in some words, in some gestures,
in some time, in some place; nor profess our Faith, and Covenant-consent, but
by some sign: and so of the rest. If you choose no one, when God has tied us
to none, but bid us choose to edification, we break his General Law. If you can
prove that we choose amiss, the Fault will be, not that we choose, but that we
choose not better.

III. That is not unlawful which Christ and his Apostles did before us without
blame, and belongs also unto us. But such is the use of such Modes and
Circumstances of God's instituted worship, which are left variable, and free to
occasional choice, etc.

What Christ did, I shall speak more anon. Paul has his [ Not the Lord, but
I]; signifying, that the thing was not determined by a Law, Romans 14. He judges
circumstantial differences such as should not break communion, when yet they
that kept days, or kept them not; and they that did eat, or not eat, did it as
to the Lord. And did he bid them not judge each other for idolatry? or say, Romans
14.17, 18. That Idolaters were acceptable to God, or approved of men? or Romans
15. or bid them receive Idolaters, as Christ received us? He regulateth their
Church-Meetings, How many shall speak at a Meeting, and by what course and
order; and that women shall be veiled, and not men; and that they salute each
other with an holy Kiss, etc. not by a Law that setleth the Particulars, but by
the General Law of doing all in order, and to edification; and pleads not
Institution, but the Custom of the Churches, which is alterable, as the
signification of such acts are. And St. James will have the Elders anoint the
sick with Oil for recovery, which yet binds not us. The Papists use this as
an Institution, as they do imposition of hands in Confirmation: They say in
Ordination, Receive the Holy Ghost, and breathe on the Person: They wash the
feet of one another in imitation of Christ: And yet these men condemn them in
this, as superstitious, for imitating Christ and his Apostles, and
Scripture-Examples, and cry down Popery, and at the same time call us
Idolaters, for going beyond Scripture-institution. The same I say of their
keeping Lent, in imitation of Christ's forty days fast, etc. Is it Idolatry
both to follow, and not to follow Scripture-Examples?

To all the rest I add one Instance more: Swearing by appeal to God, is a most
solemn act of worship: but the sign of taking an Oath, is left free to
convenient choice. Abraham's Servant did it by putting his hand under his
thigh: Was this a common Law, or Institution? Others did it otherwise: We do it
by laying our hand on the Book, and kissing it. These are neither sinful
additions, or Idolatry. The Memorial of God's Works, and Men's Covenants, were
kept, sometime by pitching Stones, sometime by Pillars, sometime by set days
(as the Feast of Purim), sometime by laying up the Ensigns (as Goliah's Sword,
etc.) And all these lawful, and no Ido^latry.

IV. Lastly, I will unveil these men's Doctrine of Separation, and then judge
whether it be the Doctrine of Christ, which is a Law of Love, and Union, and
Peace* or the Wisdom from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
etc.

1. ^t is false, that all such Secondary Medal Worship, is unlawful, which is
not instituted by a fixing Law.

2. It is deceit not to distinguish these different things.

3. The charge of [ false Worship] unexplained, is mere deceit: 1. Worship is
so far [ false], as it is contrary to the Rule. Every Sermon, Prayer or
Sacrament which we administer, has faultiness and sin, and is so far [ false
Worship]. 2. But Worship offered God on pretense that he instituted it when he
did not, or that Man has authority to command the like, is yet worse false
Worship. 3. And the worship of false Gods or Idols, is yet worse than that, and
abhorred of God.

4. His making all faulty circumstances, such as he names, to be Idolatry,
because false, as he calls it, is yet more sinful, and of mischievous
importance.

5. So is it to make the Churches Id^ls Temples, where they do kneel at the
Sacrament, and use the Liturgy.

6. So is it to feign falsely, that God calls men to come out from such, and
be separate, because he calls them out of Babylon; falsely adding to the Laws
of God.

7. By his Doctrine he makes Christ an Idolater (which I mention with horror):
For he 1. used Circumstances not instituted before, or by himself: He preached
on a Mountain, in a Ship, etc. not commanded: He commended Mary for anointing
him, washing his Feet with Tears, wiping them with her Hair, not instituted in
particular: He commended the Publican for smiting on his breast, standing far
off, not looking to Heaven, without particular command: His Custom was to go to
the Synagogue-worship: He from his childhood performed Temple-Duties and
Service: He commanded the Lepers cleansed to go to the Priests, and offer their
due, and his Disciples to hear the Scribes and Pharisees in Moses Chair, etc.
And yet 1. The High Priests were not of Aaron's line, according to Institution.
2. They bought the Office of Heathen Romans. 3. They had it not for life,
according to institution. 4. Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Manners, were
heinously corrupted, so that the Hearers were to beware of the Leaven of their
Doctrine, and not to imitate their lives. 4. They were bitter enemies of
Christ, and Persecutors: yet Christ never bid his Disciples to separate from
any thing but their errors; but says, They shall cast you out of the
synagogues. And doubtless Christ committed no sin; nor can we be so holy as he.

8. He condemns Abraham, and all the Jewish Church of old, that used such
things that were not instituted in Worship, as is before mentioned in swearing,
etc.

9. He makes the Apostles Idolatrous that used the like.

10. He makes the Primitive Churches Idolatrous, and the Scriptures to approve
it. For they used such uninstituted things: yea, the Romans were guilty of
differences in God's Service, and despising and judging each other for them;
The Corinthians were Carnal in making Parties and Divisions, they defrauded
each other, and went to Law before Heathens. They had Fornicators, Judaizing
envious Slanderers of Paul, Heretical deniers of the Resurrection; such as eat
in Idols Temples, or of their Sacrifices: Were drunk at, or before the
Sacrament. The Galatians are yet sharplier charged: Almost all the Seven
Churches Romans 2. and 3. had Nicholaitans, or Iezabels Doctrine, which God
hated: and no Christian is called to separate from the Communion of any one of
all these; but commanded to amend, and live in Unity, without division.

11. He condemns as Idolaters all the Churches on Earth, for Six Hundred, if
not One Thousand Years after the Apostles; not One Church Christian, or
Heretic (as far as any History tells us that I have found) did ever deny such
things, as he calls False Worship, or Idolatry. They all went further than our
Parish Churches do. At Baptism they used the White Garment, tasting Milk and
Honey, Chrisme or anointing the Forehead, Crossing; they adored only Standing,
and not Kneeling, every Lords Day, all as significant Ceremonies: No one Church
or Person is said to scruple these; I think they did not well: but God rejected
not their Worship.

12. He makes all, or near all the Churches on Earth, Idolaters, at this day:
All on Earth, save the Protestants, are far grosser in their Liturgies and
Ceremonies than the English: Of the (...)* Sweden, Denmark, Saxony, and all the
Lutherans, have Liturgie^, Crossing, Ceremonies, Church-Images,
Consubstantiation. The Helvetians are such as are called Erastians, making the
Magistrate the only Ruler, and Sacraments common. Geneva, and France, yea, and
H^lland, have their Liturgies, and some Rites.

13. He condemns Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, and all Dissenters
that are here called Protestants. For they have all many of the foresaid
uninstituted things: They put off the Hat in Church at Prayer. They stand up at
the Blessing; they use uncommanded gestures at Sacrament; they use
Psalm-versions, Metres, Tunes, Scripture-Translations, Divisions into Chapter
and Verse, never instituted particularly. The Scots used a Government by
Classes, National Assemblies of various Elders, ruling by Vote, instead of mere
consulting for Concord, uncommanded.

14. I humbly propose it to consideration, Whether by consequence (which he
sees not, nor owneth) he do not deny Christ, and all the Gospel, and work of
man's redemption: I challenge him to name me one Church on Earth for many
hundred years after the Apostles, that had not that which he calls false
Worship and Idolatry: Suppose this were but in a few Ages, as the second,
third, or fourth Century: Then a Temple of Idols, and Company of Idolaters, is
no true Church: And if at any time there was no Church there was no Head of the
Church: No Kingdom, no King: No Wife, no Husband, that is no Christ. How much
more, if he make all, or near all the Church Idolaters to this day, and himself
with the rest?

15. If it be a heinious sin to bear false Witness against a Neighbor, or to
slander one man, what is it to slander and back-bite all the Church on Earth,
and Christ himself?

16. Is it not a work of Satan to destroy Love, and to render almost all
Christians odious? And does not he do so, that calls them Idolaters? Is not
this Preaching men into the hatred of each other? Do we owe no Love to any
Christians, but such as is due to Idolaters? Is not the fruit of the Spirit
otherwise described?

17. Does he not deny that Communion of the Saints, which is an Article of the
Creed? and tempt weak Christians into sinful Separations, Divisions, Slanders,
Judgings, Murmurings, Envies, which are the fruits of the flesh?

18. Does not this directly destroy the Church by Dissolution? When there is
none to be owned or joined with, that has not somewhat which he calls false
worship. And is not separating the Materials, destroying the house?

19. Does he not directly rush into the Sin which he condemns adding to God's
Laws, and saying he forbids what he forbids not? yea, fathering on him Laws
more rigorous than the Jewish, as disowning Christ's Church as Idolators and
false Worshippers?

20. I add, such woefully harden men in that which they themselves suffer by,
and which they call enmity and persecution, and make more Conformists while
they deny it, than R. B. whom he frivolously talks of, ever did (except it be
a Conformity to Truth and Goodness.) For when men read and hear others
confidently rage against Truth and Duty, by rash presumptuous ignorance, they
judge of all our dissent by this: And while many run into this Guilt, it seems
to justify their Afflicters: And it tempts weak Persons to suffer for sinful
separation as evil do^rs* thinking it is for Truth. Oh with what grief will
understanding men see Christians together, as in a state of enmity by mistakes.
To see some at once require from others, things good and necess^ry, things
Lawful but unnecessary, things necessary in their Genus, but not this more than
that, and some things sinful, as if they were all almost alike. To see those
whose Senses are not exercised to discern things that differ, misled by the
words and reverence of men, to swallow some Sins as excellent Duties, and fly
from things Lawful; yea, often from great Duties, as odious Sins, and suffer
rejoycingly for sinning against God, and condemning all that sin not as they
do; yea, even all, or almost all the Churches on Earth; yea, and calling them
Idolaters for being wiser and better than they, who alas, do in all things show
themselves to be ignorant Babes, and who speak evil of that which they
understand not. And then to see others revile, and hate, and ruin these
mistaking Christians by a far more dangerous mistake; as if Religious fear of
Sin, were an unsufferable thing, and such were intolerable Hypocrites, and
Conscience were a disgraceful thing; and as if themselves and all Mankind were
not liable to worser Errors, than to take some lawful things for Sin, when they
see unlawful things stand near them, or among them.

But of all this, I have often spoken, and now only say again, That i^ those
justly called Separatists, and who think Parish Communion under honest
Ministers to be Idolatry, or unlawful, will but without prejudice, read what is
written to prove it lawful by the old Godly, Judicious Non-Conformists,
especially John Ball's Trial of Separation, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Bradshaw, Dr.
Ames, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Gifford, Mr. John Paget, Mr. Brightman, Mr. R^thband,
etc. they will need no more to save them from this scandalous Schism: But if
Peter withdraw or separate from the Gentiles for fear of offending the Jewish
Christians, and Barnabas be led away with the Dissimulation, Paul must oppose
it to their Faces: And I that have seen what the Spirit of Division has done,
and read that God never blessed unnecessary separation, will imitate Paul. And if
this World be uncurable, the Lord prepare me for that World where Love and
Unity have no Enemies.

FINIS.
A Survey of the Reply to Mr. Humphrey, and my Self; called A Vindication, etc.
of Dr. Stillingfleet.
1. HAving lately read six or seven Casuists, that persuaded Men to Communion
with the Parish Churches; I found in them many sober discourses, worthy to be
read by those that are inclined to a faulty alienation; and I persuaded some
such to read them, as being obliged to hear what both sides can say, if they
will escape partiality and error. Though I find very few such Writers that seem
to be acquainted with the true case of Non-Conformists, but much strangers to
it, while they dissuade men from it. But some of them I found are not content
to persuade men to Communion with their Party, to which they find it
advantageous to appropriate the name of The Church of England, (unjustly)
unless they also persuade them from Communion with all others in the land that
be not of their Mind and Party. And they conclude,

1. If it be lawful to hear and Communicate with us once, it is lawful to do it
constantly.

2. And if it be lawful to Communicate with us, it is unlawful to Communicate
with the Non-conformists.

2. One would think, this task should signify gross Schism in these men, as
well as in other Sects, that say, We are the only true Church, and it is
unlawful to Communicate with any but us: So did the Donatists, and most Sects
of old; and every Sect usually that got uppermost by the Emperors countenance,
called themselves the Catholic Church, and their Communion the Catholic and
only lawful Communion: So did the Arians, and so did the Acacians, and
Semi-arians; and so did the Nestorians a little while, and the Eutychians long;
and so did the Monothelites, and the Phantasiasts, and the Image-adorers, and
such like. And so do the Papists; and some say, That some Anabaptists have come
to that; but I have not met with them.

3. But though little Sects for this use some appearance of Scripture-reason
(as the Anabaptists, that say, The unbaptized are no Church Members: but you
are all unbaptized, etc.) yet there are few big Sects, but worldly advantage,
and cheating Words and Names, are the strength of their Cause, by which they do
more than by any sober show of reason. The assumed names [of the Church, and
Catholics, and Ancient] and the Names of Heretics, and Schisma^icks, and
Lutherans, and Calvinists, and Novelists, falsely imposed on their Adversaries,
next to the Sword and Flames, are the Engines of the Popish Sect, by which they
defend their Separation from all other Christians in the World. And such use
the gross Schismatical parts do make of the names of [ The Church of En^land,
and Catholic Communion] appropriated to themselves, and the names of
Seperatists and Schismatics imposed arbitrarily on others: Next to the Sword,
this is their chief proof, That men are Separatists, if they will not separate
from all save them, and such as they.

3. Among all the Casuists, I found none abound with this sort of Logic, so
much as the Resolver of three Cases about Church-Communion] which when I had
read, I am so much against Separation, that I thought meet to join with the
rest of the Casuists, who unite against Schism, so far as to dissuade Men from
this Man's (and Mr. Dodwells) extraordnary Schismatical Doctrine.

4. But when I had written a just Confutation of him, hearing by fame who he
is, I thought it my duty before I published it, to see the Book which he wrote
against Mr. Humphrey, and Me; because he may perhaps be there more
intelligible; (for I had never before seen it, and would not seek it, because I
would not tempt my self to a work which I have so little pleasure in, as is the
confutation of such men). But when I had read it, I found the Author a great
deal sounder in his opinions than in his words, and than he was represented to
me to be: There is a great deal that is good and worthy the reading in his Book,
when he does but keep off from his Schismatical cause. He handsomely opens
some Doctrinals, and so fairly allows forbearance of others in Doctrinal
differences, that were he as Catholic and equal in his opinion about
Government, and that which he calls Catholic Communion, he would be against
Schism a Catholic indeed. He does fairly disclaim even Archbishop Bramhall's
concession to the Papists: And he handsomely confuteth Mr. Dodwell, and
maintains the validity of Sacraments, and the duty of our Communion with the
foreign Churches that have no Bishops, and justifies the Church of England
that has still owned Communion with them: He has proved the no necessity of
continued Successive ordination by Bishops: He has defended the Independency
of Diocesan Churches in point of Government; and that one Church has not
proper Governing Power over another, but only an obligation to Communion, of
which more anon.

5. But I must say, That though he has a smooth and handsome Style for an
Orator; either He, or I, (which of us I am no fit Judge) is so woefully
defective in Logic, and Politics, that of these Subjects one of us is utterly
unfit for a strict dispute, not knowing the usual Sense of ordinary terms, nor
explaining them aright, nor seeming to know what a true Definition is; nor
proceeding in any Scholar-like method: But that little explication of Terms
which he gives, is usually near the end of the ^ook, when a confused dispute
before, has tended but to seduce: which ever of us it is, that is in the
fault, it is a great wrong to the Reader: And if it be he, I find no likelihood
that any should cure him but himself, or some one that he has a very high
opinion of: For when his mistakes are discovered, the substance of his Answer,
is a haughty ignorant scorn at the discovery. Had he happily learnt to Explain,
Define, and Distinguish, and Methodize, when he was young enough to submit to
his Tutor, it had been well for him: But it being now to be learnt, when he is
a Doctor, and such a Doctor, Scorning and ignorant Wrangling will take the
place of necessary Learning.

6. This I must tell the Reader, That the Man speaks so much worse than he
seems (by after Contradictions) to think, and has so little Skill in exact
expressing the matter, or his mind, that I can scarce ever pretend with any
confidence to know his meaning: For when he has said worst, and is confuted,
he comes over it again, and scorneth us for misunderstanding him, and tells us,
that he meant as we do: So that it is his Words that I only undertake to
confute, and not his meaning, till I am better able to say, that I know it. Nor
would I think it a work beseeming me, to write a Book to tell the World, how
unskilful this man is in speaking intelligibly and aptly, if I did not find
that others are seduced, by receiving his words in the usual sense of such, not
knowing that he means not as he speaks: So far as he means well, I think
I am his Friend, in persuading people to be of his mind, and to believe what he
thinks, and not what he says. And if he hold on his way, and fall not out with
the Truth for my sake, I am in hope that the effect also of this Survey will
be, that in the next he will renounce all his Errors, save the terms, and will
say, that he meant as I did: And then, if he do rail and scorn at me only as
misunderstanding him, I can bear it.

7. Nor should I think it a Duty (in my condition), to save Readers from his
real errors, were it not that they notoriously tend to persuade the Land to
think of Thousands of the faithfullest Christians that I know, as damnable
intolerable Schismatics, guilty of the sin that will damn them, as soon as
Adultery and Murder; and consequently to call Men to hate them as such, and to
proceed in silencing, ruining and imprisoning them; which is to tell all them
that do so, that they do well; which if it should prove otherwise, who can
express the greatness of his sin against the Souls of one party, and the Lives,
Estate, and Ministry of the other?

8. His scorn, p. 11, 12. for my purpose to have meddled with such Men in the
Cause of Conformity no more, seems some invitation to me to prevent the like.
But the foresaid Motives are far greater.

P. 35, 36. While he over and over repeated the confused words of [ One
Communion], which must excuse us from Schism, as dangerous as Murder; and we
that live among Men that use to distinguish Union from Communion; and know that
Communion, yea, and Union too, has a Multitude of degrees, and our desire was,
that he would but explain in what he fixed it, that we might understand his
accusation; he tells us, that he did not place this Communion in any transient
Acts, but in a fixed permanent state.

Ans. But 1. Taking the Bishops for true authorized Pastors, and the Church for
a true Church, are transient acts. Believing in Christ, and repenting of sin,
are transient acts, quoad objectum, tho immanent quoad subjectum and effectum.
Baptism, and Profession of Christianity, and of love and obedience to others,
are transient, both quoad objectum and effectum. Coming to Church,
communicating, obeying Bishops, and departing from Schismatics, are transient
in both respects. You see, that by [ Catholic Communion] the Doctor means
none of all these.

2. What means he then [ a fixed permanent state]? But 1. Which Predicament
can you conjecture that word [ state] is in? It Is commonly applied to Relation,
Quality* and Site and Place. These latter I am confident he means not. If he
mean Quality, it is Disp^siti^n or Habit sure: But those come by Acts; and he
tells us not what he means, nor is it probable that this is it. Relation is
most likely to be that [ fixed state] which is indeed the true form of a Church
and a Churchmember (and, says Durandus, is meant by Baptism's indelible
Character).

Supposing this his meaning, 2. Are not transient acts the fundamentum of this
Relation, as verily as of Paternity, Marriage-Relation? etc. Is any Man a
Churchmember, or Christian, but by the transient acts of Baptism, Profession,
Covenanting, etc.? And do you define a Relation without the Fundamentum?

3. But if Relation be all, wherein lies our damning Schism? We profess
Catholic Communion then somewhat more than you do: For as we profess the same
Relation that you do to Jesus Christ, so we profess our Relation of
Fellow Members to all his Body, even to those that in such Matters depart from
each others; and if I can understand you, to the greatest part of Christ's
Church on Earth, which you damn as Rebels. This is our professed Relation: If you
can disprove it, (...)

9. He adds, [I conclude, it is sufficient to let you understand what the
Ancients meant by Christian-Communion, which in a large Notion signifies the
Christian Church or Society, which is called Communion, from Communication,
which all the Members of it had with each other. The plain and obvious sense
is, All the Churches of the World are but one Church or Society, and have the
same right, and the same obligation on them to communicate with each other; for
the sake of which, Christian Churches are instituted, as the members of a
particular Church are].

Ans. 1. Such large Notions may be sufficient to you, but they signify little
more than noise to me. Here we are told, that by [ Communion] he means [ the
Church]: And so when we read of [ Communion with the Church], it means [ the
Church with the Church]; and [ Church-Communion] are Two Synonimal words, and
signify [ Church, Church]. And in the Creed ( the Catholic Church and
Communion of Saints] is a Tautology.

2. But the Church is called [ Communion] from [ Communication]: And is
Communication no transient act, but a fixed state?

3. If the plain sense be, That all Churches in the World are one Church (as
parts in the whole), who differs from you in that? We are all then of one
Catholic Communion, and shall believe that all true Christians are of one
Church, till the Excommunicators better disprove it.

4. But have [ all the same right and obligation to communicate with each
other]? 1. All do actually communicate with each other, 1. In their Union with,
and Relation to our Savior and Head. 2. And in having one holy Spirit. 3.
Being the adopted children of one God. 4. Being of that one body formally
related to Christ. 5. Believing in the same God and Father, Savior and holy
Spirit. And 6. Consenting to the same Baptismal Covenant. 7. Having the same
hope of everlasting life. These are the Instances of Christian Union and
Communion, in Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. And 8. They have also Communion in the same
common benefits, Pardon and Justification, and right to life. 9. And besides
all this, when they may be had, they have Communion in the same species of
necessary worship; the use of the same Gospel, and Sacred Scriptures, and
Creed, of the same sort of Eucharistical Sacrament, and Prayer, and Praise and
Thanksgiving, in all parts of absolute necessity, and holy Assemblies to that
end, consisting of several Pastors with their Flocks. 10. Yea, and all true
Christians love one another as such, and live in sincere (tho imperfect)
obedience to the same holy Laws of Christ. In all this all Christians have
Communion.

2. And all have right to such measures of Local Communion, where they come, as
they are in a more immediate capacity of.

3. And all are obliged to exercise so much Mental and Local Communion as is
necessary to edification, and to the exercise of Christian love and peace,
besides what is forementioned.

But yet, 1. All Churches on Earth are separate by distance, as to Local
Communion.

2. No Two Churches* or Men on Earth, are perfectly united as to Mental
C^mmunion. There are Multitudes of degrees of differences in this.

3. There are very many just causes of diversifying Local Communion in the same
City, Diocese or other Precincts; and of diversifying individual Pastoral
Relation, and single (proper) Church Communion. Diversity of Languages is a
cause that no man can deny. The excessive Magnitude of a Church (that is, the
Multitude of Persons) is another. Suppose that I were first and alone made
Pastor of a Church in Mexico or Quinsay, and I am not able to do the work of a
Pastor for a Thousand Souls; I get the help of Three or Four Presbyters and
Deacons; and we all are utterly unable to do the Pastoral work for Four
Thousand; may Four Thousand, or Forty Thousand more claim of me the performance
of the Pastoral Office? Am I bound to undertake Tenfold more than I am able to
perform? Then Men may not only enslave me, but damn me at their pleasure, and
pretend their right to Communion with me. If you say I am bound to multiply
Presbyters in the same Church to sufficiency: I answer, 1. What if I can
neither have Men nor Maintenance? 2. What if I think that when the Multitude is
so great that I cannot know them, nor they ever speak with me, or know one
another any more than Men of several Countries, that I ought not to undertake a
personal oversight of them, but persuade them to associate in Churches capable
of such oversight? It Is no breach of Charity for one Schoolmaster or Physician
to refuse a personal Relation, as Schoolmaster to Five Hundred Schools, or
Physician to all the City, or Five Hundred Hospitals (tho he have Apothecaries
or others under him). No Man has right to more of my labor than I am able to
perform. If I be a Bishop, and bound to hear and try the Causes of all that
ought to come under Church Censure in a whole Diocese, and am certain that I am
unable to do this to One of an Hundred, who can claim a right to that or more?

4. But out of this his Doctrine, I gather, That if all the Christian World
have rig^^ to communicate with me upon occasion, 1. Sure there is some
difference between occasional and fixed Local Communion. 2. And surely if I
refuse any that would communicate on common necessary terms, because they will
not break the Custom of their several Countries, and communicate with me in
doubted unnecessary things, I wrong all the Christian World, and am to them a
Schismatic: Much more if I presume to Excommunicate every Stranger that comes
into my Precincts, and herein differs from me, as you do us: and most of all if
I impose many sinful terms of Communion on him.

All Christians are bound to hold Communion in Christianity, and in all things
necessary to the common Communion of them all; and to extend this also to as
many Integrals as they can reach: But there are Multitudes of things in which
they are not bound to have Communion; much less as necessary to salvation.

10. p. 36. We have all explained by an odd supposition, viz. Suppose the whole
World were one Family, or one Kingdom, in which every man, according to his
rank and station, enjoys equal Privileges, the necessity of Affairs would
require that Men should live in distinct Houses and Countries -- But yet if
every Man enjoyed the same Liberty and Privileges wherever he went, as he now
does in his own House and Country, the whole World would be but one great
Family, or universal Kingdom.

Ans. 1. The whole World is one great Kingdom of God, as verily as the Church
is the Church of Christ: And yet we Non-Conformists think that every Man in it
(no, nor every Saint) has not right to be King of England, nor a Judge in our
Courts, nor Lord Mayor of London, nor so much as a Freeman in any City. And we
think that the Church has no more one subordinate universal Sovereign, than
the World. And that therefore the case, in point of universal privilege, is not
by this similitude well explained.

2. Your odd supposition of the World being one Family, either supposes one
Husband to all the Wives in the World, and one Father to all the Children in
the World; or else that all distinct Husbands, Wives, Children and Servants,
are in this one Family. In the first supposition I may suppose that you take
him to be more than a Man that can be an Husband to all the Women, and a Father
to all the Children on Earth: And therefore if his Wisdom be equal to such a
greatness, he must be no Fool. And if so, while Men are his Family, he will
order and govern them as Men; and then they will be distributed into
subordinate Families, Cities and Kingdoms, as now they are. But if you suppose
many Husbands and Fathers, our Opinion is, that Husbands and Wives should not
be common, nor Parents and Children. Nay, which way ever you take, that
Childrens Food, Raiment and Portions should not be common: Nor could any come
from India, and claim a Lordship or Lands in England, as a Member of the
Family. Fathers distribute unequally, as their Will and Wisdom, and their
Childrens fitness, are diversifying Causes. Even in a College one cannot claim
another Chamber, Books, Clothes or Food. One would think by your scourge for
Non-Conformists, that you were no Leveller, nor against fatherly justice, and
inequality of right and distribution. Even they that come to your Church,
cannot so much as claim equal right in Seats.

And verily if all the World that will come to you, may claim equal Pastoral
oversight from you, or any Bishop, your equality must be like his to the
Beggars, that gave nothing to any, that he might serve them all alike.

11. P. 38, 39, etc. he says, [ He can hardly be so charitable to me, as not
to believe that I wilfully mistook him, it being impossible for any man of
common sense who ever read him, -- to mistake his Catholic Communion for some
transient acts].

Ans. Reader, it is hard terms that these Men hold us to. I was loath to judge
him so void of common Sense, or use of Words, as to talk of Catholic Communion
which was in no transient acts: But for the future, rather than forfeit common
sense, or be wilful, I will believe him, that by Catholic Communion he means
Union, and that he means neither Baptism, nor profession of Christianity, nor
owning any Article of Faith, nor owning Bishops, nor any Church Order or
Worship of God. But do not unsay all this again, and call us all to naught for
believing you.

12. But he says, [ Upon a stricter examination he finds me blundered and
confounded about the Notion of Unity -- This Unity I term Union.

Ans. The Doctor will grow over-critical if he hold on, if he mean this as part
of my blundering and confusion: But it is but Grammar that I am ignorant of: I
confess my ignorance: I thought that [ Unio] had Two significations; one
active, for that act of uniting which makes One of Two; and that also Twofold:
1. To unite efficiently: 2. To unite constitutively: And the other as
signifying the same with Unity caused. And I thought that Unitas had ordinarily
signified by a more abstract word, the same Oneness as Unio, in the latter
sense; and sometimes abusively, active Union. But I am ready to learn better.

13. But says he, [He understands it of our Union to Christ, not of the Unity
or Oneness of the Christian Church.

Ans. The best is, he saves me from unmannerly telling you that he speaks
falsely, by confessing the falsehood in the very terms of accusation: For if he
dare say, that it is no Church-Union to be all United to one Christ in our
common Christianity, he is a very fal^e Teacher.

14. P. 39. Repeating my words, he tells you, I misconstrue both terms: But you
are best take it on his word. And he feigneth, that I do, or must infer [ ergo,
the Unity of the Catholic Church does not consist in being one Body, and
Society, and Communion of Christians: Whereas I infer the clear contrary, That
it does consist in one such body, it is Union with Christ making it such an one.

Yet here he adds, [ If this be to write controversies, we may as well lay
wagers, and cast lots for major, minor, and conclusion: Which words truly tell
you what the Doctor's Logical strength is; like the Woman that told the Doctor,
that she could make her hungry Pig cry with better Logic than all the Doctors
in the University did dispute. And could not a Quaker say as much?

15. P. 41, 42. He seems serious in asking me, How the Catholic Church is
united in one Body, so as to be one Church? And when I tell him, how many sorts
af Union there are; he says, he cares not how many sorts there are, so I will
tell him what the Unity of the Catholic Church is.]

Ans. He makes me think of the Man's Answer to the Pharisee, John 9. I have
told you, and you heard not. Would you hear it again? If you would know what
Unity is, in uno, which is affectio entis, I must again send you to Schibler,
or Suarez, or some such Tutor; for I am not meet to tutor you. If you would
know in what this Unity consists, I have told you before, and often.

16. But tho this Doctor use it not, we use first to enquire whether the
Controversy be de nomine, or de re: And 1. If I satisfy him what makes the
Church to be One, will he grant, that if we agree in that Union, we are in
Catholic Communion? If he will, we shall soon be Friends, and no Schismatics,
at least with any that knows what Unity is. If he will not, does he not all
this while abuse his Reader, when he so hotly damneth us for want of Catholic
Communion, and tells us, that he means Unity, and charge me with wilfulness
or nonsense, if I think that he means any transient act.

But 1. De nomine, I will once more tell him why I distinguish Unity and
Communion, and think he should have done so too.

Words in Dispute are to be used in the sense that Men of the Profession which
the Subject most belongs to, use them, unless otherwise explained. But Men that
write of Logic, Metaphysics, Physics and Politics, use to distinguish Unity
from Communion so far, as that usually Communion pres^pposeth Unity, secundum
quid, and ever includes some transient Acts, when Unity is but the
denomination of Eus qua U^um.

I hope I may take the Language of our Creed to be so tolerable, as that it is
not necessary to salvation to condemn it. (...), is by the Church of England
[which I hope is no damned Schismatical Sect] translated [ the Communion of
Saints]. That by [ Communion] they mean some t^an^ient Acts, and not mere
Union, all Expositors that ever I read among them show, (as do all the Fathers,
and all Foreign Interpreters that I have read) At least, methinks he should
not disdain to learn his Grammar again of Dr. Hammond and Dr. Heylin.

I remember not that ever I read (...) translated Communion. Indeed Ephesians. 4.3.
(...), expresses Communion in transient acts; but bare Unity does not: But
Communion must maintain it, (...), as in the bond of peace. King James so liked
Bishop Usher's Sermon on that Text, that a Knight then near him, told me* that
when by his winking posture, the Courtiers thought he had been asleep, at the
end of the Sermon he spoke aloud, This is the Religion that I will live and die
in (or to that sense). The regardful reading of consenting learned Commentators
on Ephesians. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. Verses, might have quenched this fire^rand.

Indeed I believe with Beza, that they who translate (...) by mere
participation, say too little: For it is not all participation which is the
Communion which many Texts express; but such a participation as connoteth an
Union in quibusdam: For Union absolute and simple, is incapable of Communion,
except with some other thing, having no parts.

1 John 1.6, 7. we are said to have (...) with God and with Christ, (or one
another). I find no Expositor that takes this for mere Union: Some call it
Partnership, some Society, some Friendship, others Communion; but all take it
to include transient acts. Dr. Hammond* goes so far from this Doctor, that he
will have (...) almost every where in the New Testament to signify
Communication by transient acts: Yea, he goes so far from his Friend Grotius,
who places it in the exercise of Friendship, that he says, [ It is appliable
to Friendship or Society, no otherwise than to knowledge, or anything else]. So
he expounds Romans 15.26. 2 Cor. 8.4. 2 Cor. 9.13. Phil. 1.5. Heb. 13.16. Phil.
6. and the Creed. Tho for my part, I doubt not but the [(...), 1 Cor. 1.9. and
the (...), Phil. 2.1. and the (...), and (...), 1 Cor. 10.16, etc. do signify
such a participation of that which is common to them all, as implies and
connoteth that Unity which is the thing signified in this Communion, tho it
includes transient acts.

II. I should now again answer his question de re: What makes all these
Churches one? But he stops me with a profession that he will not be to me
intelligible, and complains that I am unintelligible to him: So that we seem
Barbarians, or Men of strange Languages in disputing with one another: And it
would be no edifying work for any to hear, e. g. a Dutchman and a Spaniard
dispute in their several Tongues, not understanding one another.

When I distinguished of [ unifying the Church, and uniting a single Member to
it], he tells me, That he [supposeth the particular Churches formed, and
particular Christians united to them, and only enquireth how they are one
Church], and says, my distinction is to prevent understanding (which his
confusion promoteth). And when I distinguish between Union in essential parts,
and in integral parts, and in accidents (without which distinction, no true
satisfaction can be given to the Querist), he says, [ He perceives that we
shall never come to the business: for he did not enquire wherein the Essence of
a Church consists, or what degrees of Communion are more or less necessary to
its being, -- but how a thousand Churches become one Church?

Ans. Which words are to me as unintelligible as any Nonsense. Does any thing
make it One Church but that which makes it A Church? Does not that which
makes it eus existens, make it Unum? Does not the word [ Church] name its
Essence? If he ask me, how the parts of Man come to make One Man? Who would
think but he meant either One Man essential, or else improperly, One entire
Man? And what Answer would any give but this? If your [ how] mean what was the
efficient cause, it is God and the Generators: If you mean, [ what are the
constitutive causes]? They are Soul and Body united, that make a Man in
Essence; and the integrating parts united, that make him an entire Man.

O! but says our Doctor, I ask not wherein the Essence of the Church consists?
Ans. Then you ask not what makes it One in constitution: What then do you
mean, unless it be the efficient cause, which no Man would think you meant that
read the rest of your Book? For my part, I despair of knowing what you mean,
till you have better learned to speak.

But this seems to imply, that we are agreed of the constitutive Causes of
the One Catholic Church; and our disagreement were of the Efficient. If that
be it, I Will tell you what makes the Church One efficiently: 1. God makes Man
to be Man, and so capable matter. 2. God gave Christ to be the Mediator and
Head. 3. God made (by Christ) the Covenant of Grace, by which, as by a Law and
Gift, he determines of the Conditions of Church-Relation and Benefits, and
commands Man's belief and consent, and professes his own acceptance of such
consenters. 4. His Ministers and Word persuade Men to believe and consent. 5.
His Spirit efficiently causes Men to believe and consent. 6. At that time
God's conditional grant becomes actual, and gives them actually a right and
relation to Christ and his Benefits. 7. Thereupon Christ's Ministers solemnize
this Covenant, declaring God's acceptance; and by Baptism, investing the person
in the visible possession of his relation to Christ and all his Members, the
person professing his believing, which makes it a mutual Covenant (the Parent
doing it for Infants).

These Seven Acts go to make up the total efficient Cause of the Churches
Essence and Unity, and each Members Union therein. And if you exclude any one
of them, you will be a false Teacher. Is there any room here for a Controversy
among Christians? The Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, the Covenant and Law,
the Consenter, the Minister and Baptism, all make up the efficient Cause of the
Churches Essence. And that which makes it a Church, makes it One Church: As
that which makes it an House, a Ship, a Family, a School, a Kingdom, makes it
thereby One House, One Ship, One Family, etc. for eus and unun convertuntur.

17. But tho his Question [ How] (that ambiguous Syllable), enquire not of the
Churches Essence (and of what, who knows?) yet p. 43. he ventures to enquire of
it, upon my words, [ it is only essential to the Church, that there be an
organized Body of Pastors and People united to Christ, the Head], says he, [
Here I agree with Mr. B. if he would add One Body; for that is the thing in
dispute, Whether Christ have one or a thousand bodies].

Ans. I pray you remember this happy agreement, that we agree of the Churches
Essence. But is not [ A Body] the Singular Number? If I say, that a man is
corpus organicum, and a rational soul united, do I need to put in [ One Body,
or One Soul], while unum is entis inseparabilis affectio? Good Doctor, why must
not Verum and Bonum be named with every eus in a definition, as well as Unum?
Can it be a Body, and not One Body? O! what a Jest will Schoolboys make of us
for such disputing?

3. But the pretended disagreement is much worse asserted. Is that the
Controversy, Whether Christ have One Body, or a Thousand? Would you make men
believe that we deny the Unity of the Universal Church? If you would, prove it,
or blush. 2. Do you your self deny the being of Thousands of particular
Churches, which are parts of the Universal? When you have seemed long to do it,
you come again and confess such Churches, and condemn us as separating from
them. 3. Is the Controversy whether these single Churches, de nomine, may be
called so many Bodies of Christ? 1. Name the men that so call them, and prove
it, or confess your self a false Accuser. 2. If they did, an unfit Name is not
an error, de re. I never heard man so speak. We say, that the word [ Church]
used for the [ Universal] and the [ Particular], is not univocally used, but
analogically, expenuria nominum. As often the whole and part have one Name. We
say, that as an hundred Cities and Counties may make one Kingdom, and were they
all equivocally called Republics, or Kingdoms, it would be no change in the
Doctrine: All the Christian World call the universal and the particulars by the
name of [ Church]. And yet, if to help us out of the Equivocation, you will
invent a better Name, and get men to consent to it (not reprehending the
Scripture-use), we will hearken to you. But as One Kingdom is individuate by
One King, and yet subordinate Societies may have subordinate individuating
Heads; so is it here. And it is grossly unfit to say Christ has many Bodies, tho
he have many Churches in one; as the King has many Cities, but one Kingdom
here.

But he adds, [ If but One, how do all the Christians in the World make up that
one Body]?

[ How] must not be explained: If by [ how] he meant [ by what efficiency], I
have told you: If it mean by what constitutive Causes, it is [ by Form and
Matter united]: If it be any Mode that you mean, vouchsafe to tell us what.

18. P. 43. he goes on thus ( reciting some of my words), [In this definition
Christ only is the supreme constitutive summa potestas, or regent part. The
organized body of Pastors and People, is the pars subdita: and the Union of
Christ and that body, makes it a Church]. ( And says he) This is very well:
But the main doubt still remains untouched; What is it that makes all the
Christian Pastors and People in the World to be but One Church]?

Ans. Contra negantem principia non est disputandum. This intimates, that eus
and unum non convertuntur: And that besides that which makes it a Church,
somewhat else must go to make it one.

Whether your obstinate equivocation in the word [ make], shall be by you
expounded of the efficient or constitutive causes, in this it is all one: That
which makes it a Church, does thereby, without any more causality, make it one
Church.

This is as if he said, We are agreed what makes a Man, an House, a City, a
Book, etc. but we agree not what makes him One Man; and so of the rest:
Nothing but that which makes him a Man, and causes the existing Essence:
Matter and Form united constitutively: And efficiently, all that which causes
Matter, and its Disposition (which Aristotle calls Privation^, and Form, and
their Union.

But, Reader, it is so hard to understand such a Speaker, that we must ^ift
every doubtful word, lest he come again and say we wilfully mistake him. Who
knows but the Doctor has a C^t^urnus in the word [ but], and the question be,
What makes this the only Church? or that God has no other but one? As if the
question were, What made Adam at first the only man in the World? or the
Israelites the only peculiar Nation? I answer, Nothing in Adam, nothing in
Israel; and so nothing in the Church can be the cause of Nothing: No Man, no
Nation, no Church speak Nothing: Not to make another, is nothing; but the words
are a mere Negation: And Nothing has no Cause. What is the Cause that there is
not another Sun? Why, Nothing has no Cause: But if we must give any other
Answer, it must be only by calling the Negation of a Cause by the Name of a
Cause, and saying, that the Cause why there is but one Sun (that we know of),
and one Church Universal, is because God made no more.

19. The Doctor proceeds, [Nor does his similitude help him out, which is so
admirable in its Philosophy and Application, that I cannot let it pass: His
words are these, [As in the constitution of man, 1. The rational soul is the
real form, which is principium motus; The organized body is the constitutive
matter. That there be Heart, Liver, Stomach, is but the bodies organization:
That these parts be duly placed and united, is forma corporis (non hominis),
and make the body but materia disposita. 3. The union of soul and body is that
nexus (like the copula in a proposition) which may be called the relative form,
or that which makes the soul become forma in actu].

Reader, Do thou know, as a Philosopher, what a man is? and do thou doubt
of ever a word of this? If this Doctor be ignorant of it, had he not been a
Doctor, and overgrown Humility and Learning, I might have expected either
thanks or silence from him: But what says the Man to it?

Had this Philosophy been known in St. Paul's days, I should not much have
wondered that he warns men against vain Philosophy, (was not Aristotle known in
Paul 's days?) Aures erigite. The Confutation will come anon.) I shall avoid
disputing with Mr. B. as much as I can (too late Sir) and therefore will not
quarrel with him for saying, The Soul is Principium motus -- to the Body,
though it may be some Cartesians will not like it, ( Hitherto we are quiet: The
Doctor is so modest that he will not deny that F^rma is Principium Motus.] And
it is but a May be, whether a Cartesian will: I have met lately with
University-men, that cried up Cartesius as if they had been quite above
Aristotle and Plato; and when I tried them, I found that they knew not what
Aristotle or Plato said (nor what Cartesius neither.)

[Nor (says he) for affirming, that the Union of Soul and Body is but like the
Copula in a proposition, which is but a spick and spang n^w Notion.] Ans. The
man is pugnacious enough, but somewhat restrains him: Is Novelty here the
fault? More than this was N^w to him within these twenty years; and much is
yet. The terms of a Proposition are no Propositon till the Copula make them one
by making the Predication. And a Soul and a Body are no Man, but as United;
which makes the Soul to be Forma in actu. Has the man confuted this?

' But (says he) I shall only consider how he applies this to the Church.)
Ans. How Sir! do you accuse the Philosophy, and now will you only question the
application of it?

Christ it seems th^n is the Soul, and Christians the Body, though in Scripture
he is represented as the Head of the Body, and the Divine Spirit as the Soul,
which enlivens and animateth it: And if Christ be not the Head of the Body
(which I think the Soul was never affirmed yet) the Church must be without a
Head, or have another Head than Christ, which I suppose is the reason why he
talks so much of a Constitutive Regent Head of the Church.]

Ans. It Is easy to suppose, that the cause of these Words was a want of
somewhat both in your Head and Heart, that should have been there. 1. Is this
any Confutation of my Philosophy? Could not a Quaker have talked against it at
as reasonable Rates as these? 2. Do you not think, that every understanding
Reader does know, that both the term [ Head and Soul] here are Metaphors, as
spoken of Christ? Both of them signify the form of the Society, because the
Head is the seat of the Soul in its Rational Regent Acts; the King is called
the Head of his Kingdom, that is, He is forma Regni (for the Politic forms of
Society is their forms of Government.) And so as the Church is a Politic
Society, Christ is the form of it: But it is nobler than all mere humane
Policies, and his Headship is Essentiated by the three parts of his Office in
One, as he is Prophet, Priest, and King; and as the principle of Knowledge,
Love, and Practice; and his Church is together, Dominion, Kingdom, and a
Society of Friendship, or Family. And the Head, which is the seat of the Soul,
as operative by Intellection, Sense, and Motion, most aptly represents all
this in Christ.

But while the Head-part of the Body is this Seat, the Soul is in it the
operator: And Christ as Man is part of the Church, in and by whom his Divine
nature performs the operations: And as the Soul is the form of the Man,
Christ is the form of his Church, quae dat esse and nomen. And that the Holy
Ghost illuminateth, and quickneth, and comfort, is so far from being against
this, that it is the chief proof of it. For the Spirit proceeds from the
Father and the Son, and is the Spirit of Christ, sent by him; and what he does
herein, Christ does by him: Opera trinitatis ad extra sunt in-divisa. Who would
have thought that a Christian durst deny Christ to be forma Ecclesiae, as the
Soul is of a Man, and the King of a Kingdom? -- Does the Man give you the least
proof, but his vain word, that Christ cannot be both as a Head, and a Soul
(that is, forma informans) to his Church, -- or that Christ is not the Soul,
because the Holy Ghost is? -- But I think neither is called by the name of a
Soul in the Scriptures. But I pray you tell us what these Texts import. -- Romans
8.10. If Christ be in you, -- the spirit is life. -- John 17.23. I in them, and
thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. -- 5.26. He has given the
Son to have life in himself. -- 21. He quickens whom he will. -- 6.51, 57. I
am the living bread, -- he that eats me, shall live by me. -- 1 Cor. 6.15.
Your bodies are the members of Christ. -- 17. He that is joined to the Lord, is
one spirit. -- 8.6. Our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him. -- 12. As the body is One, and has many members, and all the members of
that One body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ. 27. Ye are the body
of Christ. 2 Cor. 3.17. The Lord is that Spirit. -- 18. We are changed into the
same Image from glory to glory, (...) John 1.4. In him was Life, and the Life
was the Light of men. -- 2 Cor. 13.5. Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates. Gal. 2.20. Not I, but Christ lives in me. -- Gal. 3.19. Till
Christ be formed in you. -- Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Head over all things to his Church,
which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. Ephesians. 3.15, 17.
Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named -- that Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith. -- 4.15, 16. May grow up into him in all things, who
is the Head Christ, from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, -- makes increase of the body.
-- Ephesians. 5.30. We are the members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.
Col. 1.18, 19. He is the head of the body, the Church -- In him all fullness
dwells. -- 2.3. In whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 9. In him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. 17.19. The body is of Christ
the head, from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment
ministered, knit together, increases with the increase of God. -- 3.3, 4. Your
Life is hid with Christ in God, when Christ our Life shall appear. -- 11.
Christ is all and in all. -- 1 John 1.2. The Life was manifested, and we have
seen it. -- 4.9. We live through him. -- 5.11, 12. This is the record, that God
has given to us eternal life, and this Life is in his Son. He that has the
Son, has Life and he that has not the Son of God, has not life. We are in
him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ.

These and many other signify, that Christ is fitly likened both to a Head and
to a Soul, to his Church; and is not a dead Head, but a living; and that the
word Head includes the Soul operating in the Head, for the Sense, Reason, and
Guidance, and increase of the body.

And that he does operate by the Holy Ghost, who is one God with the Father and
Himself, confirms it. Even as Christ is said to be quickened by the Spirit,
and by the Spirit to offer himself to God, and to justify us, etc. which is
far from proving, that he did it not himself. Chrysostom, and Basil, and
Ambrose, need not to have been at so great care to prove that it is Christ
himself that is called [ The Spirit] and [the Lord the Spirit] 2 Cor. 3.17, 18.
against the Arians: It will prove him God, that as he the word in making the
World, moved on the Waters by the Spirit, which is one with him, so he does by
his Spirit, which is one with his own Godhead, sanctify Souls. I hope you are
not against the [ Filioque] Briefly [He that gives to his Church, and every
true Member of it, Spiritual Life, Light, and Love; illumination,
Sanctification, Strength, increase and Consolation, as appointed by the Father,
to do all this by himself, and by his Spirit, is the form Essentiating the
Church, as much and more than the Soul is to the Man: But such is Christ: Ergo
--

If I were of their mind that anathematized the Nestorians, Eutychians,
Monothelites as damned Heretics, for their unskilful words, I should much more
Hereticate a Doctor in our Age, that will say, That if Christ be the Head of
the Church, he cannot be to it as a Soul, a forma informans and denominans. But
I am not of that mind.

3. But when this Doctor added [ If Christ be not the Head of the Body, the
Church must be without a Head, or have some other Head than Christ, which I
suppose is the Reason why he talks so much of a constitutive Regent Head of the
Church.]

Reader, Can you tell what he means by [ which is the Reason?] Which of the two
means he [ that I suppose the Church without a Head?] When I so often and
largely prove Christ to be the Head. -- Or is it that [ I hold some other
Head?] When my Book is to disprove it. Which ever it be, I do not think
refusing such a Pastor as makes no more of the Ninth Commandment, is a damning
Schism. The Sin of Church tyranny goes not alone.

20. P. 45 He proceeds [But the organized Body is the constitutive matter of
the man: though other Philosophers used to call the Body a constitutive part:
but to let that pass.]

Ans. You had not the Wit to let it pass: Durst I have accused you of what you
bewray and accuse your self? Reader, Is not the Matter a Part? And is not the
Form a Part (of the man)? And does that man speak plainer, that barely calls
either of them [ a Part], and tells you not [which Part it is], Matter or Form?
If one of his Pupils should say, Sir, you should not call the Soul the Form,
but [ a Part], nor the Body the Matter, but a Part; what would the Boys say to
him?

21. He goes on, [Thus an Organical Church is the constitutive Matter: Of what?
Of Christ? or of his Church? or of some third compound^d?

Ans. 1. Did I say, [ An Organical Church, or an Organical Body]? When
Aristotle says, [ the soul is entelechia corporis physici organici], does he
say, [ Hominis physici Organici]? But you are an enemy to vain Philosophy and
distinction.

2. What if I had said an Organical Church (as I sometimes do an Organized) who
knows not that ex penuria nominum, the words Church, Kingdom* City, Family,
School, etc. are ordinarily used equivocally; sometimes properly, for the whole
Church, Kingdom, City, etc. as a Governed Society including Matter and form
united: And sometimes improperly for the Material part alone; the Kingdom, as
distinguished from the King; the Church, as distinct from Christ, and from the
Bishops; and so of all the rest. And when I so often told you, that the Organical
Body of Christians is the Matter of the Church, and Christ the fo^m, (as far as
these terms fit Bodies Politic) could you not find in such words, [ Of what it
is the Matter?] of the Church of Christ.

22. He adds [But that these parts be duly placed and united, is forma
Corporis, non Hominis; which what it means, I cannot tell, unless that a man
would be a man, though the several parts of his Body did not stand in their
right places, nor were united to one another, so they were all united to the
Soul.]

Ans. Do you not understand what it means? What if I had so accused you?
Whether it be long of your Tutor, or You, I know not; But 1. If you know not
the difference between forma Corporis, and forma Hominis, some body is too
blame. Forma dat esse and nomen: The Soul gives Being and Name to a Man: He is
no Man without it. Do you think it gives Being and Name to the Body? What if
Lazarus his Body in the Grave were without its Soul; is it not Corpus a Body?
What if such a Body as M^ns had only the Soul of a Brute, were it no Body? What
if Dr^^elius made his Engines move constantly by the Sun, or Fire? Is it not an
Engine materially organized, before the Sun or Fire move it? Has not a Wind
^^ll, or Water mill its mechanical form? which is but the Organization o^ d^e
matter, when Wind or Water, move it not. But to what purpose is it to talk to
one that tells us, he cannot understand it?

2. But the addition is shameful misunderstanding; Does he that says,
Organization is forma Corporis, say, that one may be a m^n without it? This is
below puerility? Did I not maintain, that (as Aristotle ha^h his three
principles, Matter, Privation, and Form, and by Privation means the
Dispositio receptiva of the matter; so) Politic Bodies by similitude to
natural, have: And that Organization is that Dispositio receptiva sine qua
Materia non recipit formam: And now this famous Doctor cannot understand me
when I assert it is Necessity to humanity, unless I mean that one may be a man
without it.

I would not exagitate this ignorance, were it not in a Man that is damning
(and encouraging the silencing and ruining of) so many Servants of Christ, for
their supposed Ignorance of the Lawfulness of all their Oaths, Promises, and
Impositions.

But Reader, my Heart grieveth to think, that so great a number should be
carried by such men as this, to the same Love-killing opinions, and practices.
I Will put a case to you.

A Leveller that would have got down the Universities, undertook that his
Parrot should Learn Philosophy, as well as Scholars, and should dispute with
any of them all. He taught the Parrot only two words before Noon every day [
It Is true, Sir,] and [ I understand you,] and to say two more every day
afternoon, viz. [You lie Sir,] and [ away you Rogue.] When he had learnt them
perfectly, he inviteth a Tutor to read Philosophy to his Parrot. He reads in
the morning a Lecture of the Principles of Man, and the Parrot often says, [ I
understand you,] and [ I'ts true, Sir,] The Hearers admiring it, are invited to
dispute with the Parrot in the Afternoon: Multitudes come, and the Respondent
maintained that Man has a Reasonable Soul, and next, that Parrots have none
such: The Parrot often answered [ You lie Sir,] and at last [ Away you Rogue:] If
the Company gave the Parrot the better, and concluded for Brutes against
Humanity, did they more deserve pity or indignation?

Once more: God made Adam's Body before he breathed into it the Breath of Life:
If this Body had not its form, it was not a Body; nor a humane Body, without
the proper form of such: That which has no form, is no being. If the form of
that Body was forma Hominis, then Adam's Body was a Man without his Soul: And
then the Soul is not forma hominis. But says the Doctor, I know not what it
means, unless it be, that Adam may be a man without the Corporeal form or
Organization.

But lest the Doctor when he understands me, should think, that I have hereby
served his Notion of Communion; I must add that it is not either the placing or
the being of all the parts of a humane Body, that is this form^l Organization,
but only of the Essential parts: It may be a humane Body without a Finger, or
Hand, or Foot, or Arm, or Leg; and what great diversity of parts are found
within men, and diversity of place, and shape, you may see in Skenkius his
Observation, as well as in Paraeus, Hildanus, Hollerius, and multitudes more
that afforded him his instances. But without a Heart, a Brain, a Stomach, a
Liver, Lungs, etc. it cannot be a humane Body organized. And without a Gospel
Ministry to guide the Flocks, it is not a complete organized Body of Christ,
though in fieri, it was an Embrio before.

But I must again warn the Reader, not to argue too far from Similitudes. In a
natural Body God has fixed all the parts by a constant Law of generation,
except in Monsters. But in political Bodies, the difference is much: Civil
politics quoad formas specificas, are humane Creatures; and men may alter
them. The Church is a Divine polity; God has fixed its essentials: But he
has left many of its Accidents to the choice of Man, who may alter them as
Edification requires. And again, I say, that Catholic Union in the Essentials
only, is necessary to the Being of the Church; and in the Integrals, to its
Integrity; and in the needful common Accidents, to its Comeliness; and in other
Accidents its unnecessary and impossible. God makes the Man, but the Tailor
makes his Clothes; and the Country, and Usage, and Parents, may diversifie
Color and Complexions. Metropolitans and Patriarchs, and Diocesian Churches,
as containing multitudes of Churches, without Bishops, and their Chancellors,
Officials, Commissaries, Archdeacons, etc. are humane Creatures, as the
Episcopal Protestants usually confess: And Liturgies are various, as Languages;
and Ceremonies are like our Periwigs: Some think it lawful to wear Women's Hair,
and some think it unlawful, though the fashion: But I remember none yet, that
have taken all for Rebels, or Outlaws, that wear not Periwigs, or are not of
the same Habit, Language, or Complexion; nor any that for these send men to
Prison, nor that think it a wise way to unity.

23. p. 46. He comes after with an [ If I mean] to conjecture what I mean and
think; it fits his present case well; why then does he quarrel with it? But
what is his case, [Then the Church cannot be united to Christ in one Body
without union with it self, and the unity of the Catholic Church cannot
consist merely in the Union of all particular Churches in and to Christ,
without any Union among themselves.]

Ans. Who did he ever Read, or hear say, that the Churches have no Union, or no
other than their Union in Christ, among themselves? He may see before 9. I
named ten points of their Union. On Condition that he will not take the
Clothes, or the Periwig, or the House, or the Horse, or Coach, no nor his
Wealth, or Office, for the man; I Will once more tell him, (for the Readers sake,
and not his) wherein the Unity of the Church consists, and also in what all
have Communion.

Politic Bodies are not like Natural, where all the Members must have a
continuity of contract: Men that touch not and see not one another, may be
Members of one Kingdom. Houses that touch not one another, may make one City.

1. The Church is considered in its mere Essence. 2. Its Organized complete
state, needful to its Edification. 3. In its gradual growth or perfection. 4.
In its mutable accidents.

I. Christ and Christians United, are all that is Essential to it as a Church.

II. Christ and Christians, Sub-Churches, or Societies of Pastors and Flocks,
are all that is necessary to make it an Organized Church completed in the
parts necessary to its Edification. These Pastors at first were extraordinary,
Apostles, and Prophets, for the first settling of universal Laws, and order;
And after Ordinary Pastors, to Teach and Guide the Flocks.

III. This Body has integral parts of various degrees, differing in Knowledge,
Orthodoxness, Piety, Peace, Power of Preaching, and Purity and order of Worship
and Government. Some in it Preach Christ not sincerely, but in strife, and
contention, to add affliction to sincere suffering Preachers: and some, as
Diotrephes, receive not the Brethren, but cast them out of the Church, and
forbid others to receive them, and judge or despise each other for things that
God would have left free; and receive not those that Christ receives.

IV. All of them differ in multitudes of accidents. They are not bound to agree
in the same Forms, Liturgies, or unnecessary Circumstances: Nor in humane
additional Modes, called forms of Government in Accidents; as in Patriarchs,
Metropolitans, extended Diocess's, etc. Nor are they bound to take account of
the Ordinations, Presentation, Titles, and Rights of all the foreign Churches
of other Kingdoms with whom they are to hold Communion; nor to be Tryers or
Judges between contending Parties, which is the true Pastor: (Though in the
same Kingdom, and under the same Laws, order may require this often times.)
Possession and Profession may satisfy them.

V. Though the Churches had all the degrees of Union besides, yet nothing
makes them One Church in the proper political Sense, as it signifies One
Governed Society, but their Union with Christ. But their own Capacity is
necessary to the reception of this Unity with Christ.

All Politics difference a mere Community from a public Body. A hundred or a
thousand persons agreed together to manage their affairs by a common Stock and
Converse, are a Community; but not Civitas or Respublica: No, though they
purpose to set up a Government: But when they are formed into a Body, under one
supreme Government, they are a (...)

XII. They are all obliged to use Pastors, Church Assemblies, Word, Prayer,
Praise and Sacraments, that are the same, of Christ's institution.

Now Reader, judge whether all this be no Union and Communion among our selves?
And whether his Cant of [ Catholic Communion] undistinguisht, be intelligible?

Qu. But wherein lies your difference then?

Ans. Let him that makes it, and accuses us, tell: For my part, either his
confused head cannot tell what he would have, or my dull head cannot understand
him. But I can tell you what it is that I deny.

I. Tho we are all sanctified by one Spirit, and have one faith and hope, there
is great difference among us in the degrees of these.

II. Tho we are all under one Universal Law of Love, Peace, Concord and
Obedience, every man breaks this Law in some degree: but every breach does
not outlaw us, or prove us Rebels against God. Whoever so far breaks the Law
of Christian Love, Peace and Concord, as will prove that he has not the
sincere Love of God and his Brethren, it is as truly damning (in its degree) as
Murder or Adultery, specially if it be notorious in silencings, revilings of
godly men, and persecution, to the hinderance of the Gospel, and the
encouraging of profane unconscionable men. But whoever breaks the Laws of
Christian Love, Peace and Concord, only so far as may proceed from mere
imperfection of Knowledge, Love and Obedience, in a sincere heart where Love is
predominant, God pardons him, tho he may correct him; and it does not
Unchurch him.

III. He that despises the Ministry out of predominant pride, or profaneness,
or unbelief, does it damnably: But so does not he that in uprightness of heart,
for fear of guilt, flies further from an ignorant, false or malignant Teacher,
than he ought.

IV. If Heretics, or other incapable men, get uppermost and in possession,
that binds not all Christians, or any, to own them.

V. If Power impose men without fitness, and without the Flocks consent, to be
all the Peoples Pastors, so that they are Usurpers, or such as wise men cannot
safely trust their souls with as Pastors, it is no sin (much less damnable) to
choose better Pastors, if they may be had without more hurt than benefit. It
has ever been Satan's way against Christ, to thrust his Servants into the
Sacred Office, to butcher the Flocks, and then cry out against all as
Schismatics that would save their souls, and others, from them.

VI. The Laws of Rulers that set up Patriarchs, Metropolitans, and other Humane
Orders in the Church, if they be but to do what man can empower them to do,
must be as far obeyed as other Humane Laws (not being against Gods Laws): But
the breach of them unchristens not, nor is punishable, but as the breach of
other Humane Laws (which some Casuists say, bind only in case of scandal, if we
break them; others only if they be for common good: but I say, if they be not
against it, and be things which belong to their Office to determine)*

VII. In the Roman Empire the Christian Pastors at first had no such way to
preserve the people from Heresy, as by keeping close Concord among themselves,
and agreeing that all should disown those that were regularly rejected by their
own Pastors, which in case of Controversy, Councils were to try: And Christian
Emperors added their civil sanction to this power of Councils, and banished
such as the Councils condemned as Heresiarks: And this combination they called
[ the Catholic Church] (in the Empire), to distinguish it from all the
Heresies that brake from them. And (Emperors not using the Sword to compel any
to Communion, nor enabling the Bishops to do it) this course was needful, and
did great Service to the Church, as long as the Majority of the Clergy kept
sound: But when worldly Baits drew worldly men into the Bishops seats, this
turned clean the other way; and Arians, and every Sect that by power could get
uppermost, called themselves the Catholic Church, and persecuted the rest as
Schismatics. In this case the Orthodox durst not plead Majority: but 1. They
fled to the Scriptures to try which was the sound part. 2. And they appealed to
the Nicene and first Councils when the Church was sound: But the Second Council
(at Constable.) began a breach; the Third (at Ephesus) made it wider, and was
rejected by a great party: The Fourth (at Ephesus) made it yet wider, and was
utterly disowned by the soundest part: The Fifth (at Calcedon, called the
Fourth) made it yet wider, and rent the Church almost into equal parts: And the
following Councils went on till they set up Images and Popery, and tore all to
pieces.

Therefore I conclude, that uniting on the Decrees of General Councils, as
such, is no necessary nor sure way of Catholic Communion. But while godly
Pastors use Synods really for Love and Peace, and the Churches welfare, it is
the duty of all the People finis gratia, and in obedience to their proper
agreeing Pastors, to keep such bonds of Peace. But a failing therein is not an
unchurching crime, tho a fault.

VIII. If Councils of Bishops will arrogate a Legislative power over all the
Church, or over those that are not of their Flocks, it is part of our duty to
Christ, and means of Concord, to disown their Usurpation.

IX. If a company of uncalled usurping obtruded Pastors, keep Councils, their
Pastoral Authority binds not.

X. If lawful Bishops will make Agreements for needless or noxious things, on
pretense of Concord or Ornament, and lay on them such necessity, that none
shall communicate without them, and make them dividing Snares and Engines,
particular Bishops ought to disown this; and their authority binds none to obey
such Canons, whatever the end (the Churches peace) may do.

XI. Bishops and Pastors in the same Kingdom may well be used to try what
Pastors are fit for their Communion: But (as I said before) were we bound to
disown the Communion of all Foreign Pastors, the validity of whose right to
their places we have not just notice of, our Task would be impossible, or our
Communion narrow.

And if foreign Bishops will become so pragmatical, as to make themselves
Judges of other Kingdoms, which party of Competitors are the truly called
Pastors, when they cannot try them, or will take the words of one party against
the other, because they are uppermost, it is just to disregard their Judgment,
tho they do it on pretense of Communion.

XII. If men will turn a voluntary consultation for concord, into the Nature of
a Law, tho they call it but Communion, the Church should not own their
Usurpation: As the Princes of Europe are bound to do the best they can to
promote by their concord the interest of Christ, and may well hold Diets or
Meetings for that end; yet no man calls that Diet a Kingdom, nor has the Major
Vote a power to bind the Minor to consent, when the reason of the thing does
not bind them. So is it in the concord of foreign Churches: All are bound to
agree in what Christ commands: But in circumstantial determinations, no man
is bound further than the End and Reason of the thing requires: Communion here
is not Subjection.

XIII. There is an Excommunication which is a governing act: This no Church or
Bishop can use over others: And there is a mere renunciation of Communion which
equals may use.

XIV If any Bishops or Councils (Usurpers or not) excommunicate men unjustly,
or forbid them Communion, unless they will sin, such prohibited men must obey
Christ, and not forbear Church-Worship and Communion where they can have it,
specially if they are many: Schismatical imposing Church tearers must not be
encouraged by sinful obedience to them: Whomever they call Schismatics, God
will judge them as Schismatics themselves, and their revilings and persecutions
are self-condemnation.

I doubt I weary the Reader with often repeating the same thing, to make them
plain against perverters.

24. Let us follow him further: p. 47. he says, [ But how to apply the Copula
in a Proposition either to the union of Soul or Body, or of Christ and his
Church, I cannot tell; and shall never be able to learn, till I meet with some
new Baxterian Logic, as well as Grammar and Metaphysics.

Ans. And yet you will think your self wise enough to stir up men against us
for our ignorance, while you are raging confident. Are you resolved to read no
Logic that is already written? One would have thought it should have pleased
one that pleads for Unity: As it is no Proposition, but made so by the Copula,
uniting the terms as Subject and Predicate, and the Union makes one the
Predicate; so it is no Man and no Church by the bare existence of Soul and
Body, or of Christ and Believers, without the uniting of both together, that so
the Soul may become in actu, the forma hominis, and Christ the forma Ecclesiae.
Homo and Animal rationale, are no Proposition without a Uniting est. Is not
this plain?

25. P. 47, 48. Granting that there is no Universal Government but Christ, he is
again at it, that there is somewhat more than Organization, and all the
Essentials of Christianity and Union with Christ, to make the Church One: and
thereupon feigneth me to say, [ That which makes this Body to become a Church,
is no union among themselves]; and leaves out the rest of the Sentence, [ but
their common union with Christ:] As if their common Union with Christ were not
an Union among themselves. If I have not made this plain enough, That 1. the
Church has the Unity of the parts to make it a capable Body or Matter. 2. That
it has a consequent Union and Communion after it is a Church. 3. But that it
is only the Union of adapted Matter and Form, that makes it essentially the
Church of Christ in the proper political sense, then I despair of making it
intelligible, that forma dat esse and nomen: And if that which makes it [ the
Church] do not thereby make it hoc unum, then eus and unum non convertuntur,
and unum must have a distinct cause from eus.

26. He adds, [ I should rather think that the Unity of several Churches makes
them one Church, and does not only prepare and dispose them to be one].

Ans. Their Unity in Christ does make them one formally: And this is the
informing Unity among themselves: But all other Unity is but preparatory or
consequential to the formal unity. I told you out of Dr. Barrow, and may see in
Rod. Goclenius, Martinius, and many more, beside Metaphysics, in what
abundance of loose senses things may be called One: We deny no such Unity, no
not in an heap of Sand. But of formal political Unity, why would you never tell
us what it is but Union with one King, that makes many Cities one Kingdom? Do
you rather think they are One Kingdom by any other Union among themselves? Yes,
if you take [ Kingdom] materially and equivocasly, but not else. Dare you say,
That they are the Church of Christ, without their Union with him as the Form?
Or dare you say, That all Christians united to Christ as their Head and Form,
are not eo nomine, one Polity or Church?

And what is the reason that all this while you will not name that thing else,
that makes the Church one? Do it if you can.

27. P. 49. Falsely saying, that I have not told him what Union of the Churches
among themselves is necessary, he feigns an Union in Christ the Center,
consistent with as great distance as the two Poles..

Ans. What base thoughts has this man of Christianity? Is it a contemptible
Union to have all one Faith, one Hope, one Baptismal Covenant, and so one God,
one Lord, one Spirit, and one body of such, and all the Twelve parts of Union
and Communion before named? 2. Were it not worth the labor for this man to
tell us what the more near and excellent Union is which he has a mind to set
up? Paul says, I tell you of a more excellent way, when he speaks of the Union
of Love, even Love to God and our Savior first, and to all his Members as
united in him. Out of all this man's books I cannot find what his nearer Union
is, unless it be to unite in such as he; that is, in obedience to their Wills;
and so Subjection to them be this high Communion: He says over and over the
general word, Catholic Communion; but what he places it in, let him find that
can.

28. He says, [This is a pretty easy way of determining Controversies, to
outface all the authority of Scripture and Antiquity by a dogmatical
assertion, without offering the least Reason, or shadow of Reason to confirm it.

Ans. Reader, find one word of Scripture or true Antiquity that I contradict,
or that ever he showed that I contradict; and judge who gives Reason, and take
not his word or mine.

29. Says he, [I had at large proved the necessity of one Catholic Communion
to make one Catholic Church, and instead of answering the proef, he asserts
the contrary upon his own naked authority, and that must pass for confutation.

Ans. Could a man have spoken more untruly that had studied it? 1. While he
tells us, that by Communion he means Union; did I ever deny it? No, nor ever
met with a Christian that denied it. 2. Yea, I said more than he, That besides
Union, some Communion in transient acts is necessary, which he places not his
Communion in. Is not this an hardened Disputer? Who can doubt but Union and
Communion is necessary to one Church? But the doubt is, wherein it does
consist? whether in Essentials, Integrals or Accidents? and what these be? We
are far more for Catholic Union and Communion than you. We are for Communion
with all true Christians, even those that you represent odious, and
excommunicate and ruin; and you are for Communion with a Sect that will honor
you and obey your will. We know that to have one God, and Christ, and Holy
Spirit, one Faith and Hope of Heaven, one Baptism, and a true Love to one
another, and to be all under one Law and Covenant of Christ, and in our several
Assemblies to read the same Scripture, use the same Sacraments, and the same
Rule of Prayer (the Lord's Prayer) and Praise; this is a most excellent
Catholic Communion. We believe that true Christian Unity is the Unity of the
Spirit; that is, mental in Faith, Hope and Love; but that it must be held,
exercised and preserved in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4 3. And therefore if any
Christian take it for a sin to join with us in the circumstances of Worship, if
we can, we will alter them to satisfy them: If we cannot, we will gladly allow
them to worship God together in their own circumstances, and there we will love
and pray for one another: We will not cut men off from Christ or the Catholic
Church, and damn them for not swearing or saying, that they will obey us, and
that there is nothing sinful in any of our Government, Liturgies, Forms or
Ceremonies. Our Union is in greater matters common to all Christians, and not
in wearing the same fashions, and reading the same forms, and obeying the
usurpers of the power of the Keys that are Laymen, etc.

And as for having obligation and right to Communion with all other Churches
(which is all that I can gather he places it in, save obeying the same Bishops
and Canons), we make no doubt of such right to be used in due order: And
therefore we condemn all Church Tyrants that deny men their right: And we do
not believe that our right is in the power of Prelates to take from us, unless
we forfeit it, and cast it away: And we grant obligation to due Communion, as
well as right; and therefore will be no such Separatists as you are, that
refuse Communion with Dissenters in their Churches; yea, condemn all that do
but call them Churches: And seeing no man is obliged to sin, we disown their
crime that will not let men preach nor communicate, unless they will make a
solemn Covenant to sin.

The Catholic Communion that he seems to aim at, is to receive and reject the
same persons in every Church that are received in or rejected by any one. We
are for as much of this as is needful to the purity and peace of the Church:
But we do not believe that all the Christian World is bound to take all the
godly persons for excommunicate, who shall be excommunicated here according to
the 5 th, 6 th, 7 th, 8 th, etc. Canons of the Church of England; nor to
silence all Ministers that you silence. When we were newly silenced, 1662. some
great men were employed to affirm, That if we would go and preach to the
Americans it was an excellent work, and they would bear our charges: I told
them, that our lives would be spent e're we could learn their Languages, as fit
to preach to them. But it seems if we had gone, Catholic Communion would have
silenced us there too, and have obliged the Americans, if we converted them, to
reject us.

What if Bishops excommunicate men for not paying the Civilians their Fees, or
for not repenting of a truth, or silence us for not assenting and consenting to
all in their book? must all the World reject us in conformity to them? It Is an
heinous crime for any one man to draw a Nation to sin with him; but much more
to engage all the Christian World to sin with him; yea, and that on pretense of
Catholic Communion. Christ says (by his Spirit in his Apostle), Him that is
weak in the faith receive, and receive one another as Christ received us. If
Bishops silence and excommunicate even them that ate strong in the Faith, must
all the World disobey Christ to obey them?

If you grant that, clave errante, they bind not, must we take their bare
words, that claves non errant? or must we become Tryers and Judges of all the
World that they will judge?

And how shall all Churches receive the same that some receive, when you know
not whom you receive your selves? Are all the score thousands that are in some
of your great Parishes, in your Church? Must all the World take all the
Sadduces, Hobbists, Infidels and Damners that dwell in your Parishes into their
Communion? No, nor all that come to the Altar, when the Priest knows not who
they be, and never saw them before? Do you use to write Testimonial Letters for
every one of your Communicants, when he travelleth into other Parishes or
Diocesses? Any man (save a Nonconformist) that had rather take the Sacrament
than lie in Goal, is admitted (unless some rare Minister stop a notorious
scandalous man, till the Court absolve him). If you make a Prison of your
Church, and say to all men, [ Choose this or Newgate, etc.] must all the World
receive such, because they choose the Church-Prison rather than the other?

And if we cannot possibly know which of our Neighbors be of your Church, and
which not, in the same Parish ( e. g. Martins, Giles, etc.) how shall we know
who has right to Communion all the World over? You must needs cast us on
believing the Bishops words, when as, 1. They use not to give the World such
notice. 2. If they did, we know not foreign Bishops credibility (in France,
Spain, Italy, Poland, Germany, etc.) they most separate from one another.

30. P. 50. He proceeds, [He takes that for granted which I can never grant
him, That the Churches which are divided from one another by separate and
opposite Communions, may yet be all united to Christ; for Christ has but one
Body, one Spouse, one Flock, one Church; and if we be not Members of this one
Church (as no Schism^ticks are), we are not united to Christ].

Ans. 1. The Lord have mercy then on this miserable Priest, and save him from
his heinous Schism, that out of his own month he may not be condemned as no
Member of Christ.

2. Reader, while the Piper, Harper, or Trumpeter, gives no distinction in the
sound, (1 Cor. 7.7, 8.) but thinks that crying [ Communion, Communion] should
charm men into the same Disease of Confusion and Schism, which he is sick of;
If thou be awake, I invite thee still but to use thy Reason in these three
distinctions 1. Between Subjection and Communion. 2. Between local Separation
and mental. 3. Between mental Separation in and from mere circumstances,
accidents, or integrals, and in and from essentials necessary to Christianity
and Christian Communion; And then if thou can not Answer this Doctor, and
escape Schism, which he tempts thee to, without any further Confutation, I
despair of curing thee.

1. None are of Christ's Church that separate from any thing Essential to it.

2. All Congregations are locally divided and separated from one another.

3. All Churches and Persons that differ in a Translation, a Form, a Word, a
Ceremony in their Communion, by opposite Opinions or Practices are so far
mentally opposite in their Communion. E. g. They that were for observing Meals
and Days, Romans 14. and they that were not: Peter and Barnabas that separated
from the Gentile Christians while the Jews were there, and Paul that reproved
them for it: Yea, those that for small Mental difference separate locally: A
Prelatist that scruples taking one Parish Priest, or Bishop for his Pastor,
suppossing him insufficient or a false Teacher, separateth by removing his
dwelling to another Diocese, or Parish: These Schismatics have not yet dared
to say, that this man separateth from Christ. The Convocation caused Godfrey
Goodman to be imprisoned 1640: His Diocese and the next were Separate in their
Separate Heads. Victor Excomunicated the Asian Churches. Here were opposite
Churches and Communion; the Greeks and Romans, the Abassine, Syrian, Assyrian,
Armenian, Georgian, etc. Churches censure and Separate from others in their
Communions to this day; so do some Lutherans from other Protestants hold
Communions opposite in point of Consubstantiation and Images. So do such as Mr.
Dodwell, condemn all Communion that has not uninterrupted Episcopal
Succession: You write against him, and Archbishop Bramhall: so far are your
Communions opposite. Doctor Gunning in the time of Usurpation, was against the
Parish-Communion then practiced, and separated from it: Archbishop Usher,
Bishop Browning, and multitudes of Episcopal men did not. Did all these
separate from Christ.

Was Cyprian and all the African and Numidian Bishops separate from Christ, or
the Pope -- in Augustin's days, when there was so long opposition between
three Popes and Aurelius, Augustine, and the rest of the Africans, which party
was unchristened?

Was it (Miracle-working) St. Martin, that was unchristened, or the Synods of
Bishops whose Communion he renounced to the Death?

Epiphanius gives so high a character of Audius, that wise men think his
Separation from the Bishops that abhorred his reproof, unchristened him not.

Socrates and S^zomen, tells us of great diversity and opposition in the
Communions of many Countries, about Easter, and other things, that yet
unchristened them not.

When the Scots and Britains would not communicate with Gregory's Austin, nor
eat in the same House with the Romans, which party was cut off from Christ?

Was it Chrysostomes Ioannites, or the Council that deposed him, and the
Cyrillians, that were cut off from Christ?

Was it the Party of Meletius, Paulinus, or Flavian at Antioch, that were not
united to Christ?

Not only Socrates and Sozomen, but Atticus and Procluus, and other men, freer
from Schism and Ignorance than our Dr. thought the Novatians were united to
Christ.

Was Lucifer Calaritanus cut off from Christ for gathering a Church separate
from the Bishops that he thought too hastily received the returning Arians?

Was it Zachary and Boniface that were cut off from Christ, or the Two
Presbyters that they excommunicated for holding Antipodes, etc?

Was it the Church of Canstantinople, or of Rome, that was unchurch't when
Vigilius and Menna, and other Patriarchs excommunicated one another?

If David Derodon have proved, that Nestorius spoke Orthodoxly, and Cirilas was
an Eutichian; or if I have undeniably proved, that they meant the same thing;
or Job Ludolphus, that the Eutychians were sound in the faith, which of the
parties that these 1300. years have condemned each other, are cut off from
Christ?

When the Italians set up a Patriarch at Aquileia, an hundred years against
Rome, which side was unchurched?

When the Pope ( Alexander 3. Innocent 4. etc.) interdicted whole Kingdoms (
France, England, etc.) and part of the Churches obeyed the Pope, and part the
King; and when in the Wars with Frederick, Henr. 4 th and 5 th, O^h^. etc. part
of the Bishops were for the Emperor, and condemned the rest, and the other part
condemned them as Henrician Heretics, which side was unchurched?

When all the Truths that Philastrius calls Heresies (in palpable ignorance)
had parties condemned for holding them (as Heretics), was it the feigned
Heretics, or the condemners, that were unchurched?

But if this man's words be true, and Priests can so easily damn men, it is time
to think what those men do that have made such damning Canons as ours
beforementioned; and that damn all that differ, and obey them not in every
word and ceremony which they will command on those damning terms: And (were
this true) whether it were not wisdom for all men to pack up, and leave the
Land to the Priests themselves, and those that are ductile and sequacious
enough to follow them to the last?

For my part, I believe not, that he that goes from one Church to another, as
separating from a pair of Organs, or Cathedral singing, or Copes, or from a
sorry Priest for a better, or from an undisciplined Church, to one that uses
true Discipline; not judging the Church that he goes from, worse than it is
does any thing inconsistent with his Christianity, nor is separated from
Christ: What the seed of Cain do, that hate and persecute their brethren; and
whether they separate from Christ when they fight against Love, I leave to
others.

^ 31. Page 64, 65. But the man, hard put to it, has a new notable subterfuge:
He that has said all this for One Church, has found Two Universal Visible
Churches in the World, besides the Invisible: [One c^nsists of all those
Christians and Churches who profess the true Faith of Christ, observe his Laws
and Institutions, and live in Communion and Fellowship with each other]: This
he owns.

Ans. So do we, with these Suppositions, 1. That no man observes all Christ's
Laws and Institutions, without sin; but true Christians profess and practice
the observation of them sincerely, so far as they know them.

2. Those that you damn and persecute, profess to do this to the best of their
understanding, and say, it is for doing it that you revile and ruin them.

3. We suppose, that when Christ's Laws and Man's interfere, Christ's are to be
obeyed against Man's.

4. And we take not the Church of England to be cut off from Christ's Church;
if it should be proved, that they [ observe not all the Laws and Institutions
of Christ]: In this you preach Separation too blindly. There are some Laws and
Institutions of so low a Nature, that Error and Offense against them, cuts not
Men off from the Church.

But what is his other Notion of [ a Christian Church]? Why, It Is that which
contains the Conventicles of Heretics and Schismatics, which are a middle
thing between the true Catholic Church and the World of Infidels, as Rebels in
a Kingdom.

Ans. This is the effect of Confusion: When such men are got into a Labyrinth,
they go the further the worse. The Truth of the case is this. The Church is
usually likened to a Corn Field, that has, 1. Corn: 2. the Straw and Chaff
that feeds and covers it: 3. Stricken Ears, in whole or in part: 4. Weeds: All
is but one Corn Field, so denominated from the Corn: But the Straw and unsound
Ears are Integral Parts and Acciden^s: But the Weeds are no part at all, but
noxious Adjuncts.

So, 1. True Believers and Heart-Covenanters, are the Christians in famosiore
and propria significatione analogati, to whom the denomination of the Church is
ordinarily given in the New Testament.

2. Verbal profession and covenanting, is common to the sound and unsound, as
the Straw and Chaff to the Grain and Ears. It constituteth the Church as
visible matter, as it is supposed to serve and contain the Grain

3. The Ears totally and visibly smitten, are but equivocally parts; that is,
the persons whose profession or notorious practice contains a renunciation of
their Baptismal Covenant or Christianity, are but equivocally called Christians
and Church Members.

4. Those that deny some Article of Faith consequentially, nororiously and
ignorantly thinking their Opinion consistent with all the Essentials which they
practically profess, are not thereby cut off from the Church; but they having
made their Title litigious, may be suspended from some Communion till it be
tried.

5. All good Christians are sinners, and have errors; and if any judge them
Heretics and Schismatics, for such, they are still in the Church of Christ.
The word [ Heretic and Schismatick] are now become what the speaker please. He
is a true Heretic that separateth from something essential to (Faith, Love, or
Obedience to Christ), and from the Church for that, or thereby. Persecutors
separate from Christian Love and Communion.

So that here is but one Catholic Church; and some called by men Heretics and
Schismatics, are true Members: but all that notoriously renounce any
Essentials, are no Members of it.

Rebels is a word that may signify such as cast off the Sovereign: By which,
renouncing subjection, they renounce being Members of the Kingdom, and are as
an Army of invading Enemies, who are in the Land, but not of the Kingdom. But
if any will call those Rebels that do but break a penal local Law, or that are
disobedient to a Constable, a Justice, or a Master; this proves them not to be
no part of the Kingdom.

But he numbreth the excommunicate with those that are cut off from Christ.

Ans. Yes, upon these Suppositions following: 1. That they be excommunicate not
only for sin, but for such sin by which they first cut off themselves from
Christ, the Excommunicator only declaring it by his Sentence: else
Excommunicators will be worse than Devils, if they damn men, or cut them off
from Christ, who do not first cut off and damn themselves.

2. That it be not only proved an heinous sin in it self, but that they are
proved after due instruction and patient warning, to be so impenitent in it, by
wilful ignorance, or obstinacy against Knowledge, as will not stand with sincere
Faith and Obedience to Christ.

3. That it is no cutting off a man's self from Christ, to say, that there is
somewhat sinful in your Church Government, Liturgy or Ceremonies, or to be
afraid to assent and consent to all imposed, or to take an Oath never to
endeavor any reforming-alteration of Church Government; nor will it prove a
renouncing Christ, to separate from a Usurper, or a false Teacher, or run out
of Dunstans Church (as they did) for fear it should fall on their heads. If
therefore any will cut men off from Christ for any such thing, or for observing
the 20 th Canon of the Council of Nice, or for the fashion of his Cloak, or for
not paying the Court his Fees, they either condemn themselves instead of
others, or do much worse than the Devil, that can damn none such.

It Is Two to One but this Doctor that here damns the excommunicate without
distinction, will next say, he meant well, tho he said ill, and that he
supposed the Excommunication just. The best is, it is no great matter what he
means, while he is none of our Judge, except as to himself and the seduced.

1. And I add, That we will suppose the Excommunicator to be no Usurper, but a
justly called Pastor, and not a proud ignorant Obtruder, nor a Stranger that
cannot try the Cause, nor is called to try it. Much less a Lay-Civilian,
usurping the power of the Keys.

These men have so many things to say, before they can accomplish their work,
as bespe^ks such Auditors whom darkness and interest has made monstrously
credulous.

As 1. We are your lawful Past^rs. 2. The Patron's had power to choose, and the
(...) us so, whether you (...). 3. No (...) are your lawful (...) bu^ we. 4. We
have power to c^mmand things indifferent; and if we c^mmand a Su^^lice, or a
pair of O^gans, or ^^ru^ue you are cut off from Christ if you (...) us, or at
least, if we excommunicate you for it. 5. If y^u think any of our Oa^hs, or
other Imp^sitions, to be sins that would damn you; yet if you refuse them, and
we excommunicate y^u f^r it, you are cut off from Christ, and in a state of
damnation. 6. If one Chancellor or Priest cut you off, all the Church on Earth
must judge you accordingly.

Reader, when so small a part of Christians in a thousand years have escaped
Excommunication from one or other, what have these men done in the World? Is it
any wonder if Kings and Kingdoms were subjected by Excommunication, and to say,
[ St. Peter will be angry else] frightened the Nations into obedience? Did not
Christ and Paul speak gently, when they called such grievous Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, devouring the Flocks?

32. Yet p. 69, 70. his cause leads him to say, that this Church, which is
wider than the Catholic, taking in Rebels, yea, those Rebels themselves, and
Heretics, and Schismatics, [May have the power of Orders (or else I know what
would follow), and Officers rightly constituted, Christian Sacraments, and all
the Essentials of a true Church, except Christian Peace, and Unity, and
Catholic Communinion.

Ans. Reader, pretend not to understand him, but answer him dilemmatically;
either by [ Peace and Union] you mean inclusive Union with Christ, and the
Unity of the Spirit, one Faith, one hope, and Union of Christian Love; and by
Communion, a Communion in things necessary to salvation; or you do not. If you
do, then this is the true Paraphrase of your words, [ They may have all the
Essentials of a true Church, except all the Essentials]; for those they have
not. If you do not include these, then this is the Paraphrase, [ They may be
true Believers, and penitent, and love God and Man sincerely, and be Members of
Christ, and have his Spirit, and one Baptism, and one true hope of Heaven, and
the pardon of sin, and yet be Rebels, and damned for want of somewhat ese,
which I call Unity, Peace, and Catholic Communion]. I think you mean
subjection to such as you, in all your Canonical Impositions.

In short, the plain truth of this Case I before opened, viz. When disobedience
to true Church-^astors, proves t^ be as Adultery and Murder, sins signifying
such Predominance of the Flesh, and absence of Divine Faith and Love, as is
inconsistent with (...), then it is damning, as other gr^ss and reigning sin
is: But else it ^uts not off from Christ; and if the Prelates pretend to cut
off such, they are liker to cut off themselves.

33 His rare distinction he fullier opens, which is, [Between the Visible
Church, and the one true Catholic Visible Church: The Visible Church
comprehends all Societies of professed Christians, Heretics, Idolaters, or
whatever they be: The one true Catholic Church (...) not].

Ans. I have answered this before. It Is well the distinction is not commonly
observed (as the Coyner says); for it would be a common abuse. Hitherto we
have known but one Universal Church, considered as Mystical (in Believers) or
Visible (in Prosessors of the same, and not another Faith). Professed Idolaters,
or Heretics, that deny the Essential, are no Members of it, as Visible. But
this Doctor has forged an One true Catholic Church, less than the Visible,
and yet Visible* Could he have spoken sense, he would but have said, [ The
Universal Visible Church has some Members that are sound, orderly and
peaceable, and some that are erroneous, disorderly and unruly, even as it has
some holy, and some Adulterers, Thieves and Persecutors. In a great house are
some Vessels of Earth to dishonor.

34. I fear if I should survey but half the confused passages of this book, I
should tire the Reader as well as my self. I will be briefer with the rest

P. 94, 95, etc. He gives us an allay against the tenor of his
Excommunications and Damnations, to show, that he is not so uncharitable as he
seems to be, and that his Canon that makes so great a noise, has but Powder
without Bullet. I look he should say, I misunderstand him; and therefore I will
not tell you his meaning, but the sum of his words, viz. p. 87. to show us why
[ Those that believe in Christ, repent of their sins, and lead an holy life in
all godliness and honesty -- may yet be excluded from all the ordinary means of
salvation]: He first blames them that in these days have thought Holiness so
sufficient; and would cheat his Reader, by citing Austin, as of that mind, who
has no mention in the words which he cites of Faith, Holiness, Love to God, or
to his Saints, or Service, but only a Catalogue of such Virtues as Heathens or
^nfidels plead for, viz. Chastity, Continence, not cove^^us, not serving Idols,
not contentious, patient, quiet, emulating and envying none, sober, frugal].
But yet an Heretic (who is without the Christian Faith and Love), so far is he
from including these in his Description. But no doubt he will have some Readers
that will swallow all such Hooks as these.

Then supposing men have no Love that communicate not on his terms, nor love
the Peace and Unity of the Church, unless they join in such Principles as his,
that would destroy it; he tells us truly, that Heaven is only the Gift of
Christ, as merited by him; and therefore can be had only on his terms; and that
is, only in Communion with his Church, and by his Sacraments.

Ans. And what Christ's Terms are, he has told us, Mark 16.16. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved. John 3.16. Whoever believes in him,
shall not perish, but have everlasting life, etc. The Whole Gospel is a Charter
of salvation to all that have true Faith, Hope, Love, and Holiness. And all
such are in the Church of Christ.

2. And as ordinarily does the Scripture tell us, that the preaching of the
Gospel is the means of faith and holiness, by which God saves them that
believe; and that by the hearing of faith preached, the spirit is given, Gal.
3.2, etc. Romans 10.14, 17. John 5.24. Acts 18.8. Acts 10.44. The holy ghost fell
on all them that heard the word, before they were baptized, even the miraculous
gift of the Spirit, Matthew. 13.18. Mark 4.20. Luke 8.13, 21. and 11.28. Christ
himself preached, but did not baptize: He sent forth his Disciples to convert
men by preaching, Matthew. 10.7. and 11.1. Mark 1.38. and 3.14. Luke 4.18, 19,
43. and 9.2, 60. Acts 5.42. and 10.42. and 8.5, 25, 35, 40. and 9.20. 1 Timothy
3.16. 1 Cor. 1.17. Paul says, he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel. John 15.3. Ye are clean through the word, etc. John 6.63. The words
that I speak unto you, they are spirit and life. John 17. Sanctify them
through thy truth: thy word is truth. 6.68. and 8.30. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. 1 Timothy
5.17. and 1.2. John 4.2. It is able to save souls. James 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.2. John
8.31. Heb. 4.12. It is able to make us wise to salvation: It is by the word of
God that men are born again as an incorruptible seed. 1 Pet. 1.23. It is that
abiding in us that is our continued life, 1 John 2.14.

There is no mention in Scripture of any one that was converted and made a
Believer by Baptism or the Lord's Supper. The Adult were all to repent and
believe, before they were baptized; and God promised them forgiveness
thereupon: He never bid men baptize Infidels, nor graceless men. Baptism was
but the public solemnizing of the Covenant, which they consented to before,
and the solemn investing them in that relation to which they were before
entered: And entering them by Baptism, stated them in the Universal Church,
before ever they were settled under any particular Pastor in a particular
Church, as the case of the Eunuch, Acts 8. shows.

But that which I call his Allay, is, that he copiously tells us, that [ Heaven
is a supernatural state of happiness, and not the natural reward of an eartly
creature, p. 92, 93. It is but an earthly happiness that Nature was made for,
and was promised to Adam in Paradise; an immortal life on Earth. An immortal
life after death cannot be the natural Reward. Innocent flesh is flesh: Were it
not for Heaven, man were not bound to lay any restraint on himself, nor
suppress sensual inclinations, nor deny them proper and natural satisfactions.
As far as we know, to live always in this world and body, was the Original
state of mankind, without any expectations of a more divine and spiritual life,
p. 98. Briefly, p. 272. The Divine Spirit is the principle of Immortality in
us, which first gives life to our souls, and will at last raise our bodies.

Ans. His Opinion in this, is not without the consent of some very learned and
good men: And if he had held only, that immortality is proper to the spiritual,
so far as it is immortal blessedness, who would contradict him? But seeing it
is the undistinguisht immortality of the Soul that he speaks of, I shall in
this, with submission, declare my Dissent and Reasons.

35.1. I confess that, as I said, it is an Allay to his damning Sentence of
thousands of God's faithful Servants: For it seems by [ Damnation] he means
but Death, and the loss of Heaven, in which the Soul is dead as well as the
Body; and so he judges us not to any other Hell. But then all the Infidels,
Atheists, Murderers, Perjured, Adulterers and Drunkards, find the like kindness
from him (if it will prove such). It seems all their Souls are mortal, and die
as Beasts: And so the fear of Hell, or any pain after Death, is dismissed by him
to all the World.

2. I believe not this, because God is the righteous Governor of the World, and
rules by means suited to the end: And we find, that the fear of a future
positive punishment, is so natural to the Conscience of man, that the World is
mostly governed by it: And God rules not man by mere deceit.

3. We see that even the fear of Hell is not sufficient to restrain (no, not
professed Christians and Preachers) from Perjury, Persecution, Sensuality,
Worldliness and Wickedness: What a case then would the World be in, were they
delivered from those fears? Men would be worse than Toads, Adders, or mad Dogs
to one another.

4. The Philosophers, yea, most (and almost all) the Infidel and Pagan World to
this day, were convinced of the Immortality of the Soul: So that even the Lord
Herbert, de verit. numbereth it with the Notices of (...).

5. I have in diverse books given, I think, satisfactory proof of the Souls
immortality, not now to be repeated, both Natural, and from Revelation: And if
he preach the contrary, I crave his patience with those that scruple taking him
for their Pastor.

6. But (as La^iantius and Arnobius plead against the Platonists for the Souls
Mortality by Nature) I do confess that there is nothing in Nature that will
prove that God cannot annihilate it, as he can do any Angel; nor that it is
immortal without depend^nce on God, nor that will prove infallibly that God
will annihilare no Soul: But all that we pretend to prove by Nature is, 1. That
there is nothing in the Nature of the Soul that has a tendency to annihilation
or dissolution of it. 2. That God, who makes all things suitable to their use,
seems to intimate, that he will not dissolve or annihilate it, by making it
of such a durable Nature. 3. And his Government affords us yet stronger moral
Arguments.

7. As God made Adam's Soul of an immortal Nature, so sin changed not his
Essence, but his Quality and Relation. And tho it made him mortal in the
dissolution of his humanity or composition, and liable to pain, it did not turn
him into an Animal of another species, nor acquit him from all future
suffering. God having made his Soul naturally durable or immortal, man's merits
were but to determine whether it should be immortal happiness or immortal
misery. God was not bound to change man's Essence to shorten his suffering,
because man vitiated it.

8. If one should preach, that Christ came to make Humane Souls immortal that
were all naturally mortal, it would make Faith so hard a Work, as would greatly
hinder the conversion of the Infidels. It would be an hard thing to believe
that Christ makes Saints of another species from all other men, as men are
from Brutes: And if ones Soul be naturally mortal, and others, by the Spirit,
immortal, it would seem a specific difference: And Philosophers and
Mahometans, who can say so much for the immortality of the Soul, would despise
Christians as less Orthodox than they.

9. I have elsewhere proved, that the Jews held the Souls immortality, except
the Sadduces: He that said, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit ^t^rnal
life? spoke but their common Opinion; as did all they that believed that any
rose from the dead.

10. It seems by the History of Henoch and Elias, that if man had not sinned,
he should have been so translated: For God had said, Increase and multiply; and
the Earth would not have held all Humane Generations.

11. Christ expressly says, There shall be a Resurrection to condemnation, John
5. and that the wicked shall go to everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25. and that
their worm never dies, nor their fire is quenched, etc. But if the Soul be not
immortal, there can be no Resurrection: It will not be the same man, but
another new made: And shall a new soul suffer for another sin? Luke 16. in the
case of Dives and Lazarus, tells us Christ's mind of this.

12. Yet I confess that the Resurrection of the Body was not promised before
the Fall, nor yet plainly threatened, but seems to be the common effect of
Redemption in its first instance, as it was for all Mankind; viz. That man
being filius mortis, Christ would first, as a common Savior, restore his
Nature, and then set him in the way of Trial for its happiness or misery; as
God at first made his Nature, and then tried him accordingly. But it seems had
there been no Savior, the body should have continued dead (being but the mere
instrument of the sinning soul), and the immortal soul be immortally unhappy.

13. Therefore in this, if the Doctor mean not better than he speaks, but
thinks indeed that the Spirit only is the Principle of the Souls immortality, I
differ from him, but not with contempt, acknowledging that these things are
weighty, and of difficulty: But I am loath to be less Orthodox than Heathens
and Infidels, or than the vain conceited Rabbis, who as Buxtorfe and others
tell us, do hold that good Israelites go to Heaven, and bad Israelites to Hell,
and all others die like Beasts. Did he so hold of good and bad Christians, it
were too gross (or of those that are called by the Gospel, and some believe and
some refuse). The Papists most commonly hold, That unbaptized Infants are in
some such neutral state, shut out of Heaven, but under no positive pain. But if
the Doctor preach so of the Adult and all, tho he seem to abate of his severity
to the Dissenters, he will do no service to the Church.

14. The Terms Reedeeming, Restoration, and other such in Scripture, intimate,
that Christ did restore Man to the state he fell from* adding more mercy to it:
And therefore that his Soul was immortal, and he in via, and not in patria.

And I believe not what he adds of man's being not obliged to deny Sensuality,
were it not for Heaven: 1. He thinks Adam was made but for Earth: And yet God
bound him Not to eat of that Fruit which his eye, appetite and fancy led him to
desire. Does he not here directly condemn God's Law, and justify Adam's Sin?
2. Were there no Heaven for us, man were bound to rule his Appetite and Sense
by Reason: And the bonum publicum, and his own, would oblige him by Reason to
restrain Sensuality, as to Women, Wine, Meat, desire of our Neighbors Estate,
Anger that would kill others in revenge. 3. And I think God does not bind us
now to take the forbearance of such comforts as further us in Holiness,
Thankfulness, and other Duties, to be any necessary way to Heaven.

36. Page 122, 123. To prove his sort of Catholic Unity, he is not content
with Episcopatus Unus est; but he asserteth, That all the Bishops of the Church
are but one Bishop, invested with the same Power, etc.

Ans. 1. Episcopacy may be said to be One, as it is One in specie, and for one
remote End and Object; as Justiceship in England may be called One: But that
all Bishops should be but one Bishop, is strange (Tho by impropriety of speech,
almost any thing may be said). No doubt but the Name [ Bishop] signifies in
common speech, the Subject related]: Either he means, that the Subjects are
one, or the Relation. While he abhors the distinguishing of the equivocal [
Unity], we must take him to speak in sinsu famosiore and usitato: 1. They that
have diverse numerical constitutive parts of men (matter and form), are diverse
Bishops, as Subjects of the Relation: But so have e. g. the Bishop of
Canterbury, and York, and London: They have diverse Souls and Bodies.

They that may depose and curse each other, are not the same Bishop: But so did
Chrysostom and his Adversaries, and hundreds more. If they are One
subjectively, the Virtues and Vices of ones are another, and the Creditor may
take one man to Prison for another Debt.

2. They cannot be One numerically in the Relation of Bishop: For the Relation
is Accidens quod sequitur subjectum: The same numerical Accident cannot
possibly be in two distinct Subjects: For it perishes if it cease to be in its
Subject. One man's Color, Virtue, Learning, etc. cannot numerically be the
Accident of another: So that all Bishops being one Bishop, is just like the
rest of this man's Doctrine. I believe one may be good and another bad, one
saved and another damned.

What can the man mean by it, if he could speak his mind? Sure nothing but that
their Office is of the same species, and they bound to use it in their several
places, as from one Christ, under one Law of his, with the greatest Love and
Concord they can, and for the common good of one Universal Church: Can he mean
more, without gross Error? And who denies any of this, as to the Episcopacy of
Christ's institution?

37. [ They are bound to govern where it can be had, by mutual advice and
consent].

Ans. So far as the end requires, The common good: So say the Independents:
And is that the Unity so much talked of?

38. [' No Bishops are absolutely independent, but are obliged to preserve the
Unity of the Episcopacy -- Those Churches must be independent which have an
independent Power and Government, as all must have that have independent
Governors or Bishops; and independent Churches can never make one Body, and
one Catholic Communion, because they are not Members of each other.

Ans. 1. No Two Churches on Earth of the same species (Diocesan, or Parochial,
etc.) are members of each other, but all of the Universal or National, of which
they are parts; no more than your fingers or eyes are members of each other.

2. Reader, pardon me, that in the beginning I commended him, as being for
Diocesan Independency in Power. These words make me again uncertain what he is
for. Plain English would distinguish dependence of Subjects on Rulers in a
Polity, and dependence of Equals by Concord in a Community: These are plain
words. He after says, that Diocesans have no proper Governors Ecclesiastic
over them, or to that sense: But here he says, they are not independent in
Power and Government: Yet the man says so little in any determinate sense,
that I know not whether by [ dependence in Government], he mean [ a political
dependence on superior Governors], or [ a political Union of many persons to
make one superior governing power (like a Senate), or a mere voluntary concord
of many Governors that are Equals, like that of many Schoolmasters or Princes,
whose Concord makes them not One Polity, but One Community. The former sense
some words of his do favor; but elsewhere he so much denies them, that I hope
it is but the last that he means.

3. But if this be his sense, What independent (whom he so much damneth) does
not acknowledge a dependence in Community, on all true Christians (and in Polity
on Christ)? Does not every Christian confess, that all true Churches and
Christians depend on the Whole, as Parts, and on each other, as Fellow Members,
obliged to live on the same Christ, in the same Love and Communion in
Essentials, and in as many Integrals of Religion as they can reach to? I never
met with the Christian that denied this: Therefore what to make of this man's
words, I know not.

38. P. 126. he says, [ He who causelessly breaks this Unity, can be no
Catholic Bishop].

Ans. Is it come to that? Alas! how few Catholic Bishops then do we hear of in
the World? Tho no good man breaks it in the Essentials, who breaks it not in
Degrees or Integrals. They were guilty of Schism that said, I am of Paul, and I
of Apollo, and I of Cephas. Peter brake it in some degree, Gal. 2. And much
more those, Phil. 1. that preached Christ in strife, to add to Paul's
affliction. How shall we know then what all his talk for Communion signifies
as to practice? With what Bishops in the World must we hold Communion? And how
shall we know them? If any prove that any English Bishop causelessly breaks
this Union in any degree, must we separate from him? I know no evasion for him
here, unless he will yet distinguish of Unum^ Martinius says, Unus is, 1.
Indivisus. 2. Sic indivisus, ut etiam indivisibi^^s. 3. Sic indivisas, ut
divisibilis. 4. Sic indivisus ut divisus, se^ distinctus ab aliis. 5. Unicus
solus. 6. Unus cum aliquo, seu idem, aut numero, aut gen^re, aut specie, aut
analogia: item Essentia, Persona, Voluntate, aut actu]. But this is Gibberish,
I suppose, to the Doctor: Bare Unity is more intelligible, tho no one know
wherein it must be.

39. He adds, [To preservt the Peace and Unity of Episcopacy, it is necessary
that every Bishop do not only observe the same Rule of Faith, but especially in
matter of weight and consequence, the same Customs and Usages, and the same
Laws of Discipline and Government -- and when any difficult case happens, for
which they have no standing Rule to consult.

Ans. The longer the worse! If I ask him whether he mean such Customs and
Usages as are part of God's Word materially, commanded or commended in
Scripture, I know not what he will say; but I strongly conjecture he will say,
No: It is Tradition and Church-Customs not there mentioned.

If I ask, how these come, [ espcially to be mentioned as matter of weight and
consequence], he confesses, that God, and not Man, made the Church: And is not
God's Law sufficient to be its Universal Rule? If man make these matters of
weight, man may unmake them.

2. But is it not Universal Church Communion that he is speaking of? I provoke
him to tell me, if he can, who on Earth has power (beside God and our Savior)
to make Laws (the same) of Discipline and Government to the Universal Church?
Is not Legislation the prime part of Government? Have not you often denied any
Humane Supreme Government under Christ over all the Church? Do you not here say
the contrary? Know you not the difference between the Contracts of a Community,
and the Laws of a Polity? It Is no true Law if it be not the act and instrument
of a Rector to govern his Subjects. If Twenty Kings meet (or Schoolmasters,
Physicians, etc.) and agree on certain Points of Government, this makes them
not One Polity, Kingdom (or School): Their Contracts are neither Laws to each
other, nor to their common Subjects; but every King may make them a Law to his
own Subjects.

4. If you should mean only National Laws of Discipline and Government, how
come all the Churches in the World to be obliged to [ observe the same Laws],
e, g. our Canons? This, as to Traditions, is expressly contrary to our Articles
of Religion which you subscribe. And when the Church-Laws of all Countries
differ so much, which must all be reduced to?

If you say, They must all agree to those called the Codex Ecclesiae
Universalis, or the Four or Six first approved Councils, etc. I answer, 1. It Is
gratis dictum: And how prove you those universally obligatory, and no other?
And how will you satisfy Conscience, which are the obligatory Laws indeed?

2. Why do you then cast all from Communion that observe the 20 th Canon of the
Council of Nice?

3. What power have dead Bishops over us, and all Christ's Church? They were
Canons for one Empire which is dissolved, and of which we are no part.

4. Is Christ so insufficient a Lawgiver, even for Laws necessary to the Unity
of his Church, as that we must have more Laws of Government and Discipline
which the Catholic Church must unite in, or be no Church: And shall that man
plead for such Laws that yet says, There is no universal Governor? I never
said, you are a Cassandrian, or a Papist: But it was such ignorant Doctors that
saddled the Horse, and held the Stirrup while the Pope got up.

40. [This (says he) makes it highly reasonable for Neighbor-bishops at as
great a distance as the thing is practicable with ease and convenience, as the
Bishops of the same Province or Nation, to live together in a strict
Ass^ciation and Confederacy, to meet in Synods -- to oblige themselves to the
same Rules of Discipline and Worship -- There may be a primacy of order granted
to some Bishops and their Chair, by general consent, and under the regulation
of Ecclesiastical Canons, for the preservation of Catholic Unity.

Ans. You make this Catholic Unity essential to the Church: And yet does it
lie in Humane Canons and Ass^ciations? Did Christ leave things so essential to
Humane Invention? And is concord in your Canons necessary to salvation? And yet
the proof of all this, is but this, and such Doctors Assertion, that [ it is
highly reasonable]. And so Unity and Salvation must lie on all that such will
think highly reasonable.

2. If Subjects may thus make their own Laws, no doubt they will make them
suitable to their Natures and Inclinations (And it is confessed, that often the
most, even of Bishops, are bad and worldly men), and suitable to their Ends and
Interests: How many would be glad if Sovereigns would thus let Subjects make
their own Laws?

3. But how were the Canons, or Laws of a National Church to be a Rule to all
the Church on Earth, and necessary to its Unity?

4. And how comes this man that made it damnable in the Independents to make a
Church Covenant, as if they renounced Baptism, now to make Church-Associations
and Confederacies to be so necessary to Catholic Unity? Truly I know no answer
for the man, but the same that Binnius gives us, when Pope John and Hormisda
gave a contrary determination, de fide, on the question, Whether it may be
said, that One of the Trinity was crucified? One said, Yea; But the N^storians
taking hold of it, the other said, Nay: Ita mutatis hostibus, says B^^nius,
arma necessario mutanda sunt: That Is true when it is for themselves, which is
false when it is for others.

5. But it was modestly done to confine these Confederacies to the greatest
distance that the thing is practicable with ease and convenience: And so he
fairly denies General Councils (and after more plainly). But when the
Armenians, Syrians, Abassines, Greeks, etc. cannot with ease and convenience,
go above Five or Six Hundred miles (at most); and so each Country has
different Customs, Laws and Canons: Can the Catholic Church obey them all?

41. P. 127. This (says he) seems to be the true Original of Archiepiscopal
and Metropolitical Churches.

Ans. If so, I will not believe that they are necessary to Catholic Unity and
Salvation, till I know who invented them, and whether they had as good a
Commission as the Apostles

2. If Bishops made the first Achbishops (and Parish-Bishops, say others the
first Diocesans, and Presbyters the first Parish-Bishops), then, 1. Inferiors
may make Superiors, and give the power which they never had. 2. Why then may
they not ordain Equals, and propagate their species. 3. Then Presbyters or
Bishops are of God, and Archbishops of Men.

42. Page 128. Says he, [ Every Bishop is the proper Governor of his own
Diocese, and cannot be regularly imposed on against his consent.]

Ans. Yet even now [ He that causelessly breaks this Union is no Catholic
Bishop. It seems then it goes not by Vote; but a Dissenter may be a free
Catholic: I pray you then impose not on others against their con^ent.

[The whole Authority (says he) of any Bishop or Council over other Bishops,
is founded on the Laws of Catholic Communion -- Therefore they have no proper
Authority, but only in such matters as concern the Unity of the Episcopacy, or
the Peace and Communion of the Catholic Church. If a Bishop be convicted of
Heresy or Schism, or some great wickedness or impiety, they may depose him,
and forbid his people to communicate with him, and ordain another in his stead,
because he subverts the Unity of the Faith, or divides the Unity of the Church,
or is himself unfit for Communion.

Ans. 1. Either these are meant as acts of Government, or not: If yea, then why
do you so often disclaim it, and call it only Advice and Communion Then you place
this governing Power in Foreigners, when they are no further off than with
ease and convenience we may confederate with them: And whither this will lead,
I Will not enquire. If nay, then it seems men may depose Bishops, and set up or
ordain others in their stead, without any governing Power over them. If so,
then by Authority you must mean Authoritatem Doctoris, vel Nimcii (and so, I
confess, Pastors may in Christ's Name, require other Churches to do their
duty), and not Authoritatem Regentis: And if so, it is as true, that when there
is just cause, a few may depose many, as many depose a few. But men use not to
call it deposing and ordaining in his place, when men do but charge others in
Christ's Name to do their duty: I find not tha^ St. Martin excommunicated the
Bishops and Synods in Ithacius and Idacius time; but I find that he renounced
Communion with them, and so may Equals do.

43. P. 140. he says, [The senseless imputation of Cassandrianism, and French
Popery, is managed so knavishly by Mr. Lob, and with such blind fury by Mr.
Baxter, with so much confusion, etc.]

Ans. The Terms I wonder not at; but whatever we are for Knavery, or blind
Fury, if this man help us against Confusion, it is strange.

44. P. 173. he grants that the Bishops are not the Governors of the Church,
as united in one common regent Head over the whole Church; but as every Bishop
governs his own share]: And this (of true Bishops) who denies him?

P. 183. It is but a voluntary combination, and stricter associasion for
preserving Unity by advice, etc. All this is good (tho damned by him in the
Independents) if they would combine to rule according to the Laws of Christ,
and not make any of their own without authority, nor so as to accuse Christ's
Laws of insufficiency, nor make dividing noxious snares.

45. Says he, p. 189. [ That this Church is Universal, is founded on the Laws
of Catholic Communion].

Ans. No Humane Laws make the Church Universal. Men may make their own Subjects
or Confederates unite in accidents (either just, as in one Translation of
Scripture, one time and place and meeting, etc. or unjust, when it is hurtful,
vain, or belongs not to them); but it is only he that makes the Church a
Church, who thereby makes it One Church in Essentials: And in Integrals, he
that makes it entire (by institution or efficiency).

2. This Union is founded in men's Unity in Christianity, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.

46. P. 192. He says, [ The Association and Confederacy of Neighbour-Churches
is founded on the Law of Catholic Communion, and the Catholic Communion
cannot be maintained without it.

Ans. Not without Baptismal Confedera^y in the necessary Duties commanded by
Christ: But as to your Confederacies in Humane new Church-Forms, Patriarchal,
Metropolitan, etc. was not the Church One without them, before they were
invented? Here he makes voluntary Confederacies to make new Church-Canons, or
Laws of Discipline, necessary to Unity, and that Unity necessary to Salvation,
all being cut off from Christ that break it: As if Christ had not made Laws
enough necessary to salvation, and he that only kept his Laws, and not men's
Canons, could not be saved. Can he tell us then where to fix our Religion? On
what Bishops, and on what Canons? I am certain that his Religion will not stand
with certainty of salvation, when no man can be certain what is necessary to
salvation, nor what de novo will by Bishops be made necessary the next year,
nor who those Bishops must be.

2. See here again: When he made it a renouncing our Christianity, to
confederate and associate to do men's duty in a particular Church, he yet makes
it necessary to Unity (and so to salvation) by confederacy to make new Humane
Church Forms. All this is to bring all men's salvation (opinionatively) into the
power of those that can get uppermost; as if men could as easily damn others as
themselves.

47. P. 200, 201. says he [If the Church cannot be a Political Society without
one constitutive Regent Head, then the Church is not a Political Society; for
it neither has nor can have any such -- on Earth over the whole].

Ans. We thank you for that much. But the Church is a Political Society; and to
deny it, is to deny an Article of the Creed, and to unchurch it, quoad ipsam
formam: And Christ is its constitutive regent Head: The whole Family in Heaven
and Earth is named by him; from whom the whole compacted body is increast and
edified: And it is dangerous false Doctrine (worse than breaking one of your
Canons) to hold, that the Church cannot be a Political Society, unless it have
an Head on Earth.

48. He adds (when I showed that all Episcopal Writers, as Hooker, Spalatensis,
etc. of Church Polity, take the Church for one Body Politic) [But what is this
to the purposo? Does Hooker set up one Regent Head?]

Ans. 1. Yes, Christ. 2. Was it not directly to my purpose, to prove it a
Polity, which was that which I alleged it for?

But (says he) do any of them prove, That Civil and Ecclesiastic Polity is
the same thing?

Ans. Yes, in genere. Do they use the word equivocally? Is not Polity or
Government in Civils and Ecclesiastics [Polity in genere]? How can these else
be distinct species of it? Was this ever denied by Conformist before?

Says he, [' Do not the Civil and Ecclesiastic Commonwealth differ as much as
the Church and the State?

Ans. And do not Church and State differ in specie, as being both Politic
Bodies, sub uno genere?

He adds, [Therefore he must still prove, That as one supreme Regent Head is
necessary to the Unity of a State or Kingdom, so it is to the Unity of the
Church, which will be a fair advance toward Popery.

Ans. 1. Every Christian holds, That Christ is the Head over all things to his
Church: But every Christian says not, That this is an advance to Popery. Is
Christianity Popery?

2. Is one State and Kingdom all the World? All that I have to prove is, That
as all the Earth is one Divine Kingdom, God being the absolute Sovereign, and
each particular Kingdom is part of it, a Political Body subordinate, informed
by its One Humane Sovereign; even so the Universal Church is one Body Politic,
informed by Christ, the Divine-Humane Head; and particular Churches are
subordinate Bodies Politic, parts of it; as such (but not as Christian)
constitutively informed by their proper Pastors; which all those Episcopal men
believed, that used the old description, Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo adunata.
This is all plain to other men.

49. P. 201, 202. He finds [ nothing like proof but my Assertion, That the
Regent part is the Informing part; and if it have not one Regent part, it is
not one Society, as Political: If it have none, it is no Polity: If it have
many, it is many].

Ans. Reader, his own words are, What a Drudgery it is to dispute with such: If
he had talked of these things at School, he would not have challenged his Master
to prove the signification of the words in his Dictionary; but now he is a
Disputer, there is no end with him: If he challenge me to prove, that Rex
signifies a King, and Subditus a Subject, and so of the rest, he will get the
better by tiring me: I can only refer him to books, and use, and men of that
profession: And so I do here: If Politia do not signify the Government, and
Governed Societies informed by Government, all the Politics, and Dictionaries,
and use of Politick-Professors, have deceived me. I know Politria is sometime
used Tropically for any cause of life, any rules of living, yea, for good
works, by Chrysostom, etc. But I said enough to make him know that I spoke of
it in the usual proper sense of Politicians: And so it is taken, 1. For the
stated Form of ^^vernment in Civiiate. 2. For the administration of that
Government: 3. For the Ius Civitatis, or Burgesship in a governed City: 4. For
the ^nver^ation of men in such a governed Society. What is Politica but civilis
scientia? What is Politicus but civilis respublicae gerendae peritus, or ^ui
rempublicam gerit? Tho it be called Respublica a fine, from the public ^^od,
yet men of that profession have appropriated the Names of Respubl^ca, Civitas,
and Politia, to governed Societies only, and analogum per se p^situm stat pro
famosi^re analogato.

Says he, [' This I grant is true of such Societies as are One by one supreme
(...) power; but not of such a Society as is One, not by one supreme power over
the whole, but by one Communion: And such a Society the Church is.

Ans. This is downright Heresy: But he means not as he speaks: For he often
confesses, that Christ is the Sovereign Head of the Church: And to confess
that, and yet say, [ That tho Christ be the Regent Head and Soveraign], yet
this does not inform it, or unifie it, is gross contradiction, as if the F^rm
did not give the specifying and unifying esse and nemen: We may next come to
deny, that Master and Scholars are a School, or King and Subjects a Kingdom, or
Soul and body united, a Man, or that Two and Two are Four.

2. He here plainly makes the Church to be but a Community, which is false.

3. And yet he will have it a Political Society: For he says, That [ for a
Politica^ S^ciety to be informed by the One Regent part, is not true of the
Church]: which plainly includes, That the Church is a Political Society, and
yet has not One Regent Head, which is a contradiction. He says, ( The Church
must be excepted from Mr. B 's Rules and Definitions of (...)).

Ans. You see to what a pass these men would bring us: As we must have New
Rules and Laws of salvation, if we will be of their Church State; so we must
have New Politics, and New Dictionaries: The Church cannot be a species of a
Politic Society without New Definitions of Polity. Next say, God's Laws are no
Laws, unless you make a New Definition of Laws in genere; and Christians are no
Men, without a New definition of a Man.

I will not pretend to teach this Doctor; but if he will go to School again, I
may hope he may meet with a Tutor that will teach him these Things following:

I. That a mere Community is not a proper Body Politic, Civitas vel
Respublica, but an ungoverned Society of Equals ( in hoc), associated for
common good: So are a company of men that venture all their Goods and Lives in
one Ship, as Equals, agreeing on some means of common safety; or any combined
Body without Government.

2. That no Community can make a true Law in proper sense, but mere contracts;
tho the Names of Laws may be abusively so used: For a Law is only the
signification of a Rector's Will, making the Subjects duty with due reward or
punishment: And it is the first part of the Administration in Government:
Legislation is the Prerogative of Rulers, and never belongs to Equals in
Community.

III. That a proper Political Body is only a Society consisting of Governor
and Subjects, united relatively.

IV. That if Twenty Governors, Kings or States, that are each supreme in their
Republic, confederate, so as to set up one in rule over all the rest, or the
Major Vote of themselves to be Governor of the rest, they make a new Kingdom or
Republic by it: But if they only confederate for the strictest Concord,
Offensive and Defensive, this makes no new Polity nor Law, but mere Contract of
Equals; tho all are Kings, each one may make Laws for his own Kingdom,
according to those Contracts; but they are Laws only by the Authority of their
proper Sovereign.

V. That Cities are Bodies Politic, and in a Kingdom are subordinate parts,
headed per modum formae, by their proper chief Governor; but supposing the
superior Headship of the Kingdom, and that Kingdoms are informed by Union with
their Sovereigns ( specified as the Sovereigns are, Monarchical,
Aristocratical, Democratical, or mixed), and unified by them; But no man's
Sovereignty is unlimited, independent or absolute, God being only such over
all, and Earthly Sovereigns more dependent under him than Mayors and Justices
under the King

VI. That even so it is in the Church, which is one Political Body under
Christ, containing particular Churches subordinately in^ormed by their proper
Pastors.

VII. That a Confederacy of these Pastors is very useful, for agreement to
observe the Laws of Christ, and to make such Local Bylaws as Corporations may
do by Charter, to determine their own Circumstances which the Law of the Land
determines not, each Church has power, which many may agree to use, allowing
necessary variety: And the Magistrate may determine that which is not proper to
the Pastor's Office for many. But the concord of these Associated Confederates,
can make no Law, but contract; nor any proper new Church-form, save as
improperly called a Church from Accidents. If the Saxon Heptarchs had agreed to
govern all their Kingdoms by strict consent, this had not made another Kingdom
or Law; they had not been made One Kingdom by such a Confederacy, but many
Kingdoms agreeing as one Community of Equals.

VIII. The Relation that all Pastors have to the Universal Church, will enable
any of them, more or fewer, confederate or not, ex authoritate Ministri and
Nuncii, to tell any other Bishops or Churches of heinous scandalous sin, and
admonish them, and renounce Communion with the impenitent, and exhort people to
forsake Heretic Bishops, etc. But all this as Equals, and not as the fixed
Overseers of other Churches, nor as Rulers of other Pastors: And so one Martin
may do by a Synod of Bishops.

IX. Kings are as truly (and I think as much) obliged to do their work in
Concord and Communion, The contrary dreadful Doctrine of Dr. Parker, for
setting up an Universal Council of Princes to govern all the Kings on earth, is
to be confuted elsewhere, as also his subjecting Christ to Kings, which
implies, that they may command, reward, and punish him.
as Bishops; And Kingship is as truly One as Episcopacy: That is, 1. It is of
the same species: 2. Under the same Universal King: 3. Governed by the same
Universal Laws: 4. Bound to regard the Good of all the Church and World above
that of their own Kingdoms: 5. And bound to contribute the utmost of their Wit,
Interest and Power for the said common good of Church and World. And because
all the Kings in Europe may do more to this common good of all, than Bishops
without them can do, I may say, That they are bound hereto rather more than
less than the Bishops: As a rich man is bound to liberality more than a poor
man, and one that has the Tutorage of Princes and Nobles Sons, or a Physician
that has an Hundred such Patients, is bound to more care, and more bound to
care than another. And all Kingdoms are as truly parts of God's Kingdom over
men, as all Churches are parts of the Universal Church.

If Justices or Mayors will of themselves make a New Body Politic by
Confederacy and Association, and say, We claim no Superiority, but an
Authority, in order to Communion to make Laws of Government for the Kingdom, or
many Counties, and should say, It is One Kingdom, as Unified by this Communion,
and these Laws of ours, and not by their Relation to one King, I should doubt
whether to call them Sots, or Rebels, or Traitors.

5^. P. 206, 207. he boldly repeateth, [ How often have I told him what it is
that makes the Catholic Church One Catholic Church, which is the constitutive
Form he enquires after; viz. Not one superior power over the whole Church, but
one Communion] (and this Communion is in Humane Forms and Canons).

Ans. How often does he tell us that, which if a Dissenter had asserted, I should
have thought the Name of an Heretic too gentle for him, as coming so near the
denying both of the Church and Christ. See here the Church is not made One (and
so not made the Church) by its unitive Relation to Christ the Head: He is not
the constitutive Regent Form, but a Voluntary Agreement to make Laws of
Government, etc. is the constitutive Form: And yet he says before, It is not
made by Man, but God.

51. But p. 220. he disgraceth the Dean by these words, [Mr. B. indeed says,
That the Universal Church is headed by Christ himself: But as the Dean adds,
this does not remove the difficulty: For the question is about the Visible
Church, whereof the particular Churches are parts; and they being visible
parts, do require a visible constitutive Regent Head, as essential to them:
Therefore the whole Visible Church must likewise have a visible constitutive
Regent Head.

Ans. Dangerously false, and the Fundamental Principle of Popery: When they
know how frequently the Papists are answered to this by Protestants; and I told
them how fully I had answered it to Johnson, and often; why have we no Reply, but
say over and over the same things? Viz.

1. No Kingdom, nor thing is Visible simpliciter, but secundum quid. Our King
is not visible in Ireland, nor but to ^ew in England: His soul is visible to
none; nor his body, save the outward Accidents. If he were seen by none but
Courtiers, it were a Visible Kingdom.

2. In all these Respects the Church is Visible: 1. The Bodies of the Subjests
are Visible: 2. Their Oath af Allegiance, Baptism and Profession, are Visible:
3. Christ lived Visibly on Earth: 4. He is Visible in Heaven to his Courtiers:
5. He has one Visible Law and Covenant to govern all his Church: 6. He has
Visible Officers: 7. He has Visible administrations of Mercy and Justice by
himself and his Officers: 8. And he is coming to Judgment Visibly, and all Eyes
shall see him.

Now the Controversy is either de re, or de nomine: De re none but a false
Teacher will deny any one of these, that I say not a gross Heretic. 2. De
nomine, either this much may warrant the Name of a Visible Church, or not. If
not, we must go the old way of some former Protestants, and say, That the
Chatholick Church is not Visible. And for ought I see, we must say, That the
Kingdom of Ireland, if not of England, is Invisible, because few see the King,
and no man ever saw the Soul of King or Subjects, or their Bodies, save the
skin. If all this warrant not the Name of Visible Church, the Confederacy of an
unknown Company of Bishops will not. But remember that the Controversy is but
de nomine; and we say more by far to prove it Visible than you do, while you
deny Popery.

. 52. P. 2^5. I Argued, That if a Regent Supreme be the informing part of a
Diocesan, Metropolical, etc. Church, so must it he of the Catholic, if the
word Church, be used univocally. Hence he infers that I thus argue [ If
there be not a Supreme Head over the whole Church, there is no such over any
part]: So little does he understand an Argument. When as I argued only from the
parity of Reason, That if the summa potestas be not the Form of the Catholic
Church, then it is not of Diocesan Churches: But it is of Diocesan Churches, as
is confessed; Ergo, This supposes that they confess Christ to be the summa
potestas. Therefore I say, He must be the Constitutive Form. The man blushed not
here to say, That I infer [A Bishop cannot govern his own Church, unless one
Bishop or a College govern the whole]. How little Belief is due to such a Man?

. 53. P. 844. He says, I think it as certain, That those Churches cannot be
Members of the Catholic Church, whose Communion is unlawful.

Answ. Seeing it is plain, That he means not only mental Communion in
Essentials (of which it is true) but local Communion in outward Acts, I take him
to be one of the grossest Schismatics that ever I had to do with; and one of
the greatest Enemies to Christian Catholic Love. If any could prove it
unlawful to have Ministerial Communion in England, where he cannot have it,
without declaring Assent and Consent to all thingt in their three Books, that
would not prove the Church of England no part of the Catholic Church. If a
Layman could prove it unlawful to trust other men with his Child in Baptismal
Covenanting, as far as the Church here does, or sinful to join in avoiding the
Communion of all such g^dly men as the Canons or a Lay-Civilian may
Excommunicate; This will not prove the Church of England no part of the
Catholic Church.

If any Church will deny men Communion, unless they subscribe to some one small
Untruth (as the Liturgies false Rule to find out Easter Day, or a
mis-translation; or the denial, that Christ died for all, etc.) this does not
unchurch them all. But men have made so many snares by their numerous invented
sinful forms of Communion, that by such schsmatical Censures as this, one
scarce knows what Church on Earth is ^ot unchurched.

. 54. He says, [ Where there is (...) b^^ach of Communion, no declared (...)
act of communi^n between (...) be in communion with each (...). You may say of
them what you will; But all these Negatives speak no positive Act: And is
Communion nothing but Negations? All this I may say of those that never heard
of each others being. 2. There may be an express disowning of each, as the
Romans did the Asians about Easter, and the Africans about rebaptizing, and the
Britains disowned Augustine, and as some disown a Pair of Organs, or neglect of
Discipline, etc. And yet both be parts of the Catholic Church.

. 55. P. 326. He is so Catholic in Doctrinals, as to say that [We may safely
communicate with any Church, how different soever our Opinion in other Matters
may be, when we agree in all the Fundamentals of Christian Faith and Essentials
of Worship] Answ. What could one wish more? Is this the same Man? May you not
then admit those that so far agree with you? Are all your humane Associations
and Confedearcies, and all the Laws for Church Discipline and Government (made
by men that have no Legislative Power) Essentials of Worship, or Fundamental
Doctrines of Faith? Are all that your foresaid Canons Excommunicate Men for
such Essentials? If this much be enough in the Church, notwithstanding all
other Sins and Errors, why not in those that you should receive. But it seems
by this, that Matters of Divine Faith and Worship, besides bare Essentials, are
small things to him in comparison of Bishops Rules and Canons.

. 56. Page 395. He says, [ To separate causelessly from any true and sound part
of the Catholic Church, cuts such Separatists off from the Church. [If they
will justify their Separation, they must prove that what is Enjoined, is
Sinful].

Answ. 1. Have you answered what they have said, and said again toward a
Proof? Remember that you call them to it, and justify their Separation, if
they prove it.

2. But your Conclusion is false and odious, leaving it doubtful, what part of
the Christian World you damn not. If I could prove that you separate causelessly
from the Nonconformists, does that certainly cut you from all the Church? I
doubt there are too few Christians on earth, who do not in some degree separate
causelessly from others? Grotius joined with no Church locally in Worship, long
before he died. Most of the Church in East, West, South and North, is damned
falsely by this Rule. He that does but causelessly separate pro tempore from a
Preacher, by Passion or Mistake (as Mr. Martin aforesaid from Mr. Lapth^rne)
separate causelessly from a true and sound part of the Christian Church.

His words make me think so sadly of the Case of the Church, that must be
tempted and distracted by such men, as puts me far from a sporting frame: But
as Dr. Twisse, and some of the Gravest Writers, sometime divert their Readers
with a sad Story that has somewhat in it ridiculous, why may I not put him
another such Case?

At Bridgenoth, before 1639. One Parson Cross, a thorough Conformist, Preached
a Sermon: In which, inveighing against Marriage, he said, [ If you marry a
Widow, -- She will be like a Banbury Cheese; when all the Paring is cut off,
there is little left: So when all Portions and Legacies are paid* and^. Whoever,
Maid or Widow, if you will hope for a Wife, and virtu^us Woman, you must be
like a Man that will find out one Ele in a Barrel of Snakes: It Is a hundred to
one you miss her. But if you light on her, you have but a wet Snig by the Tail;
a slippery handful.

Now the Women were angry with the Preacher; he was an Orthodox Licensed Man:
They separate from him. Quere, Whether they separated from the Catholic Church?

Reader, I am tired with following this Writer, and Mr. Crosse's Sermon, makes
me think of his Book. By that time all the wordy mistakes are pared off, the
good matter is like his pared Banbury Cheese: And if you fish for them at a
venture, it is great odds but you meet with some scurvy words or matter instead
of them: Or if you light of that which is better, his Sense is so uncertain in
undistinguisht words, that you have but Mr. Crosse's wet Snig by the Tail.

But not to seem more incredulous and indifferent from him than I am, I
subscribe to his words to Mr. Humphrey, page 226. [Ignorance and Insensibility
is as great a security to some Men against Shame, as Impudence is to others].
And to his words to Mr. Lobb, page 388. [What a blessed thing is Ignorance,
which helps Men to confute Books without Fear or Wit]. And I do acknowledge,
That this ^r has helped me more sensibly to understand St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.6. [
Not a Novice, lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the condemnation of
the Devil.

FINIS.
UNNECESSARY SEPARATING, disowned; in the Reasons of the Authors Censured
Practice.
1. WHEN I see, 1. How many suffer for refusing Communion with the Parish
Churches. 2. And how many are offended with Me, and such others for
Communicating with them; censuring Us as mistaking compliers with Sin: The
Cause and some good Peoples request, invite me to answer these following
Questions. I. Whether Men should be compelled to Communicate with any Church,
by Corporal Penalties?

II. Whether they who consent to Communicate with some Church, may choose their
own Pastor and Company, or may by force be confined to their Parish Priest, and
Church?

III. For what Reasons I, and such others, Hear in, and Communicate with the
Parish Churches? And whether so to do, be a Sin, or a Duty, or a thing
Indifferent.

2. I. To the first case I answer, 1. It were happy, if the Sword could compel
Unbelievers to Believe; but it cannot, nor is a way which Nature or Scripture
ever allowed Man to use for such an end.

2. To force an Unbeliever to Lie, by saying he Believes, is a Sin.

3. An Infidel must not be Baptized till he profess with seeming Seriousness,
and Willingness that he Believes in God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
will Vow and Devote himself to Him: Therefore to force the unwilling to be
Baptized, is a Sacrilegious Profanation of Baptism.

4. To be Baptized, is to be solemnly invested in a visible State of
Regeneration, Pardon, Adoption, and Right to Christ and Life Eternal, by a
Ministerial Delivery of such Right as in the Name of Christ. But no unwilling
Person has any Right to these unvaluable Gifts: Therefore no unwilling Person
should be forced to receive the said Investiture.

5. Christ's Trial and Description of the Willing, is, Whether they resolve to
accept of his Grace, forsaking all worldly interest that stands against it:
Luke 14.26, 27, to the end. Therefore to Baptize all that are forced to it by
the Sword, and had rather be Baptized, and say they Believe, than lose all they
have, and lie in Gaol, is to Preach another Gospel in part

6. Persons Baptized in infancy, have no right to Communion in the Lord's
Supper, till they profess their personal Faith and Consent to the Baptismal
Covenant: And the Unbaptized are not to be forced to Communicate: The Lords
Supper redelivering all the same great unvaluable Gifts to the Receivers which
were delivered in Baptism; the Unwill^ng are no more capable of one, than the
other. And to force them to say they are Willing, and to receive that which
they have no right to, is Sacrilegious profaning Holy things.

7. The ancient Churches for many hundred years, were so far from forcing any
to Baptism or Church Communion, or thinking that they should be forced, that
they admitted none that did not earnestly desire it: And if the Baptized by
Impenitency, or Apostasy, or ^long withdrawing from Communion, did show
themselves again incapable by unwillingness, they Declaratively cast them out.

8. And that the Excommunicate, as such, should be laid up in Prison, and
undone, to force them again to be Willing to be Christians, or to Communicate,
has the same Reasons against it, as against doing it at the first; and to take
them for Willing and Capable of Absolution, and Salvation, who had rather say,
they Repent and Consent, than lie in Gaol, is to pervert Christ's Gospel and
Sacraments, and confound the Church: And the ancient Churches would have
abhorred the motion of such a thing.

9. But it is just and meet, that Princes make a difference between Christian
and Infidel Subjects; and between those that live Willingly in Communion of the
Church, and those that refuse it: And that a Christian Kingdom should give
those Powers and Immunities to willing Christians, which they give not to
Infidels, and the justly Excommunicate; especially in matters relating to
Government, Legislative and Judiciary, and especially about Re^igion, and the
Church. And if any to obtain such Immunities or Powers, do Hypocritically
profess Christianity and consent, themselves only are guilty of the
Profanation, no wrong means was used, and the Church is no searcher of the
Heart.

10. But Christianity being necessary to our Salvation; and it being the
Christian Magistrates Duty to do his best for the Salvation of all his
Subjects, and Knowledge being the means of Consent, and Teaching and Learning
the means of Knowledge; it is the Duty of such Magistrates to provide
suffic^ent Teachers for Number and Qual^ty for all the Subjects; and to compel
men to Hear, Con^er, and Learn, as Catechumens: The ancient Churches had their
previous Instructions for such, who were yet dismissed before the Communion
Exercises, proper to the faithful.

3. II. To the second case I Answer; 1. There is nothing in this World that Man
can do without all inconveniences, or which may not be turned to some occasion
of Evil. On one side, 1. It is most desirable that all Kingdoms were wholly
Christians, and the Princes be Defenders and Promoters of Religion, and the
Church and Kingdom be materially the same; and the Civil Government used
Holily, according to God's Laws, to holy ends. 2. And it is desirable
accordingly, that the Kingdom being all Christian, be divided into fit parts
for Christian Conversation and Communion, such as our Parishes are, and that
all be of the Church who are of the Parish, and the Civil State sanctified, and
the Ecclesiastic, grow up as Body and Soul into one. And that all in the
Parish be of one mind, and of one Church; and that there be no just cause given
for any to separate from the rest; nor any do it without cause. 3. And it is
desirable that all these Parish-Churches in a Kingdom living under one civil
Government, do by the means of Senior Pastors and Synods, hold such
Correspondence as is necessary to their common Concord and Strength.

These things being Desirable, it is no wonder if good Governors Endeavor
them; and that ignorant men Plead for all such Concomitants, Subordinates and
Consequents, as do suppose them. When as in Fact the case being quite
otherwise, to administer matters on a false supposition of the matter of Fact;
as if that were, which is not; is but like the Men of Gothams striving and
fighting which way they should drive their Sheep, and where they should pasture
them, when they had none.

1. No Kingdom is so wholly Christian as not to have many (alas, how many!)
incapable of Church Communion. 2. Yet it is a matter of order to be
endeavored, that the Country be divided into Parishes; and that they have an
Ecclesiastic as well as a Civil Relation: That is, That each of these Parishes
have a stated Teacher (or many) for the Catechumens, who are incapable of
Communion: And that the same Men be the Pastors of all in that Parish who
consent; and have the Temples and Tithes by the Magistrates Countenance and
Consent: And this great advantage of Public Countenance and Maintenance, will
no doubt prevail with the main Body of Christians in that Parish, if the men be
desirable or tolerable, to choose them rather than others, to avoid
discountenance, and the maintaining of others: As all in the Hospital will be
for the established Physician, who dare trust him with their Lives.

But if this should be carried further, to bind all persons to an absolute
acceptance of such Parish Priests to be their only Pastors (under the Bishops)
who are put upon them, the mischiefs would be intolerable.

For 1. Then all must accept of Papists Priests only in France, Spain, Italy,
Bavaria, Austria, etc and of bare Readers in Mu^covy. 2. Or else all Subjects
are made Judges of the qualification of their Kings, whether they are Orthoodox
enough to choose them Pastors, while they are not allowed to judge what Pastor
to trust. 3. And then every ignorant, malignant, or profane Man, who by
inheritance or purchase has got Advowsons or Presentations, has got an
advantage greatly to hinder the Salvation of all the Parish: And if Money may
buy Souls for so much probability of Damnation, no wonder if the god of this
World employ many rich Merchants to purchase Advowsons. For how ordinarily God
works according to the suitableness of means, Scripture and full Experience
prove. If the Blind lead the Blind, both fall into the Ditch. 4. And this is
quite contrary to the Ordination and bounty of our Lord, who gave men gifts for
the Edification of his Church; and our Salvation, if we may not use the public
Pastoral help of any, better than many Patrons will choose. I would fly from
that Kingdom as from a Bondage where I may use no Physician, no Tutor, no Food,
but what is chosen for me by any one that can purchase such a chusing-power.
And my Soul is more to me than my Body, and less in the Power of Man. And it is
not the talk of a Magisterial Ranter that shall persuade me to be indifferent
what Teacher I use, as if God would work by all alike.

4. 2. On the other side, 1. It is of absolute necessity that every man consent
before another man can do the work of a Pastor for his Soul: And God in Nature
and Scripture has ordained, that he who must be saved or damned according to
the Ministers success, should be the chuser or refuser of that which so
unspeakably concerns him; and not have his salvation more in another power
than his own, if he be at Age, and in his Wits.

2. And yet this may be run into Extremes; and these are not easily avoided. 1.
Infants (that is, all short of an Understanding, choosing Age) and Idiots and
Madmen, are half Brutes in act, and to be governed accordingly by force, so
far as they are incapable of Reason. But these are not capable of the
Church Communion of the Adult. Yea, not only Children, but all Subjects who are
not Communicants, may be forced to hear and learn as Catechumens, as is said:
And they must not pretend a power to choose their Teachers, to excuse them from
all Learning: But if they say, that they can learn better of another than the
Parish-Minister; if they are able, they may remove to another Parish: If not,
they must give proof that they live as Learners under some Teacher who is
capable to instruct them, approved or tolerated by Authority, where Rulers own
the Truth.

3. And if Communicants will be at the charge of maintaining a Pastor whom they
can better trust their Souls with, than him whom the Patron chooses for them,
the Orthodox or tolerating Magistrate must see that he be not an Heretic, that
does more hurt than good; and must keep them under the Laws of Loyalty and
Peace, and see that they sow not Sedition, and revile not others under pretense
of worshipping God.

4. And no men should, without necessity, lose the advantages of a public
Ministry which the most consent to, and which has the Magistrates countenance
and maintenance; because gathering singular Churches within Parish-bounds,
seems some accusation of the Parish-Minister or Church; and such Churches are
often tempted to Envy and Censoriousness, and are usually envied and censured by
others: And Unity is much of our strength and beauty. But in case of necessity
it may be done.

5. In short: 1. A good Ruler choosing a worthy Teacher for the Parish, will
thereby do much to draw all the sober to consent to him as their Pastor.

2. Bad Rulers and Patrons choosing ignorant, unskilful, furious, malicious or
scandalous Teachers, will drive those that love their souls, to choose better
for themselves, whatever it cost them.

3. Where the Ministry and Churches are so vitiated in public, that their
Communion is unlawful, there God's worship must be kept up only in other
voluntary Churches.

4. Where public Ministers or Worship are not utterly intolerable, but greatly
insufficient for the preservation of Religion and good of Souls, by Disability,
or unsound Doctrine, or Vice; there the chief preservation of Religion must be
in Voluntary Churches; but so, that the Parochial be no further disowned than
there is cause.

5. Where the public Ministry and Worship are sound, but impose some
unnecessary doubtful things, as conditions of Communion, in justice they bind
themselves thereby to allow Voluntary Churches to such as take these terms to
be sin.

6. When the Ministry, and Church-Worship, and State, are sound, and the
conditions lawful, and weakness makes conscionable Christians think otherwise,
there private Churches must be tolerated, but as Hospitals for the sick, under
the care of the Magistrate, keeping peace.

The strife in England at this day, is chiefly about the choice of Pastors, in
which good people will never be indifferent: And few that I have known, refuse
audience and honor to able, godly, profitable Preachers that differ from them.
We are not at all of different Rel^gions, tho some say so, to the dishonor of
the National Church, as if their Forms, their Cross and Surplice, and their New
Oaths and Subscriptions, were their Religion, and so their Religion were
Ceremony or Novelty.

6. III. As to the Third Case, [For what Reasons I, and such other join in
Worship and Communion with Parish-Churches? And whether our practice be a sin
or a duty, or a thing indifferent?] For answer, I. I shall show what I am not
pleading for. II. What it is that I hold and plead for, or defend. III. What
are the Reasons of my practice. IV. Why it is that I now give out my Reasons.

7. I. For the First, 1. I am far from persuading any one to commit the least
sin on pretense of Concord or Communion with any Church on earth. Their
damnation is just, who say, Let us do evil that good may come. Sin may seem to
serve us for a Job, but it will be bitter in the latter end.

2. I would not have any to stretch their Consciences for Worldly Interest, to
believe that Sin is no Sin, or that they may do it because it is a little one.
It is no little one to him that does it wilfully for Worldly Ends.

3. If an honest Christian mistake an indifferent thing to be a Sin, I would
have him do his best to get a truer apprehension: But if he cannot, I would not
have him do the thing: For he that can do that which he thinks a sin, tho by
mistake, can as easily commit a real sin: And it is a real sin to him: for St.
Paul says, He that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of
faith: for whatever is not of faith, is sin.

Qu. But is such a man a martyr, or rewardable, who suffers for his error?

Ans. He is rewardable as he suffers for fearing to disobey God, and for that
which is formally obedience, tho materially it was a mistaken thing. If you had
a Servant who mistook your command, but died in the performance of that
mistake, you would commend his fidelity: And if another that mistook you, did
what you bid him by that mistake, but treacherously for hire, crossed what he
thought you meant, you would take him for a perfidious knave.

Qu. But must a man then do all that he takes to be a duty, or avoid all which
he takes for a sin?

Ans. A culpable erring judgment entangleth a man in sin, whether he follow it
or not: And there is no possibility of avoiding the sin, but by using God's
helps till his judgment be set right. For Conscience is not the Maker of the
Law, but the Discerner of it: And the Lawmakers changes not his Law, because
men change their thoughts of it. But while men are under a self-made necessity
of sinning, the lesser sin and the greater may be distinguished, e. g. If you
mis-judg it unlawful to keep a Saints day holy, to eat Flesh on Fridays, to use
a Cross as a sign of Christianity, it is a greater sin to do these, than to
omit them: But if you judge it unlawful to pray, or hear God's Word, or worship
him, or to feed your self or children, your error is the aggravation, and no
extenuation of the sin. And if you think it a duty to keep a Fast once a week,
to wear a course garment, or to do any indifferent thing, it is a greater sin to
omit them, than to do them: But if you take it to be a duty to lie, slander,
steal, be drunk, murder, persecute, it aggravateth the sin, that both mind and
practice are defiled with it.

4. I persuade no one to own the Ministry of an incapable Person; viz. one
utterly Insufficient, Heretical, or Malignant, who does more harm than good.
The Conformists own this Rule, while they silence so many, and tell men, that
those that have not Ordination by Diocesans, are not to be communicated with,
or owned as Ministers. Both sides then confess, that incapable persons are not
to be owned.

5. I persuade none to be indifferent in the matters which concern their souls,
as whom they hear or choose to be their Pastor, nor in what manner they worship
God, nor to prefer any person or mode, which (all things considered) is worse
before better; nor to deny themselves the great help of a learned, skilful,
godly, faithful Pastor, to teach them publicly, and counsel them privately,
when they may have such, merely because it is forbidden them by men, and the
Patron has chosen them another, who has no such qualifications.

6. I am persuading none that are under the government of their Parents or
Masters, to disobey them in the choice of the Pastor whom they shall ordinarily
attend, as long as they persuade them to a safer choice than the Patron has
made for them.

7. I persuade none by Profession or Subscription, to justify as true or good,
the least untruth or evil in the Doctrine, or Worship, or Discipline of any
Church, or in any extemporate performance of the Minister.

8. I persuade no Minister to conform to the Act of Uniformity, and all the
Canons.

9. I persuade none to make light of any Church-corruptions, nor to forbear
endeavoring by lawful means, in their place and calling, to reform them; much
less to swear or promise it, were that any where required, or to renounce any
Oath as not obliging them to any thing which God had made their duty.

10. I persuade none to the sinful fear of man, or to abate Christian
fortitude, constancy and patience in a good Cause, nor to be over-tender of the
Flesh, or make too great a matter of their suffering. Alas! what are Worms,
that in the way to the Grave they should be feared more than God? Poverty and
Prisons may be as safe and near a way to Heaven, as Wealth and Liberty. None of
all these are the things that I am for.

8. II. That you may know the Reasons of my own practice, I shall next tell
you, what it is that my judgment is for: which leads me to it.

And 1. I think all persons are visible Christians who are Baptized, and
profess their continued consent to the Baptismal Covenant, and are not proved
to have renounced or forsaken it by Word or Deed.

2. I think, that the Pastor is by Office made the Church-Judge, whether the
persons Profession be understanding, serious, and credible, or not: and whether
he be proved to forsake it. And if the man dissemble, or the Pastor judge
falsely, it is their Sin and not mine, if I contribute not to it by omitting any
Monitory duty of my own; nor is it lawful for me to usurp the Pastors judging
power: Nor am I bound to know (my self) the Case and Lives of all in the Church
that I join with; much less, where I occasionally or seldom come.

3. I think, that a tolerable man, though unduly chosen, yet after received
and consented to by the Parish Communicants, is a true Pastor, supposing his
own Consent: And that he and they are a true Church.

4. I hold that Christ commanded his Apostles to endeavor [ to Disciple to him
all Nations, and Baptize, and Teach them,] Mat. 28.19, 20. And that we should
pray and endeavor that the Kingdoms of the World may become the Kingdoms of
the Lord, and of his Christ. And that all Christian Kings are bound to do their
best, to make all their Subjects the Subjects of Christ, more than the Jewish
Kings were bound to promote the Jews Religion: And that Christian Kingdoms are
much more honorable and desirable than Christian Churches in an Heathen
Kingdom: And that the Civil State and Interest should be sanctified and made
religious, and more than a Shell or Body to the Religious State, as the Kernel
or the Soul: And so they should be as far coherent and commensurable, as can be
procured: Yet not so as to corrupt the religious state on that pretense, by
crookening it to any carnal interest. The Body forms not the Soul, nor is it
to be cut meet to the Clothes, nor the Foot fitted to the Shoe. I entreat
those that be not sensible of the great importance of National Christianity, to
read a little Book, called, The whole Duty of Nations (written by a Conforming
Minister, who is much more Honorable by his Extraordinary Worth, than his
Great Estate and Birth), which will bear down dissent by a stream of Evidence.

5. In order to the promoting of this National Concord in Religion, I have
still resolved to conform to all the National Laws and Orders about Religion,
which corrupt it not, nor command any sinful thing.

6. Tho I renounce all Foreign Jurisdiction, Monarchical or Aristocratical,
and usurpation of an Universal Government over all the Christian World (which
has no civil or religious Universal Lawgiver or Judge but Christ, neither
Monarch nor Senate being capable of it), yet I much more value the concord of
the Universal Church, than of one Nation: And do more abhor doing any thing
which is a sinful separation, or discord from the Church Universal: And I take
the unchurching of the Univer^al Church to be a denying or deposing Christ.

7. All Christians must be known to be Christ's Disciples by loving one another
as themselves: And love judges no evil till constrained.

8. Therefore I will separate from no Christian or Church without necessity, no
further than they separate from Christ.

9. I do not separate from a Church merely because I meet not with them: else I
should separate from all the World, save the place where I am present: But I
avoid these several degrees of sinful separation.

1. Accounting true Churches and Ministers to be none such (as the Papists do
by all that have not an uninterrupted succession of Diocesan Ordination).

2. Accounting the Ministry, and Worship, and Government so bad, as makes
Communion with the Church unlawful, if it be not so.

3. Doing that needlessly which has the scandalous appearing signification of
such a judgment.

10. I know many of the Parish-Ministers to be men of very laudable abilities
and conversations, and to have the consent of the most of the Communicants of
the Parish.

11. I am past doubt, that so much of the Liturgy as is used every Lords Day,
as the common Worship, is so far sound as to the matter of it, that it has no
more material faultiness than is too often in extemporate Church-praying: And
that the disorder and faultiness in the Manner, is no greater than is used also
by many in free prayer, with whom we all think it lawful to join. And that
prejudice makes it seem to many much more faulty than it is: The greatest
dislike is of the Responses by the People, and the shortness of the Prayers,
both which were used in the Ancient Churches, when no sound Christians scrupled
it, much less separated for it. Christ approved of the short Prayer of the
Publican, [God be merciful to me a sinner]. Repetitions, and the Peoples
Acclamations and Responses, were used in the Jewish Church, as is evident in
Ezra, and in many Psalms, etc. We all allow the Peoples speaking, even as much
as the Minister in singing Psalms: And the Congregation would murmur if the
People should be but Hearers while the Minister sings alone. Of old their
singing was like our saying, and not in Rithmes, like ours. Will any pretend to
prove that it is lawful for the People to sing God's Praise, and not to say it?
But they that dislike it, may be silent.

As to the Objection, that it is unlawful to use imposed forms; I have answered
it so fully in my Cu^e of Church-Divisions, and in my Christian Directory, that
I will here say no more, but that, 1. Every Ministers Prayer is a Form to the
People, and imposed on them to join in putting it up to God. 2. And that its
lawful for a Child to use a Form imposed by Parents; therefore not simply evil.
3. And that we all allow imposed Forms of Catechizing, and of singing Prayers
and Praise to God: And that he that said, Speak to one another in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs, never meant that they must not be premeditated. 4.
And many men sin by needless impositions, when the use of the thing imposed is
no sin, but a duty.

And I am satitsfied, that the Number of the Christian Churches on Earth* which
worship God without a Form, far worse than ours, is so small, as that the
soundness of ours is almost singular. The supposed great (...) in the
By-Offices about Godfathers, Crossing, the form of Burial, and such other, the
Hearers of the common Lords-day-Service have no business with. For my part, I
profess I take the ordinary Liturgy so* ^he best part of the public Service in
half the Churches in England; and had rather have it without the Sermon, than
the Sermon without it, in those Churches.

12. I therefore take it to be my duty, as a private Hearer, 1. When I am where
there is a tolerable Minister, and no other Church but the Parochial, to join
in Worship and Communion with them constantly. 2. As a Minister on whom the
Conditions in the Laws are put, to refuse some of those Conditions. 3. As an
Hearer where the Minister is utterly intolerable, to do nothing which seems
an owning him as a Minister. 4. In a place where the Parochial Ministry is the
best, but a private Minister and Church is peaceable and sound, I will go
ordinarily to the Parish Church, but sometime to the weaker, if my forbearance
would seem a disowning of their Communion; yea, tho it were to one that is
against Infant Baptism by mistake. 5. In a place where the privater Minister
and Worship is most spiritual, powerful and profitable, I would go ordinarily
thither, if I may: But sometimes to a tolerable Parish-Minister and Communion,
in case my not going seem to signify that I separate from their Communion, as
utterly unlawful. And if I be a Preacher in a privater Church, I will sometimes
get another to supply my place, and go to the Parish Church, if else my
forbearance would seem to signify that I judge it unlawful. 6. I therefore take
the same thing here to be lawful to one, and a fault in another, and a duty to
another. Those that have far better Helps and Communion (all things
considered), should not ordinarily prefer worse: And when the case differs not
much, the Will of a Parent, an Husband, a Master or a Magistrate, should sway
much: And where it is a duty to noted persons to go to the Parish Church
sometime, because else it will signify that they think it unlawful, an hundred
Children, Servants, Wives, poor people, who are not noted or mist, and their
absence is no scandal, are not bound to go at all, while they have much better
Helps and Communion elsewhere.

Having told you my Judgment, of which in my Two forementioned Books I have
given a fuller account: I shall next add the reason of my Practice, both to
satisfy those that censure me, and those that crave my help for their
information; but not making my self a Judge of them that differ.

The Reasons of my Practice in Parochial-Communion.
4. III. But here I am in the same straight as when I gave an account of my
Nonconformity: When upon many years urgency I did but tell men what the sins
were which I thought I should commit if I conformed, some said, that I made the
Conformists a Faction of unconscionable perjured Villains: And if I now tell
the Reasons why I join in the Parish-Churches, some will say, that these
Reasons accuse them that do not, of the guilt of Schism and sinful suffering.
But he that will perform no duty which none will be offended at, shall scarce
do any in the World. My Reasons then are these:

I. I do it much for my own Edification: And who can prove my Edification
unlawful? There is so sound judicious preaching in my Parish Church where I now
go, that I take it to be my considerable loss when sickness keeps me away.
And who can bind me to my loss? If a stranger give now and then a peevish
ignorant flirt at such as differ from him (as those called Arminians, and some
others use to do), I am not so thin-skin'd as thereby to smart; nor so foolish
as to raise a stir by talking against it, which by taking no notice, will go
out like a Squib, which the City-Engines need not be fetched to quench. Ignorant
Preachers must have some forbearance in their Self-conceitedness and petulent
Temerity, of what Sect or Faction soever they be, Conformists or Nonconformists.

II. I do it much to go as far in National Concord in Religion, as possibly I
can, and for the avoiding all that makes against it. The foresaid Book, [ The
whole Duty of Nations] will convince any impartial capable Reader, of what
great Duty and Advantage National Countenance and Concord is to the interest of
Religion. And though it bring in multitudes of Hypocrites, God makes some use
for the Church of such: I would ask the Dissenters but two Questions; 1. Would
you not wish the prosperity of the Church your Selves; and that all Power and
Laws promoted Godliness and true Reformation? No doubt you wish it: And would
not that bring in multitudes of Hypocrites? They are like Vermin and Flies, who
swarm most in the warmest Seasons.

2. If all the Hypocrites in the World should renounce Christianity, and leave
none to profess it but the sincere, would not those few be left as a wonder,
and a prey? O what a blow would it be to Religion in the World! Will you root
out not only the Tares, but the Straw and Chaff, on pretense to save the Corn?

III. I do it to keep up Brotherly Love amongst us, which certainly censorious
accusations of one another does destroy: When you fly from them, you seem to
accuse them as men incapable of your Christian Communion; and this seems
hatred or contempt. And as sure as Fire causes Fire, and Water quenches it;
Love causes Love, and Hatred destroys it, and causes hatred. And Christian
Love is no small Duty.

IV. I do it very much to avoid the scandal of seeming to judge Parish
Communion an unlawful thing, and seeming to separate from them on that account.
That they err who judge it so unlawful, I am satisfied: And that scandal is a
great Sin, the second Commandment, and Christ's dreadful threatening of the
scandalous, and Paul's abhorrence of it, satisfies me. The second Commandment
forbids Corporal Scandalous seeming to be Idolaters (what ever the Heart be:)
And I must not seem to unchurch ot sinfully censure, what ever be in my
Thoughts. I know it is no such Scandal, that I go not here to the Greek Church,
to the French Church, or the Dutch Church. For no man has any reason to
interpret it to signify, that I separate from their Communion as unlawful: But
there is great reason to interpret my total avoiding the Parish Churches, to
signify that I judge it unlawful to Communicate with them, as is evident in
these Particulars.

1. There are diverse Nonconforming Separatists, who have lately written to
prove it unlawful.

2. Multitudes suffer much upon the public accusations because they will not
Communicate with them; who tell the people, that they take it to be Sin.

3. I, and Others, are censured by such, as Sinners for doing it.

4. Parochial Churches, are the settled National order.

5. The Laws command our joining with them.

6. The Magistrates accuse and prosecute the refusers.

7. The Parish Ministers are offended at our refusal, and accuse it as sinful
separation, and so interpret it.

All this set together, makes, it past all denial, that after all this, to
avoid all Parish Communion, is by our Actions to say, that we judge it
unlawful, whatever is in our Hearts: Had we all these calls to go sometimes to
the French and Dutch Church (supposing that we understood them) and would not
go, it were a scandalous signification, that we judge it sinful. And one may
Lie by Deeds as well as by Words.

V. I take it to be a great Sin to bear false Witness against my Neighbor, and
wrongfully accuse a single person: But much greater so to accuse a Church, and
much more nine thousand Churches: But to say by my action that their worship of
God is so sinful, that it is unlawful to join with them; is, as I think, so to
accuse them. I dare not say so of an Anabaptists Church.

VI. I much more dread to separate from almost all Christ's Church on Earth.
For if Christ have no Church, he is no Head, King, or Savior of it. And to
say, that he accepts not of their Worship, is to say, that he presents it
not to God, as their intercessor. The Article of our Believing the Holy
Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints, is a practical Article. If there
be no such Body, I can be no Member of it. And this seems a renouncing of my
part in the Prayers of almost all the Church, when I take them to be
intollerably sinful, and not accepted by God: Whereas I take it to be my great
Duty, to put up no one Prayer to God, but in mental Communion with all the
Church on Earth: that is, As a Member of that Society. And I would not take all
the Riches of the World for my part in the Love, Prayers and Communion of the
universal Church. If I cut off my self from the Body, I cut off my self from
the Head, and am a withered Branch: to be united and baptized into Christ, and
to the Church, are two effects of one action; and so would it be to separate.

And I take it for such a Crime against Christ to say, that almost all his
Church is not His, but Satan's; as it would be against the King to say, that
almost all his Kingdoms are none of his but his Enemies. I may say, that the
Irish, the Highlanders, or Orcades, are the most ignorant barbarous part of his
Dominions; but not that they are none. And a slander of almost all the
Christian World, is a very great one.

But to separate from our Parrish Churches upon a Cause that is Common to
almost all the Christian World, is Virtually and Interpretatively to separate
from almost all. And to separate because of the faultiness of the Liturgy, the
Ministry (in many) or the people, is to separate on a cause common to almost
all.

1. The recorded Liturgies of the several Sects of Christians in the World (in
the Biblioth. Patrum, and elsewhere) show it evidently, that they are all far
faultier than ours. All the Abassines, Coptics, Iacobites, Nestorians,
Melchites, Maronites, the Armenians, Georgians, Circassians, Meugrelians, the
Greeks, and Muscovites, have Liturgies far worse than ours: Let them that doubt
of it, go to the Greek-Church in Sohoe-Fields. The Nestorian Liturgy is one of
the soundest and best that I find recorded (which intimates that they are not
so bad as some make them.) The Papists Mass, I think we are agreed is far
worse. And the Lutheran Protestants Images, Ceremonies, Consubstantiation, show
that theirs is no better than ours.

2. And that their Ministers and People in all these Sects are worse than our
Parishes, alas we must confess with grief.

Qu. But would you Communicate with all these?

Ans. I separate from none of them further than they separate from Christ. I
mentally separate from the Sin that is in their Worship, and as far as I can in
my own: And I locally separate from the Papists, and all such as e^ther impose
on me any Sin as the Condition, or that so corrupt their worship as to destroy
it, and make it such as Christ accepts not. And I prefer not worse before
better in any. But further I separate not.

VII. I am afraid of tempting men to Infidelity and Apostasy from Christ. I
know his Flock is little. But if you persuade men, that there are none on Earth
whom he owneth as his Church, or accepts their Worship, or that may be joined
with, who are as faulty as our Parish-Churches; it will reduce them all to so
small a Compass, as being next to none; people will easily go one step further,
and deny all. To say, that the King was only King of Windsor, or Brentford,
would be but a little from saying, that he is no King. Men will hardly believe,
that really the Son of God did all the Wonders mentioned in the Gospel, to
gather an accepted Church no bigger than the few that are better than all that
Worship him according to our Liturgy. I doubt this is laying a stumbling block.

VIII. I take my self bound to disown that principle of many, who think their
presence makes them guilty of all that is faulty in the public Worship and
Ministration: For this dissolveth all Worshipping Churches on Earth without
exception. We are sure there is none that offer God a blameless Service. We
must then join with none at all: Specially with those who Worship without a
Liturgick Form: For we never know beforehand, but that they may say somewhat
that is amiss. But in general we foreknow, that imperfect men will do all
things imperfectly and faultily. And by this we must give over Praying or
Worshipping in private also, being all sure to do it with sinful imperfections.
But to omit it will be greater Sin.

IX. I am afraid of deceiving the Servants of Christ, and tempting them into
Error, and into disaffection toward their Brethren, by making them believe,
that it is unlawful to Hear, or Communicate in the Parish-Churches. If we
constantly refuse such Communion when we are called to it so importunately, the
people can think no less, than that we judge it to be a Sin. And so we shall be
the Authors of their Error; I find already that it is so: Though many Ministers
who go not to the Parish-Churches tell them, [ We take it not for a thing
unlawful, but are kept away our selves by our constant preaching, as the
Conformists are kept from hearing one another:] Yet this is not understood by
many, but by their constant avoiding it, they judge them to think otherwise:
And it is my Office to save them from Error and Deceit, and not to deceive them.

X. I find it necessary by practice, as well as by words, to confute those who
would make the World believe, that the Non-Conformists affright men from the
Parish-Churches, by making them believe that to be there is sinful; lest they
should loose them from their dependence on themselves: Far be it from us to
have any such design as to keep up any interest of our own, against the
interest of the Church, and of Men's Souls, and by Selfishness and Deceit to
draw the people into Error and Uncharitableness: It Is Christ and not our Selves
that we Preach.

XI. I am not willing to be guilty of the peoples suffering as Recusants. I
would encourage them to patient suffering for their Duty; but not draw them
into a sinful Omission of Duty to their penal suffering. I said before, that a
Man may be accepted of God for a Well-meant Action, when the Matter of it is
culpable by mistake. But I that dare not Cheat or Rob men of their Money, or
entice them unjustly into suretiship; dare not use the name of God and Religion
knowingly, to entice many hundred honest Christians to suffer for the Omission
of a Duty to God and Man.

XII. I am resolved, that I will not wilfully be guilty of hardening any in
Persecution, or in sinful afflicting conscionable Christians on pretense of
Laws, or Concord. And I am sure, that when they see that sufferers are
deceived, and suffer for omitting a public Duty; it is the likest way in the
World, to quiet their Consciences, who afflict them, when they can say, We
punish them for their faults; they that understand not the difference of
faults, are like to justify themselves as doing well. Yea, if any shall
persecute Godly Men for doing their Duty, or refusing to Sin; if they find them
guilty but of one Fault or Error, it will make them think, that the rest is
like it; and that shall serve to justify their persecuting Truth and Duty. And
if it be so terrible to cause the stumbling of one little one, shall we cause
the stumbling of any into so damning a Sin as Persecution?

Obj. You are like to encourage men to persecution, when by your practice you
intimate, that it is their duty to come to the Parish Church, and so that they
suffer for their sin.

Ans. 1. I have showed, that the same thing may be one man's duty which is not
another: It is a French-man's duty here to go to the French-Church, but it is
not mine.

2. What will you make of the Magistrates then? Do you think, that they take
any Subject to be without Sin? Or, that they are so inhumane and worse than
Heathens, as to think, that all that have any Sin, should be silenced, or
forbidden to Worship God, or punished if they forbear not? It Is a Sin to sleep
at Church, or to give nothing, or too little there at Collections for the Poor;
and an hundred such. And are they so severe as to send Men to Gaol, or fine
them for it? They make profane Swearers pay but twelve pence an Oath (if any
thing) and few suffer for wishing God to Damn them, or for being drunk, even at
the time of Worship: And do you think, they will be so palpably partial, as to
ruin honest Christians for praying without book?

3. And do you consider, what your Objection implies? Must I forbear that
which my Conscience calls my Duty, if another suffer for accounting it a Sin?
What if some take baptizing Infants, or sanctifying the Lords day rather than
the seventh, etc. for a Sin, must I forbear these, lest I occasion their
suffering?

4. I have tried these twenty years, and though I went to the Parish Church,
none ever suffered the more by it: Yea, I have suffered more than most here,
that were of the other mind. This therefore is but a Fiction.

5. Did Mr. Tombs forbear Writing for Parish-Communion, lest his party the
Anabaptists suffer? Or did Mr. Philip Nigh forbear writing for Hearing the
Parish Ministers, lest the refusers suffer? Or did they not both write for the
Oath of Supremacy, though many Scots suffered for refusing it? Yea, and
therefore wrote all this that their followers might not suffer by mistake?

XIII. I know that the main Cause of Church-Divisions, is seeking a Union on
false and sinful terms: And I know that the opinion, That Parish-Communion is
unlawful, is an Error; and therefore unfit to be the Condition of our Union:
And I see many would make it such a Condition. And false terms of Concord, are
the great and certain means of Discord; for the wisest Christians will refuse
them: And some Impose them by Doctrine and Censures, as others do by Laws and
Sword. And I will not countenance dividing terms.

Obj. That is the chief fault of your Doctrine and Practice, That it will cause
Divisions among us; when some will do as you do, and others cannot; and so our
Congr^gations are divided.

Ans. 1. Can I cause that which is caused already? is not so much Division
known still to be among us?

2. As I said, Do not some write against the Lawfulness of Parish-Communion?
And some against Infant Baptism, and the Lords Day? And do not they divide by
Writing against them? And did Mr. Tombs and Mr. Nigh forbear, as aforesaid, for
fear of Division? If we are already divided in Judgment and Practice, sure
giving each other an account of our reasons, is rather the way to heal us.

3. But I confess this Objection seems so sad and ugly to me, that it h^th no
small hand in urging me to what they object against. Alas, what are such come
to? They that separate because of the Liturgy, Ministry, or People, do
virtually separate, as I said, from almost all the church on Earth. For it is
on a cause common to almost all. Yea, not only all the Churches in the Eastern,
Southern and Northern parts, and all in the West, save themselves, have
Liturgies, or separate not from them. But even of the Non-conformists in
England, those that of old, or of late have pleaded their Cause have taken the
Liturgy for no sufficient cause of separation: Nay, even the old Separatists,
called Brownists, denied not the lawfulness of forms of Prayer, nor refused to
join with the Parish-Churches in our Liturgy sometimes; only they thought, that
when Crossing, or such Ceremonies were used, they were bound to disown them.
And shall men that separate from the Communion of almost all the Churches on
Earth as unlawful, pretend that their way is the way of Unity; and that the
contrary does divide? Is our shunning Division from the Christian World, a
dividing Practice? In Holland, Mr. Smith thought no man capable of Baptizing
him, and so Baptized himself; and some others have done so since, thinking none
fit for Communion, but the few that are their Flocks. Yet these that divided
from all the World, cried down Dividing from themselves. But were all dividers,
that were against them? This is the saddest of all Objections.

XIV. Yea, I am loath to do that which condemns groundlesly the Reformers, the
Martyrs, the Godly Conformists, the old Non-Conformists, the later, and the
Brownists themselves, as being all for unlawful Communion.

1. If it be simply unlawful to have Communion in the Liturgy and
Parish-Churches, then it was unlawful to have Communicated in their way of
Worship, with Luther, Zuinglius, Melanchton, Bucer, Pet. Martyr, and the like
Reformers: And also with the English Martyrs in Queen Mar^^s days, or in King
Edward 6. And also with such Holy and Excellent Conformists, as Grindall,
Pilkington, Downame, B^^ton, Sibbs, Preston, (...), and abundance more such.

2. And it is well known, that the old Non-Conformists wrote and practiced
against the Brownists in this case. The Books of Hildersham; Brightman,
Bradshaw, Ball, Paget, Gifford, etc. are yet visible. Mr. Hildersham in his
Lectures chides them that will not come to the beginning of the Common Prayer.
The old Non-Conformists begin the reasons of their Nonconformity in refusing
Subscription, in these Words, [We protest before Almighty God, that we
acknowledge the Churches of England, as they be established by public
Authority, to be (...) visible Churches of Christ* That we desire the
continuance of our Ministry to them above all Earthly things; as that without
which our Lives will he bitter and wearisome to us; That we dislike not a
set-form of Prayer to be used in the Churches: And finally, that whatsoever
follows here, is not set down of any evil Mind, or of purpose to deprave the
Books of Common Prayer, Ordination, or ^^milies; but only to show some reasons
why we cannot subscribe to all things in the same contained.

3. I before told you, Mr. Tombs the Anabaptist has written at large for the
Lawfulness of Parish Church Communion: And Mr. Nigh for hearing the
Parish-Ministers.

4. The late Non-conformists that treated with the Bishops in 1660, and 1667.
have left their Judgments fully on Record, many of them being yet alive.

5. The old Separating Brownists have these Words; [ Confession and
Protestation of Faith: Touching the true visible Political Churches which we
acknowledge are in England; we profess and declare, -- that each company of
true visible Christians associated together in one place, viz. a Parish, and
Professing to serve God according to his Will, in Faith, and Order, so far as
they know (such as there are many in England) the same is a true visible
political Church in some respects. And therefore we communicate also with them
on occasion -- while in such communicating we countenance no evil thing in
them, which in many places, and many times we need not do.] -- Lastly, it being
no evil, nor any appearance of evil in us, to join to the Parish Congregation
and Ministry in such respect, and so far forth only as aforesaid; we ought (as
we believe) sometimes on weighty occasion so to join; and we sin if we do not:
Luke 17.32. Heb. 10.25. 1 Cor. 10.32. -- We believe concerning Prayer, That
though every form of prayer prescribed by Men, be not absolutely and simply a
Sin, neither (as we judge) are Idols, nor an Invention of Man, nor a
trangression of the second Commandment; yet a prescribed Liturgy, or Book of
Common Prayer by Commandment, forced on a whole Church rightly constituted, to
be used still in the same Words, whenever they assemble (in comparison of other
praying) is not so profitable and -- we judge that it is best and most
agreeable to the last Apostolic practice, that even where many Pastors in one
Church are, yet that One have, during Life, a precedence and priority in order
and place (not in power) before the rest.]

I will not be more for separation than the Separatists themselves.

XV. If joining with the Parish Ministry be simply unlawful, most, or almost
all England comparatively, must cease all public Worship of God. The
Nonconformists were but about two thousand, 1662. Most of them, I think, by
this time are Dead, and not so many sprung up in their stead* Those that are
remaining, for the most part are either in a few places quieter than the rest,
or hindered from any numerous Assemblies. In 1636. I do not think there were
many more than we have Counties, and those few in Privileged Chapels. And
shall all the rest, even of the Religious people of the Land, give over
Worshipping God in public? I think not.

XVI. Those that blame me, do more than justify me: They scruple not
communicating with those who hear Common Prayer, and receive the Sacrament in
the Parish Churches, in order to be Aldermen, Sheriffs, Common Councilmen,
Jurors, etc. nor pass any public Censure on them. Yea, they communicate with
such as take the Corporation Declaration, and Oath. And the said Declaration is
a Profession, that [I do hold that there lies no Obligation on me, or any other
person, from the Oath commonly called the solemn League and Covenant.] Here the
Person justifies all the Persons wh^m he never knew, in three Kingdoms, from
being obliged by an Oath and Vow against Popery, Schism and Profaneness, and to
repent of Sin, and to defend the King. This which constituteth all our Cities
and Corporations in England, is a little more than that which constituteth our
authorized Ministry and Vestries, which is but that [ there is no Obligation to
endeavor any alteration of Government in the Church,] etc. even of
Lay-Chancellors governing by the Church Keys.) Therefore they that pretend that
they cannot join with the Ministry, because they think they enter by Perjury,
confute themselves, while they scruple not Communion with them that do more
than the Ministry or the Vestry do. And if any shall pretend, that it is
unlawful to join with them, because of the Common Prayer, and at the same time
freely join with them that take the Corporation Declaration; I do not blame
them for the latter, but I must say, that they strain so partially at a gnat,
as makes me set a great deal the less by the Objections of such men. If I were
never so sure that the Church and Corporations were all thus Perjured, I would
greatly lament it; but it being done in ignorance (tho by men that should know)
and by men that have not heard what is said against it; I would not separate
from such a guilty Kingdom, no more than the faithful did for some great common
Jewish corruptions. I will keep my own Soul as clear as I can: And I confess
that I was ever of the mind of those Judges in Scotland, that say, that if
Oaths may be taken in a Sense of our own, contrary to the usual Sense of the
words; unless the Lawmakers give another, the Government will have no security
by Oaths. But when I think of several Universals, ^such as [no Obligation] [not
endeavor any Alteration.] [Assent and Consent to all things contained in, and
prescribed by] [on any pretense whatsoever, as against any Commissioned,] etc.
And when I remember that to this day, I never heard a Conformist own his taking
these Universals, without Limitation, universally; but in a particular Sense,
and with more Limitations than the Earl of Argyle did; it does not so much glad
me, that I never took them, as it grieveth me for the English Clergy, who take
these with such Limitations, that it falls out so unhappily, that less should
be Death in Scotland, than they thought had been no Sin, but a Duty in England.
But if the slur change not their Judgments, I hope it will make them pardon us,
who were neither willing of the stretching Exposition or Punishment.

I dare not think that that Parliament were such men as would rather have
silenced the whole Ministry, and shut up all the Churches, than have spoken a
limited Sense in limited Words, or have expounded their Universals, if they
meant not universally, if the Body of the Clergy had but let them know that it
was needful: But their Obedience was such, as told the World that Alterations
and Explications were to them unnecessary.

XVII. I would not drive the Comformists from us, by departing too far from
them! By such reasons as you plead for separating from them, you will teach
them to justify separating from us: Tho our faults be not the same, we are all
faulty: And so we shall run away from each others, to the increase of our too
great distance. Yea, experience of the contrary course encourages me: In both
the places where my Ministry was first exercised, is an honest Conformist, and
a Nonconformist, (since the writing of this, one is dead, and the other
expelled,) who live in as great Love and Peace, as if there were little
difference between them; the Nonconformists hearing and loving the public
Minister. If you think not this better than Church-wars, I do: And I am sure
Religion there prospers much more, than it would do by mutual avoidance.

XVIII. And truly, I am so tender of the honor of the Nonconformists, that I
will do my part to keep them from reproach: And as I said before, too many are
apt to judge of all their cause, by any one weakness or mistake. It was the
reason why, in 1660. and 1661. when we attempted a Concord with the Bishops in
vain, we never said a word against a Form of Prayer, n^r the most of the
Liturgy, nor Holy Days, nor Kneeling at the Sacrament, (but only against
Excommunicating the faithful that scruple it) nor the Surplice, nor the Ring in
Marriage, nor laying the Hand o^ a Book in Swearing, and other such; because,
at least, much may be said for them; and if we laid our stress on doubtful
things, many would think the rest were no other. And if we should be so weak as
for the Liturgy, etc. to avoid all Communion with the Parish Churches as
unlawful, we might flatter one another, as all Sects do, but standers by would
hence judge of all the rest, and deride or pity us, as scruplous Fanatics, that
judge not by evidence, but by prejdice and self conceit.

XIX. When great sufferings come upon men, partiality and prejudice usually
yields so much to necessity, as makes them willing to take nothing for sin
which is not sin; and then they will yield; and their change will turn to their
reproach, as if it were merely in worldly temporizing: Therefore I will at
first do what is lawful.

XX. Tho I think the Covenant binds me to nothing but what God bound me to
before* yet to that I think it does, as a secondary bond, by my voluntary self
obligation. And it binds me against Profaneness and Schism, and all that (...)
against (...) Doctrine and Godliness. And I cannot see but it were some degree
of (...), yea, and furthering pr^phaness, if I took all the Parish-Communion
for unlawful, and would have all England that have no Nonconformists, nor can
have, to forsake the Parochial, and so all Church-worship.

XXI. I fear the guilt of Unthankfulness to God, who has given England yet a
sounder Doctrine, Worship and Churches, than most of the world.

XXII. I am not willing of that way which would injure, if not destroy the
National Christianity and Reformation; and further, if not bring in, Infidelity
or Popery. That Religion has the advantage for extension to Numbers, which
has the countenance of the King and Laws, and the possession of the Parish
maintenance and Temples. To how sad a state did all the Eastern Churches
dwindle, when they fell under the Turks? How does mere tolerated Religion
thrive in France, or any other Land where the Laws and Rulers are against it?
If we lose all the Parish-Churches, some other will have them. If Protestants
have them not, Papists will: And the Parochial Religion will be the National
and common Religion: The most will go thither, and attend those Ministers who
have the public Authority and Maintenance: Therefore it is most evident, that
they who would keep up the Protestant Religion, must do their best to keep it
up in the Parish-Churches: And they that would corrupt and undermine it there,
or drive or draw it thence into mere private tolerated Churches, would drive it
out of the Land as National and Extensive, and let in Popery to be the National
Religion: And I doubt not the Papists will be the most zealous potent helpers
of all them among us who cry down a Comprehension; that is, the removing of the
things which we account sinful, that we may live in concord (which it makes me
shrug to think that ever a religious Protestant should be against, who himself
counts that sin which we would have removed: As if they said, Reform none of
your public sins, unless you will reform as much as we judge sinful, l^st --)

And doubtless it pleases the Papists, that (as some Scots refused the Oath of
Supremacy as well as they, so) so many refuse the Parish-Churches, and suffer
as Recusants as well as they. I say as Mr. Hunt, There is no happiness for
England but by an excellent Clergy, and an high (a just) esteem of them: And
excellency will cause esteem.

XXIII. There be some honest moderate men of interest (if not of power) who
would endeavor our restoration and peace, which they know must be principally
by concord, if they could see that the terms were possible. But while some make
them think that nothing will serve us but the casting out of all the Liturgy
and Church Government, they turn their thoughts from it as an impossible thing:
But the perusal of the Treaty, 1669. and the Kings's Declaration, 1660. and our
Agreement by the Lord Keeper Bridgeman's means, might have better informed
them: And I will not contribute to their error.

XXIV. But I have reserved my greatest Motive to Parochial Communion to the
last I dare not condemn Jesus Christ and his Apostles, who communicated with
far more vitiated Societies: Christ preached daily in the Temple: He there
offered according to the Law, and sent Lepers cleansed to the Priests to offer,
tho the Priesthood was more corrupt and degenerated than ours. The High Priest
that should have been of Aaron's line, was any one that could buy it with money
or favor of the Heathen Romans (And some think there were two at once). The
Pharisees had corrupted sacred Doctrine and Worship, and the Sadduces were far
worse than the Mahometans; yet Christ did ordinarily join in the Synagogues:
and had he not joined in their Liturgy, as the rest, he would have been noted
for a Disturber, and the Rulers would not have called him to preach, as they
did others: See Luke 4.16. and 6.6. John 5.59. and 18.20. Matthew. 12.9. and
13.54. Mark 1.21* 31. and 6.2. We find Christ bidding men, Take heed of the
leven of the Pharisees, but yet to hear them (delivering the Law) in Moses
chair. They accused him for not separating more from Publicans and Sinners, but
not for separating from the Temple or Synagogues: He told his Disciples, that
men should cast them out of the Synagogues, but never bid them depart
themselves.

And I find Peter, Acts 10. scrupling Communion with the Gentiles, till God
rebuked him; and c. 11. the Jewish Christians offended at it, till convinced;
and Gal. 2. Paul reproving him to his face for withdrawing from the Gentiles,
lest he should offend the Jews.

And Paul would not himself have conformed so far as to circumcise T^mothy, and
to shave his head for his Vow, and purify himself in the Temple, had it been
unlawful. It was done by the same Votes ( James, and the rest at Jerusalem) who
made the Decrees, Acts 15. And if you say, Paul, and all these, did unlawfully,
you will shake our foundation. He professed to become a Jew to the Jews, and
all things to all men, to save some. This moves me above all.

10. But it is objected, 1. That it is in vain to come so near the Prelates,
For nothing will satisfy them, or procure us the least abatement of their
cruelty, unless you will do all that is imposed.

Ans. 1. It is not to satisfy such as you describe, that I do what I do: It is
to satisfy my own Conscience in obeying God.

2. If but any one of all the forementioned Reasons hold good, it is not in
vain, tho it satisfy not the implacable. Do you think I go to worship God only
to satisfy men? I daily receive that benefit to my self, which assures me
that it is not in vain.

Obj. 2. You that come so near them, please them no better, and you have
suffered with the first.

Ans. 1. Had I done it to escape suffering, I would have done that which I
suffered for not doing, and not done that which I suffered for. But all that I
have ever suffered from men, is but a Flea-biting to that which I suffer from
the Diseases of my own Soul and Body: and yet I can love and forgive my self.

2. If I suffer for the acts of Piety, Love and Peace, it is for righteousness:
And then Christ has commanded me exceedingly to rejoice, Mat. 5.10, 11. But if
I suffer for sinful censoriousness and division, what will be my comfort?

3. I doubt not but I much more displease the Papists by my course of
Communion, than they do, who by unjustfiable Opinions, do make their cause
indefensible, and expose themselves to their triumph.

Obj. 3. You grieve many good people of the contrary mind.

Ans. No doubt of it: So I have done most good people whose mistakes I ever
sought to cure (about Antinomianism, Baptism, and the rest). But I please those
good people who think as I do.

2. Compare these Two sorts together: How vast a number do the contrary minded
censure? They think all our late Parliaments to sin in their Communion, even
these last which they most praise: Mr. Hunt challenges their Accusers to name
any Number of them all that conform not: I have not heard of Three (if of any
One) that is liable to the charge of Recusancy, and has not communicated in
the Parish-Churches.

They accuse also all the Common Council, since changed; and in a word, almost
all the Christian World: And yet we can easily forgive them, and forbear them:
And if they cannot bear with us, if we obey our Consciences, and give them the
Reason of it; yea, if we had told them why we judge them to be mistaken, and to
sin, they will show so much partiality and self-esteem, and so much impatient
tenderness of themselves, as will too much harden their Accusers.

Obj. 4. Many Learned good men do differ from you.

Ans. I think a thousand to one through the World differ from them.

Obj. 5. It will save none from suffering, there being so many other Laws
against them.

Ans. It is my duty to save men from mistakes and sinful censure and suffering
for mistakes: and so it may save me from the guilt of Omission.

Obj. 6. It is but Man's Law which you suppose makes it a duty.

Ans. 1. I make not light of the Laws of men about lawful things: But your
supposition is not true: Were there no Law for it but God's, it is my duty.

Obj. 7. Some body will answer you, and so it will cause strife.

Ans. Do, or must all men forbear giving a Reason of their Judgment and
Practice to those that think them sinful? yea, or to confute the mistakes of
others, for fear of being censured? Will you censure us, and must not hear our
Reasons? Are you so much worse than Lawyers, that can plead without breach of
Charity? May not friendly debates beat out the truth to our mutual edification?
No truths are so clear to us, before they are controverted, usually, as after.
Reproach not the Nonconformists, as if they could not bear contradiction.

Obj. 8. Your Cure of Church-Divisions did increase Divisions.

Ans. The Disease then is very far gone, if the Remedy increase it: But I have
cause to believe that it healed many. But I confess, as the Books by which I
drew off many Anabaptists, did increase Division from their Party, by ceasing
the Divisions from the Church; so it may be here.

Obj. 9. But if men believe it lawful to go to the Parish-Churches, they will
come to your Assemblies no more.

Ans. 1. Experience confuteth this: I think most who hear me, do think it
lawful, and often go thither. 2. I have often told them publicly, That I desire
none of them to hear me, who do not need my help: If they have room, and
sufficient helps in the Parish-Churches, I had rather they would not take up,
with us, the room which others should have who truly need our help. If nothing
bring them to me, but an Opinion, that it is sin to join with the Common Prayer,
I will do my best to drive them from me. But if any cannot have room elsewhere,
or cannot overcome the foresaid mistake (of the sin of hearing the
Parish-Mi^ister), I will give them the best help I can: And if any live where
public hearing is but lawful, and they truly need more suitable help, the bare
lawfulness of hearing elsewhere, will never keep away those persons who feel
their need of better, and the benefit, no more than it will make them forsake
better Clothing, good Physic, or Estate, because a worse is sometime lawful.

Obj. 10. But why do not you conform, if you can communicate with them?

Ans. 1. Why cannot I be carnal, contentious, drink too much at the Sacrament,
if I could have communicated with the Church of Corinth that had such? Why did
not Christ commit the Synagogue-sins, if he could communicate in the
Synagogues? The persons who put this question, disgrace themselves by judging
of things which they understand not. If they know not what more is in Ministers
Conformity, than in joining as private persons in the Parish-Worship, let them
read my first Plea for Peace, and they may know.

I will joyfully conform, I. If they will impose on us no sinful Oaths,
Covenants, Promises, Subscriptions, Declarations or Practices.

II. I would rejoice in the Reformation, if while some essentiate a Church by a
Bishop, they would restore the Parishes to be Churches, which they make but
Parts of the lowest Churches, as Chapels are, and make the Parish-Ministers
Pastors again, whom they have degraded to be but Half-Pastors, or Curates to
the lowest Pastors.

III. I would hope, that we might yet escape backsliding into Popery, if that
part of the Clergy never govern the Ship, who are not content with a National
Government, but make it our necessary duty, as against Schism, that all come
under a Foreign Jurisdiction: And if the true Protestant Clergy will ioyn in
the renunciation of that Jurisdiction (but not of Communion with Foreign
Churches).

11. IV. Why I publish my Reasons at this time.
Ans. 1. Because I think I have an urgent cause to endeavor to save some from
the guilt of Persecution: And if I note the mistakes of One side only, I shall
be justly charged with partiality.

2. Because men's censure of my practice, as sinful, does continue: And I owe
them an account of the Reasons of it.

3. Dr. Stillingfleet, and such others, would make the World believe, that we
defend that Separation which by word and practice we have long opposed: And we
owe fuller satisfaction to them, and to such as they misinform.

4. I am much obliged to rectify men's mistake of the Reason, why many
Nonconforming Ministers here come not to the Parish Churches: Many were agreed
to come, when the Oxford Act of Confinement coming out, prevented it: For to
have appeared in the Churches, would have exposed them to Six months
imprisonment for being in the City. And since then, the same Reason hinders
many, which keeps Conformists from communicating with each other, even their
own labors at home. But many do go to the Churches in public, and I
conjecture others hereafter will get their Places sometime supplied by others,
that they may go: For most of my acquaintance hold it lawful, as far as I can
judge.

5. I would stop them that censure, as sinners, unjustly, the late Parliaments,
the Common Council, Jurors, and all the good Christians thr^ugh all the Kingdom
who differ from them, and that have no Ministers but Conformists.

6. I remember why Mr. Io. Ball wrote against Separation just when Reformation
was intended: Many thought it unseasonable, but it proved otherwise by the sad
effects which he would have prevented.

7. I cannot forget what this mistake has wrought in England, from 1641. to
1660. which I will not further recite, but only say, That when there was
neither Bishops, nor their Courts, nor Liturgy, nor Ceremonies imposed on them,
separate Assemblies were as numerous, and as much and more pleaded for, than
now, and managed with too much strife; and reconciling and Unity was much
resisted by that side.

8. I am bound to have real compassion on the multitudes who suffer as for
Recusancy, and not by silence wrong their Consciences and their Purses. If I
shut up the bowels of my compassion, where is the love of God?

9. I am bound to do my best to keep out Popery; which must be by keeping up as
much of Religion as is possible in the Parish-Churches (that it be not first
thrust into corners, and then out of the Land), and by concord with the
Parish-Ministers who are honest: And many such, through God's mercy, there are;
tho those that in 1661. brought us into this state, do manifest no repentance.

10. Lastly, I find that our mutual Censures and Separations greatly hinder the
success of the whole Ministry against sin, while they seek to bring each other
into disesteem, and teach the people to disesteem them all: and some will not
hear one sort, and some the other.

The rest of my Reasons, you may gather from the fore recited Reasons of my
Practice. 12. I confess, that ad homin^m, the Canons Excommunicating us, may
stop the mouths of the severe Canonists, if they accuse us: Would they not have
us take their Canons to signify their will, concerning the extent of their
Church Communion? Or, would they have Excommunicate persons come to Church? All
that do but own Nonconformity by a word, are ipso facto Excommunicate, till
they publicly repent of it as a wicked Error. And their Writers Damn those as
Schismatics, that obey them not: And so consequentially all that they call
Indifferent, and Impose, are made necessary by some men to Salvation. I have
this at my heart: But yet it is not all the Parish-Ministers that like these
Excommunicating Canons. And they are not bound to reject me till the Fact be
proved; and I am not bound to do Execution on my self; but I am bound to all
Offices for Love and Concord.

I doubt not but some of the Excommunicating Clergy, will set these two
Writings against each other, and say, as their Tutor and Advocate does, that R.
is against B. and that I am hardly reconcilable with my self; but if goggle
Eyes judge each line to be a yard distant from another, I cannot cure them, but
I can bear their Disease and the effects

And if any will make use of my detection of the mistakes of conscionable
peaceable Christians in some matters of Communion, to have a pretense to revile
and persecute them, I enter my Protestation before God against them; and warn
them to remember, that while they condemn others for Infirmities of so small a
degree as few men are free from, they raise up matter of terror to their own
Consciences when awakened, who have so much more heinous Sin to answer for
before a holy dreadful God: even those little (...) of whose scandalizers and
neglecters Christ spoke so terribly, were none of them without some Sin; Though
Paul and Barnabas differed to a parting, neither of them was silenced for it,
nor called a Schismatic.

If all shall be ipso facto Excommunicated, who have far greater Sin than
humbly and peaceably saying, There is something sinful in some part of the
Liturgy, Ceremonies, Articles, Subscription, or in some that bear office in the
Church as to Government; I am past all doubt that there will no one living,
either Prelate, or Priest, Lord, or Peasant, be left to be a Member of their
Church; and that by parity of reason, they have Excommunicated every person in
the land; however the predominancy of their Wills and Interests above the Will
of Christ, and the interest of the Church and Souls, may still bewitch them
into a confidence, that those are the worst Men who most cross their carnal
will and interest; and that the most ungodly are fitter for their Church
Communion than they.

Psalm. 14.4. Have all the workers of Iniquity no Knowledge, who eat up my
people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord?

Acts 28.30, 31. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house (at
Rome) and received all that came in unto him, Preaching the Kingdom of God, and
teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence,
no man forbidding him.

1 These. 2 15, 16. Who hoth killed the Lord Jesus Christ, their own prophets,
and have persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men;
forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up
their sins always: For the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

James 5.7. Be patient, Brethren, unto the coming of the Lord.

And if both sides call me worse than I am, for these displeasing Admonitions,
I say, as St. Paul, Gal. 1.10. If I yet pleased men, I should not be the
Servant of Christ.

1 Cor. 4.3, 4. With me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment. -- He that judges me is the Lord.

Senec. Nemo pluris virtutem aestimat, quam qui boni viri f^mam perdidit, ne
virtutem perderet.

Jan. 10. 1680.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE REASONS WHY THE TWELVE ARGUMENTS, Said to be Dr. JOHN
OWEN's, Change not my Judgment about Communion with Parish-Churches. By RICHARD
BAXTER.

1 These. 5.21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man who asks you a
Reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.

Gal. 2.11.12, 13, 14. When Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed. For -- he withdrew and separated himself,
fearing them which were of the circumcision. And the other Jews dissembled
likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their
dissimulations. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly, etc.

Acts 11.2, 3. They that were of the circumcision contended with Peter, saying,
Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and did eat with them.

2 Timothy 2.20. In a great house there are not only Vessels of gold and of
silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honor, and some to
dishonor.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1684.

THE PREFACE.
REader, when the last sheet of the foregoing Paper was Printed, I received
these Twelve Arguments, famed to be Dr. John Owen's: Whether Fame truly or
falsely father them, I know not: It is the Cause that I am concerned in. After
Three and Twenty years practice since the Bishops return, I was by Accusations,
called to give the Reasons of my Practice, which yet I had often done in part
before. They said, That my communicating in the Parish-Churches, even when my
self and others were maliciously persecuted by a sort of proud and worldly
Clergymen, did more harm than ever I did good: Tho I am bound with meekness to
^ender them a Reason of my practice; I have found by experience, that neither
side can bear the account which they call for. Some wise and good men will
blame me for making our differences to be so much known, especially for
remembering old miscarriages: I obey my Conscience: All these things are
commonly known already; and we hear sharply of them from God and Man, because
Men hear not our Repentance, but our Justification: Had we conf^st, God is
faithful to forgive. Impenitence threatens our yet greater suffering. When we
give glory to God, and take shame to our selves, our hopes will revive. Nothing
brings so much scandal, and armeth Enemies against us, as owning sin, or
hiding it. I durst no longer see Thousands of good Christians misguided into
mistakes, and like to be ruined for them, and hereby hardening their
Persecutors, rejoicing the Papists, who join with them in Separation, reducing
the Protestant Religion into corners, and giving it up as public to -- we may
know whom; censuring one another, and dividing on these mistakes, and fathering
all this on God: I say, I durst not stand by in silence to see all this, no
more than to see men drowning, or the City on fire, without endeavoring to
save men. It is an exceeding great quiet to my Conscience, under all the
Confusions and Divisions that have befall^n us, that in 1660, and 1661. I
plainly and earnestly foretold the King and Bishops of them, and did my best to
have prevented them.

And the Author that I deal with, necessitateth me to recite the late fruits of
Separation, in pulling down all Governments, casting out all the Ministers in
Wales, and were near casting down those of England, with Tithes and
Universities, persecuting and killing godly men, and fathering all on God, and
now flying from the Bishops when they had opened them the door to return. He
lays his main Cause on the ill fruits of Liturgies (which indeed are rather
the fruits of Pride and Malignity), and constrains me to show the fruits of
Separation. I dare not bury that in silence which God so dreadfully disowned by
their own diss^lution, without any blood; and that when multitudes are running
into the old error, by mistaking the Judgment of the Nonconforming Ministers,
thinking that they took that for unlawful which they did not, and condemning
all the excellent old Nonconformists and Conformists, and almost all the
Churches on Earth.

Let wiser men deal wiselier: I use the best wisdom that I have.

It Is true, that abundance of good people fear and distaste Communion in the
Liturgy: What wonder, when such Reasonings as these Twelve Arguments (which how
gross soever, poor people have not the skill to answer) persuade them it is
false Worship, and heinous sin; and say others, Idolatry. They are conquered as
the Mexicans were by the Spaniards, by the frightful roaring of their Cannons;
the Militia used, Acts 15.1, 2. [Ye cannot be saved]; and as the Pope conquered
Kings and Kingdoms, by threatening to keep them out of Heaven: Even as since men
tell me, that they medicate their Wines with Arsenick and Mercury, I am afraid
to drink them, which before I feared not; so are honest souls affrightned from
Liturgies and Communion. How much in them I dissent from my self, I have openly
intimated to the World: But he that will join in no good that is mixed by men
with faultiness and evil, must separate from all the World, and all from him:
But how will he separate from himself? England in her Articles and Ordination,
professes to cleave to Scripture-sufficiency, as being the Protestant
Religion. I go to join in this professed Religion: If the Speaker of any side add
any unwarrantable passages by book, or without book, let him answer for them; I
own them not: Did my presence own all that I hear, I would join with no man
living. The Lord fit us for a wiser and more loving World.

The Twelve Arguments said to be Dr. Owens, impartially considered.
D. O. Posit. It is not Lawful for us to go to, and join in Public Worship by
the Common Prayer; because that Worship it self, according to the Rule of the
Gospel, is not Lawful. 1. Ans. I Shall use the same Method that he has used,
and first give you my Positions, and then the supposed Matter of Fact; and then
consider his Arguments.

Posit. It is not only Lawful, but a Duty for those that cannot have better
public Church-worship without more hurt than benefit, and are near a competent
Parish Minister, to go to, and join in Public Worship, performed according to
the Liturgy, and in Sacramental Communion: And for those that can have better,
to join sometime with such Parish Churches, when their forbearance scandalously
seems to signify, that they take such Communion for unlawful; and so would
tempt others to the same Accusation, and uncharitable Separation.

The History of the Matter of Fact must be premised for the right deciding of
the Case; which is as follows.

1. God has commanded us to Preach, Pray, Praise him, and Administer his
Sacraments and Discipline; and has told us what Doctrine we must preach, what
things we must pray and give thanks for, and what Sacraments and Discipline we
must Administer: But he has not told us, in what Words we must do these, nor
in what Posture, nor in what particular Method, nor whether we must use oftest
the same words, or various, nor whether they shall be before prepared, or
spoken immediately without preparation of words, nor whether written or
remembered; nor whether prepared and composed by our selves, or by others, with
such like.

2. God prescribed diverse Forms of Prayer, Confession and Praise, to the Jews
in Moses Law; and a Prophetical Song, which they were all to learn, Deuteronomy. 32.

3. The Psalms were a chief part of the Jews Liturgy, in which there are many
Forms of Prayer and Praise; some made by David, some by Asaph, some by others,
and some in or after the Captivity, no one knows by whom. And those Psalms
were not in Meter, and sung in Tunes like ours now, but lo^dly said over.

4. John taught his Disciples to pray, not only as to the Matter, but as to the
Words; and so did Christ his Disciples at their Request, who had not then the
after-pouring out of the Spirit (nay, knew not that Christ must die for Sin
rise and reign in Heaven, etc.) and he said, When ye pay, say, Our Father, etc.
tho not tying them only to these words, yet giving them a Form of Words to be
used as they had occasion, as well as a perfect Directory for Method.

5. Christ himself joined with the Jews in Synagogues and Temple, when they
used Forms, and so did the Apostles; and never blamed them for the use of such
Forms.

6. Christ prescribed a Form of Words in Baptism, and in the Administration of
the Lords Supper, and used a Hymn in Form.

7. There are diverse Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving in the New Testament, in
Luke 1. and 2. and the Acts, and Paul's Epistles, and the Revelations, which its
Lawful and Laudable to use.

8. We are commanded to use Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, which are
Forms of Prayer and Praise (and was not then in Rhyme.) And it was not every
one in the Church that composed these Extemp^re, but some made them for the
rest to use: And if none Impose them (by Office, Authority or Persuasion) the
Churches will never use the same. Christians in the primitive ages of the
Church, were known to the Heathen by their constant use of such Hymns sung to
Christ, and of Christ.

9. The Churches from Christ's time to this, had a Creed or Form of sound Words,
or necessary Articles of Faith, which they used in Catechizing and in Baptism,
which were a great means to keep out Heresy; and Church-Tyranny and Heresy
were the Introducers of all their Alterations.

10. The Lay-Christians of the first Aages were so full of Zeal, that they
would have taken it ill to have been forb^dden to speak their Answering and
Consenting parts in the Church (as the Jews before did) and as now we would
take it ill for the Minister to Sing alone, and forbid the People: And tho the
scantness of History in the first two Ages tell us not what words were then
used as a Liturgy (and no doubt but praying by Habit was used chiefly) yet some
few Sentences that are recorded, tell us that they used some Forms.

11. Constantine himself made Prayers for his Soldiers, and every Bishop then
used what Prayers he thought best in his own Church, and composed himself the
Forms which he used constantly, till Heresy and weakness of Ministers caused a
Council to decree, That every one should first show his Form of Prayer to the
Synods, to be examined and approved before he used it.

12. I do not read or hear of many Churches on earth at this d^y, that used not
a Liturgy, except N^w England, and some Non conf^rmists here: Nor did I ever
read that any one Church (...) for a (...) Years after Christ's time, did ever
scruple it or speak (...) remembrance) so that it was for many Ages the (...)
Church on earth. At this day the Greeks, Arm^^ians, (...), Circassians,
M^ngreli^ns, Indian and Persian (...)s, the (...), Egyptians, all the Countries
that have (...), M^ronites, beside the Papists, have a Liturgy very (...) more
(...): Even those ascribed to James, Mark, (...). The (...) have one, (or
diverse in diverse Countries.) And th^se called (...) Re^^^med have one, tho a
shorter and more simple (...) France, (...), H^lland, the Palatinate, Helvetia,
etc.

13. The Nonconformists in England were generally for the Lawfulness of a Form
or Liturgy and for Communion of the Parish Churches therein, in the days of
King Edward the Sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the First:
And wrote more against Separation by far than the Bishops did, as is yet
visible in their Books; specially Cartwright, Hildersham, Bradshaw, Paget,
Gifford, Brigh^man, Bayne, Rathband, John Ball, etc.

14. Those then counted the Fathers of Independency, were of the same mind, for
Parish Communion and against Separation, Mr. Jacob, Bradshaw, Ames, (see his
First and Second Manuduction.)

15. Yea, those called Brownists or Separatists were for Communion in the
Liturgy in the usual parts, and for the truth of those Parish Churches that
had good Ministers: I have cited their own words before, tho all of them were
not of the same mind.

16. The Martyrs in Queen Marys days had a chief hand in composing our
Liturgy, and rejoiced in it, and worshipped God according to it. And none that
I read of separated for this from the rest as false Worshippers

17. When before 1639. there were but about one or two Nonconformable Ministers
for each County; if it had been unlawful to Communicate in the public Churches
with the Liturgy, all England must have lived like Atheists without any Church
Worship, for want of Ministers, except about thirty or forty. Yea, those few
kept up no usual Church Worship, except those of them that by connivence had
small Chapels or peculiars. And of them most used much of the Liturgy.

18. All the Congregations of the Nonconformists in England, that I have heard
(save one now broken) not counting such as Quakers, etc.) have used, and do
use, stinted, imposed forms of Worship to this day, and therefore judge it not
unlawful, merely as forms, or as imposed. 1. Parents teach their Children a
form of words in Catechisms, in Prayers, in giving Thanks for their Meat; and
impose these on them. 2 Ministers impose on the Assemblies, their own method
and words in Prayer, which are a form to the people; yea, and a form which they
know not, till they hear it, and have no time to examine it, while it flows
from the Speaker. And their Sermons are imposed forms of Doctrine; (sometimes
written also, and read). 3. Few men that retain any Sobriety in Religion, are
against the Creed, to be used as a form of Confession of Faith. 4. The
Independents drew up at the Savor, about 1658 or 1659. a form of Confession of
their Faith and Discipline. 5. They attempted (Dr. Owen, Mr. Nigh, Dr. Goodwin,
Mr. Sid. Sampson, Dr. Cheynell, and others), by appontment of a Committee of
Parliament, to have drawn up a Catalogue of Fundamentals, to have been imposed
for consent on all that should be tolerated in the Land in Church-Worship: they
are yet to be seen in Print. (But Archbishop Usher being chosen for one, and
refusing, and I being by his consent substituted in his room, broke that
attempt; finding that their Fundamentals were lamentably composed, and that
Christianity was not an unknown thing, and that Baptism, the Creed, Lords
Prayer, and Decalogue, were a far better Catalogue of Fundamentals than
theirs). 6. We all constantly use an English form of Translation of the
Scripture, where all the English words, the division of Chapters and Verses,
are man's invention, imposed on all. 7. We all use constantly forms of
Confession, Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Praise in the singing of Psalms; where,
when David's and the Jews Psalms are used, the Translation, (or rather
Paraphrase) the rhyme or meters, and the tune, are humane and imposed: And the
Separatists themselves make no question; but other Psalms, (such as that of
Ambrose, etc.) more suited to the State of the Gospel Church, may be fitly used,
as Paul requires, which must be composed by man, and imposed on the Churches,
or never unanimously used. Our common use of singing Psalms and Hymns, is the
use of stinted imposed forms. 8. He that does not celebrate Baptism, and the
Lords Supper often in words of the same signification, shall corrupt those
Sacraments by his affectation of variety of words; the matter being the same.
9. No man knows beforehand, whether a Minister has studied and sore compsed
his Prayer or Sermon, and yet all join with him. 10. Many affect to compose all
their Prayer in Scrpture Sentences, which do but make up one form of many.

19. When the King came in, the Ministers of London were invited to attempt a
Concord with the Bishops, and they offered to join in the use of the Litugy, if
it were corrected: And they offered Additional Forms, or a Reformed Liturgy,
which they would have used.

I know it will be objected, That I plead in this but for my own works: But I
answer, 1. The Exceptions and Emendations of the old Liturgy offered, was none
of my work. 2. And the new one which I drew up by their appoinment, had their
common review and consent.

It will be said, That these were not all the then Nonconformists: I answer, It
was the main Body of the London Ministers; and it was as many as would meet
about it, when they were desired to come to Sion College, and after they
Printed a Thanksgiving to the King for his Declaration; so that then they were
not against all imposed Liturgies; so that the Imposition had no unmercifulness
in it.

20. The foreign Churches (in Holland, France, Germany, etc.) are so much used
to pray in the same form of words, that if they were put to do all ex tempore,
it would be lamentably done by most, even far worse than it is.

21. I have formerly told the world, That many of the most noted Nonconformists
in London, met and concluded for communicating in the Parish-Churches, about
1664. And two things done by the Conformists stopped them: One was a storm then
arising against those that could not do it, which they feared to seem to
countenance by their compliance: And Plague and F^re interrupting the purposes
of some. The Oxford Act of Confinement made it unpracticable; because, to be
seen in a Church would have cast them six Months in the Goal with Malefactors.

22. Being thus hindered and delayed, the King's Declaration after giving them
liberty to have Assemblies otherwise, they were then kept from the
Parish-Churches by their labors with their own ^locks, as the Parish-Ministers
be from hearing one another.

23. Some in the City, and more in the Countries, all this while went
constantly to the Parish Churches before this liberty, and as often as they could
after, lest they should by their practice, draw the people to th^nk that they
took it for unlawful.

24* Others that thought it lawful, judge it not necessary when they might do
that which they judged better: And finding many Hearers offended at it, were
loath to displease them, and bear their censures; till at last, by long disuse,
the people thought their judgment was against it: And when necessity drives
them to declare their judgments, and change their practice, their Hearers (and
their Adversaries) call them unconscionable Temporizers.

25. Tho Mr. Tombs wrote for Parish-Communion, few Anabaptists followed him;
and tho Mr. Nigh wrote for hearing the Parish-Ministers, few Ind^pendents
consented: But some of their Ministers took the advantage of the foresaid
forbearance of others, and so brought Separation to pass for a common duty with
many* And renewed sufferings made it easier to draw men from the Communion of
those that they so much suffered by; following the e^ample of St. Martin, and
saying, That persecutors obtruded without their con^ent were none of their
Pastors; and that it is no Schism not to communicate with the Church, which
causelessly has, ipso facto, excommunicated them in Can. 6, 7, 8, etc. This is
the true premised History.

D. O. Some things must be promised to the confirmation of this Position.

1. The whole (...) of Liturgical Worship, with all its inseparable
dependences, are intend^^* For as such it is established by Law, and not in any
part of it only; as (...) is required that we receive it, and attend unto it.
It is not in our pow^^, it is not left to our judgment or liberty to close
with, or make use of any p^rt of it, as we shall think fit.

There are in the Mass Book many Prayers directed to God only by Jesus Christ;
yet it is not lawful for us thereon to go to Mass, under a pretense only of
joining in such lawful Prayers.

As we must not affect their Drink Offerings of Blood, so we must not t^ke up
their names in our lips, Psalm. 16.4. Have no communion with them.

2. I Shall now examine the Doctor's Premises.

To the first I answer, 1. If he will include all that is in the Liturgy, the
Nonconformists confess, that there is somewhat in it which they dissent from,
as unju^tifiable: And so there is in all men's Worship of God.

2. He intimates, That it is not in our power to close with some, I. Error.
and not withal. This is his First Error.

Tho Man give us no such power, God does: As it is in my power (...) believe
all that one speaks truly and well, and not that which he speaks amiss. I
am not bound to own all that any Preacher or Priest shall say in the Church.
God put it in the Disciples power to beware of the Leven of the Pharisees, and
yet to hear them. Proving all things, is not approving all things.

2. Tho the Mass have many good Prayers, the corruption by twisted Idolatry and
Heresy, makes Communion there unlawful: Heathent and Turks have good Prayers.
Prove any such Heresy or Idolatry in the Church-Worship by the Liturgy, and we
will avoid it. But if I may join with your own good Prayers and Preaching,
notwithstanding your many Failings, and such Errors as are here pleaded for,
why not with others?

3. Psalm. 16.4. is too sadly abused, which speaks only of sacrificing to, and
worshipping false Gods.

D. O. 2. It is to be considered as armed with Laws: (1.) Such as declare and
enjoin it as the only true Worship of the Church. (2.) Such as prohibit,
condemn, and punish all other ways of the Worship of God in Church Assemblies:
By our communion and conjunction in it, we justify those Laws. 3. THat our
Communion justifies all the Laws that impose the Liturgy, yea, the penal
severeties, is too gross an Error to be written with any show of proof. What if
the Creed or Lord's Prayer were too rigorously imposed, II. Error.
or Presbytery or Indepency, must we forbear them, or justify the Law? I can
prove Episcopacy excluded too severely by the Covenant: But every one that is
against it, justifies not the imposition of that Covenant in that rigor. What
if rigorous Laws should make it imprisonment or death, not to use our
Translation of the Scriptures, our approved Catechisms, our Meter and Tunes of
the Psalms, not to put off the Hat at Prayer, not to meet at the appointed
Place and Hour, etc. Does every man justify the rigor of the imposition, who
obeys the Law? Then a rigorous Lawmakers may take away our Christian Liberty,
by commanding us to use such things too strictly: yea, he may turn Duty, by too
strict commanding it, into Sin. These are your unproved Premises.

D. O. 3. This conjunction in Communion by the Worship of the Liturgy, is the
Symbol, Pledge and Token of an Ecclesiastical Incorporation with the Church of
England in its present Constitution: It is so in the Law of the Land; It is so
in the Canons of the Church; It is so in the common Understanding of all men:
And by these Rules must our Profession and Practice be judged, and not by any
reserves of our own, which neither God nor good men will allow of. Wherefore,
4. TO the Third Premise, I answer, 1. The Church of England is an ambiguous
word: 1. As it signifies a part of the Universal Church, agreeing in Faith,
one God, one Christ, and all essential to the Church; so we desire the honor
of being parts of it. 2. And also as it is a Christian Kingdom under one King.
3. And as it is a Confederacy of many Churches to keep Concord in lawful
Circumstantials as well as Integrals. In all these senses it is a lawful
Association. 4. But if any Church go beyond these bounds, and on good pretenses
shall agree upon any error or evil, it is a mistake to hold, That all that
incorporate with them in the Three foresaid lawful respects, do therefore
confederate with them in their error. IV. Error.
This is your Fourth Error.

I will give you a general Instance, and a particular one: 1. You cannot name
me one combined company of Churches from the Apostles days till now, that had
no error. You take Episcopacy to be an error in the very constitution: Name one
Church from the 3 d or 4 th Century, for a thousand years, that was without it,
either Catholics or Heretics, that were indeed a Church: And must Christians
have forborne associating with any of them? Or might not own the good in their
Associations, without owning the evil?

2. The Independents gathered a Synod at the Savoy, and there among their
Doctrinals or Articles of Faith, laid down Two Points expressly contrary to
Scripture: 1. That it is not Faith, but Christ's Righteousness that we are
justified by, when as it is both; and the Scripture often says the contrary.
2. That Christ's Righteousness imputed, is our s^le Righteousness: Whereas the
Scripture does many hundred times name also our inherent and practical
Righteousness. I asked some yet living, why they consented to these, and did
not rather expound the Scripture than deny it? And they said, That it was Dr
O's* doing. Now does it follow, that every one that there con^ederated with
you, owned these errors?

The Churches of Helvetia are a very honorable part of the Reformed Churches:
They are commonly such as we call Erastian, for no Discipline but the
Magistrates: Are ail that confederate with them as Churches, guilty of this
error?

2. But I further distinguish between the many Parish-Churches, and the
Diocesan, and the Church of England, as constituted of such Diocesan Churches.
The Old Nonconformists commonly owned the Parish-Churches (and the Church of
England as made up of such), but not the Diocesan. This they openly professed.
It is therefore another of your Mistakes, that owning the Parish-Churches and
Worship, is an owning of the present Diocesan Constitution.

Also it is your Mistake to say, That Communion by the Liturgy is the Symbol
and Pledge of the foresaid Incorporation in the Church of England in its present
constitution: V. Error.
It is only a part of the Communion commanded, but no such Symbol: VI. Error.
For, 1. The Rulers openly declare, that they take multitudes to be none of
their Church, who join in the Liturgy: And it is subscribing, declaring, and
swearing Obedience, which is the Symbol: yea, they excommunicate many that come
to the Liturgy-Service.

2. And many come to it who openly disown the Diocesan present constitution: So
did, as I said, the Old Nonconformists, and many Foreigners, French, Dutch,
etc. that come over hither.

3. If one may join in Communion of Worship with a Presbyterian, Independent or
Anabaptist-Church, without owning the Errors of their constitution, then so one
may with a Parish Church: But, etc.

You mistake when you say, It is so by the Law of the Land: You mistake again,
when you say, it is so by the Canon: You mistake again, when you say, It is so
in the common understanding of all. I formerly instanced in one of the sharpest
Nonconformists, Old Mr. Humphrey Fen, of Coventry, who would say aloud, Amen,
to all the Common Prayer, save that for the Bishops; by which all there knew
his mind: Whether it were right or wrong, VII, VIII, IX. Error.
I now determine not. So here are Three more of your Mistakes.

4. You make all other reserves of our own, to be allowed neither by God or
good men. Here are two more mistakes. 1. God makes it our great duty to hold
Communion with most, X.XI. Error.
or almost all Churches on Earth with such reserves; that is, to own them in
all that is good, and disown all their evil, tho their Laws command the owning
of them; without this reserve I would not join with yours, or any Church on
Earth, that is, If my Communion were an owning of all their faultiness.

2. And it is an immodest Error to say, That none are good men, that in this are
not of your mind. Is there any spotless Church on Earth? or must we renounce
the Communion with them all, or reserve exception against their faults and
misperformances?

D. O. 4. He that joins in the Worship of the Common Prayer, does by his
practice make Profession, That it is the true Worship of God, accepted with
him, approved of him, and wholly agreeable to his Mind and Will. To do it with
other reserves, is hypocrisy, and worse than the thing it self without them.
Happy is he that condemns not himself in the thing which he allows, Romans 14
12. 5. THis is your twelfth mistake, and one that has dreadful consequents. 1.
It contradicts the express Profession of the Communicants, who openly tell
the World, That they take not all in the Liturgy, XII. Error.
to be [ wholly agreeable to Gods Mind and Will]: And you are not to feign a
Profession of men contrary to their open Protestation.

2. It is most direful to your own separating followers, who by this are
supposed to profess all your Worship to be [ wholly agreeable to Gods Mind and
Will]. And so the honest well-meaning people are made guilty of all the Errors
which you put into your Worship.

3. It is contrary to your own former Profession, That you could in charity
communicate with Presbyterians, or Anabaptists, etc. And so you approved of all
the Errors of their Worship.

4. It makes it a down right Sin, to communicate with any Church on Earth: For
all have their faults and errors, even in Worship; which you feign all that
Communicate with them to justify, as [ wholly agreeable to Gods Will]. And to
justify Sin, and teach men so to do, and to father it on God, are sad
Aggravations; such shall be called least in the Kingdom of God. By this rule
you would have separated from every Church on Earth, that we have notice of for
a thousand years, yea, and to this day; and is not that near separating from
Christ? And when no man knows before you speak in prayer, what you will say,
How shall any man that joyneth with you, koow but he may be guilty of your Sin
at the next Sentence.

5. It is a breach of the ninth Commandment, thus to charge all the Ancient
Churches, and Reformers, and the Noncoformists, with hypocrisy, and worse than
open sinning, who have all communicated on the contrary Supposition.

6. It is no friendly act to the Church, to lay down such a Principle of
perpetual Separation, and condemning each others Communion, and so to make the
Communion and Concord of the Churches impossible.

7. It is Self-condemnation to judge the present Bishops Church-Tyrants, for
excommunicating good Christians according to the Canons, for professed dissent
about their governing Offices, Liturgies, and Ceremonies; and for imposing
Assent and Consent to all things, etc. and yet to go much further than they, by
making it Sin against God, to Communicate where the Worship is not [ wholly
agreeable to Gods Will]. Prove that ever the Bishops went so far from Concord.

8. I only humbly ask, Whether this make not Christ, and all his Apostles
Hypocrites, and worse than professed Sinners: Did Christ by his usual joining in
the Synagogue and Temple-Worship, and commanding men to go to the Priests, to
hear the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. profess that he took their Worship to be
wholly agreeable to Gods Will? Or did the Apostles so, while they long joined
in the Synagogues with the Jews?

D. O. 5. There may be a false Worship of the true God, as well as a worship of
a false god. Such was the Worship of Jehovah the Lord, by the Calf in the
Wilderness, Exodus 33.5, 6. Such was the Feast unto the Lord ordained by
Jeroboam, in the eighth month, the fifteenth day of the month, which he had
devised of his own heart, 1 Kings 12.32.33. 6. YOur fifth Premise is
unquestionable. But if you distinguish not of false Worship, you will make but
false Work about it. 1. There is that, which is the corrupting of Gods own
necessary Worship-Ordinances, in so gross a manner, either outwardly in the
Matter, or inwardly in the Mind; as that God will not own or accept the Worship
and Worshippers. 2. There is that which is false in Integrals, Accidents, or
Degrees, by pardoned failings and infirmities. To be [ false] is to be
disagreeable to the rule; such in some measure, is every Prayer, Sermon or
Sacrament, that ever you administered. He that says he has no Sin, is a liar.
All sinful Worship, is so far false worship, which the best of men are guilty
of: If you put all the Errors that are in this Paper of yours, in a Sermon or
Prayer, will not so many falsehoods make it false worship?

D. O. On these Suppositions, the Proposition laid down, is proved by the
following Arguments.

1. Argument, Religious Worship not divinely instituted and appointed, is false
Worship, not accepted with God; but the Liturgical-worship intended, is a
Religious Worship, not divinely instituted and appointed, ergo, not accepted
with God. The Proposition is confirmed by all the Divine Testimonies, wherein
all such Worship is expressly condemned, see Deuteronomy. 4.2. Chap. 12.32. Prove. 30.6.
Jer. 7.31. Isa. 29.13, etc. That especially, where the Lord Christ restrains
all Worship to his own command, Matthew. 28.20. It is answered to the minor
Proposition, That the Liturgical-worship is of Christ's appointment, as to the
substantials of it, tho not as to its Accidentals; namely, Prayers and Praises;
not unto its outward rites and form, which do not vitiate the whole.

7. TO your first Argument, I answer.

I have fully answered this to Mr. Ralphson, 1. As to the bare name, either you
will call all acts done to signify immediately the Souls honoring of God, by
the name of Worship, or you will not; if not, then that which is no Worship, is
no false Worship. If you will, then your Proposition is false; so that either
your Major or Minor, XIII. Error.
is another Error. For I take it for granted, that by Gods instituting, you
mean not a general command to man to institute it; such as, [ let all be done
to edification,] if you did, then your Minor is not true. Kneeling at Prayer
rather than sitting, putting off the Hat, using white Linen and Silver plate
at the Sacrament, praising God by new Hymns, and in English Meter, and Tunes,
and many such, are Worship in the secondary sense, and yet not imposed by any
determining Divine Institution

Your wrong Exposition of all the Texts of Scripture, here cited by you, is
more than one mistake. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Prove. 30.6. forbid adding to Gods
Worship, XIV. Error.
which is broken by all that either say, that that is in Gods Word which is not
there, (as you here do); or that devise any Woship-Ordinances coordinate, or of
the same sort with his own, as if they were imperfect: But there is not a word
forbidding subordinate secondary Acts of Worship, such as Kneeling, putting off
the Hat, using written Notes in Preaching, or Forms of Singing, Praying,
Catechizing, laying the Hand on the Book, or putting it under the Thigh, or
lifting it up in Swearing, the formal words of Vows, Oaths, Covenants,
Confessions, Professions, and many such. Ier. 7.31. condemns them that
offered their Children in Fire to Idols, because God never commanded such
Cruelty and Idolatry. It is not true, that therefore we may not Kneel, or put
off the Hat, or Preach, Pray, or Sing in an humane Form of words, till God
determine it by Command. It was forbidden things which Isa. 29.13. and Mat. 14.
are reproved, as being the Precepts of Men, or things feigned to be necessary
Acts of Obedience to God, which were not so. But this you think your self does
not forbid your Form of Church Covenant, nor your Books, Translation of
Scripture, Hymns, written Sermons, because they are devised by Man; nor
Childrens Forms of Prayer, for being commanded by Parents. Matthew. 28.20. It
follows not, that because Christ bid the Apostles teach all, that he commanded
therefore nothing else subordinate may be taught. He commanded not the
additional Form of the Creed, but only the Form of Baptism in three Articles;
nor the Hymns and spiritual Songs in Form mentioned by Paul, nor the Kiss of
Peace, the Women's Vails, the Men's being uncovered, not wearing long Hair, the
selling all and laying it down at the Apostles Feet, etc.

D. O. But it is replied, There is nothing accidental in the Worship of God.
Every thing that belongs to it, is part of it. Some things are of more Weight,
Use and Importance, than others, Matthew. 23.27. but all things duly belonging
to it, are parts of it, or of its subsistence; outward Circumstances are
natural and occasional, no accidental parts of Worship.. 8. OUr Answer you well
recite, if you add, that (call it substantial, or what you will) the common
Lord's Day Worship according to the Liturgy, has not many, if any words in it,
whose signified Matter is not found and true; and as to the Manner, Extemporate
Prayer has often as great unaptness of words (which every Age changes) disorder
and defectiveness.

As to your Reply, it is the strangest that ever I read from so Learned a Man,
and is a great mistake: What is there in the world, that is a Subject, XV.
Error.
without any Accidentals? Gods Worship has a multitude of Accidents; As the
Hour, the Place, the Pulpet, the Tables, the Cups of Silver, the Linen and
other Ornaments; the Books as Printed, the Meter, the Tunes, the Chapters and
Verses, the words of Translation, the Building, the Gestures, Vestures,
Treasures, etc.

You add another mistake, that [ every thing that belongs to it, is a part of
it.] Then all these forementioned are parts of it, for they all belong to it.
XVI. Error.
What a strange thing make you of Gods Worship? Then your Time, Place, Notes,
Words, Tunes, Gestures, Covenant-Form, Catechism-Forms, etc. are all parts of
Gods Worship, for they belong to it: And then you must be separated from for
adding them. But after this mistake, you say, [ Outward Circumstances are
natural, and occasional, no accidental parts of worship]. Answ. Just now all
Accidents were parts (or else Accidents belong not to it) And now [ it has no
accidental parts] Certainly this is the truer; for I remember not that ever I
heard of mere Accidents that were Parts. A man's Name, Relation, Trade,
Clothing, Age, House, etc. belong to him, and are Accidents, but no parts of
him: no nor his Hair, if it be a mere Accident. But do none of these duly
belong to him?

2. The word [ Worship], as I said before, is Equivocal, as signifying only the
Things made necessary to the honoring of God directly by Divine Command: or
the subordinate Acts, Modes, Circumstances, left to Humane Choice. In the
former sense, the Order, Words, and Forms in the Liturgy, and in all our usual
Devotions, are Accidents, and not Parts. In the later sense, they are Parts:
But whether this later sense of Worship be apt, is but a strife about a word.

But you say, they are natural and occasional. Ans. Dark words! 1. I think the
Translations, Meter, Tunes, Notes, your Words and Method, Table, Cups, Cloth,
Temples, etc. are rather Artificial than Natural; Art and not Nature made them
what they are. If you mean that Nature commands them, then God by the Law of
Nature commands them: and what greater Authority can they have? But yet that
is not so, Nature does not determine us to this or that, but leave all to apt
and prudent Choice. And so he does as to the form or words of Prayer.

If by [ Occasional] you mean such as must be mutably fitted to just Occasions;
there is no doubt of it: And while the Occasion is constant, so may the
Accidents. But sure while they are such; yea, and relatively appropriated or
separated to worship (as Buildings, Utensils, and Maintenance may be) they
belong to that Worship which they are no parts of

D. O. 2. Prayers and Praises absolutely considered, are not an institution of
Christ; they are a part of Natural Worship common unto all Mankind: His
institution respects only the internal form of them, and the manner of their
performance; but this is that which the Liturgy takes on it self, namely, to
supply and determine the matter, to prescribe the manner, and to limit all the
concerns of them to Modes and Forms of its own, which is to take the work of
Christ out of his hand. 9. YOur Second Answer is no better: 1. If by
absolutely, you mean not generally (but as opposite to conditional), it has no
sense here that I can find: But if it be [ in genere] that you mean, as the
Context intimates, they are no part of Worship at all, natural or instituted:
For there is praying, which is cursing, and striving against God and Goodness,
and praying to Idols. But I suppose you mean [ de specie], praying to the true
God for good things needful. And so it is another Mistake, That this Prayer is
not of Christ's Institution, because it is a part of Natural Worship. All is of
Christ's institution which is part of his commanding Law: The Law of Nature is
now Christ's Law, who by Redemption is become Lord of Nature, and of all, John
17.2, 3. Mat. 28.18, 19. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Romans 14.9, 10. John 5.22, etc. He most
strictly commands Natural Duties. The Ten Commandments were of Natural
Obligation, XVII. Error.
and yet instituted. And as Love was called a New and Special Commandment, as
required on new and special grounds and ends, so is Prayer thus far also new.

2. And it is another Mistake, That Christ's institution respects only the
internal form, and the manner of performance: The internal form is inward
desire offered mentally to God. XVIII. Error.
And is not this Natural, if Prayer be? Sure the Form is the Thing. But the
institution of Christ reaches the Matter of Prayer, as well as the inward Form
and outward Manner: That we pray for the things mentioned in the Lord's Prayer;
for God's Glory, Kingdom Will to be obeyed, etc. for Pardon, the Spirit, Grace,
Glory, etc. That the Gospel may have free course, etc.

It is another Mistake* That the manner of performance is sinful, which is not
of Christ's institution. The Words, and Method, and Length, are the manner of
performance. XIX. Error.
Can you show an Institution determinative of all the Words, Method and L^ngth
of all our Prayers? Or of all our Psalms, Rhimes and Tunes, and all our
Gestures and Utensils? etc. By these words I am induced to hope, that the
common report, That you were against the ordinary use of the Lord's Prayer in
words, is false: for here you seem to be more for it than you ought: For if all
the outward Manner must be instituted by Christ, sure the Lord's Prayer will
be, at least the chief part.

You say, the Liturgy takes on it self to supply and determine Matter.

Ans. 1. Matter is more than Manner. But this is another Mistake: For the
Liturgy supposes that Scripture is the Rule, and Christ the Commander of all
the Matter of Prayer which is of constant use and need (as the Articles of
Religion, and the Ordination-Covenant show): And you give no instance of the
contrary. But as to mutable Matter, which vary as occasions by Providence do
(as days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving, the 5 th of November, and those
things that are specially suited to some times and places), you determine of
such your selves in all your Prayers.

XX. Error.
It is another Mistake, That thus to limit the Concerns of Prayer to M^des and
Forms, is to take Christ's work out of his hands. If so, then you must show us
where Christ himself undertook so to limit us to his Modes and Forms only: else
it is not Christ's proper work: Is there a Liturgy of his making, more than we
ever heard of? 2. And then do not all Ministers in every public Prayer, take
Christ's work out of his hands? Do they not limit the people in Matter, Mode,
and Form of words? What heavy charges lay you on your selves? Do not the
Composers of Hymns and Psalms, so limit them to Mode and Form? It Is clear that
they do.

D. O. 3. Outward Rites and Modes of Worship, divinely instituted and
determined, do become the necessary parts of Divine Worship. See the Instance,
Levit. 1.16. Therefore such as are humanely instituted, appointed and
determined, are thereby made parts of Worship; namely, that which is false, for
want of Divine Institution. 10. YOur Third Reply is no better than the rest;
viz. That because Divine Institution makes Rites and Modes necessary, therefore
Humane Institution makes such parts of false Worship, XXI. Error.
for want of Divine Institution. I cannot imagine how so worthy a man could
mistake so widely, but by studying only what to say for his Cause, and never
thinking what may be replied. God's determination can make any indifferent
thing a Duty* And does it follow, that therefore he has left nothing to man's
determination? God's choice of Jerusalem for his Worship, of the
Tabernacle-shape, of the Priests, etc. made these necessary: Is therefore man's
determination of the fixed places for ordinary worship, of the form of the
Temple, of ordained Ministers, false Worship? God made it a duty to sing the
Psalm, Deuteronomy. 32. and other since: Is it therefore false worship now to make
Hymns for public use? Christ taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer: may you
therefore not teach your Children or Scholars any? Christ chose a Text, Luke 4.
and preached, and that on a Mountain, in a Ship, etc. Therefore we may choose a
Text, and Place, etc. God appointed anniversary Fasts and Feasts: Is it
therefore false worship to keep the 5 th of November, or the like? God
determined of the Priests maintenance: Is it a sin now to determine of
Ministers maintenance? If God should institute and command all the words of
your Church-Covenants, Prayers, Sermons, they would become necessary: Are they
therefore sinful if man determine them? If God had made all the Articles of
your Savoy Confession, or all the Laws of the Land, they would have been
necessary: Are they now all unlawful, because Man made them?

That which God has commanded, is no false Worship: But God has commanded the
Churches to determine undetermined Modes and Circumstances needful in genere;
so as all may be done to Edification, decently and in order, and not causelessly
to cross the Customs of the Churches of God, and to obey those that are over
them in the Lord.

D. O. 4. Prayer and Praise are not the things prescribed and enj^yned in and
by the Liturgy: It is so far from it, that thereby all Prayers and Praises in
Church Assemblies, merely as such, are prohibited; but it is its own forms, way
and mode, with their determination and limitation alone, that are instituted,
prescribed and enjoined by it: But these things have no Divine Institution, and
therefore are so far false Worship.. 11. HEre are two more strange Mistakes: 1.
Are there so many Prayers enjoined, and the people called on with a [ Let us
Pray], and yet is not Prayer enjoined? There is some secret meaning in this:
For doubtless, you would never else affirm it, and expect that all men renounce
their Senses; XXII. Error.
you can mean nothing less than that their imposed Forms, when used as
commanded, are no Prayers, which is another Error. If so, then all the Prayers
of the Church of God for 1300. years at least, that we read of, were no
Prayers: And then you desire no part in the Prayers of any Churches on Earth,
at this day, save New Englands, or a few Separatists. What wonder then, if you
be left without the Benefit of all those Prayers? Is this the Communion of
Saints, in the Catholic Church?

2. And are there no Praises enjoined. Are none of their Psalms, Hymns, and
Doxologies, the Praises of God, when used: You suppose that Christ will call
them None, or else you durst not. And is such a Slander of Christ, and the
Universal Church, no sin?

Your next Misreport is that [ by the Liturgy, all Prayers and Praises in
Church Assemblies are prohibited.] This is too Rash: Where is there a word
forbidding them? XXIII. Error.
This can have no Sense, but that either none are Church Assemblies that have a
Liturgy, or that nothing commanded in the Liturgy, is Prayer and Praise in a
Church-Assembly: But if this be your meaning, it is both ways untrue. 1. Is
there no Church on Earth out of England? Or do they forbid any out of England,
to Pray and Praise God? 2. Do they forbid the Dutch and French in England, to
Pray and Praise God? 3. Do they forbid all Prayer and Praises in the Pulpits,
in the Parish-Churches? 4. Have you proved all the Parish-Churches in England
to be No Churches? Where is your Proof, how much soberer were the old
Brownists? 5. Have you proved, that Commanding Men to Pray in such words, is
forbidding them to Pray? when you set a Psalm for Praise, is that to forbid all
Praise? Is not omnis modus entis modus, and includes the Thing?

D. O. 2. Argument. That which was in its first contrivance, and has been in
its continuance, an Invention and Engine to defeat, or render useless the
Promise of Christ unto his Church, of sending the holy Spirit in all Ages to
enable it unto the due discharge and performance of all Divine Worship in its
Assemblies, is unlawful to be complied withal, nor can be admitted in
Religious Worship; But such is the Liturgical Worship. That the Lord Christ did
make such a Promise, that he does make it good, that the very Being and
Continuance of the Church (without which, it is but a dead Machine) does depend
thereon, I suppose will not be denied, it has been undeniably proved.. 12. TTo
your Second Argument, I answer. 1. To the Minor.

Do you mean that this was the Intent of the first Contrivers and Continuers?
or only that it had this effect, contrary to their Intent? The first seems
your Sense, which is another misreport. XXIV. Error.
For 1. You know not who the first Inventor was. 2. You know not all the
Continuers. 3. And so high a Charge is to be taken for a Slander, till it be
proved. 4. Are you sure that you lay not this Charge of Malignity on the Men of
God, that made the Jews Psalms? and on Christ, that composed a Form of Praying
and Baptizing? and on Paul, that commands Hymns, and imposed on Timothy a Form
of Sound Words?

And if you meant it but of the English Liturgy, you could never prove that our
Martyrs and Confessors that made it, had so malignant an End. But you speak it
of Liturgical Worship in general, which obliges you to prove almost all the
Pastors for 1120. years and more, to be such Malignants. And its easily
disproved, whether you meant it of their Intent, or of the Effect, by assigning
the true and better Intent and Effect. They did it not to render useless the
Spirits help, but 1. To be useful where such Abilities were wanting: It was the
antecedent disability of Men that occasioned Liturgick Forms. 2. And it was to
be a help subordinate to the Spirits help, to those that have it but in part;
as Spectacles to dark Sights, and Sermon Notes to weak Memories. 3. They are
really a great help to many, and therefore not made only to hinder them. When
fitter and more sound and moving words are set before an unready Speaker, they
help his affection more than his own shorter and unmeeter words would do; And
his mind being not taken up with the study of words, is the freer to attend its
affections. You must not measure all Men's Volubility of Speech by your own. I
can truly say, that Forms are often a help to me: I find young and old Christians
are more fit to use them than the middle-aged: For the young cannot at first
pray well (at least before others) without them, till use has taught them And
the old have discretion to fit their Affections to sound words often repeated.
But the middle-aged, that have a greater Heat, and a lesser Light, are much
more taken with their own sudden Effusions and Expressions.

Do you think, that when Calvin formed the Liturgy for Geneva and France, he
had so Malignant a Design, as to defeat the Spirits help? Or do our English
Psalms and Tunes quench the Spirit? and are they used to keep Men from the Gift
of making Hymns Ex tempore?

2 I answered your Minor first, because it is matter of Fact; but your Major
also is untrue: For that which is imposed with an ill Intent, may be used to a
good one: And that which hurts some, may be a help to others. If the Parish
Churches were all built to serve Popery and the Mass, and dedicated to Saints,
yet we may use them lawfully to better Purposes. If Priests Marriages be
forbidden for ill Ends, it may be forborne for good Ends. If Glebe and Tithes
were here given first to maintain the Mass, they may be used to maintain sound
Teachers. It was Popes that reverst the old Custom of not adoring, kneeling on
any Lords day: And yet you may lawfully kneel then in Prayer: Yea, tho they
brought in kneeling to the Host by that Alteration. XXV. Errer.
So that this is another Error. And your Confirmations are not true.

D. O. Hereon the Church lived and acted for several Ages, performing all
Divine Worship in their Assemblies, by virtue of the Gifts and Graces of the
holy Spirit, and no otherwise.

When these things were neglected, when the way of attaining, and the exercise
of them appeared too difficult to Men of carnal minds, this way of Worship by a
Prescribed Liturgy, was insensibly brought in, to render the Promise of Christ,
and the Work of the holy Ghost in the Administration of Gifts, useless. And
herein two things do follow.

. 13. 1. IT is a great Error to think, that the Gifts and Graces of the holy
Spirit may not be exercised, if we use the same words, or if they be
prescribed. The chief help of Gods Spirit, lies in giving us a due esteem of
the things prayed for, and a holy Desire after them, and a lively Faith and
Hope that we shall obtain them, and a fixed Resolution to use all other means
for them, and avoid all that would deprive us of them. And doubtless, he that
has these mental Dispositions, has thereby a great help for his Expression of
them; for out of the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks. But 1. It Is
well known, that Use and Knowledge, can enable an Hypocrite to pray as long,
and in as good Words and earnest Tone, as a sincere Christian.

2. That which is easiest, needs the least help: It is to me so much easier
to speak my own thoughts in Prayer ex tempore, than to remember a form of
words; that never since I was twenty years old, did I ever learn and say
without Book, the words of one Prayer, or one Sermon, since I Preached; to have
learnt a Prayer or Sermon without Book, would have cost me ten times and more,
both time and labor, and fear of being out, than I ever used or could afford.

3. Pardon me for asking, Whether if this Author put all the Errors of this his
writing into a Prayer or Sermon, he did not need more help of the Spirit, to
have avoided them, and to have spoken nothing but truth, than to have fluently
uttered so many mistakes? He has heard those called Arminians on one side, and
Antin^mians on the other, often fluently express their Opinions in Gods Worship:
The former he took to be heinous Errors: Had not all these had more of the help
of Gods Spirit, if they had uttered nothing but true and good in a form, than
they had to speak so much Error and Evil to God or Man, with extemporate
fluency.

4. May not a man use the Lords Prayer by the Spirits help? If I have any help
of Gods Spirit, it is more in the use of that Prayer, than at any other time.

5. May not one sing Psalms by the help of the Spirit, unless he make them
extempore? I doubt you lay too much on words; Gods Spirit works on the heart,
and its greatest help is in its greatest gifts, which are Faith, Repentance,
Love, Desire, etc. and not words: Words must be used and weighed; but the main
work is heart work, and God knows the meaning of the Spirit, when we have but
groans, which we cannot express, and cry but Abba, Father.

But you come to History, and add another misreport in the words, XXVI. Error.
[ and no otherwise] that the Church for several ages Worshipped [ no
otherwise] than by such gifts as you describe, which exclude Liturgick forms.
It Is plain in the descriptions of Justin and Tertullian, that they did use
extemporate Prayer then; but not that they did no otherwise. 1. Tertullian
himself gives you their form of a Creed, and so do many others. 2. They used a
set form of words in Baptizing. 3. And they constantly used singing Psalms and
Hymns, which were not made ex tempore, nor by every singer. 4. They used the
Lords prayer in form often. 5. At the Lords Supper they had diverse words of
form and responses. In Cyprian, some parcels are to he seen, and in diverse
others. 6. The truth is, our History of the Churches manner of Worship for the
first two hundred years, is so little, that we know but little how they did it,
beside the foresaid two passages in Justin and Tertullian. But by what is in
the Historians of the next Ages, and by the Churches general use of the
Liturgies, without contradiction soon after, and what Daillee has gathered, de
cultu Latinorum, etc. we know that [ no otherwise,] is not true.

2. It Is too true, that the carelesnes^, sloth and worldly alienations of
Ministers, made all useful sufficiency for the work of the Ministry, in Praying
and Preaching, to be neglected, and does to this day. But I hope no wise man
dreameth that all the Pastors had one soul, or one mind and design. If any
Malignants used or enjoined forms, to make ^hrists promise, and the Spirits
help useless; others used them, and promoted the use of them, for the
performance of Christ's promise, and the Spirits help. 1. Because there were not
(when public countenance increased the Churches) half enough men for the
Ministry, that had the extemporate gifts of Prayer and Preaching. 2. And you
confess that each Church had then many Elders for oversight, besides those that
labored in the Word and Doctrine. Do you believe that all these had such
extemporate gifts of utterance? Or that these might not on occasion Pray and
Preach. 3. If Parents teach Children necessarily to Pray in a prescribed form
of words, without designing to defeat Christ or his Spirit, but to subserve
them; how can you tell, but the first prescribers of public forms did mean as
well, when they found few persons able to do so well without, and abundance of
Heretics ready to corrupt Gods Worship with their Errors? 4. Let it be soberly
considered, Whether men's long and hard Study for all the words which they write
in Books, and for their Sermons, be done to defeat Christ and his Spirit, or to
subserve them? And why the use of words studied by others, and weighed by us,
before we utter them, should defeat the Spirit any more, than words
premeditated by our selves? Or at least, is not the Spirit as much defeated in
the People that join, who ever prepares the words? For they do not themselves
put them up by their gift of utterance. And its impossible when you speak, for
the people to know whether those words were before studied, and whether by your
self or by another, from whom you borrowed them. I have heard Mr. Ph. Nigh, wish
that some men were sent into Wales, and other such places, with an injunction
to read good Sermon Books to the people, such as Dr. Prestons, Sibbs, etc. was
this spoken to defeat the Spirit, or to serve him?

D. O. 1. A total neglect of all gifts of the Holy Ghost, in the Administration
of Church-worship and Ordinances. 14. THe first Consequence is an untruth: No
doubt but Liturgies were abused to cherish Ignorance and Negligence. XXVII.
Error.
But that the neglect was total, is not true; whether you respect all the
Churches, or all the parts of Worship and Ordinances. 1. The many holy and
excellent Men, whose fame and writings are transmitted to us, did not totally
neglect all gifts of the Holy Ghost. Were all the great Volumes of Sermons
preached and written by Chrysostom, without any gift of the Holy Ghost? Or was
Preaching no Ordinance? Were all Augustine's elaborate Volumes done without
him? Or all Cyprian's, Macarius, Ephrem Syrus, Basil's, Gregory's, yea, or
Bernard's Homilies and Works?

2. Are the gifts of Holy Desire, Faith, Hope, Repentance, no gifts of the Holy
Ghost? Or can you prove that these were all totally neglected in the
administration of Church-worship?

3. It Is known, thar in the Exercise of Discipline, which is a
Church-Ordinance, and in Catechizing and Preaching, they were not tied only to
a form of words; no, nor in all Confession, Prayer and Thanksgiving.

4. It Is a great blow to the Universal Church, to say, That it totally
neglected all the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

D. O. 2. When a Plea for the Work of the Holy Ghost began to be revived, it
produced all the enmity, hatred and contempt of, and against the Spirit of God
himself, and his whole Work in the Church, which the World is now filled
withal. 15. THat word [ his whole work in the Church], is another mis-report.
XXVIII. Error.
It is not [ his whole work] that is so contemned. A man may preach for Mercy
to the Poor, for Obedience to Authority, for Love, etc. and he may sing Psalms
of Praise, and pray for Pardon, and for Kings and Magistrates, and for daily
Bread, and may profess to believe the Creed, and Scripture, etc. without the
contempt which you describe. But no doubt but Malignity will take advantage of
Liturgies, and of almost any thing, and so has still done: All is not unlawful
which bad men abuse: What is more turned against Christ in the world abroad,
than his Two great Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry: What more abused to
strife, than the Sacrament of Love, Union and Communion? Are all these
therefore unlawful?

And it is a palpable Mistake, That the foresaid scorn of all done by the Spirit
[ariseth from hence alone], XXIX. Error.
a justification of the devised way of Worship. It arises more from a
malignant enmity to serious godliness, and from worldly interests and designs,
and from the slanders of Seducers that accuse good men, and too much from the
miscarriages of many that have boasted most of the Spirit, as Quakers, Ranters,
Familists, etc. do.

And Experience confuteth you: For all those Countries that make but little use
of Liturgies, have yet malignant parties that hate and oppose spiritual serious
Exercises of Religion.

D. O. All the Reproaches that are daily cast upon the Spirit of Prayer; all
the concontempt and sc^rn which all Duties of religious Worship performed by
his aid and assistance, are entertained withal, arises from hence alone,
namely, a justification of this devised way of Worship, as the only true way
and means thereof.

Take this away, and the wrath and anger of men against the Spirit of God and
his w^rk, in the Worship of the Church, will be abated; yea, the necessity of
them will be evident.

T^is we cannot comply with, lest we approve the original design of it, and
partake in the sins which proceed from it.

16. BEcause you lay the main stress of your Cause on History and Experience,
you constrain me to add some more History, which I had rather have past by: But
if I set not Experience against Experience, I shall leave abundance unto the
danger of error, who can judge by little else than Experience, and that see and
feel what is present, and forget what is long past and gone.

The Truth I have opened in my Christian Directory, that both ways are liable
to great abuse, and all humane actions have their inconveniences. The benefits
of a sound Liturgy, are, 1. To keep out Heresy and ill words from public
worship. 2. To be a help to men of unready utterance. 3. That the people may
know beforehand what they join in.

The inconveniences are, 1. The dulling of Affection in hearing still the same
words. 2. The tempting of slothful worldly Candidates and Ministers to learn no
other way of praying, when this will serve all their worldly turns. But I must
add, That this follows not the imposing of a Liturgy, but the exclusion of
other Prayer, and taking up with this alone.

2. The conveniences of praying from an habit* are, 1. A just variation, as
Occasions vary. 2. Help to fresh Affection. 3. Forcing Ministers to get ability
for utterance.

The inconveniences are, 1. That the people know not till the words are past,
whether they may own them, and so hardly try all, and follow with just consent.
2. That abundance of young, raw, unskilful men, do ordinarily disgrace Prayer
by their unskilful methods and expressions. 3. That Heretics and erroneous men
have great opportunity to put their sins into their prayer, which yet the
people should by joining in, make their own, were they sound (which they are
not bound to do by Sermons): And no man of understanding can choose but suspect,
that weak ignorant Ministers will be showing their weakness in the highest
Duties; and so must suspend their consent till late. 4. That less care will be
taken in speaking to God, than in speaking to Men, while most sober Ministers
study their Sermons. 5. That when to avoid disgraceful words, and manner of
praying, men must decree, that no such weak or unready men shall be Ministers,
the number that can do it better, will be so small, as that most Churches on
Earth must be so deprived of Ministers, and all public Worship, if that take
place. 6. That by this means young ignorant men, that by use can speak fluently
and fervently in prayer, shall be followed by the people; when many great
Divines, judicious and holy, that have not that readiness of utterance, shall
be rejected, as having not the Spirit. 7. That as all men's bodies and minds be
not in the like quickness and fitness at all times, but sometimes clouded by
Fumes or Weakness; the public Worship shall be as mutable, uncertain and
various as men's Tempers are.

All these on both sides are so great inconveniences, that tho both Formalists
and Fanatics have derided me for it, I have formerly said, and still say, That
I believe that the best way to avoid both sorts of Evils is, To have meet set
Forms, which shall be owned by the Church, as their professed desires, not
being so long, as to take up too much time from freer Prayer, much less to
forbid it; which Calvin wisely ordered for France and Geneva.

And now as you have Historically told us the ill Consequences of a Lturgy, I
shall first tell you, It is a Mistake: None of these arise from a sound
Liturgy, but from the using that alone, and not using also free Prayer with it:
And next, I shall add some more of the History of Separation from Churches that
have Liturgies, tho it be as displeasing to me, as it is necessary to the
People.

I will pass by the Histories of Muncer and Munster, and of David George in
Holland, and of Henry Nicols, and the Familists, which were the Offspring of
Separation: And the sad Conflicts which they had against the sober
Nonconformists; and their sad Divisions among themselves in Holland, and how
many of them went further to Anabaptistry, and more; when Brown their Leader
here, turned Conformist. It is only what I have lived to see, that I briefly
mention. When the Parliament began, 1640. there were few Separatists known
comparatively in England: But when they were encouraged by hope of Success,
they began to stir, and show themselves, and two sorts fell in with them, and
quickly increased them, that is, 1. The exasperated Sufferers. 2. Women, and
weak young Men, who thought it a great honor in Religion, to go far enough
from Persecutors, and formal or ungodly Ministers, not seeing the Danger on the
other Extreme. Holy and Learned John Ball foresaw the Danger, and wrote his
Book, called, The Trial of Separation: and after, two more; one against Can,
and another against two New England Ministers. The Assembly being called, even
sober and excellent Men that were for the old Conformity in case of Necessity,
but not otherwise; Five of their number, differing from all the rest, save two
more, wrote for Independency. This Controversy began the great Breach, while
the Five Dissenters stood stiffly for a Liberty, that Men might gather New
Churches out of the Churches of the other Ministers, of as many as should come
to them in all places, and should have all Church Power in those separated
Churches. The other did not what might have been done skilfully to heal the
Breach, tho they did much. The two Parties drew others into the Division. Those
called Presbyterians were the more quiet, because they thought the Dissenters
few. Independency might have been tolerated, but Separation was that which
would not be endured, when nothing was imposed in Doctrine or Worship, which
the Dissenters excepted against. The Separaters finding themseves few, were the
more industrious, especially to get Interest in Parliament and Army. In the
Parliament, they could never get near the Major Vote; but they had some, whose
Policy and Industry made up what was wanting in Number: And by them, they got
the Army new modeled; all Parliament Men thence put out, and Cromwell put in
Power, Second in Name, and First in Deed: He placed his Interest (as
Constantine did, in owning the persecuted Christians, who had no other outward
help but him) in declaring himself to be for Liberty in Religion, and the
Protector of all godly Men that suffered for Conscience Sake, or feared it,
whereby the Dissenters that feared lest the Presbyterians would Master them,
came in to him, and he got enough to Head his Army (and great numbers also of
Common Soldiers) who were for Separation; and being Men of other Parts and
Interest, than those that Fight only for Pay, would not run away, but Conquered
almost where ever they came. I lived in Coventry quietly, and with godly
understanding Men, who thought all the Accusations against Fairfax's (or rather
Cromwell's) Army* as turbulent, overturning Men, had been Slanders. After
Nas^by Fight, being near them, I went for Novelty to see them. There some sober
Men among them told me, how they had discouraged all the Orthodox Ministers,
save one or two, and were deserted by them, and turned Preachers themselves;
they that had most Self Conceit, being the Speakers; and in a word, foretold me
what Changes they would attempt, against King, Parliament, and Ministry, I went
home, and told what I saw and heard, and being Invited by some of the soberest
to the Army, I told an Assembly of Ministers my willingness to venture Life and
Labor among them, to undeceive as many as I could. The Ministers consented to
my going (Dr. Grew, and Mr. Simon King, yet living, were two of them); There
Cromwell having notice of all before I came, gave me no opportunity to come
near himself or the Chief in Power: But where I came, I did my best: For I
found the Separatists half Arminians, and the other half contrary, Antinonians;
agreeing to use their Power for the Changes that were after made. The Scots and
Presbyterians they designedly and bitterly reproached. The Book called, Mar^in
Mar-Priest, and other such, tell you their Dialect: Their usual Titles were,
The Priest-byters, the Drivines, the Sinners of Westminster, the Dissembly men,
and such like. The godly able Ministers, were more scorned by them, than
formerly I had heard among the Drunkards. What they did after this, England and
Scotland felt. They cut off the King, they cast out Eleven Members from the
Parliament: After that, they cast out and imprisoned the Major par, which was
the House of Commons, and cast out all the House of Lords; then by these they
made the People take an Engagement against the old Form of Government, To be
true to the Commonwealth, as then Established, without a King and House of
Lords: They ordered the Sequestring of all Ministers that would not Fast and
Pray before, and give Thanks after, for their Victories in Scotland. They then
pulled down this Remnant of the Commons, and called themselves without the
Peoples Choice, Two out of each County, and called them a Parliament. These put
it to the Vote, Whether all the Parish-Ministers in England, should not be put
down at once, and as credible Report went, it was carried against them but by
three Voices. These gave up their Commissions to Cromwell. He now becomes the
Defender of the Ministers: The Government is again Changed, and he made
Protector, and Fundamental Laws made among themselves, by we know not whom;
Parliament Lords made by him: Parliaments called, and broken at his pleasure.
The Government of the Counties put into the Hands of Major Generals. After the
Death of Oliver, his Son set up, and his Parliament first pulled down (in which
the Reverend Author, n^w opposed, told me, he was an Agent) and next himself.
Then the Commons, called the Rump, were made Sovereign again. Then they were
pulled down again, and a Council of State out of the Army that did it, is set
highest: Till at last, by God's most remarkable hand, this conquering Army
dissolved utterly without one drop of blood, and the King restored without
opposition.

It Is true, that serious godliness all this while much increased in most parts
of the Land: But how? It was mainly by the excellent preaching and living of
that Ministry whom these Separatists vilified, such as the Assembly-men had
been, and by a middle sort of Peacemakers, who engaged in no Sect, but would
fain have healed all: For the effects of the separating party were these: 1.
The Land was cast into division and confusion by them. 2. Ranters and Quakers
sprung from them. 3. Their overthrow of Government brought a Reproach on
Religion. 4. Separated Churches of Anabaptists kept up a Religious War in many
places. 5. All the Parish-Ministers in Wales were put down, and most of the
Churches shut up, Itinerant Preachers being set up in their stead, lest the
Parishes should be thought to be Churches. Perhaps you will say, That these
Itinerants were better than the old ignorant Ministers: But, 1. Their Number
was so small, that there was commonly but one to Six or Eight Parishes: so that
the People publicly worshipped God but once in Six or Eight weeks: And had not a
Liturgy been better than nothing, or than to live like Atheists? 2. The most
famous of the Itinerants were Mr. W. Cradocke and Vavasor Powel: I knew them
both: The former was a most zealous man for practical godliness, with whom I
conversed in my Youth, when in Mr. Rich. Simond's School in Shrewsbury, he was
concealed from the Bishops pursuit, by the Name of Mr. Williams: But how gross
an Antinomian he turned after he had learned Separation, before he was
Itenerant there, his Printed Sermons tell us, where he so earnestly persuades
men not to question their Justification after Conversion, for any sin
whatsoever they shall commit; and more such like: And his Printed Writings
show, that Mr. Erbury, of whom he learned Separation, fell so far, as that it is
hard to discern that he was at all a Christian. And Vavasor Powel was an
Antinomian.

Now I crave a sober Answer to this, 1. Whether a Liturgy had not been better
than no Worship for six days in seven? 2. Whether these Itinerants, that so
dangerously erred in Doctrine, were not more sadly destitute of the help of the
Spirit, than they that only wanted ability to utter sound words without a Form,
or Books? And had not good forms been safer for that People, than the Doctrine
of Mr. Erbury, Mr. Crad^k, Vavasor Powel, Morgan Lloyd of Wrexham, (known also
in Print). It grieved me to talk with one of these Itinerants in 1663, who came
to me for Counsel: He had been an Anabaptist set up for an Itinerant over many
Parishes; I examined him, and found that he had not any more learning than to
read English, and was grossly Ignorant in Divinity: He was ordained for all that
by a Bishop and conformed; I wondered how he past their Examination: He told me
that they asked him no questions about his Learning or Knowledge, but only
whether he would Conform, and so ordained him.

I have now opened some of the fruits of Separation in England, as you have
done the supposed fruits of the Liturgies, but indeed of the exclusion of free
Prayers. And judge now whether all the ill effects have come from one extreme.
The truth is, having impartially observed the mischiefs of the Age in which I
have lived, I have found that both the extremes have been the chief causes; and
the Peacemakers both the most understanding, and the most innocent: And the
nearer any of the several parties have come to them, the more innocent they
have been. It is not mere Episcopacy or Liturgies, that have done the mischief;
for such excellent men as Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Farrar, Parker, Jewel,
Grindal, Davenant, Usher, etc. could use both profitably: It Is not mere
Presbytery; for such as Calvin, Beza, Danaeus, Sadeel, Rivet, Chamier, Dallee,
Blondel, have been excellent Lights in the Church: It is not mere Independency;
for Ramus, Amesius, H. Jacob, Ier. Buroughs, and many others of that mind,
have been excellent peaceable men. It is not mere Anabaptistry, for there have
been many peaceable worthy men against Infant Baptism, (and some Bishops
thought it not of Divine Institution); and when they were rebaptized,
continued in Love and Communion with others. But it is Proud Ignorance, and
want of Christian Love, causing Excommunicating, Persecuting, Separation or
Schism in some, and withdrawing censorious Separation in others, who (neither
party) understand the truth, nor ever loved their Neighbors as themselves, nor
learnt to do as they would be done by. The worldly P R. IGs. and the unruly P
R. IGs. by Persecution, and by causless Separation and Alienation, have done
the hurt.

But I will tell the Bishops, that they should not be too angry with the
Learned Author of these twelve Arguments: For I know not three men alive, whom
they are more beholden to for their restitution, by opening the door, and
sweeping the way, and melting down or pulverizing all that was like to have
resisted them. I speak not of the Intention, but of the Action; by which the
Separatists cut down the banks, and when they had let in the Prelacy and
Liturgy which they dislike, then write and talk against them.

I will add one Question to this unpleasant Section; If there be as few in all
the Christian World; yea, among the reformed Calvinists and Lutherans, out of
our Kings Dominions, that can pray as well without a form, as with it, as we
have great cause to believe; would he have all these Nations dissolve all their
Churches, and like Atheists cast off all public Church-worship, till they have
Ministers enough that have learnt to pray better without a Form or Liturgy than
with it? If this be desired, I appeal to any that can difference Christianity
from Heathenism, Whether Liturgies, or such a Separation from Liturgies, would
do more hurt?

And I will add yet one question more, If there be not above two or three (or
at last no) Church Assemblies in a County, which have Nonconforming Ministers,
and opportunity to worship God as Churches; would you have all the rest of the
Countries dissolve their Church Assemblies, or forbear all, and live like
Unbelievers? If so, I am a Separatist from such destructive Principles and
Separations.

D. O. 3. Argument, That in religious Worship which derogates from the Kingly
Office of Jesus Christ, so far as it does so, is false Worship.

Unto the Office of Christ, it inseparably belongs that he be the sole Lawgiver
of the Church, in all the Worship of God. The rule of his Government herein is,
Teach men to do and observe whatsoever I command.

But the Worship treated about, consists wholly in the Institutions, Commands,
Prescriptions, Orders and Rules of Men; and on the Authority of men alone does
their Impositions on the practice of the Church depend. What is this, but to
renounce the Kingly Office of Christ in the Church?

17. TO the Major of your 3 d. Arguement I answer, 1. There is that in Worship,
[as the badness of the men, etc.) which is no part of the Worship, and
therefore no false Worship. 2. True Worship materially may be so abused, as to
derogate from the Kingly Office of Christ. 3. But it is granted, That all your
own, or other mers Errors, or Sin in Worship, (which no man is totally free
from) do in some degree practically derogate from the Kingly Office of Christ,
(which should be better obeyed) and so is so far false Worship.

That it belongs to this Office of Christ to be the sole Lawgiver in all the
Worship of God, XXX. Error.
is another mistake. 1. There is that in Gods Worship, which is no part of his
Worship. 2. There is a secondary Worship subservient to Gods Institutions,
which men may make Laws about. 3. There are temporary Bylaws and Mandates,
which have the essence of Law, (which is, to signify the Rulers Will, making
the Subjects Duty) besides general Laws by Excellency, so called.

And so, 1. Princes may make Laws for the Use of the best Translation of
Scripture, for the Version of Psalms, for Ministers due ordering Worship; to
restrain some Seducers, for Time, Place, Utensils, to be uncovered, and to
kneel or stand at Prayer, etc. And the Pastor may by Mandate, oblige the People
to much of the like.

Matthew. 28.20. By saying [ whatever I command you] does not say, Do nothing
which your Parents* Prince or Pastor command you, besides my Commands. Sure it
was his Spirit that said, Heb. 13. Obey them that have the Rule over you.
Christ never particularly commanded any of the Twenty things, in which I
instanced to Mr. Raphson. Must not Children obey Parents, or Servants their
Masters, in learning any Form of Catechism, or choosing any Minister, or writing
Sermons, etc. till Christ will particularly command them? This is a false
Exposition.

It is another Mistake, that the Worship treated about, consists wholly in
the Command, etc. of men. This Worship contains, 1. In General, Praying,
Praising, Preaching. Is this none of Gods Command? 2. It contains for the
Matter signified, XXXI. Error.
the Confession of Sins of Omission and Commission, the Petitioning for all
contained in the Lords Prayer, and for all Graces (tho Prayers for Faith or its
increase, was much forgotten, save on St. Thom^s day, or such an odd occasion)
and for the Church and others, as well as our selves, for Kings, and all in
Authority; And Thanksgivings for all sorts of Men. I can find little in the
Common Public Worship, whose Matter is not of Divine Command; And can you find
none such at all? wonderful difference of Eyesight!

3. The Matter signifying, is much of it: The Psalms of David, the Old
Testament and the New Read, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments, Scripture
Hymns, a Scripture-Benediction: Is none of all this commanded by God? What
Christian should believe it?

It is also a Mistake, that [ on the Authority of Men alone, does their
Imposition on the Practice of the Church depend]. For, 1. The foresaid parts
are imposed by God himself. 2. The Lawful Modes imposed by Men, depend not on
their Authority alone, XXXII. Error.
but on Gods, who Authorizeth Rulers to do it: For he has said, Let all be
done to Edification, in Order; Obey them that have the Rule. They that obey a
Pastor for Time, Place, Utensils, Translations, Psalms, etc. or that obey the
King, depend not herein on Man alone.

Your Conclusion also is a Mistake. XXXIII. Error.
This is not to renounce the Kingly Office of Christ in the Church, no more
than you did, when you wrote your Savoy-Articles of Confession, or when you
draw up the Form of a Church Covenant for your Flock. All that is a Sin against
Christ's Kingly Office, is not a renouncing of it.

D. O. 4. Argument. That which gives Testimony against the Faithfulness of
Christ in his House, as a Son and Lord of it, above that of a Servant, is not
to be complied withal; let all his Disciples judge.

Unto this Faithfulness of Christ it does belong to appoint and command all
things whatever in the Church, that belongs to the Worship of God, as is
evident from this Comparison with Moses herein, and his preference above him.
Hebr. 3.3, 4, 5 6. But that Institution and Prescription of all things in
Religious Worship, of things never instituted nor prescribed by Christ in the
Forms and Modes of them, arises from a supposition of a defect in the Wisdom,
Care, and Faithfulness of Christ; Whence alone a necessity can arise of
prescribing that in Divine Worship, that he has not prescribed.

. 18. TO your Fourth Argument, I answer. 1. To the Major Proposition (1. To
give Testimony) Signifies either by remote unseen Consequence, to cross
Christ's Faithfulness: And so do many of the mistakes of you, and every Party;
Or it signifies a known denial of Christ's Faithfulness. No Christian complieth
with this.

2. Complying also is an ambiguous word; if it mean an approbation of any Sin,
so no man must comply. If it mean communicating in good, where there is a
faulty mixture of some evil, so he that will not comply, must join with no
Church, and with no Man living.

2. To your Minor, I answer, (passing by the misforming) in your Supposition,
It is not true, that it belongs to Christ's Faithfulness to appoint and
command all things whatever in the Church, XXXIV. Error.
which belongs to the Worship of God: Else he were unfaithful in bidding them
appoint many things belonging to his Worship. I have named Instances enough;
which I must not still repeat; You and all Ministers belong to his Worship, and
yet Christ has not in Scripture named you, but left the Choice of you to Man.
So of all Accidents undetermined.

It is another Error, That the Prescription of Forms and Modes of things in
Worship, XXXV. Error.
not commanded by Christ, can arise from nothing but from Supposition of a
defect in the Wisdom, care and faithfulness of Christ. I confute it, 1. You
know not the hearts of all the World, and therefore cannot say, That this can
arise from nothing else: Did you know Ambrose, that made the Te Deum, and all
that made and prescribed Psalms, Hymns and Prayers; and Calvin that made a
Liturgy; and Bucer, and the Martyrs here, and all that prescribed Translations
and Metres, etc. so well, as to know that all these, and almost all the
Churches on Earth do suppose Christ to be unfaithful?

2. Is it only such a charge or Supposition against Christ, which made you your
self prescribe your form of Church Covenant, your Savoy Articles, your
Catalogue of Fundamentals, your Lay Elders, your time and place of Meeting,
your Utensils and Ornaments at the Sacraments, etc?

3. I tell you another possible end, They did it, because they thought that
these Modes are mutable according to Persons, Place, Time, Occasion, etc. And
therefore, that it belonged not to Christ's faithfulness to detemine them, and
that they should deny his faithfulness if they did deny that it has left them
to humane Determination under general Rules, and bid the people obey them that
have the rule over you, etc.

D. O. 5. Argument, That which is a means humanely invented for the attaining
of an end in Divine Worship, which Christ has ordained a means for, unto the
exclusion of that means so appointed by Christ, is false Worship, and not to be
complied withal.

The end intended, is the Edification of the Church, in the Administration of
all its holy Ordinances; this the Service Book is ordained and appointed by men
for, or it has no end or use at all; but the Lord Christ has appointed other
means for the attaining this end, as is expressly declared. He has given gifts
unto men for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body, Ephesians.
4.7, 8, 11, 12. that is, in all Gospel Administrations. But this means ordained
by Christ, namely, the exercise of spiritual gifts in Gospel Administrations,
unto the Edification of the Church, is excluded; yea, expressly prohibited in
the Prescription of this Liturgical Worship.

. 19. TO the Major of your 5 th. Argument, I answer, As to the former, No man
is to comply by Approbation with any thing that excludes any of Gods means;
for instance, not with you that exclude the great duty of Catholic Communion.
But we may so far comply with you and others, as to join with you in Gods
Worship, tho you mix some evil. Mr. Faldo at Barnet was fain many years to
Preach to a people that excluded singing Psalms. He did what they would bear,
when he could not do what he would. He complied not by Approbation with
exclusion, for he spoke against it.

Are you sure that all your ways have tended to the Edification of the Church?
Every weak Minister that preaches or prays, when an abler might be had,
hinders the Edification of the Church. Is it a Sin therefore to hear any but
the ablest?

2. That which hinders the Churches Edification by the Rulers fault, it may
be the Peoples duty to obey for a greater good: For instance, ^t is less
edifying to use our old singing Psalms, than a better Version: And yet for
Concord, if the Ruler appoint them, the People must use them; because Concord
with that imperfection, is better than to sing every one a several better
Version, or diverse at once: so a faulty Translation of Scripture, a weak
Sermon, an inconvenient hour and place, when Concord is necessary, and cannot
be had in the more edifying circumstances, it must be had in the best way we
can. If the Sheriff appoint an unfit time and place to meet to choose
Parliament Men; it is a duty to comply, rather than not to meet at all; every
evil so far excludes good: And yet we must not renounce Communion in all good,
where men mix any evil, left we also give over all good our selves.

3. Christ gives gifts to men now in the due use of means, and not by miracle:
Therefore he gives them in great diversity, and by hard Study, and long Time,
Heb. 5. For the time they ought to have been teachers, etc. Therefore a Novice
must not be a Bishop; but an Elder, whence the Office had its name. All your
pupils, people or Ministers, that had the Spirits gifts, had not your
redundancy of Expression. And many can talk more fluently for falsehood, than
good men can for truth. I was never much troubled my self for want of words to
express what I know; but I have ten thousand times more begged hard for more
Knowledge, Faith, Love, and Hope, than ever I did for the gift of utterance; a
full heart is earnest, fervent and ready.

It is another mistake, That the exercise of Spiritual gifts is expressly
forbidden; XXXVI. Error.
unless you had meant that just at the use of the Litutgy, extemporate
utterance is forbidden; but it is not so in the Pulpit.

And you should not confound things so different, as is the use of the Liturgy,
and the forbidding of other prayers.

Nor yet the act of the Commander, and of the People. If Rulers should command
Preaching, Prayer, etc. to exclude the singing Psalms, that is their Sin, and
not the Peoples, who must not (like peevish Children at meat) refuse all,
because they cannot have what they would.

D. O. The pretense of men's liberty to use their Gifts in Prayer before
Sermons, and in Preaching, is ridiculous; they are excluded in all the solemn
Worship of the Church. 20. THis answer is not only a mistake, but of an ill
aspect on your selves. XXXVII. Error.
It Is not true, That the use of Gifts [ is excludeded in all the solemn Worship
of the Church]. As if Prayer, Praise, Thanksgiving, Confession, Explication of
the Scripture, Reproof, Exhortation, Comfort, Direction, Benediction, were no
part of the solemn Worship of the Church. Indeed some Superconformists have
said so, but I had hoped you would not.

2. I said, It Is of an ill aspect. For 1. If Preaching and Pulpit-Prayer before
and after, be none of the solemn Worship of the Churches, then all those
Churches which seldom use any other, (saving a Psalm, which is a Liturgick
form) have no solemn Worship at all. 2. But if it be otherwise, (as it is) then
the Parish Churches so far excel most of you, that they have all that you have
(Pulpit Prayer and Sermon, and sometimes a Chapter) and all the Common Prayer
more. And is not that better than your nothing (except at Sacraments)? I know
that the Nonconformists that I have converst with, are in judgment for more,
(for reading the Psalms, Chapters, Creed, Lords Prayer, Decalogue, etc.) But I
have come into so few of their Churches that do any more than the common Pulpit
work, (sing a Psalm, Pray and Preach there) that I have in that respect
preferred the Churches that do all that, and add all the Liturgy besides, more
than you use.

D. O. Argument 6. That which has been, and is obstructive of the edification
of the Church, if it be in Religious Worship, it is false Worship: For the end
of all true public Worship is edification. But such has been, and is this
Liturgical Worship: For,

21. YOur Sixth Argument is but a Former repeated. To the Major I grant it: All
that is bad, is so far false.

To the Minor, 1. And such is all your Errors, and all the Disorder, ill
Reflections, slovenly Expressions which any weak Minister uses, and the faults
that all men have in some degree.

D. O. 1. It puts an utter stop to the progress of Reformation in this Nation,
fixing bounds unto it that it could never pass.

2. It has kept multitudes in ignorance, etc.

3. It has countenanced and encouraged many in reviling and reproaching the
holy Spirit, and his Work.

4. It has set up and warranted an ungifted Ministry.

5. It has made great desolations in the Church: 1. In the silencing of
painful Ministers. 2. In the ruin of Families innumerable. 3. In the
destruction of souls.

It is not lawful to be participant in these things; yea, the glory of our
profession lies in our testimony against them.

22. TO your Reasons: 1. It Is not the use of a Liturgy that hinders
Reformation, but the abuse of it, and forbidding other ways of duty.

2. The same I say of keeping men in ignorance: Use all other means, and the
Liturgy with it, and it will keep none in ignorance. Some Helvetia Ministers
who endeavored to have practiced my Reformed Pastor, in personal conference,
told me, That there the common people go customarily, almost every day in the
week, to a Sermon, without Ceremonies or Liturgies (usually) with a Bible in
their hands, and continue as ignorant as those here that have no preaching.

3. I think it was not the esteem of a Liturgy that made Quakers and
Separatists here, revile and scorn the best Ministry, I think, in all the World.

4. Nor was it the Liturgy that set up and warranted such ill-gifted Teachers
as Mr. Erbury, Dell, Den, Paul Hobson, Chillington, Lilhurne, Prince, Wallwin,
William Sedgwick, no, nor Mr. Saltmarsh, who wrote for comfort, That Christ
has repented and believed for us; and we should no more question our Faith and
Repentance, than we would question Christ. I pass by multitudes of
Army-Preaching-Soldiers, such as those in Major Bethel's Troop, in the same
Regiment that I was with; against whom, one day in Amersham-Church, I was put
to dispute from morning till near night, to save multitudes whom they drew
every week to hear them, from their absurd Errors (and at last they turned
Levellers, and Cromwell was put to hunt them to death). The like I was put to
with Brown, an Army-Chaplain, and an Arrian, that maintained, That Christ was
not God, in a Church at Worcester: And this life I had with them long. Was all
this caused by a Liturgy?

5. The desolations made in the Church, malignant men would make with or
without a Liturgy. What may not be abused? The Authors must answer for it. Such
as aforesaid, Jewel, Grindal, Usher, etc. Preston, Sibs, Bolton, and a Thousand
such, made no such havoc.

It is not lawful to partake in persecution: but we must partake in much good,
which bad men will abuse to persecution. An excellent foreign Church has
decreed to reject all Ministers that are not, 1. For the Antiquity of the
Hebrew Points. 2. Against Universal Redemption. Our Learned Author here was for
both these, tho men abused them to persecution.

D. O. Argument 7. That practice whereby we condemn the suffering Saints of the
present Age, rendering them false Witnesses of God, and the only blamable cause
of their own sufferings, is not to be approved: But such is this practice: And
where this is done on a pretense of liberty, without any plea of necessary duty
on our part, it is utterly unlawful. 23. TO your Seventh Argument: The Major
means, either Saints that suffer for well-doing, or for ill-doing. If the
Anabaptists should be suffering-Saints, I would be none of those that they
suffer by: But yet I would not be for Anabaptistry, for fear of condemning them
as the cause of their own suffering: By that Rule I must own every error or sin
that any Saint suffers for.

2. The Truth bids me say more than I am willing, to confute this Error. I have
heard Army Officers say, That they believed abundance of the Ten Thousand
Scots, killed at Dunbar, were godly men: And yet you were one that publicly,
in Pulpit and Print, accused them, and did not justify their cause for being
Saints. Do you think none of the Ministers in England were Saints, that refused
the Engagement, and were sequestered for that, and not keeping Fasts and
Thanksgivings for Blood? Are you sure that Christopher Love (beheaded), was no
Saint? Or did you therefore own their Causes?

To your Minor: It is a gross Mistake to say, That going to the Liturgy makes
the Refusers [ the only blamable cause of their own sufferings]. What! XXXVIII.
Error.
are you one that acquit all their Prosecutors, if it be but proved, that the
Refusers are mistaken? Who could have suspected this? What if Presbyterians,
Anabaptists, and such others err (as you believe they do)? If any would
therefore silence, imprison, banish or hang them, dare you justify it, and
say, That the Dissenters are the only blamable cause of their own sufferings?
Sure you consider not what you wrote: You thought not so.

2. But are there no Saints that go to Common Prayer? Why do not you
distinguish Saints? I hope there are many times more Saints (and wiser), that
separate not, than that do: And are not you as faulty for saying, They sin, as
they for saying, You sin, if their cause be true? This sounds as too much of
a Sect.

3. The Truth is, Repentance is so hard a work, that I see both Extremes fly
from it on a proud pretense of Constancy, and that they may not confess that
they have erred. It was the grand Argument that bore down me and others, when
we pleaded with some Bishops to have prevented our Divisions by some
alterations [ Oh then it will be thought that we erred, and gave cause for old
complaints]: And now we must none of us hold Communion with the
Parish-Churches, lest some Saints that separate, should be rendered False
Witnesses of God, and blamable. But were not the old Nonconformists and
Conformists, as real Saints as the old Separatists, and a Thousand for One? And
do not you now make them all as False Witnesses? If really you have fathered
any Love-killing, dividing Error on God, repent of it, and do not justify it,
for fear of being thought blamable. This is it that keeps England in
confusion, and threatens worse: Neither of the Extremes that have caused our
calamities, are humbled, nor can endure a motion to repent; but Overturners
justify their former and their present love-destroying ways. The Lord give
England Repentance unto Life: And the Lord help me to see all my Errors, and to
repent the more, because I see that proud Nature is so much against it.

And you mistake, if you think that we plead only liberty for this Communion.
It is duty that we plead: but not duty to all persons, nor all times, as if the
case of all were the same.

We have not the happiness of Innocence: Repentance is next to it: When we
confess our sins, we vindicate Christ and Religion, which are against them:
When we justify them, we falsely honor our selves, and lay all on Christ, as
if he would justify that which he abhors and died for. God will yet more
shame us, if we will shame his Cause, instead of taking shame to our selves.
Impenitence is more dangerous than any sin which we should repent of. Carnal
Policy will be angry with me for mentioning the old faults which Adversaries
sufficiently reproach us with. (And I must say, that God in his time, will
justify the generality of the sober godly people of England, from the false
Accusation of those Malignants and Papists, who charge them with all the Guilt
of the Sins of a few Sectaries got into an Army, even the subversion of
Church Order, and Civil Power, when it could not be done, but by a Conquest and
Oppression of these Religious People first, both Parliaments, Ministers and
their Flocks; in comparison of whom, the Army separatists were inconsiderable
for number. They that would destroy thousands of faithful Subjects, as guilty
of that which they opposed, till they were Conquered, and suffered for
opposing, do but show their own Iniquity) But yet God never taught men that way
of Policy: Repentance, and not Impenitence, or Self-justification, is the way
to take off men's reproach. God permits them to do it, because we do it not. To
confess our own Sins, is no Extenuation of the wickedness of any Malignant
Persecutors, or debaucht men. What they truly upbraid us with in malice, let us
openly lament in serious penitence; and not stand to a sinful dividing
Principle and Cause, lest the Saints be blamed, that have fathered it on God.
This Learned Author has done otherwise himself, and so has the Party now
opposed. He and I knew the Man who was Pastor to the Commanders of the Army,
when they pulled down and set up, and again pulled down, till they had turned
their Armed Bulwark into Atoms; and when he saw what they had done; said, [ I
wonder the people do not cast stones at us as we go along the streets]. Was not
this a blaming of his Flock? He knew how often the Addresses of the Separatists
to the several suddenly erected Soveraignties, did change their minds, and cry
peccavimus by their new Addresses for the old: And why may we not blame them
that blamed themselves for Fathering their Mistakes on God?

D. O. Argument 8. That Practice which is accompanied with unavoidable Scandal,
engaged in only on pretense of Liberty, is contrary to the Gospel; but such is
our joining in the present Public Worship.

It were endless to reckon up all the Scandals which will ensue herein. That
which respects our Enemies, must not be omitted. Will they not think, will they
not say, That we have only Falsely and Hypocritically pretended Conscience for
what we do, when we can on outward Considerations comply with that which is
required of us? woe to the World because of such Offenses: but woe to them also
by whom they are given.

. 24. TO the Major of your Eighth Argument, I answer, 1. It is not true, when
there is far greater Scandal by forbearing that Practice; but only when there
is less on the other side.

To the Minor I answer, It is not true, That it is only Liberty that is pleaded
for the Communion in question. It is great Duty that is pleaded: XXXIX. Error.
1. The Duty of Christian Union, and Concord, and Love, and Peace. 2. The Duty
of obeying the Commands and Example of Christ and his Apostles. 3. The Duty of
avoiding the Principles of Schism, and the condemning and false accusing the
Church of Christ on earth. 4. The Duty of bearing Witness against the Principle
(of the sinfulness of Communicating with a Church in Liturgies) which would
make Christ in most Ages to be no King, as having no Kingdom or Church on
earth. 5. The Duty of taking warning by the mischiefs of Causeless Separation,
in Ages that has so much smarted by it. 6. The Duty of seeking our own
Edification. 7. The Duty of keeping thousands of Christians from ceasing all
Public Worship, where they can have no other, but in the Parish-Churches. 8
The Duty of keeping thousands of good people from being ruined for mistakes and
evil doing. 9. The Duty of obeying Magistrates in Lawful things. 10. And the
Duty of avoiding Scandal on the other side: Is all this nothing but pretense of
Liberty?

As to the Scandal mentioned by you, No doubt, Adversaries will reproach you,
whether you Communicate in the Parish Churches or not. But note, 1. That if any
be guilty of such sin, as for outward Considerations to do any Evil, or any
Good which they take to be Evil, these men deserve some Reproach. But, 1. If
they before were in Circumstances which made it no Duty, and after by Gods
providence are in Circumstances which make it a Duty, the Reproachers do but
show their ignorance or malice, whether they be Persecutors or Separatists,
that so reproach them. 2. Or if men see the Error of their former Separation,
they must not forbear Repentance and Amendment, for fear of Reproach.

There is so great a difference of Men and Cases, that it is gross sottishness,
to think that their Duties and Sins are the same in mutable Cirstances. It Is a
Sin to Preach or Pray, when we should be quenching a Fire, saving Men's Lives.
Christians, as well as Pharisees, are yet to learn what that means, I will
have mercy and not Sacrifice, and therefore accuse the guiltless. Some men have
no possibility of any other Church-Worship, but in the Parish-Chuches. Some
have no other, but what is worse. Some may have abler Teachers, but at the cost
of Imprisonment and Ruin. It is not Lawful to lie in Prison merely for
refusing to hear a weak Nonconformist, when you might hear an abler: And so it
is in the Case of Conformists; Else all were bound to a few men. Some have
Liberry to hear fitter men, or at the least, more agreeable to them, without
greater hurt than good (As the Dutch and French here have). Some are commanded
by Husbands, Parents and Masters, to one Church, and some to another. Some have
more able and godly Ministers in the Parish-Churches, and some have such as I
would never own or encourage in the Ministry, by seeming to own them. Some can
remove their Dwelling, and some cannot. Some had Liberty the last year, that
cannot have it this year, without more hurt than their benefit will compensate.
In these Cases where God has not at all tied us to a Book, or no Book, to this
Church or to that; he that can truly tell which way he shall do, and get most
good or hurt, may by that better know his Duty, than by these Arguments, or
Men's Censures.

But, verily, my chief Reason for Communion in public, is the very same which
you bring against it: Even the avoiding of heinous Scandal. I have told the
World, 1. That Scandal is not displeasing men, but laying before them a
temptation to sin. 2. That if the Separatists be the best Christians, they are
farthest out of the danger of Scandal: It is the worst that are easiliest
tempted to Sin, and so whom we should be most fearful to scandalize. 3. And
it is a greater Sin to scandalize many, than few. 4. And worse by scandal to
tempt men to the mortal Sins of persecuting or scorning godly men, than merely
to tempt them to some small mistakes, or to grieve them. 5. And to scandalize
our Rulers, is worse than to scandalize Inferiors (Caeteris paribus).

And now I tell you, I the rather join in Public, 1. Lest I should harden
thousands in the Opinion, That we take that to be unlawful which is not, and
that we are for sinful Separation, and that we separate from, and unchurch
almost all Christ's Church* and that we are Enemies to Order, and Peace, and
Concord, and that we are unruly enemies to Government, and giddy, ignorant,
self-conceited people. 2. And so, lest we breed throughout the Land such a
contempt of Conscience in Gods service, as they have of Quakers; and thousands
by this should be alienated from the Reverence of serious Religion, and Youth
should be educated to the like contempt, under these temptations. 3. And lest
if any in Church Matters be guilty of sinful Extremes on the other side, (in
Oaths, Professions, Ceremonies or Practices), we should harden them therein, by
tempting them to think, that we have no worse against their way, than the Use
of a Liturgy. 4. Lest the Conceit, that we are but a company of giddy
Fanatics, encourage any contentious Preachers to render us odious, and rail at
us in the Pulpits, to their own shame, and the widening of our Breaches. 5. And
lest the same Error should tempt any Bishops or Magistrates to think, they do
God and their Church and Country service, in silencing, imprisoning,
reproaching and ruining Gods faithful Servants without cause, and bring the
Land under Gods wrath by persecution. Are these no Scandals? or not greater
than offending or displeasing the dissenting Separators? to say nothing of
ocsioning our Reproach in all the Foreign Churches which have a Liturgy.

If against all this, the displeasing your mistaken Flocks should prevail, then
their weakness and error would constitute them our chief Governors.

D. O. Argument 9. That Worship which is unsuited to the spiritual relish of
the New Creature, which is inconsistent with the conduct of the Spirit of God
in Prayer, is unlawful: For the Nature, Use and Benefit of Prayer is overthrown
hereby in a great measure. Now let any one consider what are the Pr^mises, Aids
of the Holy Spirit, with respect to the Prayers of the Church, whether as to
the Matter of them, or as unto Ability for their performance, or as unto the
Manner of it, and he shall find that they are all rejected and excluded by this
Form of Worship, as is pretended, comprizing the wh^le Matter, limiting the
whole Manner, and giving all the Abilities of Prayer that are needful or
required: This has been proved at large. 25. TO your Ninth Argument, I answer,
1. O! confine not the New Creature to those of your Opinion. Do you think none
of the Old Nonconformists or Conformists, none of the Reformed Churhes, and no
Church on Earth for a Thousand years, had any of the New Creature? When you
have affrighted People with telling them, it is heinous sin, and returning to
Babylon; and also by long disuse, made a Liturgy uncouth to them, do not
ascribe all their averseness to the New Creature, which is from prejudice and
disuse. For my part, when God taught me first to pray, I had no averseness to a
Form: When I heard it charged with sin, I began to be averse to it: When I had
studied the case, I was cured of that aversness: but never reconciled to the
forbidding of all other Prayer, nor to the faults of any Forms.

And who knows not, that Man's culpable Nature loves Novelties, and are
hardly kept in lively Affections under any thing that is very often said? A
Book, or Sermon, tho never so good, affects us not so much after many times
reading and hearing, as at the first: We must not lay this weakness on the New
Creature, tho it should teach Imposers to suit the Remedy to the Disease, and
give children such food as is not too displeasing to their Appetites.

And yet I find not the generality of Appetites* even in your Flocks, is
against the Forms of Psalms, being not prejudiced against them.

It is not true, that Liturgies are inconsistent with the conduct of the Spirit
in Prayer: It is a Mistake also, XL. Error.
That this Form of Worship rejects and excludes the matter of Prayer, whenas
the Visible Book tells all the contrary. Do all those words express none of the
Matter of Prayer? It is untrue, That it rejects and excludes the Manner, as
to the chief part: For the Lord's Prayer is a perfect Form for Matter, Order
and Method: And the Psalms read and sung, are for Matter and Manner, neither
evil nor excluded. And sure there is much of the rest laudable. If all Matter
and Manner be rejected and excluded, then the Martyrs that used it, and all the
Churches on Earth, almost, have no Church-Prayers. But again I tell* The use of
Forms, and the forbidding all other Prayers, are Two different things, which
you ill confound.

D. O. Argument 10. That which overthrows and dissolves our Church Covenant, as
unto the principal end of it, is as to us unlawful. This end is the professed
joint subjection of our souls and consciences unto the Authority of Christ, in
the observasion of whatever he commands, and nothing else, in the Worship of
God.

But by this practice, this end of the Church Covenant is destroyed, and
thereby the Church Covenant it self broken: For we do and observe that which
Christ has not commanded: And while some stand unto the Terms of the Covenant,
which others relinquish, it will fill the Church with confusion and disorder.

26. TO your Tenth Argument, I answer, 1. What your Church Covenant is, I know
not: But if it profess subjection to nothing in Worship but what Christ
commands, XLI. Error.
it is your Church-Error: For then you are in Covenant not to obey the Pastor
(even your self), if he set a Psalm, a Tune, a Translation of Scripture, nor if
he appoint Time, Place and Utensils for Worship: For these are in the Worship.
Then you are covenanted to disobey the Magistrate, if he command any of these,
or command men not to put on their Hats, or sit at Prayer; or for concord, the
all the Land to one Translation of Scripture, or any such undetermined Mode.

2. It is a greater disgrace to your Churches than ever I knew of before, not
only to covenant against God's Word, Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 These. 5.12, 13. etc. and
against the Fifth Commandment; but also to make this necessary to Concord, That
your Churches must break, if the Members agree not all herein. This is a plain
demand of Conformity to an Humane unsound imposition. No wonder if they are
Dividers who set up by Church-Covenants, false Terms of Unity.

D. O. Argument 11. That which contains a virtual renunciation of our
Church State, and of the lawfulness of our Ministry, and Ordinances therein, is
not to be admitted or allowed.

But this also is done in the practice enquired into: For it is a professed
conjunction with them in Church Communion and Worship, by whom our Church State
and Ordinances are condemned as null: And this Judgment they make of what we
do, affirming that we are gross Dissemblers, if after such a conjunction with
them, we return any more unto our own Assemblies. In this condemnation we do
outwardly and visibly join.

27. IF your Church State be essentiated by a Covenant, to be subject to
nothing else in Worship (even the Accidents which God bids men determine by his
general Rules of Edification, Order, Decency, Love, Peace, Church-Custom, etc.)
then I commend the generality of Nonconforming Ministers, that they set up no
such Church State: And they do well to renounce all that you do ill to invent
and impose, while you talk against Imposition, and adding to God's Word such
Humane Forms.

But yet it is an Error to hold, That if any unjustly condemn other Churches,
XLII. Error.
it is a renunciation of that condemned Church State, to have Communion with
them that condemn. Who would have thought the Two separating Extremes had so
agreed in their Principles? This is just the very Core of the evil of the Book
of the contrary party which I here answer. Alas! how few Churches on Earth have
not peevishly condemned one another; it may be for Easter Day, for the choice
of a Bishop, as the Donatists (striving whose Bishop was the right): The case
of the Novatians, Audians, Luciferians, and even of most in East and West, are
sad Instances: And will such censoriousness unchurch them, and forbid us
Communion with them? This is plain revenge, and to curse them that curse us,
and abuse them that abuse us. I l^ke Calvin's Spirit better than this, who
said, Tho Luther should call me a Devil, I would call him, the Excellent
Servant of God. Too many Lutherans now renounce Communion with the Calvinists,
who yet renounce not Communion with them.

D. O. 12. Argument, That which deprives us of the principal Plea for the
Justification of our Separation from the Church of England, in i^s present
state, ought not justly to be received or admitted. But this is certainly done
by a Supposition of the lawfulness of this Worship, and a practice suitable
thereunto, as is known to all, who are exercised in this Cause.

Many other heads of Arguments might be added to the same purpose, if there
were occasion.

28. TO your 12 th. Argument, I answer, 1. That which discovers the
unsoundness of any ones Plea for Separation, is to be received. There are
several Cases, in which Separation from the Church of England is sinful. As 1.
If any separate as the Papists do, because they are against sound Doctrine, or
any good that is in the Church.

2. If any renounce Communion with all the Parish Churches under the name of
the Church of England.

3. If any renounce Communion with the Church of England, as it is a Christian
Kingdom, headed by one Christian Protestant King?

4. If they renounce Communion with the Church of England, as it is called one
from the Association or Concord of its Pastors, or Church Governors.

5. If any renounce Communion with faulty Bishops, or Worship, or Discipline,
simply and absolutely, and not only secundum quid, and so forsake the good that
is in them for the sake of the evil. In a word, 1. All that Separate for a
wrong cause. 2. Or further than they Separate from Christ, or than Christ would
have them separate, do sin.

2. But they that renounce any corruption, as such, and the Church no further
than secundum quid, as it is faulty, do well: For we must so renounce the
faults of all Churches and Christians in the World, (and our own first.) But
not the Churches and Christians for any tolerable faults, so we commit no Sin
our selves, which they impose as the condition of their Communion.

Reader, I displease my own disposition as well as others, in the answering of
these Arguments. But when I had read them, my Conscience would not suffer me to
see many thousand good People so misguided, who have not skill themselves to
discern the Fallacies, and by Silence to betray them.

Let it be noted, That it is not all, nor the greatest Objections I confess
which I here deal with, having done it often elsewhere; but these Twelve militate
so much against all the Liturgies in the World, as well as ours, that I durst
not pass them by in Silence.

1. Some object against the faults, which they supposed very great in diverse
By-offices, Baptizing, Confirmation, the Lords-Supper-Impositions, Burial
Circumstances and Forms: But these are nothing to the common Worship of the
Church on the Lords days.

2. Some object against the Ministers as Usurpers, being chosen by Patrons, and
not consented to by the Flocks. But this is nothing against them that are
consented to by Acceptance, tho not by Election.

3. Some Object the heniousness of the Sins of Ministers Conformity, as being
deliberate Covenanting to -- (I am loath to name them) and so the command, (
from such turn away, with such not to eat]: And the case of Martial and
Basilides in Cyprian, and that of Miracle-working Martin, (which on another
occasion I have mentioned). But were these Sins never so surely proved, as
great as alleged, 1. Every Minister cannot be proved guilty of the worst part.
2. And the Matter of a Sin may be heinous, and yet ignorance take off much of
the guilt, as it did of Paul's Persecution: An unlawful War, in which thousands
were murdered, and Countries ruined, is Materially one of the greatest Sins in
the World; And yet woe to abundance of Princes and People, if Ignorance excuse
it not; and if we must renounce Communion with all Countries and Persons, that
are guilty of it. 3. And when whole Countries and Churches are in Sin, which we
cannot cure, and have no government of, the case of commanded Communion much
differs from that which is with single Offenders, and that is in our Power to
choose or refuse.

4. Some Object, that the 5 th, 6 th, 7 th, and 8 th, Canons, have
excommunicated us already. Therefore we separate not, but they cast us out.
Ans. Let them that are concerned in those Canons, defend them if they can, and
justify themselves, for it is past my skill. But we are not bound (tho
excommunicate) to execute them on our selves: Let others do it, if it must be
done.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
REader, Upon the review of what I have here written, I think meet to repeat
the Occasion, and to say somewhat of the Matter and the Manner of this Writing:
The last sheet of my Reasons for Communion being Printed, and the opposite
Twelve Arguments suddenly sent me, as being in many hands, and such as would
frustrate all that I had written, if they were not answered: For the sake of
such as have not skill to see Truth from Error, and are led by Prejudice and
Names, I durst not in Conscience let them pass unanswered, they being of such
dangerous tendency, and so exceeding erroneous and fallacious. But being put,
by the stay of the Press, to do it suddenly, I see Reason to say more, lest I
be misunderstood.

And First, of the Cause which I write of, in its self and its consequents: 2.
The Season of it: 3. The Manner, as to the Authors whom I gainsay and confute
and the manner of confuting them: 4. My Reasons for the writing of this
Confutation.

I. I am not writing against Episcopacy, Presbytery, Independency or
Rebaptizing: I am so far from judging any part of them to be men rejected by
Christ, or to be cast out of the Church, or denied leave to worship God in
their own Way, or persecuted for it, that I would do any lawful thing for their
just Liberty: Yea, so far, that it is only the contrary principle and
endeavors by which they strive against, and condemn one another, and call
aloud to their followers (such I mean that are for the opposed Separation) to
avoid one another, as ever they would escape the guilt of Idolatry or wilful
sin. And if I see one man in the streets beating all about him, I cannot keep
peace without resisting his unpeaceableness.

I am not justifying all that is required to Conformity, nor all in the
Liturgy: Let them do it, that can. Mr. Warner speaks untruly when he talks of
my change herein, and as if I went to the Parish-Churches for some worldly end.
I have been at no Church since August was Twelvemonth, nor am ever more like to
be, unless the Church come to my bedside or my door. Is Mr. Warner so lately
born, that he never saw nor heard of our joint endeavor when the King came in,
1660. to have prevented these Confusions, by getting a Reformation of the
Liturgy? at least, before he said he knew not what, of one whom he knows not,
he should have enquired, whether I have not, to this day, since then, 1660.
held constant Communion with good Ministers in the Parish-Churches.

But with bad men, and well-meaning honest men, Satan does most of his Work in
the World by untruths and fallacies. Most that think they do God Service by
speaking evil of me, falsely, believe and persuade one another, That I do write
against them for not coming to the public Churches; and that I am an Accuser
and Plaintiff against them for this; and that hereby I animate men to afflict
them, with many other such untruths.

Whereas I have written over, and over, and over, That I persuade no man either
to or from a public Church, till I know his Circumstances: And that I doubt
not but it is one man's duty, and another sin. Were I under one intolerable
for Ignorance, Heresy, or malignant Wickedness, who did more hurt than good, I
would not seem to own him as a Minister, any more than Cyprian did Martial and
Basilides, or Martin Ithacius, Idacius, and the like; or Gildas the Priests
whom he describes, or the ancient Churches Heretical Bishops: Abundance of
Circumstances make various the Cases of particular men.

Yea, tho those Dividers renounce Communion with one another (while I blame
them, and lament it), I renounce Communion with none of the Parties, no, tho
they revile and hate me: Only, 1. I will not commit any known sin with them
while I communicate with them in all things else, and own them as true
Christians, tho faulty. 2. And I will not prefer worse before better, if I know
it, tho I renounce neither.

It Is ordinary for Two Women fighting and scolding in the streets, to turn both
their railing against him that would quiet them. And I expect the like.

The Cause that I write against, is this (Reader, understand it, or meddle not
with what you understand not, 1. That God's Worship (says D. O.) (...): That
all that is in it, and belonging to it, and the manner o^ it, is fal^e Worship,
if it have not a Divine Institution in (...): That all Liturgies, as such, are
such fal^e Worship (and not the English only) used to (...) Christ's Pr^mi^e of
Gifts, and God's Spirit.

2. That this Worship is Idolatry (say some), or so false and unlawful, say the
rest, That it is a denying of Christ's Fidelity, and it is a going to Idols
Temples; or at least, unlawful to join in Communion with such as use it. And
therefore they persuade all, as they will avoid Idolatry, or false Worship and
sin, to avoid Communion with such Churches.

3. And suppose that they truly instance in many things amiss, in Order,
Ceremony, Forms, Impositions, Defects; because these are sinful, he sins who
communicates with the Church which uses them, his presence signifying his
approbation, specially if commanded to that end.

4. And so Renunciation of Communion being the Excommunication which one Church
has power to inflict on another, the sum is, I write against the unjust
Excommunicators of one another. Their Executions are diverse, but their
Principles and Spirits too like, tho few of them know, or will know what manner
of Spirit they are of. The uppermost Schismatics, like the uppermost
Millstone, are the Active, and the nethermost the Passive part, between both
which Truth and Peace is broken, and the Church pulverized. Both Parties have
not power to burn the Excommunicate, or lay them in Goals, or defame them
without open control: But the nethermost Party in this agrees, if not exceeds
the other; That they renounce Communion with the whole Church on Earth for
1200, or 1300 years, and with almost all (Protestants as well as others) now:
Whereas the Pope was taken to be intollerably arrogant when he excommunicated
and interdicted, but rarely a whole Kingdom, or one King; but not all the
Church on Earth.

2 That the Pope and his Prelates excommunicate the Greeks, and such as they
call but Schismatics, and not Heretics, with Exceptions, That they may yet
possibly be saved Christians: But those that I confute, charging the whole
Church on Earth, for 1200. years, with Idolatry, or false Worship, which God
accepts not, and none may communicate therein, do thereby call all men to
come out from among them, and be separate, and to hate them with that hatred
which is due to Idolaters, and to afford them no other love than is due to
Idolaters, or men that we must renounce Communion with.

I write therefore but as a Defendant of Love, and Unity, and the Catholic
Church, and the Communion of Saint^, and the Souls of Thousands young ignorant
persons, that being justly afraid of sin, and Idolatry and Damnation, are
a^frightned from Christian Love, and Unity, and Forbearance, into the
Wilderness of sinful Divisions and Confusions, by these false frightful Names.

As I renounce all Canons that, ipso facto, exccommunicate men for being
against humane unnecessary Formalities, Offices, yea, and Corruptions: So do I
for the same Reasons, renounce them that at one blow wo^ld cut off all Christ's
Churches on Earth, or renounce Communion with them, if they have (but really or
conceitedly) such Corruptions and Defects. Yea, I maintain (in the First Part),
That such faulty se^arating from one another, is not a separation of them all
from Christ, when they see not the Consequences of their own Errors; and man on
Earth is in so great darkness, that we all swarm with multitudes of Errors.

Now Reader, if opposing all this, be not Peacemaking, I know not what is: And
if the Peacemakers be the Incendiaries for confuting the Excommunicators, and
to be taken for the Enemies of Peace, for breaking Satan's factious Peace
breaking Peace, Christ was mistaken that calls them blessed: And if the Zeal
of the Sects which inclines men to speak evil of such Peace makers, as
Troublers of the Church, be the Wisdom from above, why did Christ call such the
Children of God? O that men would often read over Romans 14, and 15. 1 Cor. 12.
and James 3. with ^hil. 2.

The ^lain Consequents of the Cause which I confute, are these (which I charge
on the ill Cause, and not on the honest ignorant men that see them not).

1. That is is unlawful to communicate with almost any Church on Earth. 2. That
Christ having no Church for 1200. years, was no Head of it* and so no Christ. 3
That men must covenant to disobey Rulers or Pastors, if they bid them kneel, be
uncovered, or any of the often named Accidents and manner of Worship: And
Children must d^sobey Parents that command them a Form of Prayer, Psalm or
Catechism. 4. The Scots Covenant, and Independent Covenant, Catalogue of
Fundamentals, etc. are made Idolatry. 5. The contrary Extreme is encouraged, To
charge all this falsely on the Nonconformists, if we confute it not. 6. The
Nonconformists, that 1660, 1661. attempted Concord by reforming the Liturgy,
are made Idolaters, or their Communion unlawful, etc.

II. And whereas my Writing is judged unseasonable by some that own the Cause ^
write for; 1. ^t never will be so seasonable as to be liable to no
inconveniences or great abuse, nor has been this Three and Twenty years.

2. It is when the Universa^ Non-Communion is maintained in Print by many, and
more dangerously by an excellent man in Writing, and multitudes by these drawn
into the sin.

3. And when thousands are possessed with a false Opinion, that the
Nonconformists commonly are of these Opinions, and are to be hated and
destroyed; our silence seeming to them to own them.

4. And when by 20 years forbearing public Communion, tho commanded and
persecuted for it; our hearers are brought confidently to believe that we all
this while took it for unlawful; and that if any now say otherwise, it is but
cowardly backsliding.

5. It is when the Papists assaults of us, and of honest Conformists, as
Trimmers, makes it necessary to unite and encourage all honest men, That we
fall not all into Roman snares, and not to bid all Christians forsake all such
honest Parish-Ministers.

6. It is at a time, when thousands are in danger of being ruined for mistake,
and thousands to be drawn from all Church-Worship, when they can have no other
than in Parish Churches.

7. It is, when we are in danger of transmitting this dividing Error to
posterity, by suffering for it, as for the cause of God.

8. It is when other Ministers do it not, and therefore some one must: And I
that have no great impediment from friends, or outward temptations, but wait
for my change, am fitter to bear the noise of Censures, than they that I hope
may labor longer.

9. And if I do it, it must be now or never: For there is no work in the Grave
and Darkness. But of all this, my Reasons say more

III. As to the Manner of my writings, I doubt not but all that ever I wrote,
are faulty: I am imperfect, and can do nothing perfectly: I herein suspect this
(and all) my self: and which is worst, I have not skill enough on the longest
consideration to avoid the faultiness: For I have a strong love to Truth, and
hatred of Lying, and specially a love to historical Truth, and hatred to the
deceiving of the World and Posterity: And I have a diseased Impatience, (above
any ordinary Trial) to hear men rage and be confident in Error, and pour out
words for untruths, with unconvincible Fallacy, and speak evil most zealously
of that Truth, which they least understand.

And in this Impatience, I am apt to fit my Confutations to the Cause, taking
words to be false, that are not to be adapted to the Matter: But when I have
done, the guilty, (yea and their favorers) cannot bear them, and the words fit
not the hearer which fit the Matter, but the Disease is exasperated by the
Medicine. But then I think what is needful to save those that are not yet
infected, and to silence reproaching Enemies, tho the guilt be not cured.

As to this writing, it grieved me to write a Defense against Mr. Ralphson in
Prison, and more when I heard that he was dead: But I knew no other means
suitable against a printed Temptation, and Accusation, but a printed Antidote
and Defense.

Mr. Warner has since printed a further Accusation, with the same charge of
Idolatry and false Worship, against all the Manner of Worship not instituted,
and gives no Answer to my Confutation of it in Mr. Ralphs^n; and said so
little, that I will not write for him, that cannot himself confute him.

The Twelve Arguments I understand, are likest to prevail most by the honor of
Dr. Owens name, more than by any strength that is in them: I was willing, as
long as I could, to believe that they were not his; they being as fallacious
and frivolous as any of the rest, and one Error managed with above forty
Mistakes. But when his own Friends that have more of his on the same Subject,
(chiding me for Answering them) professed that they are his, I thought on Paul's
case, Gal. 2. who openly opposed Peter, because he was to be blamed, lest his
great Name should make the Separation the most prevalent, when Ba^^abas and
others were carried away to Dissimulation, and seeming to approve it.

It grieved me, I think, as much as any that blame me for it, to seem to
confute so worthy a man, when he is dead, and cannot answer for himself: But I
durst not let the writing of a dead man be so dangerous a trap for Souls, and
silently see the mischief prosper, for fear of displeasing the mistakers.

But let the Reader know, That it is so far from my design to wrong the Name of
Dr. Owen, by this Defense; that I do openly declare, That except in this point
of his Mistake, (and who mistaketh not in more than one? I doubt not but he was
a Man of rare Parts and Worth: And tho in the Trials of the late Distractions
of this Land, I mention some of his Confessions; it is to tell you that I had
reason to hope that he repented for doing no more in his public opportunities
against the Spirit of Division, which dissolved us. And which of us need not
repentance for our faults in those days of Trial?

Ye^, in his Doctrinal writings in his later Years, he is much clearer than
heretofore: And even, that Book of Communion with the Trinity, (which he
writes against whom I here deal with in the beginning*) is an excellent
Treatise: And his great Volumes on the H^brews, do all show his great and
eminent Parts: it was his strange Error, if he thought that freedom from a
Liturgy, would have made most or many Ministers, like himself, as free* and
fluent, and copious of Expression. In the late time he had never been so long
Dean of Christ-Church, so often Vice chancellor of (...); so highly esteemed in
the Army, and with the Persons then in Power, if his extraordinary Parts had
not been known.

But, Reader, if this excellent man had one mistake (against all Liturgies, and
for Separation from them) when yet he was of late years of more complying
mildness, and sweetness, and peaceableness, than ever before, or than many
others; and if you will use his Name and Authority for this one Error, Let me
tell you, I am confident you will wrong Dr. O. by ignorant defending him: I
doubt not but his Soul is now with Christ; and that tho Heaven have no Sorrow,
it has great Repentance: and that Dr. O. is ^ow more against the receiving of
this his mistake, than I am: and by de^ending it, you far more displease him
than me: There is there no Darkness, no Mistakes, no Separation of Christ's
Members from one another; no excommunicating or renouncing of Communion: They
all repent that ever they did any thing against Christian Love and Unity, and
received not one another as Christ receives us, and did not own Communion in
all that was good, while they avoided the wilful consent to evil.

Were D. O. now to speak to you, I am fully confident, it would be to this
purpose.

Tho all believers must be holy, and avoid all known wilful Sin, they must not
avoid one another, or their Communion in good, because of adherent faults or
imperfections; for Christ, who is most holy, receives Persons and Worship that
is faulty, (and false, if all faultiness be falsness) else none of us should be
received. There is greatest goodness where the^^ is greatest Love and Unity of
Spirit maintained in the bond of Peace. O call not to God to deny you Mercy, by
being unmerciful, nor to cast you all out, by casting off one another. O
Separate not from all Christ's Church on Earth, lest you separate from him, or
displease him? God has bid you pray, but not told you whether it shall be often
in the same Words, or in other, with a Book, or without a Book: Make not
superstitiously a Religion, by pretending that God has determined such
Circumstances: O do not Preach and Write down Love, and Commu^i^n ^f Saint^, on
pretense that your little Modes and Ways are only go^d, and theirs Idolatrous
or Intolerable; and do not slander and excommunicate all, or alm^st all
Christ's Body, and then wrong G^d by fa^hering this upon him. You pray [Thy will
be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven]. Why here is no S^^ife, (...)
Animosity, S^cts or Factions* n^r Separating from, or Excom^^nicating on
another. Learn of Christ, and know what Spirit ye are of, and separate from
none further than they separate from Christ; and receive all hat^ (...)
receives. While ^ou blame canonical Dividers, and unjust (...), do not you
reno^nce Communion wi^h (...) m^re than they (...) of too na^r^w (...)
^rinciple^, and in the time of Temptation, I did not foresee to what (...)
Con^usion* and Dissolution, and Hatred, and Ruin, dividing (...) did tend, but
the (...) in (...) perfection of Love to God, and one anoth^r; bids me beseech
you to avoid all that is against it, and to make use of no mistakes of mine, to
cherish any such offenses, or to oppose the motions of Love, Unity, and Peace.

No doubt but now this is D. O's mind.

If any one think that my Answers to him, favor of too much disrespect, (which
I fitted merely to the Words I answered) confessing my imprudence and
liableness to such faultiness; I desire that none will approve my failings,
blame me for them, but do not therefore justify true Schism, and blame the
cause of Love and Catholic Communion.

As to the mention of former miscarriages, which arose from the Spirit and
Principles of Division; the Drs. Argument led me to mention them so
necessarily, that I must else have wronged the Cause and Truth Defended: And I
had great reasons, I thought, both for that, and for this Defense, which I
shall next enumerate.

IV. I am not so blind as not to see inconveniences that abusers will raise
from all that I have said. But while I put those into one end of the Balance,
I have so much to put into the other, as with my Conscience quite weighs
down. I know that men have already made tenfold worse use of our Silence in
this Case; and the Opinion, 1. That we were all for the old Seditions and
Convulsions, And 2. that we are now o^ ^he Dividers mind, than ever they did of
our writing against them. And I have said so much against the active violent
Dividers, that should I say nothing against the Passive, I should be partial,
and seem a Sectary my self. Ovid taught me when I was a Child, That Omnia
perversas possunt corrumpere mentes.
Stant tamen illa suis omnia tuta locis.


1. Truth, and Love, and Peace, will be good, when men have said and done their
worst against them: And I owe much more than this to their honor and defense.
Buy the Truth, and sell it not, is an old Precept: These three are the very sum
of all Religion, and must not be forsaken or betrayed.

2. The great success, and late prospering, on both sides of dividing
Love-destroying Opinions (which I foretold in my Moral Prognostication) calls
loud for remedying attempts: And when is the Medicine seasonable, but when the
Disease is most dangerous and common: They that go to Sea, carry Medicines
against the Scurvy, and Flux; and they that go where the Plague reingeth, carry
Antidotes against it, etc.

3. The Ministerial calling lays strong Obligations on us to fidelity, sowing
Pillows, and saying peace to sin, and daubing with untempered mortar, are often
concluded with that Thunderclap, Their blood will I require at thy hands: And
I have been loath to desert the worst Malignants by despair, as Dogs and Swine:
And shall I forsake the Children as such, because they cry, and are angry with
the Mother because she hinders them from calling one another Bastards, or
beating one another, or forsaking the house, because of one another Presence?
or is She the makebate, because they cry for being parted in their frays?

4. Thousands that hear the great Precepts of Love, and Pray to be forgiven as
they forgive; are by such mistakes engaged in sinful despising, censuring,
backbiting; yea, and rendering odious one another, and so live in ordinary sin.

5. Charity to such Souls is more necessary than to the Body; and how dwells
the Love of God in him that neglects it?

6. He that does not what he can to save others yea, multitudes from sin,
becomes a partaker in the guilt and danger.

7. He that opens a Pit, must fill it; and he that sees it covered with
Leaves, and tells not men of the danger, is guilty of the hurt.

8. I must not cease Preaching, because men will misconstrue it: Therefore not
Preaching by the Press, when I have a call.

9. I have long found, that multitudes of our conscionable hearers, are settled
in belief, that their Teachers take Parish-Communion for Sin, because they
practice it not, even when they are commanded, and threatened, and punished: By
which they are silently misled, till necessity force us to tell them otherwise.
And then they Censure them as unconscinable Temporizers, and so they do all
godly men that communicate in public.

10. I see how hard it is after, to undeceive all these.

11. Most of the Epistles of Paul, James, and Jude, Peter, and John, speak much
and sharply against Church-dividers, and separaters.

12. The Scots Covenant swore all that took it, against Schism, and profaneness,
and all that is against sound Doctrine and Godliness.

13. Christ told us, A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

14. I saw that it is a dreadful dishonouring God and Religion, to father on
him our love-killing mistakes and sins: And that he will vindicate his honor
on us, if we do it not our selves, by open and penitent confession of such
faults.

15. We have long smarted under his Judgments already, and show no public
Repentance, and are threatened with much more; which if God may judge, it is
repentance that must prevent.

16. The common Convulsions, Silencing, and Calamities, which we have long
felt, are notoriously the fruits of this same Spirit and Error, and both the
parties which I here gainsay. And shall we lie four and twenty years in the
Flames, and be afraid to cry [ Fire] or call for Water, lest the Incendiaries
on both sides be displeased?

17. God's dissolving their Power, and conquering Armies, without a drop of
Blood, by their own Divisions, did so notoriously show the Sin by the
punishment, and show Gods hand against it, as was a kind of Miracle of
Providence, and makes their Sin, that be not moved by it, too like to
Pharoah's.

18. The main thing that moves me, is, That thousands being too young to know
those days and deeds, blind and malicious Enemies, without any shame, charge
all the Crimes and Confusions of a party of men in Arms, upon all the Religious
People of the Land, that be not in all other things of the Slanderers opinions;
and have made multitudes believe that it was all such that did the very thing
which they opposed, and suffered for opposing: Yea, they would interpret some
late Laws, as if they had such an accusing Sense. And shall we by silence,
leave so many thousands under the guilt of such false Accusations, to their own
sin, and to others wrong, lest we blame the guilty?

19. I find that this Error possesses the minds of so many young Scholars, and
some Ministers, as that they think of all Dissenters with so much scorn, as
that it is the very thing which has tempted them into the contrary extreme.

20. I read and hear so many on this very Supposition, calling out for our
destruction, and not to bear with us, or spare us; that our Rulers have great
need of Gods Mercy to save them from the damning guilt of Persecution, to which
such temptations would induce them, lest they take the Innocent for Guilty, and
think that it is Service to God to ruin them.

21. I see that it is a most dangerous Scandal not to remove such a
stumbling block, which tempts thousands to hate their Brethren, if not Piety
it self; as if all the stir that we have made, were but against such things as
Communion in the Liturgy with Parish Churches.

22. I see multitudes like, by mistakes, to suffer as evil doers, and be ruined
for their Error; and by glorying in it, to disgrace the suffering of those that
suffer for Truth and Duty.

23. I see many Servants and Children, tempted to disobey their Parents and
Masters* that call them to public Worship; and Families to be divided by this
mistake.

24. I see how Atheism is at the door, if when all private Church-meetings are
forcibly hindered, men be taught that all Church Worship must be forsaken. And
in how great a part of the Land already must they have such, or none?

25. I know that to drive all godly people from the Parish-Churches, and to
cast out sound Religion thence, is the way to let in -- you know whom: And that
it greatly serves the interest of the Papists, to have the Parish Churches
vilified, and us divided; besides the discouraging many godly Conforming
Ministers.

26. I have said after and often, That to separate from a Liturgy, as such, is
virtually to separate from all Christ's Church on Earth (that is known by
History) for a thousand years and more. And at this day to separate from almost
all, even the reformed Churches: And to make Christ no King, if he had all that
while no Kingdom: And to censure himself and his own practice.

27. I have showed the wrong that was done the old Nonconformists by this
party, and their full Testimony against it. Yea, and that the old Separatists
were for much that these now do condemn.

28. I have observed, That the deepest Sufferers have been readiest to run into
this exream, and therefore Passion to be suspected.

29. I see that the foreign Protestants are scandalized by a false conceit,
that the Dissenters here are against Communion in the Liturgy.

30. It greatly moves me to see, That as Church-dividers by Oppression, do
tear East and West, by making false terms of Communion by their Canons; so the
Passive-dividers take a like way; that is, make false impossible Terms of Union
and Communion; censuring all that communicate with other Churches on such
Terms, as they mistakingly think sinful; making men guilty of the faults of
Worship, by their presence. What is their Censure of us, and Anger, that we
write our reasons, but as much as to say, we must all Unite on their Terms, or
be judged Dividers, and Corrupters? So that they are at the old game, Romans
14.1, 2. one part despising, and the other judging.

31. By the reason, That we may not write our reasons against them; it follows,
That Magisterially they must not be gainsaid, tho they mistake and mislead
others (remedilesly).

32. The History of the Church shows, that the Separation opposed, is a cause
that God never blessed, but ended still in worse.

33. If the Principles that caused it, be not cured, a continual War against
Love and Communion will be kept up from Age to Age.

34. Historical Truth is of great use to Posterity. And as God needs not our
Lie, his Cause fears not Truth.

35. God himself records the faults of his Servants; and has made Repentance
necessary to Pardon: It Is Impenitence that is impatient of Evidences and
Conviction.

36. The History of our Faults and Confusions is published over and over by
Adversaries; and it is impossible to conceal it. The Booksellers Shops, and
their Talk and Sermons, abound with it. If a deaf man hear not this, must it
not therefore be spoken? And when the generality of the innocent are falsely
accused, it is the fittest season to confute the Accusers.

37. It cost me dear to attempt the preventing of such Confusions* Almost Two
years Travel in that Army, in heat and cold, whither I went for no other end:
It cost me the ruin of my Health, and after the wilful dissolution of all Power
and Order, cast me into those Groans and Tears which I can never on Earth
forget. And must I not after all that, disown the things which I opposed at so
dear a rate?

38. If men of Name and Piety write that which tends to cast honest Souls not
only into scruples, but into a way of opposition to Unity, Love and Order, to
their own and the Churches detriment and danger, it is Cruelty not to try to
help them: And what way is there, if we must not not give our Reasons against
the snare and error?

39. To say, That it will but enrage them, and make them worse, is to be
uncharitably censorious, as if they were so partial, passionate and proud, as
not to endure to be contradicted, nor to hear us give a Reason of our Judgment
and Practice, and defend it against Error. I can bear it without alienation
from them, in Respect and Love, if they say, That I am erroneous, or bad, or
whatever they will censure me. If they cannot bear my true Confutation of
Church-dissolving, and Love-destroying Principles and Errors, that proves them
not better than I in Judgment and Charity. If I yet please men, I am no longer
the Servant of Christ. Carnal Policy in complying with sin, never was blessed of
God, tho for some Job it seemed to be needful. If a man going out of the World,
may by silence betray the Truth, on pretense of despairing of success, even
with godly men, and let Peter lead Barnabas into dissembling Separation, in
reverence of Peter's Name, then Paul was too blame; and who then shall ever own
Truth or Duty, or try to save the Church from danger, if he must not do it till
the mistaken do consent? Or if a pretense, That the Disease is uncurable, shall
excuse us; and godly men must be taken for Dogs and Swine, that must not have
God's Truth given them, lest they tread it under foot, or turn again, and all
to ^end us?

40. Either this Doctrine of renouncing Communion with all Churches that use
Forms of Liturgy, as Idolaters, or false Worshippers, and Adversaries to the
Spirit, and the Office of Christ (and that Churches must covenant to obey none
but Christ in any thing duly belonging to Worship, or any manner or accident of
it): I say, Either this must be confuted, or not: If not, Christian Love and
Communion are given up as hopeless, and Christ deposed by denying his Kingdom
or Church: And why strive men about Ceremonies, when they have renounced the
substance, and pulled down the house, and threatened all that come not out of
it. ^ut if it must be confuted, 1. When, if not now? must it first take deeper
Root, and deceive more? Both Extremes already are silencers of all that would
undecieve them: And those that accuse one sort of silencers, are the other sort
themselves, and cannot bear a Confutation.

2. And who shall do it? I confess I am liable to do this, and all amiss in
Manner: But if others would do it, that wish it done, I would have forborne. The
Truth is, Again I say, I am willing to save many the cost of it, who are not so
fit as I to bear it. I have cast my Reputation overboard long ago, with both
Extremes: I am not like ever again to be considerably serviceable to the
Church: I am Independent, and neither have preferment to get or lose, nor any
Church these Three and Twenty years, with whom I should be solicitous to keep
any Reputation for their good. The Dust, or the Souls in Heaven, feel not the
Reproaches of men on Earth. How could I lay down my Life for TRUTH, LOVE and
UNITY, if at so cheap a rate I would sell it, or desert it, and go away
sorrowful? But many others of my mind, I hope, may live to serve God longer;
and their peace with mistaken froward persons, may be needful to their
desirable success. I do therefore voluntarily take the Thorn into my Foot, and
let God do with my Reputation what he please.

The Names of the Ministers who, as Commissioned, did consent to the use of the
Liturgy when corrected* were, Dr. Anth. Tuckney, Dr. Conaut, Dr. Spurstow, Dr.
Wall^s, Dr. Ma^ton, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Arthur Iackson, Mr. Case, Mr. S. Clerk,
Mr. Ma^th. Newcomen, Dr. Horton, Dr. Iacombe, Dr. Bates, Mr. Cooper, Mr.
Rawlinson, Dr Lightfoot, Dr. Collins, Dr. Drake, Mr. Woodbridge, and Ri. Baxter
(named in the King's Commission): But Dr. Lightfoot and Dr. Horton came not to
us; but they conformed after, as did also Dr. Edw. Reignolds, and Dr. Worth^
who joined with us, and were made Bishops, and one or two more were distant.

The Names of a greater Number of London-Ministers, who gave the King thanks
for his ^eclaration, may be seen in the Printed Thansgiving: Of all that met,
only Two refused to subscribe (Mr. Iackson and Mr. Crofton), lest the
Subscription should seem an Approbation of so much of Prelacy as the
Declaration stablished; and so be a breach of their Covenant: But they
professed their gratitude without subscribing. Diverse of them are yet living
but most by far are dead.

Were it not lest the Papists take advantage by it, to undermine and ruin
Peacemakers, under the Name of Trimmers, I would name you many places up and
down in England, where all the people live in love and quietness, as if there
were no Convulsive Cruelty or Schisms in the Land; and this through the wise
and conscionable behavior of the Ministers; the public Ministers, with the
ejected Nonconformists, living in so great and open amity, as uniteth all the
people: Those that desire Reformation, won by the good preaching and living of
the public Minister, and by his kindness, go all to hear him; and when at
other hours they meet to edify one another by praying, singing Psalms,
repeating a Sermon, or reading a good Book, he is far from hindering them.

Let any man that has the Spirit of Christ judge, whether this be not a better
state of the Church, than for some to be railing men from Communion, with the
charge of Idolatry, and making the rest odious; and for others to profane the
Pulpits, by preaching up slanders, and scorns, and serving Satan in Christ's
Name, by making Religion seem Hypocrisy, and conscionable men pass for odious
Rebels for fearing lest some points of Conformity be sin; and stirring up
Rulers to use them accordingly, if they were so bad and miserable as to be
persuaded by such to persecution: Which of these, think you, is the better and
more desirable case?

Obj. But what would you do your self, if you were in Spain, or any other Land
where there is no Church-worship but the Mass? Would you not forbear all? And
will not the Papists use against you the same Arguments which you use against
us, and say, That you separate from all the Church on Earth for 1000. years,
and so from Christ?

Ans. 1. What the Papists will say, makes not all true which they say: The
Question is, Whether they say it truly?

2. It Is the trick of deceivers in dispute, to prove ab obscuriore, and carry
the Controversy into a darker Room, and to fish in troubled Waters. What if it
were an hard Controversy, whether I must separate from Papists, from Bonner,
Gardener, etc. does it follow, that it is as hard, whether I must separate from
Bradford, Ridley, Hooper, and all those Martyrs, and all the Protestant
Churches? With whom then shall I communicate?

3. I Will tell you what I would say, and do to such Papists: 1. I will prove
their Objection false. And 1. that at this day all Papists in the World are but
(as Bishop Br^mhall estimates) about a fourth part of the Christian World. 2.
And that it was not till the days of our King John, and their Innocent the 3 d,
that a General Council decreed the Idolatry of Transubstantiation. 3. That a
great part of their own never consented to this, and that few of the people
understood or believed it. 4. That even this Canon was made against great
numbers of Godly men, called Albigenses and Waldenses, who opposed them in this
Idolatry.

4. Therefore I would resolve, I will have no Local Communion with any Church
in the use of this, or any Idolatry, but will Worship God in private, if I can
have no better; but if I can, I will. And I separate not by this, from the most
of the Church, but from a Tyrannical corrupt Sect or Schism: Yea, as to them, I
hold mental Communion with them in Christianity, and in all that is good and
sound, and renounce Communion with them in all that I know to be evil.

Obj. But what if a Protestant Church make any Sin a condition of their
Communion, will you not separate?

Ans. 1. I have said so much of this in this Book, against the Resolver, and
Unreasonable Defender, as that I am ashamed that men's Objections make me guilty
of so much repetition. 2. None such can make any Sin the Condition of my mental
Communion: For if they join good and bad, and bid me do so, God forbids me, and
requires me to own the good, and disown the bad. If they use the bad
themselves, and put not me to subscribe, or own it, I will join with them
notwithstanding, in that which is good, and in due time and place, disown the
evils, e. g. I have often heard well-meaning men Preach falsehoods against
Calvanists, and others against Arminians; some against Presbytery, some against
Independency, some against Infant Baptism; and alas! how ordinarily do men drop
their Errors, and put them into their Prayers; I will not for this separate
from a Church that professes to to take the Scripture for their rule. Let them
answer for their own misdoings.

2. But if they bid me Subscribe, or Approve any one Falsehood or Sin, I will
deny it: If they forbid me Communion, I will continue it till they put me away
by force. And then it is not I that separate from them, but it is they, by
unjust casting me out, that are Schismatical; I Will still have mental Communion
with them in Faith and Love, and not persuade any to separate from them as
Idolaters, or make them worse than they are; but if I can, I will go to another
Church (tho worse) that will receive me without imposing actual sin; but not
draw others from them, who are not cast out for refusing sin, as I have been:
And tho I will not justify many Protestant Writers, who say, That we separated
not from the Church of Rome, but they cast us out for not sinning; yet I doubt
not but this must be our case with sound Churches, that would impose any Sin
upon us.

But still, To prefer the best and (all things considered) most profitable,
before the more faulty or imperfect, without renouncing Communion with them, or
persuading all others from it, as Idolaters, or unlawful, is that which I never
called Schism, nor wrote against.

To the unknown Author of a LETTER lately sent me.
SIR,
YOUR Letter contained, 1. Your friendly reprehensions of me, not only for my
purpose to write against a MS. which you say was Dr. Owen's, but for many other
things; and your enumeration of those faults of mine. 2. With a friendly
motion, That I suspend my writing till we fairly debate the Cause, upon some
larger Papers of the Doctor's on that Subject which you offered to send me.

I wrote you presently an Answer, but your Messenger never more called for it;
by which I supposed that you changed your purpose: If yet you will send for it,
I will send it you. The Breviate of it is this: 1. I do not feignedly, but from
my heart, accept your manner of Reproof: It is honest and friendly; and I am
truly thankful to you for it: Tho I am thought to be too plain and sharp, I can
bear twice as much as I use. It Is foolish pride that makes us grudg at a
friendly, tho sharp reprehension.

But your misinformation tells me the pitiful Case of most in the World: Your
honest Reproofs are founded on abundance of untrue Conceits: There are about
Twenty Untruths, through mistake, in matter of Fact, in your Letter: And how
gross are many of them? As that I write not against Persecution, which I scarce
over write a book that has not much against it: and this book it self does
fully confute you: And that I oppose not, but encourage diverse things; which I
know not the man that has said half so much against: And you carry it all
along, as if I were your Accuser for not going to the public Churches, when I
am a mere Defendent against your Accusations, and plead the Cause of the
Universal Church, as not deserving an Excommunication; and of many poor weak
women, and young people, that would be drawn to renounce all Church-Worship in
England, for fear of Idolatry, or a Curse from God.

If you that have his offered MS's, and say, This which I answer is Dr. O's;
were the man that made this MS. which I answer, so common, I think you did him
a great deal of wrong: Tho in his Printed Books, especially that of Prayer, and
for Peace* etc. he owns the ill Principle which I now confute, against all
public Worship by Liturgy, and against man's power to command any more than
Christ has done in the order and manner of Worship and Church Government
(which also is to be seen in his Preface, etc. of his Original of Churches, and
his Vindicatian of the Nonconformists* etc). Yet these Printed Books of his
(especially his Original of Churches, etc.) have so much sound and excellent
matter, and so many healing peaceable passages in them, as did hide this one
great Mistake: so that I long purposely forbore all contradiction of him in it
(tho I plainly answered his Arguments in my Cure of Church-divisions), for fear
lest I should occasion a more common offensive or hurtful notice of them. But
when that one Error which was thus buried in abundance of sound matter, was by
some of you, not only culled out, and made common in MS. by it self, but even
in a writing, in which he goes yet further toward Non-Communion with all the
Churches almost on Earth, than ever he did in his Printed Books; and this to
affright all others into the same Non-Communion; you could not sure imagine,
that no Christian had so much love to the Church, to Souls, to Catholic
Communion, to Love and Concord, as not to let such a Writing do its worst,
without any Antid^te and Answer. You could scarce have wronged the Doctor, or
his Memory m^re: All his Enemies could not have done half so much against him,
having no such matter to accuse him of, as you have unadvisedly given them. And
if (...) also you will lay your own Fault on others that love the Truth, and
Church, and Souls, and Peace, better than this Manuscript, or its Reputation,
you will but run further into Error.

And can you possibly be ignorant how like you are to the other Extreme, 1.
While you excommunicate far more than they do, even almost all the Body of
Christ, as to External Communion: 2. And are for silencing us as well as they:
Why else may not I have leave to render a Reason of my Judgment and Practice,
to those that are offended at it? 3. And as they would deprive Congregations of
sound Doctrine, Instruction and Worship, for the Cause of the Opinions of their
Faction, would not you discharge almost whole Counties from all Church-worship,
where Forms are used, and your way is not tolerated?

Had not the MS. been against all Forms of Liturgy, but only against the real
or supposed faults of the English one; and had it been only against owning the
faults, and not against Communion in necessary Duty, I had not troubled you, by
my Defense.

II. I did much approve of your brotherly motion to debate the Case friendly,
on the perusal of his larger Writings. And tho your Letter came to me a week
after the Book was printed, the Bookseller said he had sold but two, and I
purposed thankfully to accept your offer, and (tho to my cost) to have done my
best to stop the rest, and recall those two: But not knowing you, nor how to
send to you, I must suppose that you retract your Motions, your Messenger not
calling for my answer, as we appointed.

Remember, I beseech you, that the Dr. writes for mental Communion in Faith
and Love, with all true Churches, tho he write against outward Local Communion
with almost all: And I crave your perusal of the first and third parts of this
Book, against the Resolver of three Cases, etc. And if you find that all the
Cases, in which I vindicate Local Separation to be no Schism, be not enough,
bethink you what the Scripture means by reprehended Heresy, Schism, and
Division; and whether there be any such Sins; and whether they that are so much
for Scripture-sufficiency, as not to communicate with a Mode, Order or Form of
Words, which it prescribes not, should set so light by it, as not to fear its
many sharp Condemnations of the foresaid sins, and its frequent and vehement
Exhortations to Unity and Communion of Saints, and to receive one another, as
Christ received us, to the Glory of God.

Lord pardon the faulty imperfections of our Services, which we must rather
venture on, than a total Omission; and teach us to pardon one another.

April 7. 1684.
REader, I have not time to gather the Errata of the Press or Copy; only I
entreat you to insert an omitted line, page 29. line 35. because the sense is
altered by the omission: After [ them] add [ than those of the Opinion which he
pleads for].

Books Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, near
Mercers-Chappel.
1. MR. Baxter's Christian Directory, or Sum of Practical Divinity, and Cases
of Conscience. 2 -- Catholic Theology, Plain, Pure, and Peaceable. 3 -- Which
is the True Church, in Three Parts. 4 -- Life of Faith in Three Parts. 5 --
Answer to Mr. Dodwell and Dr. Sherlock. 6 -- History of Councels Enlarged and
Defended. 7 -- Catechizing of Families, A Teacher of Householders, how to Teach
their Households; wherein the Creed, Ten Commandments, Lords Prayer, and
Sacraments, are Expounded. 8 -- Two Disputations of Original Sin. Dr. Horton's
100. Select Sermons. -- Sermons on the 4 th, 42 d, 51 st, 63 d. Psalms. Dr.
Anthony Burges Sermons on 2 Cor. 3. Chap. Dr. Donn's Sermons, Vol. 3. A
Discourse of Gods Providence, by Dr. John Collings. Morning Exercise against
Popery. Sermons on the Epistle to the Colossians, by John Daille, Author of the
Use of the Fathers. A Discourse of the Covenant of Redemption.

