THE MORALITY OF THE Seventh-day Sabbath Disproved.

IN ANSWER To C. T. Tillam's Book, Entitled, A Present from Prison, Dedicated
to L. C. Hobson.

WHEREIN The most Material Points in another Book, Entitled, A Discourse of
the Sabbath, lately Published by Henry Sowrsby and Mehetabel Smith, are
succinctly discussed.

Written by the Learned J. B. Master of Arts, at the Request of the said L. C.
Hobson.

Col. 2.16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat, or in Drink, or in
Respect of an Holy Day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbaths, which are a
shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ. LONDON, Printed by Francis
Clark for L. Curtis. 1683.

The Morality of the Seventh-day Sabbath Disproved, etc.
Page 1. THE word Moral, according to the Common usage, is all one as to say
Natural, and is opposed to that which is Ceremonial, or Positive, or of mere
Institution. This being so, (as you cannot be ignorant of) I wonder you should
talk of removing the Veil of Obscurity lying upon the word Moral, unless it
were, that wanting a solid Answer, you had a Mind to Quibble upon words; for
you know that Aristotle and other Philosophers have written Books concerning
Moral Duties, by which I believe you your self will confess, can be understood
no other than those Duties that Natural Reason exacteth of all Men, as they are
Men.

Page 2. In that you here barely say, that the main thing in Question is
undeniable; namely, That the Seventh day Sabbath is as Naturally Holy, as the
six days are Naturally Common. This to me seems plainly to Argue, that you
had nothing material to allege to prove your Assertion. Otherways you know
well enough that I, and almost all other Christians whatsoever deny it: Yea, I
for my part, had brought many (as I believe) convincing Reasons, to show that I
have good ground for the denial thereof. Neither does it follow, that because
God in the production of Natural things did not act unnaturally; neither was
the Institution of the Seventh-day Sabbath contrary to his Natural intention;
therefore the Law of Nature does require of all Men to observe the Sabbath: For
to omit your own affirmation, that God instituted the Sabbath, which plainly
shows it not to be Natural, and so Moral but Positive; I might by the same
Reason Argue, that for as much as God did not act unnaturally in producing the
Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil; neither was it contrary to his Natural
inclination to forbid the eating of the same; therefore it was a Moral and
Natural Duty to abstain from it, which I think you your self will deny. If you
do not, certain I am, that as you will scarce find any man that will Second
you, so will it be altogether impossible for you to show, that Natural Reason
(setting aside the Commandments of God) did dictate unto Adam, that he ought to
forbear the eating of that Tree above all the other Trees of the Garden. Or why
(if it be a Natural and Moral Duty) the same Tree is not set forth to us by
God, that we may show our Obedience by abstaining from it. These Expressions of
yours, that God did Celebrate and Observe the Seventh day Sabbath are unsound,
there being no such thing affirmed of God in the Scripture, but only of Men,
see Levit. 23.32. From Even to Even shall you Celebrate your Sabbath. And Exodus
31.16. The Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath to observe the Sabbath
throughout their Generations. For to Celebrate and Observe, such or such a
time, argues that it has been Commanded by some other. Moreover when God is
said to have Sanctified or Hallowed the Sabbath, it was not that he himself,
but that Men should observe and keep it holy, as appears by the Fourth
Commandment.

Page 3. Your Comparison between a Wife in Relation to her Husband, and the
Sabbath in Relation to a Christian, does not hold. For Marriage, though in the
beginning instituted of God, is yet not of institution, but of Nature; the
difference of Sects Naturally requiring it without such an Institution. And
this (as I am told) is acknowledged by Aristotle the best Naturallist that ever
was, who says, Eth. 8. Chap. 12. That there is naturally Friendship betwixt
Man and Woman, and that Man was Naturally made, rather for Marriage than for
Civil Society. But no such thing as this can (I believe) be alleged out of
Aristole concerning the Observation of the Sabbath.

Page 4. That other Similitude of yours between the Sun and the Sabbath, being
wholly of your own making, without any hint of the Scripture, is altogether
frivolous, and proves nothing. And whereas you Advise me to cease Polluting of
the Sabbath, in as much as I have (say you) acknowledged the
Seventh-day Sabbath to be Holy by Divine Institution. I wonder you should so
boldly impose on me, when you know sufficiently, even by this very writing of
mine, which you endeavor to answer, that I deny the Seventh-day Sabbath now to
be Holy, believing it, as being a shadow, to be done away by Christ. Neither
does that Passage, Heb. 4.9. intimate the contrary. For when that Divine Author
says, there remains therefore a rest, (so I am told the word (...) is
rightly rendered, as will appear by two passages of the Septuagint, Exodus 16.30.
Lev. 23.32. where the word is so used) to the People of God, he means not the
rest of the Seventh-day Sabbath, but the rest of the Kingdom of Heaven, or (as
the Author styles it, Verse the 10.) the rest of God, into which whosoever is
entered, he also has ceased from his own works, as God did from his.

But to cease from our own works, as God did from his, is to cease from them,
as never to return again to them; not to cease for one day, and then to Labor
again as before. Again, this rest is inferred from those words, verse. 6. and
so are meant of such a rest, into which the Israelites did not enter because of
Unbelief. But Moses testifies that they kept the Rest of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, Exodus 16.30. Moreover, this is a Rest into which we should
labor to enter; but there needs no laboring to rest on the
Seventh-day Sabbath. Finally, when it is here said, there remains a Rest,
this plainly employed that the Rest here spoken of, is something that is
reserved for the People of God, and so not enjoyed at present, and therefore
not the Rest of the Seventh-day Sabbath. Thus much appears from the same word
thus used in the 6th. Verse foregoing.

Page 6. Your saying, That the Seventh day is every way Moral, both by Natural
Production, and by Primitive Institution, shows plainly, that you are
mistaken in the true Notion of Moral, and my use of the same. For I (as
appears by my words, which you cite, page 1.) distinguish that which is Moral
from that which is of Institution, esteeming that to be Moral, which the light
of Nature dictateth, that it ought to be, or at least may laudably be done,
though God had not Instituted and enjoined the same; which if you can make
good, concerning the Observation of the Seventh-day Sabbath, then will I
readily assent to you that it is Moral.

Page 7. Where did you learn, that the work of the Law, written in men's Natural
hearts, is the Old Covenant? For, does not the Scripture oppose the New
Covenant to that Covenant which God made with the Children of Israel, when he
brought them out of Egypt, Heb. 8.8, 9, 10. And does not the Author of that
Epistle, in the 13th. Verse affirm, That in as much as he says, a new
Covenant, he has made the first old? So that it undeniably follows, That the
first Covenant which God made with the Israelites, when he brought them out of
Egypt, is the Old Covenant. It is also as evident, that the words of the Law is
that Old Covenant, there being no other Old Covenant, but the Law delivered in
Writing by Moses. Again, where did you learn, That the words of the Law,
written in the Christians hearts, is the new Covenant? It Is true indeed that
the Scriptures says, the New Covenant consists in this, That God will write
his Laws in his peoples hearts, but does not affirm, that he will write the
words of the Law (whereby Moses Law is usually alone understood in the
Scripture) on their Hearts: So that by the laws which God promises to write on
the Hearts of his People, must needs be understood, not the laws which he had
formerly delivered by Moses, the Mediator of the Old Covenant, but those which
he would afterward deliver by Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant.
Whereby you may perceive, that the New Covenant differs from the Old in the
very laws that were written, as well as in the Tables whereon they were
written, (these being Tables of the Heart, the other Tables of stone) and also
in the Instrument of writing them, (these being written by the Spirit of the
Living God, the other with Ink) 2 Cor. 3.3. So that your Error in distingushing
(as you did) the Old Covenant from the New, is conspicuous. As for those words
then, Romans 2.15. by the works of the law, is meant the works of Moses Law (for
of that it is treated in the foregoing words) and consequently the word or
matter, or things (for these Expressions amount to the same) of Moses Law,
written in the Hearts of the Gentiles; not the things that are therein, merely
of Institution, and so Ceremonial or Positive, (for none can know such things
unless they be told him) but only those that be Natural and Moral. For that
such things of the Law were written in the Hearts of the Gentiles, appears
every where by their writings, and for the breach of them they are reproved in
the Scripture, as the Tyrrians are blamed for not keeping Covenant, Amos 1.9.
The Edomites for Cruelty, ibid. ver. 11. The Ammorites, for insulting over
other men's Calamities, Ezekiel. 25.3. But no where shall you find, that the
Heathens are Rebuked in Scripture for not keeping the Sabbath; neither is there
any hint in their Writings, that they thought themselves bound to such a Duty.
Wherefore it is manifest, that the keeping of the Sabbath is no Moral Duty,
which the Light of Nature does dictate unto men, that they ought to perform.
But you will, perhaps, demand of me, how the Condition of Christians excels
that of Heathens and Jews, if the work of the Law was written in the Hearts of
the one, as Paul testifies, and the word of the Law was in the Heart of the
other, as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 30.14. The word is nigh thee, in thy Mouth, and in
thy Heart, that thou may do it. I Answer, that the difference lies chiefly
in two things: First, the things of the law are not said to be written in the
Hearts either of Jews or Heathens, by the Spirit of the living God, (and so not
so plainly and so easily Legible to them) the contrary whereof is affirmed of
Christians. Secondly, their Hearts are not said to be Hearts of Flesh, but on
the contrary, the Jews hearts are called hearts of stone, Ezekiel. 11.19. which
may be as truly affirmed of the Heathens hearts; whereas the hearts of
Christians are by Paul termed Hearts of Flesh, 2 Cor. 3.3.

Page 9. You are here, as well as in other passages of your Book, somewhat
injurious to me, in imposing that upon me, which I neither said nor meant. For
did I give this as a ground for us to forget the Seventh-day Sabbath, because
God has Commanded us to remember it? Yea, do I not again and again tell you,
that God has no where Commanded us Christians to remember any such Sabbath?

What can I with Reason conclude from hence, but that you had a mind to render
me Contemptible in the eyes of the Brethren, by ascribing so Ridiculous a kind
of Reasoning to me? As little ingenious is your Reprehension of me, a little
after, saying, that I am mistaken, in denying that to be Naturally Moral which
depends upon Memory, where you leave out the words, as to know, as you do in
sundry other Passages afterward, which expression quite varieth the Case. For
certainly that which a man cannot know but by means of his memory, is such a
thing as is not Naturally written in his heart, but suggested to him from
without. Neither does the greatness and goodness of God depend upon memory, as
to know, which words you again leave out, dealing as unfaithfully as before.
For it is Naturally imprinted in the Heart of every man, that God is good and
great, but not that we ought to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath, as will appear to
any man that is acquainted with the Writings of such as are merely Naturalists.

The Gospel, as to the principle Mysteries therefore, transcendeth the Natural
Understanding of man to find out: For so the Apostle intimates, when he says,
We preach the things that neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, neither
has it come up into the Heart of man. Wherefore no man was bound to know, or
publish these things without Divine Revelation and Command. And consequently
they are not Naturally Moral; that being Naturally Moral, which is taught by
the Light of Nature.

Page 12. It Is true, a Child can of himself no more know who are his Parents,
than he can which is the Seventh day. But prove that it is as much written in
the Nature and Heart of man, that he should Celebrate the Seventh day, when he
is told which day of the Week is it, as that he should honor his Parents, when
he has once learned who are they. Were this so, the Heathen, who are very
studious of the Law of Nature, and have left us Excellent Treatises concerning
the same, would as well have delivered Precepts about the Observation of the
Sabbath, as they do about Honoring our Parents.

Page 13. When I affirm, that the Sabbath was a sign of Gods Sanctifying his
own People, you would (had you intended the finding out of the Truth, and not
abusing both of your self and others with a vain show) easily have perceived by
the Text cited by me out of Ezekiel, for the Proof thereof, that I meant it in
relation to Gods People, under the Old Covenant, and not under the New.

Page 14. You deny that ever the Sabbath did stoop to any Law, either
Ceremonial or Moral, because (say you) this and other Moral Laws have evermore
submitted to the Will and Pleasure of the Royal Lawgiver. How does this
disprove my Argument, unless you do withal show, that the Lawgiver never
willed the Precept of the Sabbath to be broken, that other Precepts might be
kept? The contrary whereof is very evident from the Texts of Scripture that I
have alleged in my third Reason; also from Numb. 28.9. where certain
Sacrifices are enjoined by God, to be Offered on the Sabbath day, which could
not be done without the breach of the Fourth Commandment of the Decalogue,
where all manner of Work is forbidden on that day. Accordingly, the Priests on
the Sabbath Day did in the Temple Profane the Sabbath, and were blameless, as
Christ speaks, Mat. 12.5. Here you see plainly that the Law of the Sabbath is
broken, and that by the Will of God, that the Law of Sacrifices might be kept.
But you shall never find in the Scripture, that the Law concerning Mercy,
Righteousness, Faith, or any other undoubted Moral Duty, is ever Profaned, that
the Sabbath might be kept. For when you allege on the contrary, that the Moral
Law, which says, Thou shall not steal, or Covet, does stoop as low as that of
the Sabbath, and for Proof thereof, cite Exodus 11.2. you are mistaken, for the
Israelites are there Commanded by God, neither to Steal, nor to Covet, but only
(as I am told the inspection of the Hebrew words will inform you) to ask of the
Egyptians Vessels of Silver, and Vessels of Gold. But to ask something of
another, was never yet counted to be a breach of either the Eighth or Tenth
Commandment of the Decalogue. Neither is that Moral Law, Thou shall not kill,
violated; or as you term it, prostituted by that Command of God, Genesis 22.12.
For as much as the killing forbidden in the sixth Commandment, is by God
himself, Exodus 21.12, 14. explained to be coming upon a man presumptuously, and
slaying him with guile; neither of which can be said of Abraham's attempt to
slay his Son, he having received an express Commandment from God to do it.
Neither was that Moral sentence of acquitting the Innocent, and condemning the
Wicked, subjected, and as it were, subverted (so you are pleased to speak) in
the Death of Christ; for the Jews that Condemned and killed Christ, are by God
in the Scripture pronounced to have done it by Wicked hands, Acts 2.23. and
they accordingly exhorted to Repent, that they might receive the Remission of
their sins, ver. 38. Which Justification is not contrary to those words of the
Law, I will not Justify the Wicked, Exodus 23.7. Which are meant of such a
Justification, whereby the Wicked Person is Approved and Vindicated, and not
whereby he is Forgiven upon his Repentance, and turning from his Wickedness.

You should have done rightly to prove, and not barely assert, that Natures Law
never allowed a man to have more Wives than one: For though I freely grant,
that the Law of Nature does dictate it to be better for a man to content
himself with one Wife, yet does it not suggest that the contrary is sinful,
howbeit the Law of Christ has now made it so. And a wonder it is to see what
pains many men take (but without success) to prove that Polygamy is contrary to
the Law of Nature. You should likewise have proved, that the Act of Hosea the
Prophet, in Marrying one that had been an Harlot, was against the Law either of
God or Nature, and not have taken it for granted.

Page 16. When the Disciples of Christ did pull the Ears of Corn on the
Sabbath Day, and eat them, rubing them with their Hands, they did (as the
Pharisees objected to them) what was not Lawful to do on the Sabbath. For
though the Law allowed a man to pull Ears of Corn in another man's Field, Deuteronomy.
23.25. yet might not this be done on the Sabbath, as being a breach of the
Fourth Commandment. This that I have said is further confirmed by our Saviors
Answer to the Pharisees, wherein are so many notable Considerations, clearly
evincing the Ceremoniality of the Sabbath, that this one History is abundantly
sufficient to determine the Question in Debate between us. For first, our
Savior defends the breach of the Sabbath in his Disciples, by the Act of
David, who being hungry, brake the Ceremonial Law of God, in eating the
Shewbread, which none but the Priests were allowed to eat. But should our
Savior have defended the breach of a Moral Law, by the breach of a Ceremonial
one, who would not presently have discerned the disparity? Secondly, he
Justifies it by the deed of the Priests, who Offering Sacrifices in the Temple
on the Sabbath, did Profane the same, and yet were blameless. Where he
intimates that the Temple was more Sacred than the Sabbath, because in that
place the Sabbath was Profaned without blame. Thirdly, he Argues that the
Disciples did well in breaking the Sabbath upon so urgent an Occasion, because
God desired Mercy and not Sacrifice: Where by Mercy he means all Moral
Duties, among which Mercy is eminent; as by Sacrifices he understands all
Ceremonial and positive Duties, in as much as Sacrifice is chief among such
performances. That this is the right meaning of the words, and not that Fancy
of yours touching the Sacrifice of the Sabbath, appears by the use of them to
the same purpose, Mat. 9.13. For when the Pharisees blamed our Savior for
eating with Publicans and Sinners, Christ, in defense of himself, bids them
go and learn what that is, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice: Thereby
intimating that to abstain from such Company, was to be reckoned amongst
Sacrifice and Ceremonial things; but to be Familiar with them of purpose to
Convert them, was a work of Mercy, and so might be upon Occasion observed with
the breach of the other. This being so perspicuous, how is it that you should
say, That till now you never met with any that charged our Savior with putting
upon the Sabbath the Tittle of Sacrifice; since it is apparent by the Discourse
and Practice of all Christians in general throughout the whole World, that they
esteem the Observation of the Seventh-day Sabbath to be Ceremonial, and so
fitly comprised by our Savior, under the appellation of Sacrifice. Again, how
is it, that to deceive the simple, you should cast forth so many empty
Expostulations, and talk of my censuring Christ himself as Ceremonial? To which
purpose you allege (though very impertinently) these words, Heb. 10.12. But
this man, after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins. And whereas it is
evident, that the word Sacrifice in the forecited passage of Hosea, is meant
of the Ceremonial Sacrifice of the Law, amongst which the Sacrifice of Christ
ought not to be reckoned; for after God had said, I desired Mercy, and not
Sacrifice, he presently adds, and the knowledge of God more than Burnt
Offerings. By which it appears that by Sacrifice he means such Sacrifice as
was joined with Burnt Offerings, according to the prescript of the Law, to
which Jer. Chap. 7.21. alluding, says, Put your Burnt Offerings to your
Sacrifices and eat Flesh. I should take little Comfort in discovering these
shameful mistakes of yours, were it not that I saw you went about to Rob us of
our Christian Liberty, and to bring us into Bondage unto the weak and Beggarly
Rudiments of the World. Fourthly, our Savior Warrants the violation of the
Sabbath in his Disciples, because the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for
the Sabbath, and therefore ought to yield to the Necessities of man. Which
thing also shows that the Sabbath is Ceremonial. For as for Moral Duties, the
Scripture testifies that man was made for them. Thus Acts 17.26, 27. Paul
says, that God made mankind to seek the Lord, which all will confess to be a
Moral Duty. And Ephesians. 2.10. We are his making (so I am told the Greek word
signifies) Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before
prepared, that we should walk in them. But the good Works enjoined in the
Gospel, are by all confessed to be Moral, and not Ceremonial Performances.

Fifthly, It is said, that for as much as the Sabbath was made for Man, and not
Man for the Sabbath, therefore the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.
Which words imply, that the Son of Man could, in case of Man's Necessity,
dispense with the Law of the Sabbath, other ways how was he Lord of it? For
does not his being Lord of it, signify that he was above it, and had Power
over it? But no where is it said or intimated in the Scripture, that the Son of
Man, yea, any other, is Lord of Moral Duties, they being in their own Nature
indispensable, in that they agree to Man, as he is a Rational and Sociable
Creature, and so bound to Act Rationably and sociably. Neither did you ever
Read that such Duties have in Scripture been by Christ dispensed with:
Wherefore those Expressions of yours, which you so often inculcate in your
Book, That the Sabbath is made for Man, and that Christ is Lord of the Sabbath,
do (being rightly understood) subvert your Opinion, intimating that the Sabbath
is Ceremonial, and may Lawfully upon an emergent Necessity of Man be dispensed
with. That the Walls of Jericho were surrounded for seven days together, and
consequently on the Sabbath is evident. But that the seventh day of the
surrounding was the Sabbath, appears not out of the Text. For to evince that,
you must show that they began to surround the City on the first day of the
Week, whereas no such thing is so much as hinted in the Sacred Text. Wherefore
that which you infer from thence, touching the extraordinary Dignity that was
put upon the Sabbath, in that the City was taken Miraculously upon that day, is
altogether groundless. Howbeit, this is certain from the story, (as I before
hinted) that the Sabbath was broken, in as much as to Compass a City in a
Hostile manner on that day, is to Profane it, by Working upon it, contrary to
the Fourth Commandment.

So that this plainly shows the Observation of the Sabbath to be no Moral
Duty, as being dispensed with. What you farther say of Jericho's being a Type
of Babylon, and of the man of sin's changing the Times, are more groundless
surmises, than what you before spoke concerning the taking of Jericho on the
Sabbath day, as would easily appear, if you attempted to confirm those Notions
of yours by the Scripture rightly and soundly Interpreted.

Page 20. Here you confess as much as I desire, namely, That the Institution of
the Sabbath comes only from the power and authority of God. For this
unanswerably proves it to be Ceremonial; the difference between a Moral and
Ceremonial Law lying in this, that the one is Naturally written in the Heart of
Man, and so ought to be Observed, though God had not Commanded it; (whence the
Heathens, to whom God had not made known himself, nor given any Commandments
and Judgments, are nevertheless grievously Reprehended by the Prophets for not
Observing Moral Duties; See page 7. foregoing.) Whereas Ceremonial Laws depend
merely upon the Will and Authority of God Commanding them. Where I admire that
you should Reprove me for suggesting That the Sabbath receives Being, and takes
Rise from a Reason without us. For is not the Power, Will, and Authority of
God, upon which only you your self ground the Observation of the Sabbath
something without us?

Page 21. How irrational therefore are your words, where (contradicting your
self) you say, It Is unseemly to assert, that the Ceremonial Laws did ever rise
from any Reason without us, for even their springhead was Originally from the
Pleasure and Providence of God? For is not the Pleasure of God a Reason without
us? And are not such Laws as flow from the Pleasure of the Lawgiver mere
Placits, and so Positive and Ceremonial things? For instance, the sacrificing
of Beasts, was it not a thing that sprang from the Pleasure of God? And is it
not therefore Ceremonial, there being no other Obligation upon Men to perform
it, but the Command of God? so that the injunction of God about that matter now
ceasing, we are no longer bound thereunto. It Is true, that Moral Precepts are
sometimes in the Law enforced by reason from without, as Obedience to God, from
deliverance out of Egypt; but then these Precepts do not Originally spring from
such Reasons, but from the Law of Nature, to which those other Considerations
are added, and consequently Men have a new Obligation to such Duties, which
they were before bound by Nature to perform.

Page 24. To prove that the sabbath is not Moral, I alleged that it is called
a Sign, and a Covenent. The Adversary wanting a solid Answer hereunto, and
intending here, as he does page 16. to make a Flourish, says, that I may as
well prove our Savior himself to be a Ceremony, for as much as the same Titles
are given to him; though the Passages that he cites, reach not home to his
purpose (as will easily appear to him that shall confer them with those
concerning the Sabbath.) Yet I willing join Issue with him, and affirm that in
as much as Christ is called a Sign and a Covenant, it does unavoidably follow,
that the Mystery of Christ is such a thing as depends not on the Law and
light of Nature; but only on the good pleasure of God, as Christ himself
intimates, John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me; that whosoever
beholds the Son, and believed on him, should have Eternal Life. And Paul Ephesians.
1.5. says plainly, Having predetinated us unto the adoption of Children
through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.
Neither will it be possible to prove that by the light of Nature (setting aside
the Commandment of God) we are directed to believe in Christ, and expect
Salvation from him. So that I retort the Adversaires similitude upon him, and
conclude firmly from thence, that as the Mystery of Christ is not Moral, but
depends on the good Pleasure of God, so neither is the observation of the
Sabbath which he compares therewith.

Page 25. In this Page the Adversary speaks out, and shows, that though he
often mentions the Name of Christ, and Christians, yet his design is, by this
Doctrine of the Seventh-day Sabbath, to bring us from Christ unto Moses, for he
expressly says, I know no newer Covenant than the Covenant of Life and Peace,
which was made with Levi, Mal. 2.5. For is not Gods Covenant with Christ Jesus
newer than his Covenant with Levi? Or is not his Covenant with Levi, that which
he made by the hand of Moses the Levite, when Israel came out of Egypt? Why is
Christ called the Mediator of a better Covenant, and thereby opposed to the
Levitical Priests, Heb. 11.21, 22. If there be no newer Covenant of Life and
Peace, than that which of Old was made with Levi? Behold therefore, O ye
Brethren that love the Lord Jesus and his Gospel, how the Adversary here does
cast off his Vizard, acknowledging no new Covenant to be made with Christ, but
that the old Covenant with Levi is still in force. For if this be so, why do we
not presently renounce the Gospel, and take upon us the Observance of the Law,
which was received under the Levitical Priesthood? Why do we not trun Jews? For
you see this is the Mark, at which the Adversary, notwithstanding his specious
Pretenses to the contrary, does indeed aim.

Page 27. That none before Moses time was under Reproof, either from their own
Conscience, or from God (that we Read of) for breaking the Sabbath, is an
evident Proof, that the Sabbath is not Moral; else why should they not have
been Reproved for the breach of that as well as of other Duties, which are
confessedly Moral? Neither is it to the matter to say as you do, that the
Sabbath was in force before Moses, unless you prove it to be therefore in
force, because the Law of Nature did suggest it unto Men, which you have not
yet, nor ever shall be able to evince. If you thereupon demand, how it could
be, that God should have Commanded it from the beginning, and yet the
Patriarchs not be blamed for neglecting it? I Answer, because it was grown out
of knowledge, as that passage, Neh. 9.14. shows, where it is said, Thou
made known unto them thy Holy Sabbath. But none can be justly reproved for
not observing a Ceremonial and Positive Law, when it is once grown out of
knowledge and forgotten; and this is the Reason, why the word Remember is
prefixed to this, and to no other of the Ten Commandments; implying that the
Sabbath, being of Institution, and no part of the Law of Nature, as the other
Nine Commandments are, might in after Ages, as well as it had formerly, be
utterly forgotten Page 34. Though the word Sabbath be not mentioned Exodus 16.4,
5. yet is the thing it self there plainly intimated, when God says, On the
sixth day they shall prepare what they bring in, and it shall be twice as much
as they gathered daily. For why should that which they brought in on the sixth
day be prepared and be double to what they gathered daily, but because they
might not prepare or gather any Manna on the Seventh day, but ought to keep it
for a Sabbath of Rest? So that it is truly affirmed by Moses, ver. 23. that the
Lord had said, to morrow is the Rest of the Holy Sabbath, in that he had before
Commanded them to gather on the sixth day twice as much as they did upon any
other day, and also to prepare it. Wherefore it is undeniable that God
Commanded the Sabbath in the fourth and fifth Verse of the sixteeth Chapter of
Exodus.

Page 40. That Text, Col. 2.16, 17. is so directly opposite to the Adversaries
Opinion, and shines with so full a Light, that it is no marvel that he should
strive might and main to raise up a whole Cloud of Dust to obscure it; but all
in vain, seeing he may sooner darken the Sun it self. For first, when the
Apostle here says, Let no man judge you in meat or drink, does he not thereby
signify, that the difference of meats and drinks formerly enjoined by God,
does now cease? Secondly, when he adds, or in respect (so I am told) ought
the words to be rendered, as will appear by comparing 2 Cor. 3.10. and Chap.
9.3. (where the same expression is so used) of an Holyday (or Feast) or New
Moon, or Sabbath: Does not this in like manner show, that neither the Feasts or
New Moons formerly Commanded to the People of God, do more bind Christians than
the difference of meats and drinks aforesaid. But if they be not obliged to
observe them, they are by the same Reason as little bound to keep the Sabbath;
which is here put in the same Rank with Feasts and New Moons: Neither can it be
denied that by the Sabbath is here meant the Seventh-day Sabbath. For there is
no place in all the New Testament where the word Sabbath (in Greek (...) or
(...)) does signify any other than the Seventh-day Sabbath. Yea, being simply
put (so that it is not said, such or such a time shall be to you a Sabbath, or
to the Land) it does always in the Old Testament denote the
Seventh-day Sabbath. Again, the Sabbath is here distinguished from Feasts and
New Moons, and therefore can be understood of no other than the
Seventh-day Sabbath. For though, as you Object, the word Feasts, when put by it
self, may comprehend the Seventh-day Sabbath (as perhaps it does, Lev. 23.23.)
yet when it is joined with Sabbaths, it cannot do so (for then the same thing
would be twice expressed) and this is manifest from that Text, Lev. 23.37, 38.
These are the Feasts of the Lord, which you shall Proclaim to be Holy
Convocations, besides the Sabbaths of the Lord. As for other Sabbaths besides
the Seventh-day Sabbath, they are comprehended under the word Feasts: So that
in the foresaid passage, Col. 2.16. by Sabbath joined with Feasts and New
Moons, can no other Sabbath be possibly meant but the Seventh-day Sabbath, as
those instances which in my former Discourse I alleged out of the Old
Testament do clearly prove, neither shall so much as one instance be alleged
out of the New to the contrary. And whereas you further Object (though as
little to the purpose as before) that we shall find one Sabbath so far from
being a Feast, that it is the day of severe Affliction. Have I not here just
cause again to tax you for Quibbling upon words, seeing it is apparent from the
4th. Verse of this 23d. of Levit. that by Feasts are not meant times of
Belly-cheer, but Holy Convocations, wherein men ceased from their ordinary
Labor, and were employed in Religious Duties, whether they made Mirth, or
Afflicted their Souls? In the third place (to return to the forecited Text,
Col. 2.16, 17.) Where the Apostle super-addeth, which are a shadow of things to
come, but the Body is of Christ. This has relation to the five things
mentioned in the 16th. Verse, at least to that which is immediately foregoing
the Sabbath. So that the Sabbath (distinguished from Feasts and New Moons, and
so according to the perpetual usage of the Scriptures, signifying no other than
the Seventh-day Sabbath) is by the Apostle Paul called a shadow, the Body
whereof is exhibited to us in Christ, namely, in the Everlasting Sabbath of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Wherefore to bring us back to shadows, after that the Body
is come, is not only Preposterous, but tends to the enslaving us under the
Rudiments of the World, and instead of Sons to make us Servants.

Page 57. For as much as the Adversary, not only here, but elsewhere in his
Book says, that Christ delivered the Law to Israel at Mount Sinai. I would
fain hear from him why the Scriptures, Heb. 8.6. and 12.24. calls Jesus the
Mediator of a New and better Covenant? For certainly this implies, that some
other Person was the Mediator of the Old and wose Covenant. Again, why does the
Apostle John prefer Christ before Moses in this regard, namely, that whereas
the Law was given by Moses, Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Chap. 1.17.
Undoubtedly this strongly Argues that the Law was not given by Christ;
wherefore you deal ridiculously, in desiring me to take heed of persuading
others to transgress any one word that Christ immediately Commanded at Mount
Sinai. To what purpose do you bestow such Elegies upon the Law of God?

Page 61. Is it not to insinuate into the Minds of the unwary Readers, that I
am a Contemner, yea, an Opposet thereof? Whereas I think very Honorably of it,
as being Holy, Just, and Good: Only I believe (what you your self dare not
disavow) that all the Ceremonial and Shadowy things thereof are now done away
in Christ. And that the Sabbath is one of those Ceremonial and Shadowy things,
I have undenyably evinced, as from other passages of the Scripture, so
especially from that Text of Paul, Col. 2.16, 17. which plainly signifies,
that as the difference of Meats, and Drinks, and the Celebration of Feasts and
New Moons, so also the keeping of the Sabbath was a shadow of things to come,
the Body whereof is now held forth unto us in Christ.

Page 68. As for that passage, Mat. 24.21. where our Savior Christ bids his
Disciples pray, that their flight might not be on the Sabbath day, the words
plainly intimate, that it would be Lawful to flee on that day (and consequently
that the Law concerning the Sabbath would cease, whereby it was enjoined, that
no man should remove out of his place on the seventh day, Exodus 16.29.) The
words (I say) plainly intimate, that it would be Lawful to flee upon that day,
otherways why should they pray, that their flight might not be then?
Nevertheless it would not be expedient, in that the unbelieving Jews, thinking
the Sabbath still to remain, would be ready to offer Violence to such as should
attempt to fly on that day. Yea, perhaps the believing Jews themselves, not
understanding their own Liberty in Christ, but thinking the Sabbath still in
force, would be exceedingly grieved, if they should be reduced to a Necessity
either of Perishing, or of Flying on the Sabbath day. Of which thing I will
speak more anon. If you Reply, that Christ calls it the Sabbath in relation
to the time that should be long after his death; whereas I believe that by his
death the difference of times, in point of Holiness, and consequently the
Observation of the Sabbath, was abolished, according to the Doctrine of Paul,
Col. 2.14. I Answer, that the Scripture calls the times of the Jewish Feasts,
after the death of Christ, by the same names they had formerly. See Acts 12.3.
and Chap. 20.16. when notwithstanding you your self will not deny, that the
Obligation to observe those Feasts, had then ceased.

Page 69. What needed the mention of the first day of the Week, commonly called
Sunday, when I never affirmed, that Christ has left us any Precept for the
Observation of the same. Howbeit, we have the Practice of all believing
Gentiles, down from the Apostles unto our time, who have unanimously and
constantly observed the same, as being that day, which is in Rev. 1. called the
Lords day; which perpetual Custom of Christians is sufficient to Warrant our
keeping of the Lords day: Whereas no such thing can be alleged to justify the
observing of the Seventh-day Sabbath. And therefore when you say, that Christ
has established in his House all the Moral Duties of Moses House, it is
nothing to the purpose, unless you first prove, that the keeping of the Sabbath
is a Moral Duty, the contrary whereof, my comparison taken out of the
Scripture, does evince. For Christ being as Faithful in the House of God as
Moses. If it had been his Will that his Disciples should have observed the
Seventh-day Sabbath, he would have expressly enjoined it, and not have left them
to gather it by I know not what uncertain Consequences, such as you, and others
of your Opinion make use of. For Moses openly and frequently Commanded to the
Israelites that they should keep the Seventh-day Sabbath. So that your
proceeding herein is just like the dealing of the Papist about the Popes
pretended Supremacy. For when it is Questioned whether he be the Judge of all
emergent Controvercys amongst Christians, the Papist having no such Precept
from Christ in the Scripture, where Christ Ordains the Pope or Bishop of Rome
to such Judicature, bring instead thereof certain far-fetched probabilities and
consequences to prove it. In like manner you when you are urged by me and other
Christians to show where Christ (who was as faithful in the House of God as
Moses) has Commanded his followers to keep the Sabbath, allege Ordinances for
other things, and similitudes, and strains of your own Poetry, and other like
impertinences, without producing so much as one undoubted Precept for the same.
But whereas you say, that Christ has confirmed all the Moral Precepts of
Moses: Who denies it? You should have done well, not to have begged the thing
in Question, but to have proved that the Celebration of the Sabbath is a Moral
Duty. But this you have not yet been, nor ever shall be able to perform.

Page 79. That Paul excluded the Law touching the Seventh-day Sabbath out of
the Counsel of God toward believing Gentiles, is evident, both from his
perpetual silence in his Writings touching such matters (the contrary whereof
you being unable to prove, do here, as well as elsewhere turn aside to
impertinencies) and also by his ranking the Sabbath among shadows, Col. 2.16,
17. for the not observing of which, no man ought (as you, not regarding his
Injunction, rashly do) to Judge and Censure others as Offenders.

Page 80. I wonder at your boldness to aver, That the Apostles did own the
Sabbaths Observation, as a great virtue, and admonish Christians to beware of
the breach thereof as a most provoking sin; and that this is evident from Mat.
5.9. where it is said, Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of
these Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Is here (or in the whole Chapter) so much as one word of the Sabbaths;
yea does not this expression, the least of these Commandments, argue that he
spoke of his own Commandments, differing from those in the Law? For should you
understand it of the Commandments in the Law, would it not from thence
unavoidably follow, that Christians are bound to keep all the Law of Moses;
even to the least Commandment thereof; So that of Christians we must all
presently turn Jews. And whether this be not indeed the bottom of your design,
you give me too much reason to suspect, as by other expressions of yours, so
especially by that downright Jewish Speech of yours, p. 25. where you say that
you know no newer Covenant, than the Covenant of Life and Peace that was made
with Levy. As for that other Text, from whence you endeavor to prove, That the
Apostles did own the Sabbath observation as a great virtue, namely Luke 23.56.
where it is said, They rested on the Sabbath, according to the Commandment? Is
here any mention made of the Apostles, or of their owning the observation of
the Sabbath, after the death of Christ? Is not that which is here spoken of the
Commandment, meant of the Commandment in the Law? which the godly Jewish Women
here spoken of, knew not to be abolished; as neither did the believing Jews in
general a long time after, as you may see, Acts 21.20. where the Apostle James
says to Paul, Thou see, Brother, how many thousands of Jews there are that
believe, and they are all Zealous of the Law. But as for any Commandment of
Christ about the Sabbath, you do not allege any such out of the Gospel (there
being none) but instead thereof bring uncertain Consequences.

Page 83. In this Page your Judaism again breaks forth, and plainly discovers
it self, when you tell us, that Moses Writings were then (namely, when that
Decree, Acts 15.28, 29. was made) esteemed the most Righteous Rule for true
Believers. Which words of yours are directly opposite both to the Epistle of
the Apostle, set down in the foresaid Chapter (where they blame such as taught
the Disciples that they ought to keep the Law) as also to the words of Christ
himself, Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe not whatsoever Moses, but
whatsoever Christ had commanded them. Yea, your words make the Law more
Righteous than the Gospel; for if the Law be the most Righteous Rule for
Believers, there is no other Rule so Righteous as it, and consequently the Rule
of the Gospel must stoop to the Law. By this may easily be perceived what the
tendency of your Doctrine is, and how by those goodly words of Gods Sanctifying
Presence on the Sabbath day, and the like, you go about to beguile the simple.

Page 84. This last Argument alleged by me out of Romans 1^.2, 3, etc. is like
to that other, drawn from Col. 2.16, 17. and it does so fully and exactly
determine the business touching the Ceremoniality of the Seventh-day Sabbath,
that it is a wonder how any man professing himself a Christian, and to own the
Authority of the New Testament, should make any scruple of this matter. And you
your self sufficiently show by your many turnings and windings in putting off
this Portion of Scripture, that you could by no means abide the force thereof.
For when it is said, ver. 2. One man believes he may eat all things, another
being weak, eats herbs. Does not this clearly imply, that the difference of
Meats formerly observed according to the will of God, whether before or after
the Law, does now cease? For that there was distinction between clean and
unclean Beasts and Fowls, before the Law; and that by the approbation of the
Lord God himself, is apparent from Genesis 28.20. Also that by clean Beasts and
Fowls, are meant such as may Lawfully be eaten; by unclean, such as may not, is
evident from Lev. 11.3, 4, 46, 47. So that if your Exception concerning days,
were true, namely, that the fifth Verse meant of such days only as were
Ordained to be kept Holy under the Law, and not of the Sabbath, which was
Instituted before the Law; I might by the same Reason say as much of Meats,
namely, that the Apostle means such a difference of Meats as was introduced
by the Law: so that still those Meats remain unclean to us Christians, which
were by God himself called unclean before the Law, and they (it is likely) were
as many if not the very same with those under the Law. And therefore by this
kind of Arguing we are not sure of having attained any Liberty in this kind by
means of Christ. You may by this see how absurd your exceptions are, and that
as the difference of Meats, whether in Relation to the Will of God before or
after the Law, is now taken away; so in like manner the difference of days, and
therefore that none is by the Commandment of God to be now esteemed more Holy
than another. For the Apostle plainly affirms (without reprehending it) that
one man esteems every day alike, and that he which esteems not one day
above another esteems it not unto the Lord. But you have yet another
exception, and that more strange than the former, for you say, that by every
day the Apostle only intends every one of the six days, because, Exodus 16.4.
(which is the first place where this expression occurreth) when the Lord says,
the people shall go out togather a certain rate every day, there is meant every
one of the six days. But I pray you tell me why, when you cited this place out
of Exodus you would not take so much pains to consult the Hebrew Text, you
having skill in that Language? Or, if that seemed too painful, why you did not
cast you eye upon what the Translators set in the Margent? For they there tell
you, that the words in Hebrew are, the portion of a day in its day, which being
so, your exception, that by every day, Romans 14.5. is meant only every one of
the six days of the Week, has not so much as any colorable warrant from the
aforesaid Text in Exodus; and consequently as your Exception was but a mere
evasion to my Argument, drawn from the aforesaid Text of the Apostle it remains
invincible, namely, that not only the difference of Meats, but also the
difference of days, is, (as to any Law of God) now taken away, and accordingly
they are but weak and ill informed Believers, who think the Obligation of the
Seventh-day Sabbath does still remain.

FINIS.

