The Christians CONVERSE with GOD, OR, THE Insufficiency and Uncertainty OF
Human Friendship And the Improvement of SOLITUDE IN CONVERSE with GOD; With
some of the AUTHOR's Breathings after him.

By Richard Baxter.

Recommended to the Reader's serious thoughts when at the House of Mourning,
and in Retirement. By Mr. Matthew. Silvester.

LONDON, Printed for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1693.

TO THE READER^
THis Excellent Discourse, breathing the Excellence of it is (now Deceased)
Authors Spirit, craves thy most serious perusal; and it will plentifully reward
the hours which shall be spent thereon. It greatly savours of deep thoughts,
strict observations, and long and great experience of God, of Things, and
Persons. Creatures look best when at a distance, and in prospect; but when
nearer to us, they are then easily looked through, and seldom found to
correspond with their Appearances to us, and with our expectations from them.
But God is such a deep and boundless Abyss of Perfection, as most delightfully
will endure and recompense all the severity and closeness of our eternal
Thoughts about him. Perfected Spirits are all thought concerning God, and find
their Hearts enflamed, and all their Powers invigorated thereby eternally, to
inexpressible Satisfaction: And what varieties of pleasant Thoughts the
Innumerable Instances and Mirrours of Divine Excellencies in the Heavens will
endlesly Minister unto, I do not know, nor dare I guess too boldly at them. But
how those Souls can look for Heaven, or truly be accounted gracious, who never
retire solemnly to converse with God, I know not. Surely, where God is not more
than all to us, he can be comfortably nothing: And our religious Exercises and
Pretenses must needs be mean and dull, whilst God is triflingly and seldom
thought on, and conversed with by us. Can holy Walking be preserved and
promoted without love? Can love to God and Christ, and to the invisible State,
be kindled, cherished, and continually advanced without Faith? Can Faith be any
thing but Fancy and Presumption, without Thought and Knowledge? And can the
Life of Faith, Hope, Love, and holy Walking, be fixed and vigorous, and
proficient, without our serious and frequent representations of God unto our
selves by solemn Contemplations of his excellent Perfections, free
Communications, plentiful Provisions, and glorious Designs, whereto he has
entitled us, seeing our Religion and Devotions in all the parts thereof can
have no Life and Soul but this? What is it to converse with God in Solitude,
but to actuate our Thoughts of what we know concerning God in Christ, and to
accomodate them to all the needful and useful Purposes of Religion and
Devotion; and to make Thoughts solemnly serviceable to the great Ends thereof,
viz. our due and seasonable Representations of our God to us, and of our selves
to him in Christ, pursuant to the stated and occasional Ends and Interests of
Christian Godliness, as the matter may require? Conversing thus with God, wants
not its great Advantages in life and death. And if these Thoughts contained in
this Book, (which did so greatly reconcile the Author to the Thoughts of his
then approaching, but now experienced Death,) were more in Exercise at Funeral
Solemnities, and this Book then put into the hands of Mourners, it would be no
matter of Repentance that I know of. These are the hasty Thoughts and
Sentiments of thine in and for the Lord, whilst

Matthew Sylvester.
London, Sept. 12. 1692.
THE CONTENTS^
THE Context opened. p. 1 Why Christ was forsaken by his Disciples. p. 6. Use
1. Expect by the forsaking of your Friends to be conformed unto Christ: Reasons
for your Expectation. p. 12 The Aggravations of their forsaking you. p. 34 Some
quieting Considerations. p. 38 The Order of Forms in the School of Christ. p.
51 The Disciples scattered every Man to his own. p. 57. Selfishness contrary to
friendly fidelity. p. 58. Considerations to quiet us in the death of faithful
Friends. p. 60 Whether we shall know them in Heaven. p. 71 Whether Creatures be
any matter of our Comfort in Heaven. p. 73. Quest. Shall I have any more
Comfort in present friends than in others? p. 76 Doct. 3. When all forsake us,
and leave us (as to them) alone, we are far from being simply alone, because
God is with us. p. 80. The advantages of having God with us. p. 81 Quest. How
he is with us. p. 82 Use. 1. Imitate Christ: Live upon God alone, though men
forsake you; yet thrust not your selves into Solitude uncalled. p. 91 In what
cases Solitude is lawful and good. p. 92 Reasons against unnecessary Solitude.
p. 94 The Comfort of Converse with God in necessary Solitude. The Benefits of
Solitude. The Reasons from God. Improved largely in some Meditations. p.
102.111 Directions for Conversing with God in Solitude. p. 149 Concluded in
further Meditation. p. 160 A Caution. p. 166
Books Printed for John Salusbury in Cornhill.
THE certainty of The Worlds of Spirits, fully evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, Operations, Voices, etc. Proving the
Immortality of Souls, the Malice and Miseries of the Devils and the Damned, and
the Blessedness of the Justified. By Richard Baxter. An End of Doctrinal
Controversies which have lately troubled the Churches, by ^econciling
explication without much Disputing. By Richard Baxter. The Protestant Religion
truly stated and justified, by the late Reverend Divine Mr. Richard Baxter:
Whereunto is added by way of an Epistle, some Account of the Learned Author,
never before published. By Mr. Matthew. Sylvester and Mr. Daniel Williams. The
Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the contrivance and accomplishment of Man's
Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. By William Bates, D. D. The Changableness
of this World, with respect to Nations, Families, and particular Persons; with
a practial Application thereof to the various conditions of this Mortal Life.
By Timothy Rogers, M. A. The Christian Lover, or a discourse opening the Nature
of Participation with, and Demonstrating the necessity of Purification by
Christ. By T. Cruse. The Duty and blessing of a Tender Conscience, plainly
stated and earnestly recommended to all that regard acceptance with God, and
the prosperity of their Souls. By the same Author. Five Sermons on various
Occasions. By the same Author. The Mirror of Divine Love unvailed, in a
Paraphrase on the High and misterious Song of Solomon. By Robert Fleming. V. D.
M. The Mourners Memorial, in two Sermons on the death of the truly Pious Mrs.
Susannah Some. With some Account of her Life and death. By T. Wright, and
Robert Fleming. V. D. M. A new Examination of the Accidence and Grammar, in
English and Latin, wherein all the Rules of Properi quae Maribus, Que Genus, As
in presenti, Sintax, and Praesodia, are made plain and easy, that the meanest
Capacity may speedily learn the Latin Tongue.
OF CONVERSING WITH God, etc.
Joh. XVI.32. Behold, the hour comes, ye^ is come* that ye shall be scattered
every Man to his own, and shall leave me alone* And yet I am not alone, because
the Father is with me.


I Am this day to handle the instance of [ Christ's being forsaken by his
Friends and Followers.]

He thought meet to foret^ll them, how they should* manifest their infirmity
and untrustiness in this temporary forsaking of him, that so he might fullyer
convince them, that he knew what was in Man, and that he knew future
contingencies (or things to come, which seem most dependent on the Will of Man)
and that he voluntarily submitted to his deserted State, and expected no
support from Creatures, but that Man should then do least for Christ, when
Christ was doing most for Man; that Man by an unthankful forsaking Christ,
should then manifest his forsaken deplorate state, when Christ was to make
Atonement for his Reconciliation to God, and was preparing the most costly
Remedy for his Recovery. He foretold them of the Fruit which their Infirmity
would produce, to humble them that were apt to think too highly of themselves
for the late free Confession they had made of Christ, when they had newly said
[ Now we are sure that thou know all things: by this we are sure, that thou
come forth from God, ver. 30.

He answers them [ Do ye now believe? Behold, the hour comes, etc.] Not that
Christ would not have his Servants know his graces in them, but he would also
have them know the Corruption that is latent, and the infirmity consistent with
their grace. We are very apt to judge of all that is in us, and of all that we
shall do hereafter, by what we feel at the present upon our hearts. As when we
feel the stirring of some Corruption, we are apt to think that there (...)
nothing else, and hardly perceive the contrary grace, and are apt to think it
will never be better with us: So when we feel the Exercise of Faith, Desire or
Love, we are apt to overlook the contrary Corruptions, and to think that we
shall never feel them more. But Christ would keep us both humble and vigilant*
by acquainting us with the mutability and unconstancy of our minds. When it
goes well with us, we forget that the time is coming when it may go worse. As
Christ said to his Disciples, he^e in the case of Believing, we may say to our
selves in that and other (...)* Do we now Believe? It is well^ But the time may
be coming in which we may be brought to shake with the stirrings of our
remaining Unbelief, and shrewdly tempted to question the (...) of Ch^istianity
it self, and of the ^oly Scriptures, and of the Life to come. Do we now rejoice
in the persuasions of the Love of God? The time may be coming when we may think
our selves forsaken and undone, and think he will esteem and use us as his
Enemies. Do we now pray with fervor, and pour out our Souls enlargedly to God?
It is well: But the time may be coming when we shall seem to be as dumb and
prayerless, and say, we cannot pray, or else we find no audience and acceptance
of our Prayers. Christ knows that in us which we little know by our selves;
and therefore may foreknow, that we will commit such Sins, or fall into such
Dangers, as we little fear.

What Christ here prophesies to them did afterward all come to pass. As soon
as ever Danger and Trouble did appear, they began to flag, and to show how ill
they could adhere unto him or suffer with him, without his special
corroborating Grace. In the Garden when he was sweating Blood in Prayer, they
were sleeping; Though the Spirit was willing, the Flesh was weak: They could
not* watch with him one hour, Mat. 26.40, 41. When he was apprehended, they
shifted each Man for himself, Mat. 26.56. [ Then all the Disciples forsook him
and fled. And as this is said to be that the Scriptures might be fulfilled,
Mat. 26.54, 56. so it might be said to be, That this prediction of Christ
himself might be fulfilled. Not that Scripture Prophesies did cause the Sin by
which they were fulfilled, nor that God caused the sin to fulfill his own
Predictions, but that God cannot be deceived who foretold in Scriptures long
before, that thus it would come to pass: When it is said, That [ thus it must
be, that the Scripture may be fulfilled] the meaning is not that [ thus God
(...) but only Necess^^^ (...); a Logical Necessity in (...) noscendi and
dicendi; nor a (...) in ordine essendi: (...) of the Thing it self as caused by
(...) Prediction or Decree; but a (...) of the Truth of this (...); [ such a
thing will b^, (...) has decreed, foreknown or foretold (...) or [ whatever
God foretells, must nescessarily come to pass, that is, will certainly come
to pass: but this God has foretold; therefore this will come to pass.]

Here are three observable points in the Text, that are worthy our distinct
Consideration, though for brevity sake I shall handle them together.

1. That Christ was forsaken by his own Disciples, and left alone.

2. When the Disciples left Christ, they were scattered every one to his own.
They returned to their old Habitations, and old Acquaintance, and old
Employment, as if their hopes and hearts had been almost broken, and they had
lost all their labor in following Christ so long: Yet the root of Faith and
Love that still remained, caused them to enquire further of the end, and to
come together in secret to confer about these Matters.

3. When Christ was forsaken of his Disciples, and left alone, yet was he not
forsaken of his Father, nor left so alone as to be separated from him or his
love.

We (...) ^ow ^o consider of this, (...) (...) as a part of Christ's
Humiliation, (...) as a Point in which we must (...) to be conformed to him. It
may possibly seem strange to us, that Christ would suffer all his Disciples to
forsake him in his Extremity; and I doubt it will seem strange to us, when in
our extremity, and our suffering for Christ (and perhaps for them) we shall
find our selves forsaken by those that we most highly valued, and had the
greatest familiarity with. But there are many Reasons of this permissive
Providence open to our observation.

1. No wonder, if when Christ was suffering for Sin, he would even then permit
the Power and odiousness of sin to break forth, that it might be known he
suffered not in vain. No wonder, if he permitted his Followers to (...) him,
and to show the latent (...) and Selfishness, and unthankfulness tha^ remained
in them, that so they might know, that the death of Christ was as necessary for
them as for others; and the universality of the Disease might show the need
that the Remedy should be Universal. And it is none of Christ's intent to make
his Servants to seem better than they are, to themselves or others, or to
honor himself by the hiding of their Faults, but to magnify his pardoning and
healing grace, by the means or occasion of the sins which he pardons and
heals.

2. H^reby he will bring his Followers to the fuller knowledge of themselves,
and show them that which all their days should keep them humble, and watchful,
and save them from p^^^sumption and trusting in themselves: When we have made
any full Confession of Christ, or done him any considerable service, we are apt
to say with the Disciples, Mat. 19.27. [ Behold, we have forsaken all, and
followed thee; What shall we have?] As if they had rather been Givers to
Christ, than Receivers from him; and had highly (...) his hands: But when (...)
him, and the rest shift for them^^lves, and when they come to themselves after
such cowardly and ungrateful Dealings, then they will be^ter understand their
Weakness, and know on whom they must de^end.

3. Hereby also they shall better understand what they would have been, if God
had le^t them to themselves, that so they may be thankful for grace received,
and may not boast themselves against the miserable world, as if they had made
themselves to differ, and had not received all that grace by which they excel
the common sort: when our falls have hu^t us and shamed us, we shall know to
whom we must be beholden to support us.

4. Christ would permit his Disciples thus far to forsake him, because he would
have no support from man, in his sufferings for man: This was part of his
voluntary humiliation, to ^e deprived of all earthly comforts, and to be^r
affliction even from those few, that b^t lately were his faithful servants:
that men dealing like men, and sinners, while he was doing like God, and as a
Savior, no man might challenge to himself the honor of contributing to the
Redemption of the world, so much as by encouraging the Redeemer.

5. Christ did permit the Faith and courage of his Disciples thus far to fail,
that their witness to him might be of the greater credit and authority, when
his actual Resurrection and the Communication of the Spirit should compel them
to believe: when all their doubts were dissipated, they that had doubted
themselves, and yet were constrained to believe, wo^ld be received as the most
impartial witnesses by the doubting world.

6. Lastly, by the desertion and dissipation of his Disciples, Christ would
teach us whenever we are called to follow him in suffering, what to expect from
the best of men; Even to know that of themselves they are untrusty, and may
fail us: and therefore not to look for too much assistance or encouragement
from them. Paul lived in a time when Christians were more self-denying and
steadfast than they are now: And Paul was one that might better expect to be
faithfully accompanied in his sufferings for Christ, than any of us: And yet he
says, 2 Timothy 4.16. [ At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men
forsook me:] and prays, that it be not laid to their charge: Thus you have
seen some Reasons why Christ consented to be left of all, and permitted his
Disciples to desert him in his sufferings.

Yet note here, that it is but a partial temporary forsaking that Christ
permits* and not a total or final forsaking or Apostasy. Though he will let
them see that they are yet men, yet will he not leave them to be but as other
men: Nor will he quite cast them off, or suffer them to perish.

Nor is it all alike that thus forsake him; Peter does not do as Judas: The
sincere may manifest their infirmity; but the Hypocrites will manifest their
Hypocrisy.

And accordingly in our sufferings our familiars that were fals-hearted (as
being worldlings and carnal at the heart may perhaps betray us, and set against
us, or forsake the cause of Christ, and follow the way of gain and honor: when
our tempted shrinking friends that yet may have some sincerity, may perhaps
look strange at us, and seem not to know us, and may hide their heads, and show
their fears; and perhaps also begin to study some self-deceiving arguments and
distinctions, and to stretch their consciences, and venture on some sin,
because they are afraid to venture on affliction; till Christ shall cast a
gracious rebuking quickening aspect on them, and shame them for their sinful
shame, and fear them from their sinful fears, and inflame their Love to him by
the motions of his Love to them, and destroy the Love that turned them for him:
And then the same men that dishonourably failed Christ and us, and began to
shrink, will turn back and reassume their arms, and by patient suffering
overcome, and win the Crown as we have done before them.

Use. CHristians, expect to be conformed to your Lord in this part of his
Humiliation also: Are your friends yet fast and friendly to you? For all that
expect that many of them at least should prove less friendly: and promise not
your selves an unchanged constancy in them: Are they yet useful to you? expect
the time when they cannot help you: Are they your comforters and delight, and
is their company much of your solace upon earth? Be ready for the time when
they may become your sharpest scourges, and most heart-peircing grief^, or at
least whom you shall say, We have no pleasure in them. Have any of them, or
all, already failed you? what wonder? Are they not men, and sinners? To whom
were they ever so constant. As not to fail them? Rebuke your selves for your
unwarrantable expectations from them* And learn hereafter to know what man is;
and expect that friends should use you as follows.

1^ Some of them that you thought sincere, shall prove perhaps unfaithful and
dissemblers, and upon fallings out, or matters of self-interest may seek your
ruin. Are you better than David that had an Achitophel? or than Paul that had
a Domas? or than Christ that had a Judas? Some will forsake God: what wonder
then if they forsake you? Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall
wax cold, Mat. 24.12* Where pride and vain glory, and sensuality and
worldliness are unmortified at the heart, there is no trustiness in such
persons: For their wealth, or honor, or fleshly interest, they will part with
God and their Salvation; much more with their best deserving friends. Why may
not you as well as Job have occasion to complain, [ He has put my Brethren far
from me, and my Acquaintance are very estranged from me: My kin^folk have
failed, and my familiar Friends have ^^^actten me: They that dwell in my House,
and my Maiden^ count me for a Stranger, I am an Alien in their sight: I called
my Servant, and he gave me no Answer, I entreated him with my mouth^ My breath
is strange to my Wife; though I entreated for the Childrens sake of my own
Body: Yea, young Children despised me: I arose, and they spoke against me: All
my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned against me, Job
19.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 1^, 19. Why may not you as well as David be put to sav,
Yea mine own familiar Friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of my Bread, has
lift up his Heel against me!] Psalm. 41.9. Those that have been most acquainted
with the secrets of your Soul, and privy to your very thoughts, may be the
persons that shall betray you, or grow strange to you. Those that you have most
obliged by benefits, may prove your greatest Enemies. You may find some of your
Friends like Birds of prey, that hover about you for what they can get, and
when they have caught it, fly away. If you have given them all that you have,
they will forsake you, and perhaps reproach you, because you have no more to
give them. They are your Friends more for what they yet expect from you, than
for what they have already received. If you cannot still be helpful to them, or
feed their covetous desires, or supply their wants, you are to them but as one
that they had never known. Many a faithful Minister of Christ has studied, and
preached, and prayed, and wept for their Peoples Souls, and after all have been
taken for their Enemies, and used as such; yea even because they have done so
much for them. Like the Patient, that being cured of a mortal sickness, sued
his Physician at Law for making him sick with the Physic (But it is indeed our
uncured Patients only that are offended with us.) Paul was accounted an Enemy
to the Galathians, because he told them the truth. Ungrateful truth makes the
faithfullest Preachers most ungrateful. It must seem no wonder to a Preacher of
the Gospel, when he has entreated, prayed, and wept night and day for
miserable Souls, and laid his hands as it were under their feet in hopes of
their Conversion and Salvation, to find them after all, his bitter Enemies, and
seeking his Destruction, that could have laid down his Life for their
Salvation. Jeremy seemed too impatient under this affliction, when he said [
Give heed to me, O Lord, and hearken to the Voice of them that contend with me:
Shall Evil be recompensed for good? Remember that I stood before thee to speak
good for them, and to turn away thy Wrath from them: Therefore deliver up their
Children to the famine, and pour out their blood by the force of the S^^ond,
etc. Jer. 18, 19, 20.

Thus may Ingratitude afflict you, and kindness be requited with unkindness,
and the greatest benefits be forgotten, and requited with the greatest wrongs:
Your old Familiars may be your Foes: and you may be put to say as Jeremy [For I
heard the defaming of many: Fear on every side: Report, say they, and we will
report it: All my Familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he
will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our
revenge on him.] Jer. 20.10. Thus must the Servants of Christ be used, in
conformity to their suffering Head.

2. And some that are sincere, and whose hearts are with you, may yet be drawn
by temptation to disown you: When malice is slandering you, timorous friendship
may perhaps be silent* and afrai^ to just^fie you or take your part. When a
Peter in such imbecility and fear can disown and deny his suffering Lord, what
wonder if faint hearted friends disown you, or me, that may give them too much
occasion or pretense? Why may not you and I be put to say as David did, Psalm.
38.11, 12. [ My lovers and my Friends stand aloof from my sore, and my Kinsmen
stand afar off: They that seek after my Life lay Snares for me: And they that
seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long.]
They that in fearfulness will ^ail their Maker and Redeemer, and hazard their
Salvation, may by a smaller temptation be drawn to fail such friends as we.

3. Moreover, a hundred things may (...) action or (...) may cause passions in
(...) these may grow so high till (...) seem to one another to be like (...):
Paul and Barnabas may grow so hot, as to fall out to a parture. How easily can
Satan let fire on the Tinder which he finds in the best and gentlest natures,
if God permit him? No Friends so near and dear, that passionate weaknesses may
not either alienate or make a grief to one another; how apt are we to take
unkindnesses at one another, and to be suspicious of ou^ Friends, or offended
with them? And how apt to give occasion of such offense? How apt are we to
censure one another, and to misinterpret the words and actions of our Friends?
And how apt to give occasion of such mistakes and cutting censures? And the
more kindness we have found in, or expected from our Friends, the more their
real or supposed injuries will affect us. We are apt to say, [ Had it been a
stranger, I could have born it: But to be used thus by my bosom or familiar
Friend, goes near my heart.] And indeed the unkindness of Friends is no small
affliction^ the suffering going usually as near the Heart, as the person that
caused it was near it: Especially when our own weakness causes us to forget
the frailty and infirmities of Man, and with what allowances and expectations
we must choose and use our Friends; and when we forget the Love that remains
in the midst of passions.

4. Also cross Interests and unsuitableness may exceedingly interrupt the
fastest friend^hip. Friendship is very much founded in suitableness, and
maintained by it: And among mortals, there is no perfect s^it^bleness to be
found; but much unsuitablen^ss still remains. That which pleases one, is
displeasing to another: One li^eth this place, and the other that: One likes
this habit, and the other that: One is for mirth, and the other for sadness:
One for talk, and the other for silence: One for a public, and the other for a
private life. And their personallity or individuation having self love as
inseparable, will unavoidably ^^use a contrariety of interests. The Creature is
insufficient for us: If one have it, perhaps the other must want it: Like a
covering too narrow for the bed. Sometimes our ^^puta^ions seem to stand a
(...), so that one man's is diminished by another: and then how apt is envy to
create a grudge, and raise unfriendly jealousies and distastes. Sometimes the
Commodity of one is the discommodity of the other: And then [ Mine and Thine]
(which are contrary to the community of friendship) may divide and alienate,
and make two of those that seemed one. The instances of Abraham and Lot (upon
the differen^e among their Servants) and of Isaac and Ishmael, and of ^acob and
Esau, and of ^ban and Jacob, and of Leah and Rachel^ and of Joseph and his
Brethren, and of Saul and David, and of Ziba Mephibosheth and David, with many
others tell us this. It is rare to meet with a Jonathan, that will endearedly
love that man to the death, who is appointed to deprive him of a Kingdom. If
one can but say [ I suffer by him, or I am a looser by him] it seems enough
to excuse unfriendly thoughts and actions. When you can gratify the desires of
all the covetous, ambitious, self-seeking persons in the World, or else cure
their diseases, and possess their minds with perfect C^^rity, then ^ll the
(...) has over and over again given (...) as full and sad demonstrations of
the (...) of Cross opinions, to alienate (...) and make divisions, as most ages
of the World have ever had. If your Friend (...) proud, it is wonderful how he
will ^ligh^ you, and withdraw his Love, if you (...) not of his mind* If he be
zealous, he is easily tempted, to think it a part of his duty to God, to disown
you if you differ from him, as taking you for one that disowneth the truth of
God, and therefore one that God himself disowneth; or at least to grow cold in
his affection toward you, and to decline from you, as he that thinks you do
from God. As agreement in opinions does strangely reconcile Affections; so
disagreement does secretly and strangely alienate them; even before you are
well aware, your Friend has lost possession of your hearts, because of an
unavoidable diversity of apprehensions: When all your Friends have the same
intellectual complexion and temperature, and measure of understanding with your
selves, then you may have hope to escape the ruptures, which unlikeliness and
differences of apprehensions might else cause.

6. Moreover, some of your friends may so far overgrow you in wisdom, or
wealth, or honor, or worth, in their own conceits, that they may begin to take
you to be unsuitable for them, and unmeet for their further special friendship.
Alas poor man, they will pity thee that thou art no wiser, and that thou have
no greater light to change thy mind as fast as they, or that thou art so weak
and ignorant as not to see what seems to them so clear a truth; or that thou
art so simple to cast away thy self by crossing them that might prefer thee, or
to f^ll under the displeasure of those that have power to raise or ruin thee:
But if thou be so simple, thou may be the object of their lamentation, but
art no familiar friend for them. They think it fittest to close and converse
with those of their own rank and stature, and not with such shrubs and
children, that may prove their trouble and dishonor.

7. And some of your friends will think that by a more through acquaintance
with you, they have found out more of your infirmities or faults; and therefore
have found that you are less aimable and valuable than at first they judged
you: They will think that by distance, unacquaintedness, and an overhasty love
and judgment, they were mistaken in you; and that now they see reason to repent
of the love which they think was guilty of some errors and excess: when they
come nearer you, and have had more trial of you, they will think they are
fitter to judge of you than before: And indeed our defects are so many, and all
our infirmities so great, that the more men know us, the more they may see in
us that deserves pity or reproof; and as Pictures, we appear less beautiful at
the nearest view: Though this will not warrant the withdrawing of that Love
which is due to friends, and to virtue even in the imperfect: nor will excuse
that alienation and decay of friendship that is caused by the pride of such as
overlook, perhaps much greater failings and weaknesses in themselves, which
need forgiveness.

8. And perhaps some of your Friends will grow weary of their Friendship,
having that infirmity of humane nature, not to be much pleased with one thing
long. Their love is a flower that quickly withers: It is a short lived thing
that soon grows old. It must be novelty that must feed their love and their
delight.

9. And perhaps they may have got some better Friends in their apprehensions,
that may have so much interest as to take them up, and leave no room for
ancient Friends. It may be they have met with those that are more suitable, or
can be more useful to them: that have more learning, or wit, or wealth, or
power, than you have, and therefore seem more worthy of their Friendship.

10. And some of them may think when you (are in a low and suffering state, and
in danger of worse, that it is part of their duty of self-preservation to be
strange to you though in heart they wish you well) They will think they are not
bound to hazard themselves upon the displeasure of superiors, to own or
befriend you or any other: Though they must not desert Christ, they think they
may desert a man for their own preservation.

To avoid both extremes in such a case, men must both study to understand which
way is most serviceable to Christ, and to his Church, and withal to be able to
deny themselves, and also must study to understand what Christ means in his
final sentence [ In as much as you did it (or did it not) to one of the least
of these my Brethren, you did it (or did it not (to me.] As if it were to visit
the Contagious, we must neither cast away our lives to do no good, or for that
which in value holds no proportion with them; nor yet must we deny to run any
hazard when it is indeed our duty: So is it in our visiting those that suffer
for the cause of Christ: (but that here the owning them being the confessing of
him, we need more seldom to fear being too forward.)

11. And some of your friends may cover their faithfulness with the pretense of
some fault that you have been guilty of, some error that you hold, or some
unhansom or culpable act that you have done, or some duty that you have left
undone or failed in. For they think there is not a better shelter for their
unfaithfulness, then to pretend for it the Name and Cause of God, and so to
make a duty of their sin. Who would not justify them, if they can but prove,
that God requires them, and Religion o^ligeth them to forsake you f^r your
faults? There are few crimes in the world that by some are not fathered on God
(that most hates them) as thinking no name can so much honor them. False
friends therefore use this means as well as other Hypocrites: And though God is
Love, and condemns nothing more than uncharitableness and malice, yet these
are commonly by falsha^ted Hypocrites, called by pious virtuous names, and God
himself is entitled to them: so that few worldlings, ambitious persons or
timeservers, but will confidently pretend Religion for all their falsehood to
their friends, or bloody cruelty to the servants of Christ, that comply not
with their carnal interest.

12. Perhaps some of your friends may really mistake your case, and think that
you suffer as evil doers, and instead of comforting you, may be your sharpest
censurers: This is one of the most notable things set out to our observation in
the book of Job: It was not the smallest part of his affliction, that when the
hand of God was heavy upon him, and then if ever was the time for his friends
to have been his comforters, and friends indeed, on the contrary they became
his scourge, and by unjust accusations, and misinterpretations of the
providence of God, did greatly add to his affliction! when God had taken away
his children, wealth and health, his friends would take away the reputation and
comfort of his integrity; and under pretense of bringing him to repentance, did
charge him with that which he was never guilty of; They wounded his good name,
and would have wounded his conscience, and deprived him of his inward peace:
Censorious false accusing friends do cut deeper then malicious slandring
enemies. It is no wonder if strangers or enemies do misjudge and misreport our
actions: But when your bosom friends, that should most intimately know you, and
be the chief witness of your innocence against all others, shall in their
jealousy, or envy, or peevishness* or falling out, be your chief reproachers
and unjust accusers, as it makes it serve more credible to others, so it will
come nearest to your selves. And yet this is a thing that must be expected: yea
even your most self-denying acts of obedience to God, may be so misunderstood
by godly men, and real friends, as by them to be taken for your great
miscarriage, and turned to your rebuke: As David's dancing before the Ark was by
his wife; which yet did but make him resolve to be yet more vile: If you be
cast into poverty, or disgrace, or prison, or banishment, for your necessary
obedience to Christ, perhaps your friend or wife may become your accuser for
this greatest service, and say, This is your own doing: your rashness, or
indiscretion, or self-conceitedness, or willfulness has brought it upon you:
what need had you to say such words, or to do this or that? why could not you
have yielded in so small a matter?] Perhaps your costliest and most excellent
obedience shall by your nearest friends be called the fruits of pride, or
humor, or passion, or some corrupt affection, or at least of folly and
inconsiderateness. When flesh and blood has long been striving in you against
your duty, and saying, [Do not cast away thy self: O serve not God at so dear a
rate: God does not require thee to undo thy self: why should thou not avoid
so great inconveniences?] When with much ado you have conquered all your carnal
reasonings, and denied your selves and your carnal interest; you must expect
even from some religious friends, to be accused for these very actions, and
perhaps their accusations may fasten such a blot upon your names, as shall
never be washed out till the day of judgment. By difference of interests, or
apprehensions, and b^ unacquaintedness with your hearts, and actions, the
righteousness of of the righteous may be thus taking from him, and friends may
do the work of enemies, yea of Satan himself the accuser of the brethren; and
may prove as thorns in your bed, and gravel in your shoes, yea in your eyes,
and wrong you much more than open adversaries could have done. How is it like
to go with that man's reputation, you may easily judge, whose friends are like
Jobs, and his enemies like David's, that lay snares before him, and diligently
watch for matter of reproach: yet this may befall the best of men.

13. You may be permitted by God to fall into some real crime, and then your
friends may possibly think it is their duty to disown you, so far as you have
wronged God: When you provoke God to frown upon you, he may cause your friends
to frown upon you: If you fall out with him, and grow strange to him, no marvel
if your truest friends fall out with you, and grow strange to you. They love
you for your godliness, and for the sake of Christ; and therefore must abate
their love if you abate your godliness; and must for the sake of Christ be
displeased with you for your sins. And if in such a case of real guilt, you
should be displeased at their displeasure, and should expect that your friend
should befriend your sin, or carry himself toward you in your guilt as if you
were innocent, you will but show that you understand not the nature of true
friendship, nor the use of a true friend; and are yet your selves too friendly
to your sins.

14. Moreover, those few friends that are truest to you, may be utterly unable
to relieve you in your distress, or to give you ease, or do you any good. The
case may be such that they can but pity you and lament your sorrows, and weep
over you: you may see in them that man is not as God, whose friendship can
accomplish all the good that he desires to his friends. The wisest and
greatest and best of men are silly comforters, and uneffectual helps: you may
be sick, and pained, and grieved, and distressed, notwithstanding any thing
that they can do for you: Nay, perhaps in their ingnorance, they may increase
your misery, while they desire your relief; and by striving indirectly to help
and ease you, may tie the knot faster and make you worse. They may provoke
those more against you that oppress you, while they think they speak that which
would tend to set you free: They may think to ease your troubled minds by such
words as shall increase the trouble: or to deliver you as Peter would have
delivered Christ, and saved his Savior, first by carnal counsel, Math. 16.22.
[ Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee] And then by carnal
unjust force, (by drawing his sword against the Officers.) Love and good
meaning will not prevent the mischiefs of ignorance and mistake. If your friend
cut your throat while he thought to cut but a vein to cure your disease, it is
not his friendly meaning that will save your lives. Many a thousand sick people
are killed by their friends, that attend them with an earnest desire of their
life; while they ignorantly give them that which is contrary to their disease,
and will not be the ^ess pernicious for the good meaning of the giver. Who have
more tender affections than Mothers to their children? And yet a great part of
the calamity of the World of sickness, and the misery of man's life, proceeds
from the ignorant and erroneous indulgence of Mothers to their Children, who to
please them, let them eat and drink what they will, and use them to excess and
gluttony in their childhood, till nature be abused and ma^tered and clogged
with those superfluities and crudities, which are the dunghill matter of most
of the following diseases of their lives.

I might here also remember you how your friends may themselves be overcome
with a temptation, and then become the more dangerous tempters of you, by how
much the greater their interest is in your affections. If they be infected with
error, they are the likest persons to ensnare you: If they be tainted with
Covetousness or Pride, there is none so likely to draw you to the same sin: And
so your friends may be in effect your most deadly Enemies, deceivers and
destroyers.

15. And if you have friends that are never so firm and constant, they may
prove (not only unable to relieve you) but very increasing to your grief. If
they are afflicted in the participation of your sufferings, as your troubles
are become theirs (without your ease) so their trouble for you will become
yours, and so your stock of sorrow will be increased And they are mortals, and
liable to distress as well as you. And therefore they are like to bear their
share in several sorts of sufferings: And so friendship will make their
sufferings to be yours: Their sicknesses and pains, their fears and griefs,
their wants and dangers will all be yours. And the more they are your hearty
Friends, the more they will be yours. And so you will have as many additions to
the proper burden of your griefs, as you have suffering Friends: When you do
but hear that they are dead, you say as Thomas, Joh. 11.16. [ Let us also go
that we may die with him.] And having many such friends you will almost always
have one or other of them in distress; and so be seldom free from sorrow;
besides all that which is properly your own.

16. Lastly, if you have a Friend that is both true and useful, yet you may be
sure he must stay with you but a little while. The godly men will cease, and
the faithful fail from among the Children of men; while men of lying flattering
lips, and double hearts survive, and the wicked walk on every side while the
vilest men are exalted, Psalm. 12.1, 2, 8. while swarms of false malicious men,
are left round about you, perhaps God will take away your dearest Friends: If
among a multitude of unfaithful ones, you have but one that is your friend
indeed, perhaps God will take away that one. He may be separated from you into
another Country; or taken away to God by Death. Not that God does grudge you
the mercy of a faithful Friend; but that he would be your All, and would not
have you hurt your selves with too much affection to any Creature, and for
other reasons to be named anon.

And to be forsaken of your Friends, is not all your affliction; but to be so
forsaken is a great aggravation of it. 1. For they use to forsake us in our
greatest sufferings and streights, when we have the greatest need of them.

2. They fail us most at a dying hour, when all other worldly comfort fails:
As we must leave our houses, lands and wealth, so must we for the present leave
our Friends: And as all the rest are silly comforters, when we have once
received our citation to appear before the Lord, so also are our Friends but
silly Comforters: They can weep over us, but they cannot with all their care,
delay the separating stroke of death, one day or hour.

Only by their prayers, and holy advice, remembering us of everlasting things,
and provoking us in the work of preparation, they may prove to us friends
indeed. And therefore we must value a holy, heavenly, faithful friend, as one
of the greatest Treasures upon Earth. And while we take notice how as men they
may forsake us, we must not deny but that as Saints they are precious, and of
singular use to us; and Christ uses by them to communicate his mercies; and if
any Creatures in the World may be blessings to us, it is holy persons, that
have most of God in their hearts and lives.

3. And it is an aggravation of the Cross, that they often fail us, when we are
most faithful in our Duty, and stumble most upon the most excellent acts of our
obedience.

4. And those are the persons that ofttimes fail us, of whom we have deserved
best, and from whom we might have expected most.

Review the experiences of the choicest Servants that Christ has had in the
World, and you shall find enough to confirm you of the vanity of man, and the
instability of the dearest Friends. How highly was Athanasius esteemed? and yet
at last deserted and banished even by the famous Constantine himself! How
excellent a Man was Gregory Nazianzene, and highly valued in the Church? and
yet by reproach and discouragements driven away from his Church at
Constantinople whither he was chosen: and envyed by the Bishops round about
him. How worthy a man was the eloquent Chrysostom, and highly valued in the
Church! And yet how bitterly was he prosecuted by Hierome and Epiphanius; and
banished, and dyed in a second banishment, by the provocation of Factious
contentious Bishops, and an Empress impatient of his plain reproofs? What
person more generally esteemed and honored for learning, piety and
peaceableness then Melanchthon? and yet by the Contentions of Illyricus and his
party, he was made aweary of his life. As highly as Calvin was (deservedly)
valued at Geneva, yet once in a popular lunacy and displeasure, they drove him
out of their City, and in contempt of him some called their Dogs by the name of
Calvin; (though after they were glad to entreat him to return.) How much our
Grindal and Abbot were esteemed, it appears by their advancement to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury: And yet who knows not that their eminent piety
sufficed not to keep them from dejecting frowns! And if you say, that it is no
wonder if with Princes through interest, and with People through levity, it be
thus; I might keep up instances of the like untrustiness of particular Friends:
But all History and the experiences of the most, do so much abound with them,
that I think it needless. Which of us must not say with David that [ all men
are lyars] Psalm. 116. that is, deceitful and untrusty, either through
unfaithfulness, weakness or insufficiency; that either will forsake us, or
cannot help us in the time of need?

Was Christ forsaken in his extremity by his own Disciples, to teach us what to
expect, or bear? Think it not strange then to be conformed to your Lord in
this, as well as in other parts of his humiliation. Expect that Men should
prove deceitful: Not that you should entertain censorious suspicions of your
particular friends: But remember in general that Man is frail, and the best too
selfish and uncertain; and that it is no wonder if those should prove your
greatest grief, from whom you had the highest expectations. Are you better then
Job, or David, or Christ? and are your Friends more firm and unchangeable then
theirs?

Consider, 1. That Creatures must be set at a sufficient distance from their
Creator. All Sufficiency, Immutability and indefectible fidelity, are proper to
Jehovah. As it is no wonder for the Sun to set or be Eclipsed, as glorious a
body as it is; so it is no wonder for a Friend, a pious Friend, to fail us, for
a time, in the hour of our distress. There are some that will not: But there is
none but may, if God should leave them to their weakness. Man is not your Rock:
He has no stability but what is derived, dependant, and uncertain, and
defectible. Learn therefore to rest on God alone, and lean not too hard or
confidently upon any mortal might.

2. And God will have the common infirmity of man to be known, that so the
weakest may not be utterly discouraged, nor take their weakness to be
gracelesness, whilst they see that the strongest also have their infirmities,
though not so great as theirs. If any of God's Servants lives in constant
holiness and fidelity, without any shakings or stumbling in their way, it would
tempt some self-accusing troubled Souls, to think that they were altogether
graceless, because they are so far short of others. But when we read of a
Peter's denying his Master in so horrid a manner, with swearing and cursing that
he knew not the man, Mat. 26.74. And of his dissimulation and not walking
uprightly, Gal. 2. and of a David's unfriendly and unrighteous dealing with
Mephibosheth, the seed of Jonathan; and of his most vile and treacherous
dealing with Vriah, a faithful and deserving Subject; it may both abate our
wonder and offense at the unfaithfulness of our Friends, and teach us to
compassionate their frailty, when they desert us; and also somewhat abate our
immoderate dejectedness and trouble, when we have failed God or man our selves.

3. Moreover, consider, how the odiousness of that sin, which is the root and
cause of such unfaithfulness, is greatly manifested by the failing of our
Friends. God will have the odiousness of the Remnants of our Self-love and
Carnal mindedness, and Cowardice appear. We should not discern it in the Seed
and Root, if we did not see, and taste it in the Fruits. Seeing without Tasting
will not sufficiently convince us. A Crab looks as beautiful as an Apple; but
when you taste it, you better know the difference. When you must your selves be
unkindly used by your Friends, and forsaken by them in your distress, and you
have tasted the Fruits of the Remnants of their Worldliness, Selfishness and
Carnal Fears, you will better know the odiousness of these Vices, which thus
break forth against all Obligations to God and you, and notwithstanding the
Light, the Conscience, and perhaps the Grace, that does resist them.

4. Are you not prone to overvalue and overlove your Friends? If so, is not
this the meerest Remedy for your Disease? In the loving of God, we are in no
danger of Excess; and therefore have no need of any thing to quench it. And in
the loving of the Godly purely upon the account of Christ, and in loving Saints
as Saints, we are not apt to go too far. But yet our Understandings may
mistake, and we may think that Saints have more of sanctity than indeed they
have; and we are exceeding apt to mix a Selfish Common Love with that which is
Spiritual and Holy; and at the same time, when we love a Christian as a
Christian, we are apt not only to love him (as we ought) but to overlove him,
because he is our Friend, and loves us. Those Christians that have no special
Love to us, we are apt to undervalue and neglect, and love them below their
holiness and worth: But those that we think entirely love us, we love above
their proper Worth, as they stand in the esteem of God: Not but that we may
love those that love us, and add this love to that which is purely for the sake
of Christ; but we should not let our own Interest prevail and overtop the
Interest of Christ, nor love any so much for loving us, as for loving Christ:
And if we do so, no wonder if God shall use such Remedies as he sees meet, to
abate our excuse of Selfish Love.

O how highly are we apt to think of all that Good which is found in those who
are the highest esteemers of us, and most dearly love us; when perhaps in it
self it is but some ordinary Good, or ordinary Degree of Goodness which is in
them! Their Love to us unresistibly procures our Love to them: And when we
love them, it is wonderful to observe, how easily we are brought to think well
of almost all they do, and highly to value their Judgments, Graces, Parts and
Works: When greater Excellencies in another perhaps are scarce observed, or
regarded but as a common thing: And therefore the destruction or want of Love,
is apparent in the vilifying Thoughts and Speeches, that most Men have one of
another; and in the low esteem of the Judgments, and Performances, and Lives of
other Men; (much more in their Contempt, Reproaches, and cruel Persecutions.)
Now though God will have us increase in our love of Christ in his Members, and
in our pure love of Christians as such, and in our common Charity to all, yea,
and in our just Fidelity to our Friend; yet would he have us suspect and
moderate our selfish and excessive Love, and inordinate partial esteem of one
above another, when it is but for our selves, and on our own account. And
therefore as he will make us know, that we our selves are no such excellent
Persons, as that it should make another so laudable, or advance his worth,
because he loves us; so he will make us know, that our Friends, whom we
overvalue, are but like other Men: If we exalt them too highly in our esteem,
it is a sign that God must cast them down. And as their Love to us was it that
made us so exalt them; so their unkindness or unfaithfulness to us, is the
fittest means to bring them lower in our estimation and affection. God is very
jealous of our hearts, as to our overvaluing and overloving any of his
Creatures. What we give inordinately and excessively to them, is some way or
other taken from him, and given them to his Injury, and therefore to his
offense. Though I know, that to be void of natural, friendly or social
affections, is an odious extreme on the other side; yet God will rebuke us, if
we are guilty of Excess. And it is the greater and more inexcusable fault to
over-love the Creature, because our Love to God is so cold, and hardly kindled
and kept alive. He cannot take it well to see us dote upon dust and frailty
like our selves, at the same time when all his wondrous kindness, and
attractive goodness, do cause but such a faint and languid Love to him, which
we ourselves can scarcely feel. If therefore he cures us by permitting our
Friends to show us what they are, and how little they deserve such excessive
Love (when God has so little) it is no more wonder, than it is, that he is
tender of his Glory, and merciful to his Servants Souls.

5 By the failing and unfaithfulness of our Friends, the wonderful Patience of
God will be observed and honored, as it is showed both to them and us. When
they forsake us in our distress, (especially when we suffer for the Cause of
Christ) it is God that they injure more than us: And therefore if he bear with
them, and forgive their Weakness upon Repentance, why should not we do so, that
are much less injured? The worlds perfideousness should make us think, How
great and wonderful is the patience of God, that bears with, and bears up
so vile, ungrateful, treacherous Men that abuse him, to whom they are
infinitely obliged? And it should make us consider, when Men deal treacherously
with us, How great is that mercy that has born with, and pardoned greater
wrongs, which I my self have done to God, than these can be which men have done
to me! It was the remembrance of David's Sin, that had provoked God to raise up
his own Son against him (of whom he had been too fond) which made him so easily
bear the Curses and Reproach of Shimei. It will make us bear abuse from others,
to remember how ill we have dealt with God, and how ill we have deserved at his
hands our selves.

6. And I have observed another of the Reasons of God's permitting the failing
of our Friends, in the season and success. It is, that the Love of our Friends
may not hinder us when we are called to suffer or die. When we overlove them,
it teareth our very hearts to leave them: And therefore it is a strong
temptation to draw us from our Duty, and to be unfaithful to the cause of
Christ, lest we should be taken from our too-dear Friends, or lest our
suffering cause their too-much Grief. It is so hard a thing to die with
willingness and peace, that it must needs be a mercy to be saved from the
Impediments which make us backward: And the excessive Love of Friends and
Relations, is not the least of these Impediments. O how loath is many a one to
die, when they think of parting with Wife, or Husband or Children, or dear and
faithful Friends! Now I have often observed, that a little before their death
or sickness, it is ordinary with God to permit some unkindness between such too
dear friends to arise, by which he moderated and abated their affections, and
made them a great deal the willinger to dye. Then we are ready to say, it is
time for me to leave the World, when not only the rest of the World, but my
dearest Friends have first forsaken me! This helps us to remember our dearest
everlasting Friend, and to be grieved at the heart that we have been no truer
our selves to him, who would not have forsaken us in our extremity. And
sometimes it makes us even weary of the world, and to say as Elias, Lord take
away my Life, etc. 1 King 19.4.10, 14. When we must say, I thought I had one
friend left, and behold even he forsakes me in my distress.] As the love of
Friends intangleth our affections to this World, so to be weaned by their
unkindnesses from our Friends, is a great help to loosen us from the World, and
proves often a very great mercy to a Soul that is ready to depart.

And as the friends that Love us most, and have most interest in your esteem
and Love, may do more than others, in tempting us to be unfaithful to our Lord,
to to entertain any error, to commit any sin, or to flinch in suffering; so
when God had permitted them to forsake us, and to lose their too great interest
in us, we are fortified against all temptations from them. I have known where a
former intimate friend has grown strange, and broken former friendship, and
quickly after turned to such dangerous ways and errors, as convinced the other
of the mercifulness of God, in weakening his temptation by his friends
desertion; who might else have drawn him along with him into sin. And I have
often observed, that when the husbands have turned from Religion to Infidelity,
Familism, or some dangerous heresy, that God has permitted them to hate and
abuse their wives so inhumanly, as that it preserves the poor women from the
temptation of following them in their Apostasy or sin: When as some other
women with whom their husbands have dealt more kindly, have been drawn away
with them into pernicious paths.

Therefore still I must say, we were undone if we had the disposing of our own
conditions. It would belong before we should have been willing our selves to be
thus unkindly dealt with by our friends: And yet God has made it to many a
soul, a notable me^^s of preserving them from being undone for ever. Yea the
unfaithfulness of all our friends, and the malice and cruelty of all our
enemies, does us not usually so much harm, as the love and temptation of some
one deluded ^^ring friend, whom we are ready to follow into the gulf.

7. Lastly, consider that it is not desirable or suitable to our state, to have
too much of our comfort by any creature: Not only because it is most pure and
sweet which is most immediately from God; but also because we are very prone to
over-love the Creature; and if it should but seem to be very commodious to us,
by serving our necessities or desires, it would seem the more amiable, and
therefore be the stronger snare: The work of mortification does much consist in
the annihilation or deadness of all the Creatures as to any power to draw away
our hearts from God, or to entangle us and detain us from our duty. And the
more excellent and lovely the Creature appears ^o us, the less it is dead to
us, or we to it; and the more will it be able to hinder or ensnare us.

When you have well considered all these things, I suppose you will admire the
wisdom of God in leaving you under this kind of trial, and weaning you from
every creature, and teaching you by his Providence as well as by his word, to
Cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be
accounted of?] And you will see that it is no great wonder that corrupted souls,
that live in other sins, should be guilty of this unfaithfulness to their
friends: And that he that dare unthankfully trample upon the unspeakable
kindness of the Lord should deal unkindly with the best of men. You make no
great wonder at other kind of sins, when you see the world continually commit
them; why then should you make a greater or a stranger matter of this than of
the rest? Are you better than God? Must unfaithfulness to you be made more
heinous, than that unfaithfulness to him, which yet you daily see and slight?
The least wrong to God is a thousand fold more than the greatest that can be
done to you, as such. Have you done that for your nearest friend, which God
has done for him and you, and all men? Their obligations to you are nothing in
comparison of their great and manifold obligations to God.

And you know that you have more wronged God, your selves, than any man ever
wronged you: And if yet for all that he bear with you, have you not great
reasons to bear with others?

Yea, you have not been innocent toward men your selves: Did you never wrong
or fail another? Or rather, are you not apter to see and aggravate the wrong
that others do to you, than that which you have done to others? May you not
call to mind your own neglects, and say, as Adonizebeck, Judge. 1.7. [
Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and their great toes cut off,
gathered their meat under my table: As I have done, so God has requited me.]
Many a one have I failed or wronged: and no wonder if others fail and wrong me.]

Nay you have been much more unfaithful and injurious to your selves, than ever
any other has been to you. No friend was so near you, as your selves: None had
such a charge of you: None had such helps and advantages to do you good or
hurt: And yet all the Enemies you have in the world, even in Earth or Hell,
have not wronged and hurt you half so much as you have done your selves. O,
methinks the man or woman that knows themselves, and knows what it is to
Repent; that ever saw the greatness of their sin and folly, should have no
great mind or leisure, or aggravate the failings of their friends, to the
injuries of their enemies, considering what they have proved to themselves!
Have I forfeited my own salvation, and deserved everlasting wrath, and sold my
Savior and my Soul for so base a thing as sinful pleasure, and shall I ever
make a wonder of it, that another man does me some temporal hurt? Was any
friend so near to me as my self? Or more obliged to me? O sinful soul, let thy
own, rather then thy friends deceit and treachery, and neglects, be the matter
of thy displeasure, wonder and complaints!

And let thy Confirmity herein to Jesus Christ, be thy holy ambition and
delight: Not as it is thy suffering, nor as it is caused by men's sin: but as it
is thy Confirmity and fellowship in the sufferings of thy Lord, and caused by
his Love.

I have already showed you that sufferers for Christ, are in the highest form
among his Disciples. The Order of his followers usually is this; 1. At our
entrance, and in the lowest form, we are exercised with the fears of Hell, and
Gods displeasure, and in the Works of Repentance for the sin that we have done.
2. In the second form, we come to think more seriously of the Remedy, and to
enquire what we shall do to be saved, and to understand better what Christ has
done and suffered, and what he is and will be to us; and to value him and his
love and grace. And here we are much enquiring how we may know our own
sincerity, and our interest in Christ, and are laboring for some assurance,
and looking after signs of Grace. 3. In the next form or order we are searching
after further Knowledge, and laboring better to understand the mysteries of
Religion, and to get above the Rudiments and first Principles: And here if we
escape turning bare Opinionists or Heretics by the snare of Controversy or
Curiosity, it is well. 4. In the next form we set our selves to the fuller
improvement of all our further degrees of Knowledge; and to digest it all, and
turn it into stronger Faith, and Love, and Hope, and greater Humility,
Patience, Self-denial, Mortification, and contempt of Earthly Vanities, and
hatred of Sin; and to walk more watchfully and holily, and to be more in holy
Duty. 5. In the next form we grow to be more publick-spirited: To set our
Hearts on the Churches welfare, and long more for the progress of the Gospel,
and for the good of others: and to do all the good (...) the World that we are
able, for men's Souls or Bodies, but especially to long and lay out our selves
for the Conversion, and Salvation of ignorant, secure, unconverted Souls. The
counterfeit of this, is, An eager desire to Proselyte others to our Opinions or
that Religion which we have chosen, by the direction of Flesh and Blood, or
which is not of God, nor according unto Godliness, but does subserve our carnal
Ends. 6. In the next form we grow to study more the pure and wonderful Love of
God in Christ, and to relish and admire that Love, and to be taken up with the
goodness and tender mercies of the Lord, and to be kindling the Flames of holy
Love to him that has thus loved us; and to keep our Souls in the Exercise of
that Love: And withal to live in Joy, and Thanks, and Praise to him that has
redeemed us and loved us. And also, by Faith to converse in Heaven, and to live
in holy contemplation, beholding the Glory of the Father and the Redeemer in
the Glass, which is fitted to our present use, till we come to see him face to
face. Those that are the highest in this form, do so walk with God, and burn in
Love, and (...) so much above inferior Vanities, and are so conversant by
Faith in Heaven, that their hearts even dwell there, and there they long to be
forever. 7. And in the highest form in the School of Christ, we are exercising
this confirmed Faith and Love, in Sufferings, especially for Christ. In
following him with our Cross, and being conformed to him, and glorifying God in
the fullest exercise and discovery of his Graces in us, and in an actual
trampling upon all that stands up against him, for our hearts; and in bearing
the fullest witness to his Truth and Cause, by constant enduring, though to the
Death. Not but that the weakest that are sincere, must suffer for Christ, if he
call them to it. Martyrdom it self is not proper to the strong Believers:
Whoever forsakes not all that he has for Christ, cannot be his Disciple, Luke
14.33. But to suffer with that Faith and Love forementioned, and in that
manner, is proper to the strong: And usually God does not try and exercise his
young and weak ones with the trials of the strong; nor set his Infants on so
hard a service, nor put them in the front or hottest of the Battle, as he does
the ripe confirmed Christians. The sufferings of their inward Doubts and Fears
does take up such. It is the strong that ordinarily are called to Sufferings
for Christ, at least in any high Degree; I have digrest thus far to make it
plain to you, that our Conformity to Christ, and fellowship with him in his
Sufferings, in any notable degree, is the lot of his best confirmed Servants,
and the highest form in his School, among his Disciples: And therefore not to
be inordinately feared or abhorred, nor to be the matter of impatiency, but of
holy joy; and in such infirmities we may glory. And if it be so of Sufferings
in the general (for Christ) then is it so of this particular sort of Suffering,
even to be forsaken of all our best and nearest, dearest Friends, when we come
to be most abused by the Enemies.

For my own part, I must confess that as I am much wanting in other parts of my
conformity to Christ, so I take my self to be yet much short of what I expect
he should advance me to, as long as my Friends no more forsake me* It is not
long since I found my self in a low (if not a doubting) case, because I had so
few Enemies and so little Sufferings for the Cause of Christ (though I had much
of other sorts:) And now that doubt is removed by the multitude of Furies which
God has let loose against me. But yet, methinks, while my Friends themselves
are so friendly to me, I am much short of what I think I must at last attain to.

BUT let us look further in the Text, and see what is the Cause of the failing
and forsaking Christ in the Disciples; and what it is that they betake
themselves to, when they leave him.

[ Ye shall be scattered every Man to his Own.]

Self-denial was not perfect in them, selfishness therefore in this hour of
temptation did prevail. They had before forsaken all to follow Christ; they had
left their Parents, their Families, their Estates, their Trades, to be his
Disciples: But though they believed him to be the Christ, yet they dreamt of a
visible Kingdom, and did all this with too carnal Expectations of being great
men on Earth, when Christ should begin his Reign. And therefore when they saw
his apprehension and ignominious suffering, and thought now they were frustrate
of their hopes, they seem to repent that they had followed him (though not by
Apostasy and an habitual or plenary change of mind^ yet) by a sudden
passionate, frightful apprehension, which vanished when grace performed its
part. They now began to think, that they had lives of their Own to save, and
families of their Own to mind, and business of their Own to do. They had before
forsaken their private Interests and Affairs, and gathered themselves to Jesus
Christ, and lived in Communion with him, and one another. But now they return
to their Trades and Callings, and are scattered every Man to his own.

Selfishness is the great Enemy of all Societies, of all Fidelity and
Friendship. There is no trusting that person in whom it is predominant. And the
Remnants of it where it does not Reign, do make men walk unevenly and
unstedfastly toward God and men. They will certainly deny both God and their
Friends, in a time of trial who are not able to deny themselves: Or rather, he
never was a real Friend to any, that is predominantly selfish. They have always
some interest of their Own, which their Friend must needs contradict, or is
insufficient to satisfy. Their Houses, their Lands, their Moneys, their
Children, their Honor, or something which they call their Own, will be
frequently the matter of contention; and are so near them, that they can for
the sake of these cast off the nearest Friend. Contract no special friendship
with a selfish man: Nor put no confidence in him, whatever Friendship he may
profess. He is so confined to himself, that he has no true love to spare for
others: If he seem to love a Friend, it is not as a Friend, but as a Servant,
or at best as a Benefactor: He loves you for himself, as he loves his Money,
or Horse, or House, because you may be serviceable to him: Or as a Horse or Dog
does love his Keeper, for feeding him. And therefore when your Provender is
gone, his Love is gone; when you have done feeding him, he has done loving
you. When you have no more for him, he has no more for you.

Object. But (some will say) it is not the falseness of my Friend that I
lament, but the separation, or the loss of one that was most faithful: I have
found the deceitfulness of ordinary Friends; and therefore the more highly
pri^e those few that are sincere. I had but one true friend among abundance of
self-seekers; and that one is dead, or taken from me, and I am l^ft as in a
Wilderness, having no mortal man that I can trust or take much comfort in.

Answ. Is this your case? I pray you answer these few Questions, and suffer the
truth to have its proper work upon your mind.

Quest. 1. Who was it that deprived you of your Friend? Was it not God? Did not
he that gave him you take him from you? Was it not his Lord and Owner that
called him home? And can God do any thing injuriously or amiss? will you not
give him leave to do as he list with his own? Dare you think that there was
wanting either Wisdom or Goodness, Justice or Mercy in God's disposal of your
Friend? Or will you ever have Rest, if you cannot have Rest in the Will of God?

2. How know you what sin your Friend might have fallen into, if he had lived
as long as you would have him? You Will say, that God could have preserved him
from sin. It Is true: But God preserves sapientially, by means, as well as
omnipotentially: And sometime he sees that the temptations to that person are
like to be so strong, and his Corruption like to get such advantage, and that
no means is so fit as Death it self, for his preservation. And if God had
permitted your Friend by temptation to have fallen into some scandalous sin, or
course of evil, or into errors, or false ways, would it not have been much
worse than Death to him and you? God might have suffered your Friend that was
so faithful, to have been sifted and shaken as Peter was, and to have denied
his Lord; and to have seemed in your own Eyes, as odious as he before seemed
amiable.

3. How know you what unkindness to your self, your dearest friend might have
been guilty of? Alas! there is greater frailty and inconstancy in man, than you
are aware of. And there are sadder roots of Corruption unmortified, that may
spring up into bitter Fruits, than most of us ever discover in our selves. Many
a Mother has her heart broken by the unnaturalness of such a Child, or the
unkindness of such a Husband, as if they had died before, would have been
lamented by her, with great impatience and excess. How confident soever you may
be of the future Fidelity of your Friend, you little know what trial might have
discovered. Many a one has failed God and Man that once were as confident of
themselves, as ever you were of your Friend. And which of us see not reason to
be distrustful of our selves? And can we know another better than our selves?
or promise more concerning him?

4. How know you what great calamity might have befallen your Friend, if he had
lived as long as you desired? When the Righteous seem to men to perish, and
merciful Men are taken away, it is from the evil to come that they are taken,
Isa. 57.1. How many of my Friends have I lamented as if they had dyed
unseasonably, concerning whom some following Providence quickly showed me, that
it would have been a grievous misery to them to have lived longer! Little know
you what Calamities were imminent on his Person, his Family, Kindred,
Neighbors, Country, that would have broke his Heart: What if a Friend of yours
had died immediately before some calamitous subversion of a Kingdom, some
ruins of the Church, etc. And if ignorantly he had done that which brought
these things to pass, can you imagine how lamentably sad his life would have
been to him, to have seen the Church, the Gospel, and his Country in so sad a
case? especially if it had been long of him? Many that have unawares done that
which has ruined but a particular Friend, have lived in so much grief and
trouble, as made them consent that death should both revenge the injured on
them, and conclude their misery. What then would it have been to have seen the
public good subverted, and the faithful overwhelmed in misery, and the Gospel
hindered, and holy worship changed for deceit and vanity; and for Conscience to
have been daily saying, [I had a hand in all this misery: I kindled the fire
that has burned up all.]

What comfort can you think such Friends if they had survived, would have ^ound
on Earth? Unless it were a comfort to hear the Complaints of the afflicted, to
see and hear such odious sins as sometimes vexed righteous Let to see and hear;
or to hear of the scandals of one Friend, and the Apostasy of another, and the
sinful compliances and declinings of a third; and to be under temptations,
reproaches; and afflictions themselves? Is it a matter to be so much lamented
that God has prevented their greater miseries and woe?

5. What was the World to your Friends while they did enjoy it? Or what is it
now, or like to be hereafter to your selves? Was it so good and kind to them,
as that you should lament their separation from it? Was it not to them a place
of toil and trouble, of envy and vexation, of enmity and poison? of successive
cares and fears and griefs? And worst of all, a place of sin? Did they groan
under the burden of a sinful nature, a distempered, tempte^, troubled heart of
languishings and weakness of every grace; of the rebukes of God, the wounds of
Conscience, and the malice of a wicked World? And would you have them under
these again? Or is their deliverance become your grief? Did you not often join
in prayer with them, for deliverance from Malice, Calamities, troubles,
imperfections, temptations and Sin? And now those Prayers are answered in their
deliverance: And do you now grieve at that which then you prayed for?

Does the World use your selves so well and kindly, as that you should be
sorry that your Friends partake not of the Feast? Are you not groaning from day
to day your selves? And are you grieved that your Friends are taken from your
griefs? you are not well pleased with your own condition: When you look into
your hearts, you are displeased and complain; when you look into your lives,
you are displeased and complain: When you look into your Families, into your
Neighbourhoods, unto your Friends, unto the Church, unto the Kingdom, unto the
World, you are displeased and complain: And are you also displeased that your
Friends are not under the same displeasedness and complaints as you? Is the
World a place of Rest or trouble to you? And would you have your Friends to be
as far from Rest as you?

And if you have some Ease and Peace at present, you little know what storms
are near! You may see the days, you may hear the tidings, you may feel the
griping griefs and pains, which may make you call for Death your selves, and
make you say that a life on Earth is no felicity, and make you confess that
they are Bl^ssed that are dead in the Lord, as resting from their Labors, and
being past these troubles, griefs and fears. Many a poor troubled Soul is in so
great distress, as that they t^ke their own lives to have some taste of Hell:
And yet at the same time, are grieving because their friends are taken from
them, who would have been grieved for their griefs, and for ought they know
might have fallen into as sad a st^te as they themselves are now l^menting.

6. Do you think it is for the Hurt or the go^d of your Friend, that he is
removed hence? It cannot be for his Hurt unless he be in Hell. (At least, it is
uncertain whether to live would have been for his Good, by an increase of
Grace, and so for greater Glory*) And if he be in Hell, he was no fit person
for you to take much pleasure in upon Earth: He might be indeed a fit Object
for your Compassion, but not for your Complacency. Sure you are not undone for
want of such company as God will not endure in his sight, and you must be
separated from for ever. But if they be in Heaven, you are scarce their Friends
if you would wish them th^nce. Friendship has as great respect to the good of
our Friends as of our selves. And do you pretend to Friendship, and yet lament
the removal of your friend to his greatest happiness! Do you set more by your
own enjoying his company, then by enjoying God in perfect blessedness? This
shows a very culpable defect either in Faith or Friendship; and therefore
beseems not Christians and Friends. If Love teaches us to mourn with them
that mourn, and to rejoice with them that rejoice; can it be an act of rational
Love to mourn for them that are possessed of the highest everlasting joys?

7. God will not honor himself by one only, but by many: He knows best when
his work is done: When our Friends have finished all that God intended them
for, when he put them into the World, is it not time for them to be gone, and
for others to take their places, and finish their Work also in their time? God
will have a succession of his Servants in the World. Would you not come down,
and give place to him that is to follow you, when your part is played, and his
is to begin? If David had not dyed, there had been no Solomon, no I^hoshaphat,
no Hezekiah, no Josiah, to succeed him and honor God in the same Throne. You
may as wisely grudge that one day only takes not up all the Week, and that the
clock str^keth not the same hour still, but proceeds from one to two, from
two to three, etc. as to murmur that one man only continues not to do the work
of his place excl^ding his Successors.

8. You must (...) have all your Mercies by one Messenger or Hand: God will not
have you confine your Love to one only of his Servants: And therefore he will
not make one only useful to you: But when one has delivered his Message and
done his part, perhaps God will send you other Mercies by another hand: And it
belongs to him to choose the Messenger who gives the gift. And if you will
Childishly dote upon the first Messenger, and say you will have no more, your
frowardness more deserves Correction than Compassion: And if you be kept
fasting till you can thankfully take your Food, from any hand that your Father
sends it by, it is a Correction very suitable to your sin.

9. Do you so highly value your Friends for God, or for them, or for your
selves, in the final consideration? If it was for God, what reason of trouble
have you, that God has disposed of them, according to his wisdom and unerring
Will? should you not then be more pleased that God has them, and employeth
them in his highest service, than displeased that you want them?

But if you value them and love them for themselves, they are now more lovely
when they are more perfect; and they are now fitter for your content and joy,
when they have themselves unchangeable content and joy, than they could be in
their sin and sorrows.

But if you valued and loved them but for your selves only, it is just with God
to take them from you, to teach you to value Men to righter ends, and upon
better considerations: And both to prefer God before your selves, and better to
understand the nature of true Friendship, and better to know that your own
felicity is not in the hands of any Creature, but of God alone.

10. Did you improve your Friends while you had them? or did you only love
them, while you made but little use of them for your Souls? If you used them
not, it was just with God for all your Love to take them from you. They were
given you as your Candle, not only to Love it, but to work by the Light of it:
And as your Garments; not only to Love them, but to wear them; and as your
meat, not only to Love it, but to feed upon it. Did you receive their Counsel,
and hearken to their Reproofs, and pray with them, and confer with them upon
those holy Truths that tended to elevate your minds to God, and to inflame your
Breasts with sacred Love? If not, be it now known to you, that God gave you not
such helps and mercies only to talk of, or look upon, and Love, but also to
improve for the benefit of your Souls.

11. Do you not seem to forget both where you are your selves, and where you
must shortly and for ever live? Where would you have your Friends, but where
you must be your sel^es? Do you mourn that they are taken hence? Why, if they
had staid here a thousand years, how little of that time should you have had
their Company? When you are almost leaving the World your selves, would you not
send your treasure before you to the place where you must abide? How quickly
will you pass from hence to God, where you shall find your Friends that you
lamented as if they had been lost, and there shall dwell with them for ever! O
foolish Mourners! would you not have your Friends at home! at their home and
your home, with their Father, and your Father; their God, and your God? Shall
you not there enjoy them long enough! Can you so much miss them for one day,
that must live with them to all Eternity? And is not Eternity long enough for
you to enjoy your Friends in?

Obj. But I do not know whether ever I shall there have any distinct knowledge
of them, or love to them, and whether God shall not there be so far All in All,
as that we shall need or fetch no comfort from the Creature.

Answ. There is no reason for either of these doubts. For, 1. You cannot justly
think that the knowledge of the Glorified shall be more confused or imperfect
than the knowledge of natural Men on Earth. We shall know much more, but not so
much less. Heaven exceeds Earth in knowledge, as much as it does in joy.

2. The Angels in Heaven have now a distinct particular knowledge of the least
Believers; rejoicing particularly in their conversion, and being called by
Christ himself [ Their Angels.] Therefore when we shall be equal to the Angels,
we shall certainly know our nearest Friends that there dwell with us, and are
employed in the same attendance.

3. Abraham knew the Rich Man in Hell, and the Man knew Abraham and Lazarus:
Therefore we shall have as distinct a Knowledge.

4. The two Disciples knew Moses and Elias in the Mount, whom they had never
seen before: Though it is possible Christ told them who they were, yet there is
no such thing expressed: And therefore it is as probable that they knew them by
the Communication of their irradiating glory. Much more shall we be then
illuminated to a clearer knowledge.

5. It is said expressly, 1 Cor. 13.10, 11, 12. That our present knowledge shall
be done away only in regard of its imperfection; and not of it self, which
shall be perfected: [ when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away:] As we put away childish thoughts and speeches, when
we become men: The change will be from [ seeing in a glass] to [ seeing face to
face] and from [ knowing in part] to [ knowing even as we are known.]

2. And that we shall both Know, and Love and rejoice in creatures even in
Heaven, notwithstanding that God is all in all, apeareth further thus.

1. Christ in his glorified humanity is a Creature: and yet there is no doubt
but all his members will there Know and Love him in his glorified humanity,
without any derogation from the glory of the Deity.

2. The Body of Christ will continue its unity, and every member will be so
nearly related, even in Heaven, that they cannot choose but Know and Love each
other. Shall we be ignorant of the members of our Body? and not be concerned in
their felicity, with whom we are so nearly one?

3. The state and felicity of the Church hereafter, is frequently described in
Scripture as consistent in Society. It is a Kingdom, the City of God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem: and it is mentioned as part of our happiness to be of that
society, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24, etc.

4. The Saints are called Kings themselves: and it is said that they shall
judge the world, and the Angels (And Judging in Scripture is frequently put for
Governing) Therefore, (whether there will be another world of mortals which
they shall Govern as Angles now Govern men; or whether the Misery of damned men
and Angels will partly consist in as base a subjection to the glorified Saints,
as Dogs now have to men, or wicked reprobates on Earth to Angles; or whether in
respect of both these together, the Saints shall then be Kings, and Rule and
Judge; or whether it be only the participation of the Glory of Christ, that is
called a Kingdom, I will not here determine, but) it is most clear that they
will have a distinct particular Knowledge of the world, which they themselves
must judge; and some concernment in that work.

5. It is put into the description of the Happiness of the Saints, that they
shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. Therefore they shall know them, and
take some comfort in their presence.

6. Love (even to the Saints as well as unto God) is one of the graces that
shall endure for ever, 1 Cor. 13. It is exercised upon an Immortal object (the
Image, and Children of the Most High) and therefore must be one of the Immortal
Graces. For Grace in the Nature of it dies not: and therefore if the Object
cease not, how should the Grace cease, unless you will call it is perfecting a
ceasing?

It is a state too high for such as we, and I think for any mere Creature to
live so Immediately and only upon God, as to have no use for any fellow
Creature, nor no comfort in them. God can make use of Glorified Creatures, in
such subserviency and subordination to himself, as shall be no diminution to
his All Sufficiency or Honor, nor to our glory and felicity. We must take heed
of fancying even such a Heaven it self, as is above the capacity of a Creature;
as some very wise Divines think they have ^one, that tell us we shall
Immediately see Gods Essence (his Glory being that which is provided for our
intuition and felicity, and is distinct from his Essence; being not every where
as his Essence is) And as those do that tell us because that God will be All in
All, therefore we shall there have none of our comfort by any Creature. Though
flesh and blood shall not enter into that Kingdom, but our Bodies will then be
Spiritual Bodies; yet will they be really the same as now, and distinct from
our Souls: and therefore must have a felicity suitable to a Body glorified: And
if the soul did immediately see God's Essence, yet as no reason can conclude
that it can see nothing else, or that it can see even Created Good, and not
Love it, so the Body however must have objects and felicity fit for a Body.

Obj. But it is said, If we knew Christ after the flesh, henceforth know we him
no more.

Answ. No doubt but all the carnality in Principles, matter, manner and ends of
our knowledge will then cease as it is imperfection: But that a carnal knowledge
be turned into a spiritual, is no more a diminution to it, than it is to the
glory of our Bodies, to be made like the stars in the Firmament of our Father.

Obj. But then I shall have no more comfort in my present friends than in any
other.

Answ. 1. If you had none in them, it is no diminution to our happiness, if
indeed we should have all in God immediately and alone. 2. But if you have as
much in others that you never knew before, that will not diminish any of your
comfort in your ancient Friends. 3. But it is most probable to us, that as
there is a twofold Object for our love in the Glorified Saints; one is their
Holiness, and the other is the Relation which they stood in between God and us,
being made* his instruments for our conversion and salvation, so that we shall
love Saints in Heaven in both respects: And in the first respect (which is the
chiefest) we shall love those most that have most of God, and the greatest
Glory (though such as we never knew on Earth.) And in the second respect, we
shall love those most that were employed by God for our greatest good.

And that we shall not there lay by so much respect to our selves, as to forget
or disregard our Benefactors, is manifest, 1. In that we shall forever remember
Christ, and love him, and praise him, as one that formerly Redeemed us, and
washed us in his Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests to God: And
therefore we may also in just subordination to Christ, remember them with Love
and Thankfulness, that were his Inst^uments for the Collation of these benefits.

2. And this kind of Self-love (to be sensible of Good and Evil to our selves)
is none of the sinful or imperfect selfishness to be renounced or laid by, but
part of our very Natures, and as inseparable from us, as we are from our selves.

Much more, were it not digress^ve, might be said on this subject; but I shall
only add, that as God does draw us to every holy Duty, by showing us the
excellency of that duty; and as perpetu^ty is not the smallest excellency; so
he has purposely mentioned that Love endures for ever (when he had described
the Love of one another) as a principle motive to kindle and increase this
Love. And therefore those that think they shall have no personal Knowledge of
one another, nor personal Love to one another (for we cannot Love person^lly,
if we know not personally) do take a most effectual course to destroy in their
souls all holy special Love to Saints, by casting away that principal or very
great motive given them by the Holy Ghost, I a^ not ^ble to Love much where I
f^^eknow that I shall not Love long. I cannot Love a comely Inn, so well as a
nearer dwelling of my own, because I must be gone to morrow Therefore must I
love my Bible better than my Lawbooks or Physickbooks, etc. Because it leads
to Eternity. And therefore I must Love Holiness in my self and others, better
than meat and drink, and wealth, and honor, and beauty and pleasure; because
it must be Loved for ever, when the Love of these must needs be transitory, as
they are transitory. I must profess from the very experience of my soul, that
it is the belief that I shall Love my friends in Heaven, that principally
kindles my Love to them on Earth: And if I thought I should never know them
after death, and consequently never love them more, when this life is ended, I
should in reason number them with temporal things, and Love them comparatively
but a little; even as I Love other transitory things (allowing for the
excellency in the nature of Grace) But now I converse with some delight with my
Godly friends, as believing I shall converse with them for ever, and take
comfort in the very Dead and Absent, as believing we shall shortly meet in
Heaven: And I Love them, I hope, with a Love that is of a Heavenly Nature,
while I Love them as the Heirs of Heaven, with a Love which I expect shall
there be perfected, and more fully and for ever exercised,

12. The last Reason that I give you, to move you to bear the Loss or Absence
of your friends, is, that it gives you the loudest call to retire from the
world, and to converse with God himself, and to long for Heaven, where you
shall be separated from your friends no more. And your forsaken state will
somewhat assist you to that solitary converse with God, which it calls you to:
But this brings us up to the third part of the Text.

AND yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.]

Doct. When all forsake us and leave us (as to them) alone, we are far from
being simply alone; because God is with us.

He is not without company, that is with the King* though twenty others have
turned him off. He is not without Light that has the shining Sun, though all
his Candles be put out. If God be our God, he is our All, and is enough for us:
And if he be our All, we shall not much find the want of creatures while he is
with us.

For 1. He is with us, who is Everywhere, and therefore is never from us; and
knows all the ways and projects of our enemies; being with them in wrath, as
he is with us in mercy.

2. He is with us who is Almighty, sufficient to preserve us, conquerable by
none? and therefore while he is with us, we need not fear what man can do unto
us: For they can do nothing but what he will: No danger, no sickness, no
trouble or want can be so great as to make it any difficulty to God to deliver
us when and how he please.

3. He is with us who is Infinitely wise, and therefore we need not fear the
subtilty of enemies; nor shall any of his undertaken works for his Church or
us, miscarry for want of foresight, or through any oversight. We shall be
preserved even from our own Folly, as well as from our Enemies subtilty: For it
is not our own wisdom that our greatest concernments do principally rest upon,
nor that our safety and peace are chiefly secured by; but it is the Wisdom of
our great Preserver. He knows what to do with us, and what Paths to lead us
in, and what is best for us in all conditions: And he has promised to Teach
us, and will be our sure infallible Guide.

4. He is with us who is Infinitely Good, and therefore is only fit to be a
continual delight and satisfaction to our souls: That has nothing in him to
disaffect us, or discourage us: whom we may love without fear of over-loving;
and need not set any bounds to our Love, the Object of it being infinite.

5. He is with us, who is most nearly related to us, and most dearly loves us;
and therefore will never be wanting to us in any thing that is fit for us to
have. This is he that is with us, when all have left us, and as to Man we are
alone; and therefore we may well say that we are not alone. Of this I shall say
more anon in the application.

Quest. But how is he with us? Answ. 1. He is with us not only in his Essential
presence, as he is every where, but as by his Gracious Fatherly presence: We
are in his Family, attending on him: Even as the Eye of a Servant is to the
hand of his Master: We are always with him, and (as he phraseth it himself in
the Parable) Luke 15. all that he has in ours, that is, all that is fit to be
communicated to us, and all the Provisions of his bounty for his Children. When
we awake, we should be still with him: When we go abroad we should be always as
before him: Our life and works should be a Walking with God.

2. He is always with us efficiently to do us good; Though we have none else
that cares for us, yet will he never cast us out of his care, but bids us
cast our care on him, as promising that he will care for us. Though we have
none else to provide for us, he is always with us, and our Father knows what
we want, and will make the best provision for us, Mat. 6.32, 33. Though we have
none else to defend us against the power of our Enemies, he is always with us
to be our sure defense: He is the Rock to which we fly, and upon which we are
surely built. He gathers us to himself as the Hen gathers her Chickens
under her Wings, Mat. 2.37, 3. And sure while Love is thus protecting us, we
may well say that the Father himself is with us. Though in all our wants we
have no other to supply us, yet he is still with us to perform his promise,
that no good thing shall be wanting to them that fear him. Though we may have
none else to strengthen and help us, and support us in our weakness, yet he is
always with us, whose Grace is sufficient for us, to manifest his strength in
weakness. Though we have no other to teach us, and to resolve our doubts, yet
he is with us that is our chiefest Master, and has taken us to be his
Disciples, and will be our Light and Guide, and will lead us into the Truth.
Though we have none else to be our Comforters, in our agony, darkness or
distress; but all forsake us, or are taken from us, and we are exposed as Hagar
with Ishmael in a Wilderness; yet still the Father of all consolations is with
us; his Spirit who is the Comforter is in us: And he that so often speaks the
words of Comfort to us in his Gospel, and says, [ Be of good cheer; let not
your hearts be troubled, neither be afraid, etc.] will speak them (in the
season and measure which is fittest for them) unto our hearts. Though all
Friends turn Enemies, and would destroy us, or turn false Accusers, as Job's
Friends, in their ignorance or passion; though all of them should add
affliction to our affliction, yet is our Redeemer and Justifier still with us,
and will lay his restraining hand upon our Enemies, and say to their proudest
fury [Hitherto and no further shall thou go] He is angry with Job's accusing
Friends, notwithstanding their friendship and good meaning, and though they
seemed to plead for God and Godliness against Job's sin: And who shall be
against us while God is for us? or who shall condemn us when it is he that
justifies us? Though we be put to say as David, Psalm. 142.4. [ I looked on my
right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would know me; refuge failed
me; no man cared for my Soul:] Yet we may say with him, verse. 5. and 7. [ I
cried unto thee, O Lord; I said, Thou art my refuge and my Portion in the land
of the Living: Bring my Soul out of Prison that I may praise thy Name: The
Righteous shall compass me about: For thou shall deal bountifully with me: 2,
3. I poured out my complaint before him; I showed before him my trouble: When
my Spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my Path: In the way
wherein I walked have they privily laid a Snare for me.] Thus [ God is our
refuge and strength; a very present help in trouble.] Psalm. 46.1. Therefore
should we not fear though the Earth were removed, and though the Mountains were
carried into the mi^st of the Sea; though the Waters thereof roar and be
troubled, etc. verse. 2.3. Though a^ David says, Psalm. 41.5, 6, 7. [ Mine
Enemies speak Evil of me: When shall he dye, and his name perish? And if he
come to see me, he speaks vanity: His Heart gathers Iniquity to it self;
when he goes abroad he tell^th it: All that ^^te me whisper t^gether against
me: against me do they devise my hurt: An evil Disease, say they, cleaves fast
unto him; and now that he lies, he shall rise up no more: Yea, my own familiar
friend in whom I trusted, that did eat of my Bread, has lift up his heel
against me -- ] Yet we may add a^ he, v. 12. [ And as for me, thou upholdest me
in mine integrity, and set me before thy face forever.] Though (as Psalm.
35.7, etc. Without cause they have hid for me their Net in a Pit, which without
cause they have dug for my Soul: 11. And false Witnesses did rise up, they
laid to my charge things that I knew not; they rewarded me evil for good: 15,
16. In my adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together; the
objects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did
tear and ceased not; with hypocritical mockers in Feas^s, they gnashed upon me
with their teeth: 20. For they speak not peace, but they devise deceitful
matters against them that are quiet in the Land.] Yet verse 9. [ My Soul shall
be joyful in the Lord; it shall rejoice in his Salvation: 10. All my Bones
shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, who deliverest the poor from him that
is too strong for him, yea the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him.]
Though Friends be far off, the Lord is nigh to them that are of a brok^n heart,
and saves such as be of a contrite Spirit: Many are the Afflictions of the
Righteous; but the Lord delivers him out of them all.] Psalm. 34.18, 19. The
Lord redeemeth the Soul of his Servants; and none of them that trust in him
shall be desolate.] v. 22. Therefore [ I will be glad and rejoice in his Mercy,
for he has considered my trouble, and has known (and owned) my Soul in
adversity: and has not shut me in the hand of the Enemy. -- When my life was
spent with grief, and my years with sighing; my strength failed because of mine
iniquity, and my Bones were consumed; I was a reproach among all mine Enemies,
but especially among my Neighbors, and a fear to mine Acquaintance; they that
did see me without fled from me: I was forgotten, and as a dead man out of
mind: I was like a broken Vessel: I heard the slander of many: fear was on
every side; while they took counsel together against me, they devised to take
away my life: But I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my God: my times
are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that
persecute me: Make thy face to shine upon thy Servant: Save me for thy mercies
sake. -- O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the Sons of
Men! Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the Pride of Man:
Thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of Tongues, Psalm.
31.] Thus God is with us when men are far from us, or against us: His people
find by happy experience, that they are not alone. Because he is nigh them,
evil shall not come nigh them, unless as it works for their good. He is their
hiding place to preserve them from trouble: the great water-floods shall not
come nigh them: he will compass them about with Songs of deliverance.] Psalm.
32.6, 7.

3. And as God is with us thus Relatively and Efficiently, so also Objectively
for our holy converse. Wherever our Friends are, God is still at hand to be the
most profitable, honorable and delightful Object of our thoughts. There is
enough in him to take up all the faculties of my soul. He that is but in a well
furnished Library, may find great and excellent employment for his Thoughts
many years together: And so may he that lives in the open World, and has all
the visible Works of God to meditate upon: But all this were nothing, if God
were not the sense of Books and Creatures, and the matter of all these noble
Studies: He that is alone, and has only God himself to study, has the matter
and sense of all the Books and Creatures in the World, to employ his thoughts
upon. He never need to want matter for his meditation, that has God to
meditate on. He need not want matter of Discourse (whether mental or vocal)
that has God to talk of, though he have not the name of any other Friend to
mention. All our Affections may have in him the highest and most pleasant work.
The Soul of Man cannot have a more sweet and excellent work than to love him:
He wants neither work nor pleasure, that in his solitude is taken up in the
believing contemplations of Eternal Love, and of all his blessed Attributes and
Works. O then what happy and delightful converse may a Believer have with God
alone! He is always present, and always at leisure to be spoken with; and
always willing of our access and audience: He has no interest Cross to our
felicity, which should move him to reject us (as worldly great ones often
have*) He never misunderstandeth us, nor charge that upon us which we were
never guilty of: If we converse with Men, their Mistakes, and Interests, and
Passions, and Insufficiencies, do make the trouble so great, and the benefit so
small, that many have become thereby aweary of the World, or of human Society,
and have spent the rest of their days alone in desert places. Indeed, so much
of God as appears in Men, so much is their converse excellent and delightful;
and theirs is the best that have most of God. But there is so much of vanity,
and self* and flesh, and sin in the most or all of of us, as very much darkneth
our Light, and dampeth the pleasure, and blasteth the fruit of our Societies
and Converse. O how often have I been solaced in God, when I found nothing but
deceit and darkness in the World! How often has he comforted me, when it was
past the power of Man! How often has he relieved and delivered me, when all the
help of Man was vain! It has been my Stay and Rest, to look to him, when the
Creature has been a broken Staff, and deceitful Friend^ have been but as a
broken Tooth, or a Foot that is out of Joint (as Solomon speaks of confidence
in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, Prove. 25.29.) Verily, as the World
were but an horrid Dungeon without the Sun, so it were a howling wilderness, a
place of no considerable Employment or Delight, were it not that in it we may
live to God and do him Service, and sometime be refreshed with the light of his
countenance, and the communications of his love. But of this more ano^.

Use 1. WE see our Example, and our Encouragements. Let us now as followers of
Christ, endeavor to imitate him in this, and to Live upon God, when men
forsake us, and to know that while God is with us, we are not alone, nor indeed
forsaken while he forsakes us not.

I shall, 1. Show you here Negatively, what you must not do. 2. Affirmatively,
what you must do; for the performance of your duty in this imitation of Christ.

1. You must not make this any pretense for the undervaluing of your useful
Friends; nor for your unthankfulness for so great a Benefit as a Godly Friend:
nor for the neglect of your Duty in improving the Company and help of Friends:
Two is better then one: The communion of Saints, and help of those that are
wise and faithful, is a mercy highly to be esteemed. And the undervaluing of
it, is at least a sign of a declining Soul.

2. You must not hence fetch any pretense to slight your Friends, and disoblige
them, or neglect any duty that you owe them, or any means therein necessary to
the continuation of their Friendship.

3. You must not causelessly withdraw from humane society into Solitude. A
weariness of converse with Men, is often conjunct with a weariness of our Duty:
And a retiring voluntarily into Solitude, when God does not call or drive us
thither, is often but a retiring from the place and work which God has appointed
us: And consequently a retiring rather from God, than to God. Like some idle
Servants, that think they should not work so hard, because it is but Worldly
business, and think their Masters deal not Religiously by them, unless they let
them neglect their labor, that they may spend more time in serving God: as if
it were no serving God to be faithful in their Masters Service.

I deny not but very holy persons have lived in a state of retirement from
humane converse: In such cases as these it may become a Duty, 1. In case of
such persecution as at present leaves us no opportunity of serving or
honoring God so much in any other place or state.

2 In case that natural infirmity, or disability, or any other accident shall
make one less serviceable to God and his Church in Society than he is in
solitude.

3. In case he has committed a sin so heinous and of indelible scandal and
reproach, as that it is not fit for the Servants of Christ any more to receive
him into their local Communion, though he repent: (For as to Local Communion, I
think, such a case may be.)

4. In case a man through custom and ill company be so captivated to some
fleshly Lust, as that he is not able to bear the temptations that are found in
humane converse; but falls by them into frequent heinous sinning: In this
case the right hand or eye is rather to be parted with, than their Salvation.
And though a mere restraint by distance of temptations and opportunities of
sinning, will not prove a man sanctified, nor save the soul that loves the sin
and fain would live in it; Yet, 1. Grace may sometime appear in the strength
and self denial which is exercised in the very avoiding of temptations, when
yet perhaps the person has not strength enough to have stood against the
temptation if it had not been avoided. And 2. The distance of temptations, and
opportunity of serious and frequent consideration, may be a mean^ to help to
sincerity that want it.

5. In case a man by age or sickness find himself so near to death, as that he
has now a more special call to look after his present actual preparation, than
to endeavor any more the good of others; and find withal, that solitude will
help him in his preparations, his Society being such as would but hinder him.
In these five cases I suppose it lawful to retire from humane converse into
solitude.

But when there is no such necessity or call, it usually proceeds from one of
these vicious distempers: 1. From Cowardice and fear of suffering, when the
soldiers of Christ do hide their heads, instead of confessing him before men.

2. From a laziness of mind and weariness of duty: when slothful unprofitable
servants hide their talents, pretending their fear of the austerity of their
Lord. Its easier to run away from our work, then do it: and to go out of the
reach of ignorance, malice, contradiction and ungodliness, than to encounter
them, and conquer them by Truth and Holy lives. So many persons as we converse
with, so many are there to whom we owe some duty: And this is not so easy as
it is to over run our work, and to hide our selves in some Wilderness or Cell,
whilst others are fighting the Battles of the Lord. 3. Or it may proceed from
mere impatience: When men cannot bear the frown, and scorns, and violence of
the ungodly, they fly from sufferings, which by patience they should overcome.
4. Or it may come from humor and mutability of mind, and discontent with ones
condition: Many retire from humane converse to please a discontented passionate
mind; or expecting to find that privacy, which in public they could not find,
nor is any where to be found on Earth. 5. And some do it in Melancholy, merely
to please a sick imagination, which is vexed in company, and a little eases it
self in living as the possessed man among the Tombs. 6. And sometimes it
proceeds from self ignorance, and an unhumbled state of a Soul: When men
think much better of themselves than others, they think they can more
comfortably converse with themselves than with others: Whereas if they well
understood that they are the worst or greatest enemies, or troubles to
themselves, they would more fear their own Company than other men's: They would
then consider what proud, and fleshly, and worldly, and selfish, and disordered
hearts they are like to carry with them into their solitude, and there to be
annoyed with from day to day: And that the nearest enemy is the worst, and the
nearest trouble is the greatest.

These vices or infirmities carry many into solitude; and if they live where
Popish vanity may seduce them, they will perhaps imagine, that they are serving
God, and entering in perfection, when they are but sinfully obeying their
corruptions: and that they are advanced above others in degrees of grace, while
they are pleasing a diseased fancy, and entering into a dangerous course of sin.
No doubt but the duties of a public life are more in number, and greater in
weight, and of more excellent consequence and tendency (even to the most
public good, and greatest honor of God) than the duties of privacy or
retirement. Vir bonus est commune bonum: A good man is a common good. And
(says Seneca) Nulla essent communia nisi pars illorum pertineret ad singulos]
If every one have not some share or interest in them, how are they common? Let
me add these few Cons^derations, to show you the evil of voluntary unnecessary
Solitude.

1. You less contribute to the honor of your Redeemer, and less promote his
Kingdom in the world, and less subserve his death and office, while you do good
but to few, and live but almost to your selves.

2. You live in the poorest exercise of the grace of Charity; and therefore in
a low undesirable condition.

3. You will want the communion of Saints, and benefit of public ordinances
(for I account not a College life a Solitary life.) And you will want the help
of the Charity, Graces and Gifts of others, by which you might be benefited.

4. It will be a life of smaller comfort, as it is a life of smaller benefit to
others. They that do but little good (according to their ability) must expect
but little comfort. They have usually most peace and comfort to themselves,
that are the most profitable to others. [ Non potest quisquam been degere qui
se tantum intuetur: Alteri vivas oportet, si tibi vis vivere: Sen.] No man can
live well, that looks but to himself: Thou must live to another, if thou will
live to thy self.]

O the delight that there is in doing good to many! None knows it that has
not tried it: Not upon any account of Merit; but as it Pleases God, and as
Goodness it self is amiable and sweet; and as we receive by communicating; and
as we are under promise; and as Charity makes all the good that is done to
another to be to us as our own!

5. We are dark and partial, and heedless of our selves, and hardly brought or
kept in acquaintance with our hearts; and therefore have the more need of the
eye of others: And even an enemies eye may be useful, though malicious; and may
do us good while he intends us evil, says Bernard [Malum quod nemo videt nemo
arguit: Vbi autem non timetur reprehensor, securus accedit tenat^r; licentius
perpetratur iniquitas] [The evil that none sees, none reproves: and where the
reprover is not feared, the temper comes more boldly, and the sin is committed
the more licentiously.] It Is hard to know the spots in our own faces, when we
have no glass or beholder to accquaint us with them. Says Chrysostom'
[Solitude is velamen omnium vitiorum] the cover of all vices] In company this
cover is laid aside, and vice being more naked, is more ashamed. It is
beholders that cause shame; which Solitude is not acquainted with: And it is a
piece of impenitency not to be shamed of sin.

6. And we are for the most part so weak and sickly, that we are unable to
subsist without the help of others. Sen. Nemo est ex imprudentibus qui relinqui
sibi debet] unwise men (or infants, or sick-like men) must not be left to
themselves.] And God has let some impotency, insufficiency and necessity upon
all that should keep men sociable, and make them acknowledge their need of
others, and be thankful for assistance from them, and be ready to do good to
others, as we would have others do to us. He that feels not the need of
others, is so unhumb^ed as to have the greater need of them.

7. Pride will have great advantage in private, and Repentance great
disadvantage, while our sins seem to be all dead, because there is not a
temptation to draw them out, or an observer to reprove them. [ Tam diu patiens
quisque sibi videtur and humi^is, donec nullius hominum consortio commiscetur;
ad naturam pristinam reversurus quum interpellaverit cujuslibet occasionis
commotio, inquit Cassianus] Many a man seems to himself patient and humble,
while he keeps out of company? who would return to his own nature if the
commotion of any occasion did but provoke him.] It Is hard to know what sin or
grace is in us* if we have not such trials as are not to be found in Solitude.

8. Flying from the observation and judgment of others, is a kind of
self-accusation; as if we confessed our selves so bad as that we cannot stand the
trial of the Light.] Bona conscientia turbam advocat: Mala in solitudine anxia
est and sollicita: si honesta sunt que facis omnes sciant: siturpia, quid
refert neminem scire: cum tu scias! O te miserum si contemnis hunc testem:
inquit Seneca.] That is [ A good conscience will call in the crowd (or
witnesses, not caring who sees:) A bad conscience is anxious and sollicitous
even in solitude: If they be things honest which thou do, let all men know:
If the be dishonest, what good does it thee that no man else knows it, when
thou know it thy self! O miserable man if thou despise this witness!]
Something is suspected to be amiss with those that are always in their
Chambers, and are never seen. Tell not men that you cannot bear the light: It
is he that does evil that hates the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

9. Solitude is too like to Death, to be desirable: He lives that does good;
and he is dead that is useless. [Vivit is qui multis usu^ est: Vivit is qui
sentitur: qui vero latitant and torpent, mortem suam antecesserint, inquit
Sen.] [He lives that is profitable to many: He lives that is observed or
perceived: but they that lie hid and drowsy do anticipate their death.] And it
is the most culpable death, and therefore the worst, to have Life, and not to
use it.

10. A life of holy Communion is likest unto Heaven, where none shall be
solitary, but all as members of the Heavenly Jerusalem, shall in harmony Love
and Praise their Maker.

These Reasons seem to me sufficient to satifie you that no man should choose a
Solitude without a special necessity or call: nor yet should it be taken for a
life of greater perfection, then a faithful serving of God ^n public, and
doing good to more.

I Shall now come to the Affirmative, and tell you for all this, that [If God
call us into Solitude, or men forsake us, we may rejoice in this, that we are
not alone, but the Father is with us.] Fear not such Solitude, but be ready to
improve it, if you be cast upon it. If God be your God, reconciled to you in
Christ, and his Spirit be in you, you are provided for Solitude, and need not
fear if all the World should cast you off. If you be banished, imprisoned, or
left alone, it is but a Relaxation from your greatest labors; which though you
may not cast off your selves, you may lawfully be sensible of your ease, if God
take off your Burden. It is but a cessation from your sharpest conflicts, and
removal from a multitude of great Temptations. And though you may not cowardly
retreat or shift your selves from the Fight and danger, yet if God will
dispense with you, and let you live in greater peace and safety, you have no
cause to murmur at his dealing. A Fruit Tree that grows by the highway side,
does seldom keep its fruit to ripeness, while so many Passengers have each his
stone or Cudgel to cast at it: Seneca could say [ Nunquam a turba mores quos
extuli refero: Aliquid ex eo quod composu^ turbatur; aliquid ex his quae fugavi
redit: Inimica est multorum conversatio] I never bring home well from a Crowd
the manners which I took out with me: Something is disordered of that which I
had set in order: Something of that which I had banished does return: The
conversation of many I find an enemy to me.] O how many vain and foolish words
corrupt the minds of those that converse with an ungodly World, when your Ears
and Minds who live in Solitude, are free from such Temptations! You live not in
so corrupt an Air as they: You hear not the filthy ribbald Speeches, which
fight against modesty and chastity, and are the bellows of Lust: You hear not
the discontented complaining words of the impatient; nor the passionate
provoking words of the offended; nor the wrangling quarrelsom words of the
contentious; nor the censorious, or slanderous, or reproachful words of the
malicious, who think it their interest to have their Brethren taken to be bad,
and to have others hate them, because they them selves hate them; and who are
as zealous to quench the Charity of others, when it is destroyed in themselves,
as holy persons are zealous to provoke others to Love, which dwe^^eth and
rules in themselves. In your Solitude with God, you shall not hear the lies
and malicious revilings of the ungodly against the generation of the just: Nor
the subtle cheating words of Heretics, who being themselves deceived, would
deceive others of their Faith, and corrupt their lives. You shall not there be
distracted with the noise and clamours of contending uncharitable professors of
Religion, endeavoring to make odious first the Opinions, and then the persons
of one another: one saying, here is the Church, and another, there is the
Church: One saying, This is the true Church Government, and another saying Nay,
but that is it: One saying, God will be worshipped thus, and another, not so,
but thus or thus: You shall not there be drawn to side with one against
another, nor to join with any faction, or be guilty of divisions: You shall not
be troubled with the Oaths and Blasphemies of the wicked, nor with the
imprudent miscarriages of the Weak; with the Persecutions of Enemies, or the
falling out of Friends. You shall not see the cruelty of proud Oppressors, that
set up lies by armed violence, and care not what they say or do, nor how much
other men are injured or suffer, so that themselves may tyrannize, and their
wills and words may rule the World, when they do so unhappily rule themselves.
In your solitude with God, you shall not see the prosperity of the wicked to
move you to envy, nor the adversity of the just to be your grief: You shall see
no Worldly pomp and splendour to be fool you; nor adorned beauty to entice you,
nor wasting calamities to afflict you: You shall not hear the laughter of
Fools, nor the sick man's groans, nor the wronged man's Complaints, nor the poor
man's murmurings, nor the proud man's boastings, nor the angry man's abusive
ragings. As you lose the help of your gracious friends, so you are freed from
the fruits of their peevishness and passions; of their differing opinion and
ways and tempers; of their inequality, unsuitableness, and contrariety of minds
or interests; of their levity and unconstancy, and the powerful temptations of
their friendship, to draw you to the errors or other sins which they are
tainted with themselves. In a word, you are there half delivered from the
VANITY and VEXATION of the world; and were it not that you are yet undelivered
from your selves, and that you take distempered corrupted hearts with you, O
what a felicity would your solitude be! But, alas, we cannot overrun our own
diseases, we must carry with us the remnants of our corrupted nature; our
deadness, and dullness, our selfishness and earthly minds, our impatience and
discontents; and worst of all* our lamentable weakness of faith and love and
heavenly mindedness, and our strangeness to God, and backwardness to the
matters of eternal life. O that I could escape these, though I were in the
hands of the cruellest enemies! O that such a heart could be left behind! How
gladly would I overrun both house, and land, and honor, and all sensual
delights, that I might but overrun it! O where is the place where there is none
of this darkness, nor disaffection, nor distance, nor estrangedness from God! O
that I knew it! O that I could find it! O that I might there dwell! though I
should never more see the face of mortals; nor ever hear a human Voice, nor
ever taste of the delights of flesh! Alas, foolish Soul: such a place there is,
that has all this, and more than this* But it is not in a Wilderness, but in
Paradise, not here on Earth, but above with Christ! And yet am I so loath to
die? yet am I no more desirous of the blessed day, when I shall b^ uncloathed
of flesh and sin? O death, what an Enemy art thou even to my Soul* By
affrighting me from the presence of my Lord, and hindering my desires and
willingness to be gone, thou wrongest me much more, than by laying my flesh to
rot in darkness. Fain I would know God, and fain I would more love him and
enjoy him: But O this hurtful love of life! O this unreasonable fear of dying,
detaineth my desires from pressing on to the happy place where all this may be
had! O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death!
this carnal unbelieving heart, that sometime can think more delightfully of a
Wilderness then of Heaven; that can go seek after God in desert solitude, among
the Birds and Beasts and Trees, and yet is so backward to be loosed from flesh
that I may find him and enjoy him in the World of glory: Can I expect that
Heaven come down to Earth! and that the Lord of glory should remove his Court,
and either leave the retinue of his Celestial Courtiers, or bring them all down
into this drosly World of flesh and sin, and this to satisfy my fleshly
foolish mind! Or can I expect the translation of Henoch or the Chariot of
Elias? Is it not enough that my Lord has conquered Death, and sanctified the
passage, and prepared the place of my perpetual abode.

Well! for all this, though a Wilderness is not Heaven, it shall be sweet and
welcome for the sake of Heaven, if thence I may but have a clearer prospect of
it: and if by retiring from the crowd and noise of Folly, I may but be more
composed and better disposed to converse above, and to use my Faith (alas, my
too weak languid Faith) until the beatifical Vision and Fruition come. If there
may be but more of God, or readier access to him, or more heart quickening
flames of Love, or more heart-comforting intimations of his Favor, in a
wilderness than in a City, in a Prison than in a Palace; let that Wilderness be
my City, and let that Prison be my Palace, while I must abide on Earth. If in
solitude I may have Henochs walk with God, I shall in due season have such a
translation as shall bring me to the same felicity which he enjoys: And in
the mean time as well as after, it is no incommodity, if by mortal eyes I be
seen no more. If the Chariot of contemplation will in solitude raise me to more
believing affectionate converse with Heaven, than I could expect in Tumults and
Temptations, it shall reconcile me unto solitude, and make it my Paradise on
Earth, till Angels instead of the Chariot of Elias, shall convey me to the
presence of my glorified Head, in the Celestial Paradise.

Object. But it is grievous to one that has been used to much company, to be
alone.

Answ. Company may so use you, that it may be more grievous to you not to be
alone. The Society of Wasps and Serpents may be spared; and Bees themselves
have such Stings as make some that have felt them think they bought the honey
dear.

But can you say, you are alone, while you are with God? Is his presence
nothing to you? Does it not signify more than the company of all Men in the
world? Says Hierom, [Sapions nunquam solus esse potest: habet enim secum omnes
qui sunt, and qui fuerunt boni -- and si h^minum sit inopia, loquitur cum Deo]
viz. A wise man cannot be alone: for he has with him the good men that are or
have been -- And if there be a want of men, he speaks with God.] He should
rather have said, There can be no want of man, when we may speak with God: And
were it not that God is here revealed to us as in a glass, and that we do
converse with God in Man, we should think human converse little worth.

Object. O but Solitude is disconsolate to a sociable Mind.

Answ. But the most desirable Society is no Solitude: Says Hierom, [Infinita
cremi vas^itas te terret? sed tu Paradisum mente de ambula: Quotiescunque
cogitatione ac mente illuc conscenderi^, toties in eremo non e^is] that is [
Does the infinite vastness of the wilderness terrify thee? But do thou
(ascend) in mind and walk in Paradise: As often as thou ascendest thither in
thought and mind, so often thou shall not be in the wilderness.] If God be
nothing to thee, thou art not a Christian but an Atheist. If God be God to
thee, he is All in all to thee; and then should not his presence be instead of
all? O that I might get one step nearer unto God, though I receded many from
all the world! O that I could find that place on Earth where a Soul may have
nearest access unto him, and fullest knowledge and enjoyment of him, though I
never more saw the face of Friends! I should cheerfully say with my blessed
Savior [ I am not alone, for the Father is with me.] And I should say so for
these Reasons following.

1. If God be with me, the Maker, and Ruler, and Disposer of all is with me: So
that all things are virtually with me in him. I have that in Gold and Jewels
which I seem to want in Silver, Lead, and Dross. I can want no Friend if God
vouchsafe to be my Friend; and I can enjoy no benefit by all my Friends, if God
be my Enemy. I need not fear the greatest Enemies, if God be reconciled to me.
I shall not miss the light of the Candle, if I have this blessed Sun. The
Creature is nothing but what it is from God, and in God: And it is worth
nothing, or good for nothing, but what it is worth in order unto God, as it
declares him, and helps the Soul to know him, serve him, or draw nearer to
him: As it is Idolatry in the unhappy worldling, to thirst after the Creature
with the neglect of God, and so to make the world his God; so does it savor of
the same heinous sin to lament our loss of Creatures more than the displeasure
of God. If God be my Enemy, or I am fallen under his indignation, I have then
so much greater matters to lament than the loss, or absence, or frowns of Man,
as should almost make me forget that there is such a thing as man to be
regarded: But if God be my Father, and my Friend in Christ, I have then so much
to think of with delight, and to recreate and content my Soul, as will procl^im
it most incongruous and absurd to lament mordinately the absence of a wo^m,
while I have his Love and Presence who is All in All. If God cannot content me,
and be not enough for me, how is he then my God? or how shall he be my Heaven
and everlasting H^ppiness?

2. If God be with me, he is with me to whom I am absolutely devoted. I am
wholly his, and have acknowledged his interest in me, and long ago disclaimed
all Usurpers, and repented of Alienations, and unreservedly resigned my self to
him: And where should I dwell but with him that is my owner, and with whom I
have made the solemnest Covenant that ever I made? I never gave my self to any
other, but in subordination to him, and with a salvo for his highest inviolable
right. Where should my goods be but in my own house? With whom should a servant
dwell but with his Master? and a Wife, but with her Husband? and Children but
with their Father? I am nearlier related to my God and to my Savior, than I am
to any of my Relations in this world. I owe more to him than to all the World:
I have renounced all the World, as they stand in any competition or comparison
with him; and can I want their company then while I am with him? How shall I
hate Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brother and Sister for his
sake, if I cannot spare them, or be without them to enjoy him? To hate them is
but to use them as Men do hated things, that is, to cast them away with
contempt as they would alienate me from Christ, and to cleave to him, and be
satisfied in him alone. I am now married to Christ, and therefore must
cheerfully leave Father and Mother, and my native place, and all to cleave to
him: And with whom should I now delight to dwell, but with him who has taken
me into so near relation, to be, as it were, one Flesh with him! O my dear
Lord, hide not thou thy face from an unkind an unworthy sinner! Let me but
dwell with thee and see thy face, and feel the gracious embracements of thy
Love, and then let me be cast off by all the world, if thou see it meetest for
me; or let all other friends be where they will, so that my Soul may be with
thee: I have agreed for thy sake to forsake all, even the dearest that shall
stand against thee; and I resolve by thy grace to stand to this Agreement.

3. If God be with me, I am not alone, for he is with me that loves me best.]
The Love of all the Friends on Earth is nothing to his Love. O how plainly has
he declared that he loves me, in the strange condescension, the Sufferings,
Death, and Intercession of his Son? What Love has he declared in the
communications of his Spirit, and the operations of his Grace, and the near
Relations into which he brought me? What Love has he declared in the course of
his Providence? In many and wonderful preservations and deliverances? In the
conduct of his Wisdom, and in a Life of Mercies? What Love appears in his
precious Promises, and the glorious Provisions he has made for me with himself
to all eternity? O my Lord, I am ashamed that thy Love is so much lost; that it
has no better return from an unkind unthankful heart; that I am not more
delighted in thee, and swallowed up in the contemplation of thy Love; I can
contentedly let go the Society and converse of all others, for the converse of
some one bosom Friend, that is dearer to me than they all, as Jonathan to
David: And can I not much more be sati^fied in thee alone, and let go all if I
may continue with thee? My very Dog will gladly forsake all the Town, and all
Persons in the world, to follow me alone! And have I not yet found so much Love
and Goo^ ness in thee my dear and blessed God, as to be willing to converse
alone with thee? All men delight most in the company of those that love them
best: They choose not to converse with the Multitude when they look for solace
and content, but with their dearest Friends: And should any be so dear to me as
God? O were not thy Love unworthily neglecte^ by an unthankful heart, I should
never ^e so unsatisfied in thee, but should take up, or seek my comforts in
thee: I should then say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on
Earth that I desire besides thee! Though not only my Friends, but my Flesh and
Heart themselves should fail me, it is thou that will still be the strength of
my heart, and my portion forever: it is good therefore for me to draw near to
thee, how far soever I am from Man: O let me there dwell where thou will not be
strange, for thy loving kindness is better than life. Instead of the multitude
of my ^u^moiling thoughts, let me be taken up in the believing views of thy
reconciled Face, and in the glad Attendance upon thy Grace; or at least in the
multitude of my thoughts within me, let thy celestial comforts delight my soul.
Let me dwell as in thy Family; and when I awake, let me be still with thee! Let
me go no whither but where I am still following thee: Let me ^o nothing but thy
work, nor serve any other but when I may truly call it a serving thee: Let me
hear nothing ^ut thy voice, and let me know thy voice by whatever instrument
thou shall speak: Let me never see a^y thing but thy self and the glass that
represents thee, and the Books in in which I may read thy Name: And let me
never play with the outside, and gaze on Words and Letters as insignificant,
and not observe ^hy Name which is the sense. Whether it be in company or in
solitude, let me be continually with thee, and do thou vouchs^fe to hold me by
my right hand: And guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me unto
thy Glory, Psalm. 73.23, 24, 25, 26, 28. Psalm. 63.3.

4. If God be with me I am not alone; for I shall be with him whose Love is of
greater use and benefit to me, than the love of all my Friends in the world.
Their Love may perhaps be some little comfort, as it flows from His: But it
is His Love by which and upon which I Live. It is His Love that gives me Life
and Time, and Health and Food, and Preservation; that gives me Books, gives me
books and gives me understanding: that gives me provision, and saves me from
turning it to pernicious fleshliness and excess; that gives me even my friends
themselves, and saves me from that abuse which might make them to me worse
than enemies. The Sun, the Earth, the Air is not so useful or needful to me as
his Love. The Love of all my friends cannot make me well when I am sick: It
cannot forgive the smallest of my sins; nor yet assure me of Gods forgiveness:
It cannot heal the maladies of my soul, nor give a solid lasting peace to the
conscience which is troubled: If all my friends stand about me when I am dying,
they cannot take away the fears of death, nor secure my passage to everlasting
life: Death will be Death still, and danger will be danger, when all my friends
have done their best. But my Almighty friend is All sufficient: He can prevent
my sickness, or rebuke and cure it, or make it so good to me, that I shall
thank him for it: He can blot out my transgressions, and forgive all my sin;
and justify me when the world and my conscience do condemn me: He can teach me
to believe, to repent, to pray, to hope, to suffer, and to overcome: He can
quiet my soul in the midst of trouble, and give me a well grounded everlasting
peace, and a joy which no man can take from me. He can deliver me from all the
corruptions and distempers of my froward heart; and ease me and secure me in
the troublesome war which is daily managed in my breast. He can make it as easy
a thing to dye, as to lie down and take my rest when I am weary, or to undress
me at night and go to bed. He can teach Death to lay by its terrible aspect,
and to speak with a mild and comfortable voice, and to bring me the joyfullest
tidings that ever came unto my ears; and to preach to me the last and sweetest
Sermon, even the same that our ^aviour preached on the Cross [ Luke 23.43.
Verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with Christ in Paradise.]

And is this the difference between the Love of man and of God? And yet do I
lament the loss of man! And yet am I so backward to converse with God, and to
be satisfied in his Love alone! Ah my God, how justly may thou withhold that
Love which I thus undervalue; and refuse that converse which I have first
refused? and turn me over to man, to silly man, to sinful man, whose converse I
so much desire, till I have learnt by dear experience the difference between
man and God, and between an Earthly and an Heavenly friend! Alas, have I not
tried it often enough, to have known it better before this day! Have ^ not (...)
enough sound what man is in a time of trial! Have I not been tol^ it over and
over, and told it to the quick, by deceitful friends, by self-seeking friends,
by mutable, erroneous, deceived, scandalous, backslding friends, by proud and
selfconceited friends; by passionate, quarrelsom, vexatious friends, by
self-grieved, troubled friend^, that have but brought me all their calamities
and griefs to be additions to my own; by tempting friends, that have drawn me
to sin more effectually than enemies; by tender, faithful, but unable friends,
that have but fetched fire from my calamities and sorrows to kindle their own,
not equally sharing, but each one taking all my trouble entirely to himself:
that have been willing, but insufficient to relieve me; and therefore the
greater was their Love, the greater was their own, and consequently mine
affliction, that would have been with me, but could not; that would fain have
eased my pain, and strengthened my languishing body, but could not; that would
fain have removed all my troubles, and comforted my cast down mind, but could
not. O how often have I found that humane friendship is a sweet desired
addition to our woe; a beloved calamity, and an affliction which nature will
not be without, not because it Loves evil, nor because it is wholly deceived
in its choice (for there is Good in friendship, and delight in holy Love) but
because the Good which is here accompanied with so much evil, is the beginn^ng
of a more high and durable friendship, and points us up to the blessed
delightful society and converse which in the heavenly Jerusalem we shall have
with Christ.

But O how much better have I found the friendship of the All-sufficient God!
His Love has not only pitited me, but relieved me: He has not only been as it
were afflicted with me in my afflictions, but he has delivered me seasonably,
and powerfully, and sweetly has he delivered me: And when he had once told me
that my afflictions were his own, I had no reason to doubt of a deliverance. My
burdened mind has been eased by his Love, which was but more burdened by the
fruitless Love of all my friends. Often have I come to man for help, and ease,
and comfort, and gone away as from an empty Cistern, that had no water to cool
my thirst; but God has been a present help: Could I but get near him, I was
sure of Light, how great soever was my former darkness: Could I but get near
him, I was sure of warming quickening Life, how dead soever I had been before:
But all my misery was, that I could not get near him! My darkened estranged
guilty soul, could not get quiet^ng and satisfying acquaintance: My lumpish
heart lay dead on earth, and would not stir, or quickly fall down again, if by
any Celestial force it began to be drawn up, and move a little toward him: My
carnal mind was entangled in diverting vanities: And thus I have been kept from
communion with my God. Kept! not by force or humane tyranny; not by bars or
bolts, or distance of a place, or by the lowness of my condition; nor by any
misrepresentations o^ reproach of man; but, alas, by my self, by the darkness
and deadness, and sluggishness, and earthliness, and fleshliness, and passions
of a naughty heart. These have been my bars, and bolts, and jaylors; These are
they that have kept me from my God: Had it not been for these I might have got
nearer to him; I might have walked with him, and dwelt with him; yea dwelt in
him, and he in me: and then I should not have mist any friends, nor felt mine
enemies: And is it my sinful distance from my God that has been my loss, my
wilderness, my woe! And is it a nearer admittance to the presence of his Love
that must be my recovery and my joy, if ever I attain to joy! O then my soul,
lay hold on Christ the Reconciler, and in him and by him draw near to God: And
cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils: Love God in his Saints, and
delightfully converse with Christ in them, while thou have opportunity. But
Remember thou Live not upon them, or on their Love, but upon God, and
therefore desire their Company but for His: And if thou have His, be content if
thou have not theirs.

He wants not man that enjoys God. Gather up all the Love, and Thoughts, and
Desires which have been scattered and lost upon the Creatures, and set them all
on God himself, and press into his presence, and converse with him, and thou
shall find the mistake of thy present discontents, and sweet experience shall
tell thee thou have made a happy change.

5. If God be with me, I am not alone, because he is with me with whom my
greatest business lies: And what company should I desire, but theirs with whom
I have my daily necessary work to do? I have more to do with God, than with all
the World: Yea more and greater business with him in one day, than with all the
World in all my life. I have business with man about house, or lands, or food,
or raiment, or labor, or journying, or Recreations, about society and public
peace: But what are these to my business with God! Indeed with holy men I have
holy Business; but that is but as they are Messengers from God, and come to me
on his business, and so they must be dearly welcome: But even then my business
is much more with God then with them; with him that sent them, then with the
Messenger. Indeed my business with God is so great, that If I had not a
Mediator to encourage and assist me, to do my work and procure me acceptance,
the thoughts of it would overwhelm my Soul.

O therefore my Soul, let man stand by: It is the Eternal God that I have to do
with: And with whom am I to transact in this little time the business of my
endless life. I have to deal with God through Christ, for the pardon of my
sins, of all my great and grievous sins; and woe to me if I speed not, that ever
I was born: I have some hopes of pardon, but intermixed with many perplexing
fears: I have evidences much blotted, and not easily understood: I want
assurance that he is indeed my Father, and reconciled to me, and will receive
me to himself when the World forsakes me: I have many languishing graces to be
strengthened; and alas, what radicated, obstinate, vexatious corruptions to be
cured! Can I look into my heart, into such an unbelieving, dead, and earthly
heart, into such a proud and peevish and disordered heart, into such a
trembling, perplexed, self-accusing heart, and yet not understand how great my
business is with God! Can I peruse my sins, or feel my wants, and sink under my
weaknesses, and yet not discern how great my business is with God! Can I look
back upon all the time that I have lost, and all the grace that I unthankfully
resisted, and all the mercies that I trod under foot, or fooled away, and can I
look before me and see how near my time is to an end, and yet not understand
how great my business is with God; Can I think of the malice and diligence of
Satan, the number, power and subtilty of mine Enemies, the many snares and
dangers that are still before me, the strength and number of temptations, and
my ignorance, unwatchfulness and weakness to resist, and yet not know that my
greatest business is with God: Can I feel my afflictions and lament them, and
think my burden greater than I can bear, and find that man cannot relieve me;
can I go mourning in the heaviness of my soul, and water my Bed with Tears, and
fill the air with my groans and lamentations, or feel my soul overwhelmed
within me, so that my words are intercepted, and I am readier to break than
speak, and yet not perceive that my greatest business is with God? Can I think
of dying? Can I draw near to judgment? Can I think of everlasting joys in
Heaven? and of everlasting pains in Hell, and yet not feel that my greatest
business is with God? O then, my soul, the case is easily resolved, with whom
it is that thou must most desirously and seriously converse. Where should
thou be but where thy business is, and so great business! Alas, what have I to
do with man! what can it do but make my head ache, to hear a deal of senseless
chat, about preferments, lands and dignities, about the words and thoughts of
Men, and a thousand toys that are utterly impertinent to my great employments,
and signify nothing but that the dreaming world is not awake! What pleasure is
it to see the busles of a Bedlam world? what a stir they make to prove or make
themselves unhappy? How low and of how little weight, are the learned
discourses about syllables and words, and names and notions, and mood and
figure, yea, or about the highest Planets, when all are not referred unto God?
Were it not that some converse with men, does further my converse with God; and
that God did transact much of his business by his messengers and servants, it
were no matter whether ever I more saw the face of man: were it not that my
Master has placed me in society, and appointed me and much of my work for
others, and with others, and much of his mercy is conveyed by others, man might
stand by, and solitude were better then the best society, and God alone should
take me up. O nothing is so much my misery and shame, as that I am no more
willing, nor better skilled in the management of my great important business!
That my work is with God, and my heart is no more with him! O what might I do
in holy meditation or Prayer one hour; if I were as ready for prayer, and as
good at prayer as one that has so long opportunity and so great necessity to
converse with God, should be! A prayerless heart, a heart that flies away from
God, is most excusable in such a one as I, that has so much important business
with him: It is work that must be done; and if well done, will never be
repented of: I use not to return from the presence of God (when indeed I have
drawn near him) as I do from the company of empty men, repenting that I have
lost my time, and trembled that my mind is discomposed or depressed by the
vanity and earthly savor of their discourse: I often repent that I have prayed
to him so coldly, and conversed with him so negligently, and served him so
remisly; but I never repent of the time, the cares, the afflictions, or the
diligence employed in his holy work. Many a time I have repented that ever I
spent so much time with man, and wished I had never seen the faces of some that
are eminent in the world, whose favor and converse others are ambitious of:
But it is my grief and shame that so small a part of all my life, has been
spent with God; and that fervent prayer and heavenly contemplations, have been
so seldom and so short. O that I had lived more with God, though I had been
less with my dearest of my friends! How much more blameless, regular and pure!
How much more fruitful, and answerable to my obligations and professions! How
much more comfortable to my review! How many falls, and hurts, and wounds, and
greifs, and groans might I have escaped! O how much more pleasing is it now to
my Remembrance, to think of the hours in which I have lain at the feet of God,
though it were in tears and groans, than to think of the time which I have
spent in any common converse with the greatest, or the learnedest, or the
dearest of my acquaintance!

And as my Greatest business is with God, so my daily-business is also with
him: He purposely leaves me under wants, and suffers necessities daily to
return, and enemies to assault me, and affliction to surprise me, that I may be
daily driven to him: He loves to hear from me: He would have me be no stranger
with him: I have business with him every hour: I need not want employment for
all the faculties of my Soul, if I know what it is to converse in Heaven. Even
Prayer, and every holy thought of God, has an Object so great and excellent,
as should wholly take me up. Nothing must be thought or spoken lightly about
the Lord. His Name must not be taken in vain: Nothing that is common beseems
his Worshipers. He will be sanctified of all that shall draw near him: He must
be loved with all the Heart and Might. His Servants need not be wearied for
want of employment, nor through the lightness or unprofitableness of their
employment: If I had Cities to build, or Kingdoms to govern, I might better
complain for want of Employment for the Faculties of my Soul, than I can when I
am to converse in Heaven. In other Studies the delight abateth, when I have
reached my desire, and know all that I can know: But in God there is infinitely
more to be known, when I know the most. I am never satiated with the easiness
of knowing, nor are my desires abated by any unusefulness or unworthiness in
the Object; but I am drawn to it by it is highest Excellencies, and drawn on to
desire more and more by the infiniteness of the Light which I have not yet
beheld, and the infiniteness of the Good which yet I have not enjoyed. If I be
idle, or seem to want employment, when I am to contemplate all the Attributes,
Relations, Mercies, Works, and revealed perfections of the Lord, it is sure for
want of Eyes to see, or a Heart inclined to my business: If God be not enough
to employ my Soul, then all the Persons and Things on Earth are not enough.

And when I have Infinite Goodness to delight in, where my Soul may freely let
out it self, and never need to fear excess of Love; how sweet should this
employment be? As Knowledge, so love is never stinted here, by the narrowness
of the Object: can never love him in any proportion either to his Goodness and
amiableness in himself, or to his Love to us. What need have I then of any
other company or business, when I have infinite Goodness to delight in, and to
Love (further than they subserve this greatest Work?)

Come home then, O my Soul, to God: Converse in Heaven: Turn away thine eyes
from beholding Vanity: Let not thy affections kindle upon straw or briars, that
go out when they have made a flash or noise, and leave thee to thy cold and
darkness: But come and dwell upon celestial beauties, and make it thy daily and
most diligent Work, to kindle thy affections on the infinite everlasting Good;
and then they will never be extinguished or decay for want of Fuel; but the
further they go, and the longer they burn, the greater will be the Flame.
Though thou find it hard while Love is but a Spark to make it burn, and
complain that thy cold and backward heart is hardly warmed with the love of
God, yet when the whole pile has taken fire, and the flame ascends, fire
will breed fire, Love will cause Love; and all the malice of Hell it self shall
never be able to suppress or quench it unto all Eternity.

6. And it is a great Encouragement to my converse with God, that no
misunderstanding, no malice of Enemies, no former sin or present^ frailty, no,
nor the infinite distance of the most holy glorious God, can hinder my access
to him, or turn away his Ear or Love, or interrupt my leave and liberty of
converse. If I converse with the poor, their wants afflict me, being greater
than I can supply: Their complaints and expectations which I cannot satisfy,
are my trouble. If I would converse with Great ones, it is not easy to get
access: and less easy to have their Favor, unless I would purchase it at too
dear a rate: How strangely and contemptuously do they look at their inferiors!
Great Friends must be made for a word or Smile: And if you be not quickly gone,
they are aweary of you: And if you seek any thing of them, or would put them to
any cost or trouble, you are as welcome to them as so many Vermin or noisome
Creatures. They please them best that drive you away. With how much labor and
difficulty must you clime, if you will see the top of one of these Mountains?
And when you are there, you are but in a place of barrenness; and have nothing
to satisfy you for your pains, but a larger prospect and vertiginous despect
of the lower grounds which are not your own: It is seldom that these Great Ones
are to be spoken with: And perhaps their Speech is but a denial of your
Requests, if not some snappish and contemptuous Rejection, that makes you glad
when you are got far enough from them, and makes you the better like and love
the accessible calm and fruitful Plains.

But, O how much greater encouragements has my Soul to converse with God!
Company never hinders him from harkning to my Suit: He is Infinite and
Omnipotent, and as sufficient for every individual Soul, as if he had no other
to look after in the World: When he is taken up with the attendance and praises
of his heavenly Host, he is as free and ready to attend and answer the groans
and prayers of a contrite Soul, as if he had no nobler Creatures, nor no higher
Service to regard. I am often unready, but God is never unready: I am unready to
pray, but he is not unready to hear: I am unready to come to God, to walk with
him, and to solace my Soul with him; but he is never unready to entertain me.
Many a time my Conscience would have driven me away, when he has called me to
him, and rebuked my accusing fearful Conscience. Many a time I have called my
self a Prodigal, a companion of Swine, a miserable hard-hearted Sinner,
unworthy to be called his Son, when he has called me Child, and chid me for my
questioning his Love. He has readily forgiven the Sins which I thought would
have made my Soul fuel of Hell: He has entertained me with Joy, with Music
and a Feast, when I better deserved to have been among the Dogs without his
Doors. He has embraced me in his sustaining consolatory Arms, when he might
have spurned my guilty Soul to Hell, and said, Depart from me, thou worker of
Iniquity, I know thee not. O little did I think, that he could ever have
forgotten the Vanity and Villainy of my Youth; yea, so easily have forgotten my
most aggravated sins. When I had sinned against Light; when I had resisted
Conscience; when I had frequently and wilfully injured Love, I thought he would
never have forgotten it: But the greatness of his Love and Mercy, and the blood
and intercession of his Son, has cancelled all. O how many Mercies have I
tasted since I thought I had sinned away all Mercies! How patiently has he
born with me, since I thought he would never have put up more? And yet besides
my sins and the withdrawings of my own heart, there has been nothing to
interrupt our converse. Though he be God, and I a worm, yet that would not have
kept me out: Though he be in Heaven, yet he is near to succor me on Earth, in
all that I call upon him for: Though he have the praise of Angels, he
disdaineth not my Tears and Groans: Though he have the perfect Love of perfect
Souls, he knows the little Spark in my Breast, and despises not my weak and
languid Love: Though I injure and dishonor him by loving him no more; though I
often forget him, and have been out of the way when he has come or called me;
though I have disobediently turned away mine ears, and unkindly refused the
entertainments of his Love, and unfaithfully played with those whose company he
forbad me, he has not divorced me, nor turned me out of doors. O wonderful!
that Heaven will be familiar with Earth! and God with Man! the Highest with a
Worm! and the most Holy with an unconstant Sinner! Man refuses me, when God
will entertain me: Man, that is no wiser or better than my self. Those that I
never wronged or deserved ill off, reject me with Reproach: And God whom I have
unspeakably injured, does invite me, and entreat me, and condescendeth to me,
as if he were beholden to me to be saved: Men that I have deserved well of, do
abhor me: And God that I have deserved Hell of, does accept me. The best of
them are Briars, and as a thorny Hedge, and he is Love, and Rest, and Joy: And
yet I can be more welcome to him, though I have offended him, than I can to them
whom I have obliged: I have freer leave to cast my slef into my Fathers Arms,
than to tumble in those Briars, or wallow in the Dirt. I upbraid my self with
my sins, but he does not upbraid me with them. I condemn my self for them, but
he condemns me not: He forgivet^ me so^n^r than I can forgive my self: I have
peace with him, before I can have peace of Conscience.

O therefore my Soul, draw near to him that is so willing of thy company! That
frowneth thee not away, unless it be when thou have fallen into the dirt, that
tho^ may wash thee from thy filthiness, and the fitter for his converse. Draw
near to him that will not wrong thee, by believing misreports of Enemies, or
laying to thy charge the things thou knew not: but will forgive the Wrongs
thou have done to him, and justify thee from the sin, that Conscience lays
to thy charge. Come to him that by his Word and Spirit, his Ministers and
Mercies calls thee to come; and has promised, that those that come to him,
he will in no wise shut out. O walk with him that will bear thee up, and lead
thee as by the right hand ( Psalm. 73.23.) and carry his Infants when they
cannot go! O speak to him that teaches thee to speak, and understands and
accepts thy Stammering; and helps thine Infirmities when thou know not
what to pray for as thou ought; and gives thee Groans when thou have not
words, and knowe^h the meaning of his Spirit in thy Groans: that cannot be
contained in the Heaven of Heavens, and yet has respect to the contrite Soul,
that trembles at his word, and fears his displeasure: That pityeth the
Tears, and despises not the sighing of a broken heart, nor the desires of the
sorrowful. O walk with him that is never weary of the converse of an up^ight
Soul! That is never angry with thee, but for flying from him, or for drawing
back, or being too strange, and refusing the kindness and felicity of his
presence. The day is coming when the proudest of the Sons of Men would be glad
of a good look from him, that thou have leave to walk with: Even they that
would not look on thee, and they that injured and abused thee, and they that
inferiors could have no access to; O how glad would they be then of a Smile,
or a word of hope and mercy from thy Father! Draw near then to him, on whom the
whole Creation does d^pend; whose favor at last the proudest and the worst
would purchase with the loudest cries, when all their pomp and pleasure is
gone, and can purchase nothing. O walk with him that is Love it self, and think
him not unwilling-or unlovely; and let not the Deceiver by hideous
misrepresentations drive thee from him: when thou have felt a while the storms
abroad, me thinks thou should say, How good, how safe, how sweet is it to
draw near to God!

7. With whom should I so desirously converse, as with him whom I must live
with for ever? If I take pleasure in my House, or Land, or Country, my walks,
my books or friends themselves as clothed with flesh, I must possess this
pleasure but a little while; Henceforth know we no man after the flesh: Had we
known Christ himself after the flesh, we must know him so no more for ever.
(Though his Glorified spiritual Body we shall know.) Do you converse with
Father or Mother? with Wives or Children? with Pastors and Teachers? Though you
may converse with these as Glorified Saints, when you come to Christ, yet in
these Relations that they stand in to you now, you shall converse with them but
a little while: For the time is short: It remains that both they that have
wives be as though they had none; and they that weep as though they wept not;
and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy as though
they possessed not; and they that use the World, as not abusing it (or as
though they used it not:) for the fashion of this World does pass away.] 1 Cor.
7.29, 30, 31.

Why then should I so much regard, a converse of so short continuance? Why
should I be so familiar in my Inn, and so in love with that familiarity, as to
grieve when I must but think of leaving it, or talk of going home, and look
forward to the place where I must dwell for ever? shall I be fond of the
company of a passenger that I travel with (yea perhaps one that does but meet
me in the way, and goes to a contrary place) and shall I not take more
pleasure to remember home? I will not be so uncivil as to deny those I meet a
short salute, or to be friendly with my fellow-Travellers: But remember, O my
Soul, that thou do not dwell but travel here, and that it is thy Fathers
House where thou must abide forever: Yea and he is nearer thee than Man (though
invisible) even in thy way. O see him then that is invisible: Hearken to him
when he spea^eth: Obey his voice: Observe his way: Speak to him boldly, though
humbly and reverently, a^ his Child, about the great concernments of thy State:
Tell him what it is that aileth thee: And seeing all thy smart is the fruit of
thy own sin, confess thy folly and unkindness, crave his forgiveness, and
remember him what his Son has suffered, and for what: Treat with him about thy
future course: Desire his Grace, and give up thy self to his Conduct and his
Cure: Weep over in his Ears the History of thy misdoings and unthankful course:
Tell it him with penitential tears and groans: But tell him also the advantage
that he has for the honoring of his grace, if it may now abound where sin
abounds: Tell him that thou art most offended with thy self, for that which
he is most offended with: That thou art angry with thy disobedient unthankful
heart: That thou art even a weary of that heart that loves him no more: And
that it shall never please thee, till it love him better and be more desirous
to please him: Tell him of thy Enemies, and crave the protection of his Love:
Tell him of thy frailties, infirmities and passions, and crave not only his
tender forbearance, but his help: Tell him that without him thou can do
nothing; and crave the Grace that is sufficient for thee, that through him that
strengthens thee thou may do all things: When thou fallest, despair not,
but crave his helping hand to raise thee. Speak to him especially of the
everlasting things, and thank him for his Promises, and for thy Hopes: For what
thou shall be, and have, and do among his Holy ones for ever. Express thy joys
in the promise of those joys; that thou must see his Glory, and love him, and
praise him better than thou can now desire. Begin those praises, and as thou
walk with him, take pleasure in the mention of his perfections; be thankful
to him and speak good of his Name: Solace thy self in remembering what a God,
what a defense and portion all believers have: And in considering whither he is
now conducting thee, and what he will do with thee, and what use he will make
of thee forever: Speak with Rejoicing of the glory of his works, and the
righteousness of his judgmen^s, and the holiness and evenness of his ways: Sing
forth his praises with a joyful heart, and pleasant and triumphing voice; and
frown away all slavish fears, all importune malicious suggestions or doubts,
all peevish hurtful nipping griefs, that would mar or interrupt the melody; and
would untune or unstring a raised well composed Soul. Thy Father loves thy
very moans and Tears: But how much more does he love thy Thanks and Praise? Or
if indeed it be a Winter time, a stormy day with thee, and he seem to chide or
hide his face because thou have offended him, let the cloud that is gathered by
thy Folly come down in tears, and tell him, Thou have sinned against Heaven and
before him, and art no more worthy to be called his Son; but yet fly not from
him, but beg his pardon and the privileges of a Servant: And thou will find
embracements, when thou fear condemnation: and find that he is merciful and
ready to forgive: Only return, and keep closer to him for the time to come. If
the breach through thy neglect be gone so far, as that thou seem to have
lost thy God, and to be cast off, and left forsaken; despair not yet; for he
does but hide his face till thou repent: He does not forsake thee, but only
tell thee what it is to walk so carelessly as if thou would forsake him: Thou
art faster and surer in his Love and Covenant then thou can believe or
apprehend. Thy Lord was as dear as ever to his Father, when he cried out, My
God, why have thou forsaken me. But yet neglect him not, and be not regardless
of his withdrawings and of thy loss: Lift up thy voice and cry but [ Father;]
in despite of unbelief, cry out [ My Father, my Savior, my God,] and thou
shall hear him Answer thee at last [ My Child:] Cry out [ O why do thou hide
thy face? and why have thou forsaken me! O what shall I do here without thee! O
leave me not, lose me not in this bowling wilderness! Let me not be a prey to
any ravening beast! to my sin, to Satan, to my foes and thine!] Lift up thy
voice and weep, and tell him, they are the tears and lamentation of his Child:
O beg of him, that thy wanderings and childish folly, may not be taken as acts
of enmity, or at least that they may be pardoned; and though he correct thee,
that he will return and not forsake thee, but still take thee and use thee as
his child. Or if thou have not words to pour out before him, at least smite
upon thy breast, and though thou be ashamed or afraid to look up toward Heaven,
look down and say, [ O Lord, be merciful to me a sinner,] and he will take it
for an acceptable suit, that tends to thy pardon and justification, and will
number such a sentance with the prayers which he cannot deny. Or if thou cry,
and can not hear of him, and have long called out upon thy Fathers Name, and
hear not his voice and have no return; enquire after him of those thou
meetest: Ask for him of them that know him and are acquainted with his way!
Make thy moan unto the watchmen; and ask them, where thou may find thy Lord.
And at last he will appear to thee, and find thee first, that thou may find
him, and show thee where it was that thou did lose him, by losing thy self
and turning from him! seek him and thou shall find him: wait and he will appear
in kindness: For he never fails or forsakes those that wait upon him.

This kind of Converse, O my soul, thou have to prosecute with thy God. Thou
have also the concernments of all his servants; his aff^icted ones, his broken
hearted ones, his diseased ones, his persecuted ones, to tell him of: Tell him
also of the concernments of his Kingdom, the fury of his Enemies, the dishonor
they cast upon his Name, the matters of his Gospel, cause and interest in the
world: But still let his Righteous Judgment be remembered, and all be terminated
in the glorious everlasting Kingdom.

Is it not much better thus to converse with him that I must be with for ever,
about the place, and the company, and work, and concernments of my perpetual
abode, then to be taken up with strangers in my way, and detained by their
impertinencies?

I have formed my self so long in these meditations, that I will but name the
rest, and tell you what I had further to have treated on, and leave the
enlargement to your own meditations.

8. I have no reason to be weary of converse with God, seeing it is that for
which all human converse is regardable. Converse with man is only so far
desirable as it tends to our Converse with God: And therefore the end must be
preferred before the means.

9. It is the Office of Christ, and the work of the Holy Ghost, and the use of
all the means of Grace, and of all creatures, mercies and afflictions, to
reduce our straying souls to God, that we may converse with him and enjoy him.

10. Converse with God is most suitable to those that are so near to death; It
best prepares for it: It is likest to the work that we are next to do. We had
rather when death comes, be found conversing with God then with Man: It is God
that a dying man has principally to do with: It is his judgment that he is
going to; and his mercy that he has to trust upon: And therefore it concerns
us to draw near him now, and be no strangers to him, lest strangeness then
should be our terror.

11. How wonderful a condescension is it that God should be willing to converse
with me! with such a worm and sinful wretch: And therefore how unexcusable is
my crime, if I refuse his company, and so great a mercy!

12. Lastly, Heaven it self is but our Converse with God and his Glorified
ones, (though in a more perfect manner then we can here conceive.) And
therefore our holy converse with him here is the state that is likest Heaven,
and that prepares for it, and all the Heaven that is on earth.

IT remains now that I briefly tell you, what you should do to attain and
manage this Converse with God, in the improvement of your solitude. (For
Directions in general for Walking with God, I reserve for another place.) At
present let these few suffice.

Direct. 1. If you would comfortably Converse with God, make sure that you are
Reconciled to him in Christ, and that he is indeed your friend and Father. Can
two walk together except they be agreed? Can you take pleasure in dwelling with
the consuming fire? or conversing with the most dreadful enemy? Yet this I must
add, that every doubting or self-accusing soul may not find a pretense to fly
from God. 1. That God cease not to be a Father when ever a fearful soul is
drawn to question it or deny it. 2. That in the Universal Love and Grace of God
to miserable sinners, and in the universal act of conditional pardon and
oblivion, and in the offers of Grace, and the readiness of God to receive the
penitent, there is Glad Tidings that should exceedingly rejoice a a sinner; and
there is sufficient encouragement to draw the most guilty miserable sinner to
seek to God, and sue for mercy. But yet the sweetest converse is for children,
and for those that have some assurance that they are children.

But perhaps you will say, that this is not easily attained: How shall we know
that he is our friend?

In brief, I answer, If you are unfeignedly friends to God, it is because he
first loved you. Prefer him before all other friends, and all the wealth and
vanity of the world; Provoke him not by wilfulness or neglect: use him as your
best friend, and abuse him not by disobedience or ingratitude; own him before
all, at the dearest rates, whenever you are called to it: Desire his presence:
Lament his absence: Love him from the bottom of your hearts: Think not hardly
of him: Suspect him not; Misunderstand him not: Hearken not to his enemies:
Receive not any false reports against him: Take him to be really better for you
than all the world: Do these, and doubt not but you are friends with God, and
God with you: In a word, Be but heartily willing to be friends to God, and that
God should be your chiefest friend, and you may be sure that it is so indeed,
and that you are and have what you desire. And then how delightfully may you
converse with God!

Direct. 2. Wholly depend on the Mediation of Christ, the great Reconciler:
Without him there is no coming near to God: But in his Beloved you shall be
accepted. Whatever fear of his displeasure shall surprise you, fly presently
for safety unto Christ: whatever guilt shall look you in the face, commit your
self and cause to Christ, and desire him to answer for you: When the doors of
mercy seem to be shut up against you, fly to him that bears the keys, and can
at any time open to you, and let you in: Desire him to answer for you to God,
to your consciences, and against all accusers: By him alone you may boldly and
comfortably converse with God: But God will not know you out of him.

Direct. 3. Take heed of bringing particular Guilt into the presence of God, if
you would have sweet communion with him: Christ himself never reconciled God to
sin: And the sinner and sin are so nearly related, that for all the death of
Christ, you shall feel that iniquity dwells not with God; but he hates the
works of it, and the foolish shall not stand in his sight* and that if you will
presume to sin because you are his Children, be sure your sin will find you
out. O what fears, what shame, what self-abhorrence and self-revenge will guilt
raise in a penitent soul, when it comes into the light of the presence of the
Lord; it will unavoidable abate your boldness and your comforts: When you
should be sweetly delighting in his pleased face, and promised Glory, you will
be be fooling your selves for your former sin, and ready even to tear your
flesh, to think that ever you should do as you have done, and use him as you
would not have used a common friend, and cast your selves upon his wrath. But
an innocent soul, or pacified conscience, does walk with God in quietness and
delight, without those frowns and fears which are a taste of Hell to others.

Direct. 4. If you would comfortably converse with God, be sure that you bring
not Idols in your hearts: Take heed of inordinate affection to any Creature.
Let all things else be nothing to you, that you may have none to take up your
thoughts but God. Let your Minds be further separate from them than your
Bodies: Bring not into solitude or to contemplation, a proud, or lustful, or
covetous mind: It much more concerns thee, what Heart thou bring, that
what Place thou art in, or what work thou art upon. A mind that is drowned in
ambition, sensuality or passion, will scarce find God any sooner in any
wilderness than in a crowd (unless he be there returning from those sins to
God) wherever he sees him, God will not own and be familiar with so foul a
soul. Seneca could say [Quid prodest totious regionis silentium, si affectus
fremunt?] What good does the silence of all the Country do thee, if thou have
the noise of raging affections within?] And Gregory says [ Qui corpore remotus
vivit, etc. He that in body is far enough from the tumult of human
conversation, is not in solitude, if he busy himself with earthly cogitations
and desires: and he is not in the City that is not troubled with the tumult of
worldly cares or fears, though he be pressed with the popular crowds.] Bring
not thy house, or land, or credit, or carnal friend along with thee in thy
heart, if thou desire and expect to walk in Heaven, and to converse with God.

Direct. 5. Live still by Faith; Let Faith lay Heaven and Earth as it were
together: Look not at God as if he were far off: set him aways as before you,
even as at your right hand; Psalm. 16.8. Be still with him when you awake, Psalm.
139.18. In the morning thank him for your rest; and deliver up your self to his
conduct and service for that day* Go forth as with him, and to do his work: Do
every action, with the Command of God, and the promise of Heaven before your
eyes, and upon your hearts: Live as those that have incomparably more to do
with God and Heaven, than all this world; That you may say with David, Psalm.
37.25, 26. (as aforecited) Whom have I in Heaven but thee! and there is none on
Earth that I desire besides thee:] And with Paul, Phil. 1.21. [ To me to Live
is Christ, and to Dye is gain.] You must shut up the eye of sense (save as
subordinate to Faith) and live by Faith upon a God, a Christ, and a World that
is unseen, if you would know by experience what it is to be above the brutish
life of sensualists, and to Converse with God. O Christian, if thou had
rightly learned this blessed life, what a high and noble soul-conversation
would thou have! How easily would thou spare, and how little would thou
miss the favor of the greatest, the presence of any worldly comfort! City or
Solitude would be much alike to thee, saving that the place and state would be
best to thee, where thou have the greatest help and freedom to converse with
God. Thou would say of human society as Seneca [Vnus pro populo mihi est, and
populus pro uno: Mihi satis est unus, satis est nullus.] [One is instead of all
the people to me, and the people as one; One is enough for me, and none is
enough.] Thus being taken up with God, thou might live in prison as at
liberty, and in a wilderness as in a City, and in a place of banishment as in
thy native Land: For the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: and
everywhere thou may find him, and converse with him, and lift up pure hands
unto him: In every place thou art within the sight of home; and Heaven is in
thine eye, and thou art conversing with that God, in whose converse the highest
Angels do place their highest felicity and delight.

How little cause then have all the Churches enemies to triumph, that can never
shut up a true believer from the presence of his God? nor banish him into such
a place where he cannot have his conversation in Heaven? The stones that were
cast at holy Stephen, could not hinder him from seeing the Heavens opened, and
Christ sitting at the right hand of God. A Patmos allowed holy John Communion
with Christ, being there in the Spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1.9, 10. Christ
never so speedily and comfortably owneth his servants, as when the world
disowneth them, and abuses them for his sake, and hurls them up and down as
the scorn and offscouring of all. He quickly found the blind man that he had
cured, when once the Jews had cast him out, Ioh. 9.35. Persecutors do but
promote the blessedness and exceeding joy of sufferers for Christ, Mat. 5.11.12.

And how little Reason then have Christians to shun such sufferings by unlawful
means, which turn to their so great advantage? and to give so dear as the
hazard of their souls by wilful sin, to escape the honor, and safety, and
commodity of Martyrdom?

And indeed we Judge not, we Love not, we ^ive not as sanctified ones must do,
if we judge not that the truest Liberty, and Love it not as the Best Condition,
in which we may Best converse with God. And O how much harder is it to walk
with God, in a Court, in the midst of sensual delights, than in a prison or
wilderness, where we have none to interrupt us, and nothing else to take us up?
It is our prepossessed minds, our earthly hearts, our carnal affections and
concupisence, and the pleasures of a prosperous state, that are the prison and
the Jaylors of our souls. Were it not for these, how free should we be, though
our bodies were confined to the straightest room! He is at Liberty that can
walk in Heaven, and have access to God, and make use of all the Creatures in
the world, to the promoting of this his Heavenly conversation. And he is the
prisoner whose soul is chained to flesh and earth, and confined to his lands
and houses, and feeds on the dust of worldly riches, or walloweth in the dung
and filth of gluttony, drunkenness and lust: that are far from God, and desire
not to be near him; but say to him, Depart from us, we would not have the
knowledge of thy ways: that Love their prisons and chains so well, that they
would not be set free, but hate those with the cruellest hatred that endeavor
their deliverance. Those are the poor prisoners of Satan, that have not liberty
to believe, nor to Love God, nor converse in Heaven, nor seriously to mind or
seek the things that are high and honorable: that have not liberty to meditate
or pray, or seriously to speak of holy things, nor to love and converse with
those that do so: that are tied so hard to the drudgery of sin, that they have
not liberty one month, or week, or day, to leave it, and walk with God so much
as for recreation! But he that lives in the family of God, and is employed in
attending him, and does converse with Christ, and the Host of Holy ones above,
in reason should not much complain of his want of friends, or company or
accommodations, nor yet be too impatient of any corporal confinement.

Lastly, be sure then most narrowly to watch your hearts, that nothing have
entertainment there, which is against your Liberty of converse with God. Fill
not those Hearts with worldly trash, which are made and new-made to be the
dwelling place of God. Desire not the company which would diminish your
heavenly acquaintance and correspondency. Be not unfriendly, nor conceited of a
self-sufficiency; but yet beware lest under the honest ingenuous title of a
friend, a special, faithful, prudent, faithful friend, you should entertain an
Idol, or an enemy to your Love of God, or a corrival and competitor with your
highest friend: For if you do, it is not the specious title of a friend that
will save you from the thorns and briars of disquietment, and from greater
troubles than ever you found from open enemies.

O blessed be that High and everlasting friend, who is every way suited to the
upright souls! To their Minds, their Memories, their Delight, their Love, etc.
By surest Truth, by fullest Goodness, by clearest Light, by dearest Love, by
firmest Constancy, etc. -- O why has my drowsy and darksighted soul been so
seldom with him! why has it so often, so strangely, and so unthankfully passed
by, and not observed him, nor hearkened to his kindest calls! O what is all
this trash and trouble that has filled my memory, and employed my mind, and
cheated and corrupted my affections, while my dearest Lord has been days and
nights so unworthily forgotten, so contemptuously neglected, and disregarded,
and loved as if I loved him not! O that these drowsy and those waking nights,
those loitered, lost, and empty hours, had been spent in the humblest converse
with him, which have been dreamed and doted away upon -- now I know not what! O
my God, how much wiser and happier had I been, had I rather chosen to mourn
with thee, than to rejoice and sport with any other! O that I had rather wept
with thee, than laughed with the creature! For the time to come, let that be my
friend, that most befriendeth my dark, and dull, and backward soul, in its
undertaken progress, and heavenly conversation! Or if there be none such upon
earth, let me here take one for my friend! O blot out every Name from my
corrupted heart, which hinders the deeper engraving of thy Name! Ah Lord,
what a stone, what a blind ungrateful thing, is a Heart not touched with
celestial Love! yet shall I not run to thee, when I have none else that will
know me! shall I not draw near thee, when all fly from me! When daily
experience cries out so loud [NONE BUT CHRIST: GOD OR NOTHING.] Ah foolish
Heart, that have thought of it [Where is that place, that Cave or Desert, where
I might soonest find thee, and fullest enjoy thee? Is it in the wilderness that
thou walk, or in the crowd: in the Closet, or in the Church; where is it
that I might soonest meet with God?] But alas, I now perceive, that I have a
Heart to find, before I am like to find my Lord! O Loveless, Lifeless, stony
heart! that is dead to him that gave it Life! and to none but him! Could I not
Love, or Think, or Feel at all, methinks I were less dead than now? Less dead,
if dead, than now I am alive? I had almost said [Lord, let me never Love more
till I can Love thee? Nor think more on any thing till I can more willingly
think of thee?] But I must suppress that wish; for Life will act: And the
mercies and motions of Nature are necessary to those of Grace. And therefore in
the life of Nature, and in the glimmerings of thy Light, I will wait for more
of the Celestial life! My God, thou have my consent! It is here attested under
my hand: Separate me from what and whom thou will, so I may but be nearer thee!
Let me Love thee more, and feel more of thy Love, and then let me Love or be
beloved of the world, as little as thou will.

I thought self-love had been a more predominant thing: But now I find that
Repentance has its anger, its Hatred and its Revenge! I am truly Angry with
that Heart that has so often and foolishly offended thee! Methinks I hate that
Heart that is so cold and backward in thy love, and almost grudge it a dwelling
in my breast! Alas when Love should be the life of Prayer, the life of holy
Meditation, the life of Sermons and of holy Conference, and my soul in these
should long to meet thee, and delight to mention thee, I straggle Lord, I know
not whether! or I sit still and wish, but do not rise and run and follow thee,
yea, I do not what I seem to do. All Is dead, all is dead, for want of Love! I
often cry, O where is that place, where the quickening beams of Heaven are
warmest, that my soul night seek it out! But whether ever I go, to City or to
Solitude, alas, I find it is not Place that makes the difference. I know that
Christ is perfectly replenished with Life and Light, and Love Divine: And I
hear him as our Head and Treasure proclaimed and offered to us in the Gospel!
This is thy Record, that he that has the Son has Life! O why then is my
barren soul so empty! I thought I had long ago consented to thy offer; and then
according to thy Covenant, both He and Life in him are mine! And yet must I
still be dark and dead!

Ah dearest Lord, I say not that I have too long waited! but if I continue thus
to wait, will thou never find the time of Love? and come and own thy gasping
worm? will thou never dissipate these clouds, and shine upon this dead and
darkened soul? Has my Night no Day? Thrust me not from thee, O my God! For
that is a Hell, to be thrust from God. But sure the cause is all at home, could
I find it out, or rather could I cure it! It is sure my face that is turned from
God, when I say, His face is turned from me. But if my Life must here be out of
sight, and hidden in the Root (with Christ in God,) and if all the rest be
reserved for that better world, and I must here have but these small
beginnings, O make me more to Love, and long for the blessed day of thine
appearing, and not to fear the time of my deliverance, nor unbelievingly to
linger in this Sodom, as one that had rather stay with sin, then come to thee!
Though sin has made me backward to the fight, let it not make me backward to
receive the Crown; Though it has made me a loiterer in thy work, let it not
make me backward to receive that wages, which thy Love will give to our
pardoned, poor, accepted services. Though I have too often drawn back, when I
should have come unto thee, and walked with thee in thy ways of Grace, yet heal
that unbelief, and disaffection, which would make me to draw back, when thou
call me to possess thy Glory? Though the sickness and lameness of my soul
have hindered me in my journey, yet let their painfulness help me to desire to
be delivered from them, and to be at home, where (without the interposing
nights of thy displeasure) I shall fully feel thy fullest Love, and walk with
thy Glorified on^s in the Light of thy Glory, triumphing in thy Praise for
evermore. Amen.

BUT now I have given you these few Directions for the improvement of your
solitude for converse with God, lest I should occasion the hurt of those that
are unfit for the Lesson I have given, I must conclude with this Caution (which
I have formerly also published,) That it is not malencholly or weak-headed
persons, who are not able to bear such exercises, for whom I have written these
Directions. Those that are not able to be much in serious solitary
thoughtfulness, without confusions and distracting suggestions, and hurrying
vexatious thoughts, must set themselves for the most part to those duties which
are to be done in company by the help of others; and must be very little in
solitary duties: For to them whose natural faculties are so diseased or weak,
it is no duty, as being no means to do them the desired good; but while they
strive to do that which they are naturally unable to endure, they will but
confound and distract themselves, and make themselves unable for those other
duties which yet they are not utterly unfit for. To such persons therefore
instead of ordered, well-digested Meditations, and much time spent in secret
thoughtfulness, it must suffice that they be brief in secret Prayer, and take
up with such occasional abrupter. Meditations as they are capable of, and that
they be the more in reading, hearing, conference, and praying and praising God
with others: until their melancholy distempers are so far overcome, as that
(by the direction of their Spiritual Guides) they may judge themselves fit for
this improvement of their Solitude.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Salusbury in Cornhill.
(...) opened, (...) Supper of the Parable discovered, (...) several Sermons.
By Joseph Hussy, Pastor in Cambridge.

An Inquiry after Religion, or a Veiw of all Religions and Sects in the World.
By a Member of the Royal Society.

A Word to poor, ignorant, and careless people, that mind not the Salvation of
their precious souls; containing Directions for a Holy Life; with a Catechism
and Prayers for Families, and Graces before and after Meat.


